Copyright © 2011 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All
rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United
States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any
means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without
the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN  978-0-07-176764-4
MHID  0-07-176764-9
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version
of this title: ISBN 978-0-07-176372-1, MHID 0-07-176372-
4.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners.
Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence
of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial
fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with
no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such
designations appear in this book, they have been printed
with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity
discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for
use in corporate training programs. To contact a
representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-
hill.com.
CURRENT Medical Diagnosis and Treatment 2012
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve
all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to
these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act
of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the
work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse
engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works
based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish
or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-
Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work
is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND
ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR
WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED
FROM 
USING 
THE 
WORK, 
INCLUDING 
ANY
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH
THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its
licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions
contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its
operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither
McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or
anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission,
regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages
resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for
the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its
licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special,
punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from
the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them
has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This
limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause
whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract,
tort or otherwise.
Contents
 
Authors
Preface
 1.   Disease Prevention & Health Promotion
Michael Pignone, MD, MPH, & René Salazar, MD
Prevention of Infectious Diseases
Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease
Prevention of Osteoporosis
Prevention of Physical Inactivity
Prevention of Overweight & Obesity
Cancer Prevention
Prevention of Injuries & Violence
Prevention of Substance Abuse: Alcohol & Illicit Drugs
 2.   Common Symptoms
Ralph Gonzales, MD, MSPH, & Paul L. Nadler, MD
Cough
Dyspnea
Hemoptysis
Chest Pain
Palpitations
Lower Extremity Edema
Fever & Hyperthermia
Involuntary Weight Loss
Fatigue & Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Acute Headache
Dysuria
 3.   Preoperative Evaluation & Perioperative Management
Hugo Q. Cheng, MD
Evaluation of the Asymptomatic Patient
Cardiac Risk Assessment & Reduction
Pulmonary Evaluation in Non–Lung Resection Surgery
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
Preoperative Hematologic Evaluation
Neurologic Evaluation
Management of Endocrine Diseases
Kidney Disease
Antibiotic Prophylaxis of Surgical Site Infections
 4.   Geriatric Disorders
C. Bree Johnston, MD, MPH, G. Michael Harper, MD,
& C. Seth Landefeld, MD
General Principles of Geriatric Care
Assessment of the Older Adult
Management of Common Geriatric Problems
Dementia
Depression
Delirium
Immobility
Falls & Gait Disorders
Urinary Incontinence
Undernutrition & Frailty
Pressure Ulcers
Pharmacotherapy & Polypharmacy
Vision Impairment
Hearing Impairment
Elder Abuse
 5.   Palliative Care & Pain Management
Michael W. Rabow, MD, & Steven Z. Pantilat, MD
Definition & Scope of Palliative Care
Pain Management
Principles of Pain Management
Pain at the End of Life
Pharmacologic Pain Management Strategies
Nonpharmacologic Treatments
Palliation of Other Common Symptoms
Dyspnea
Nausea & Vomiting
Constipation
Delirium & Agitation
End-of-Life Care
Tasks after Death
 6.   Dermatologic Disorders
Timothy G. Berger, MD
Principles of Dermatologic Therapy
Common Dermatoses
Pigmented Lesions
Scaling Disorders
Vesicular Dermatoses
Weeping or Crusted Lesions
Pustular Disorders
Erythemas
Blistering Diseases
Papules
Violaceous to Purple Papules & Nodules
Pruritus (Itching)
Inflammatory Nodules
Epidermal Inclusion Cyst
Photodermatitis
Ulcers
Miscellaneous Dermatologic Disorders
Pigmentary Disorders
Baldness (Alopecia)
Nail Disorders
Dermatitis Medicamentosa (Drug Eruption)
 7.   Disorders of the Eyes & Lids
Paul Riordan-Eva, FRCS, FRCOphth
Refractive Errors
Disorders of the Lids & Lacrimal Apparatus
Conjunctivitis
Pinguecula & Pterygium
Corneal Ulcer
Acute Angle-Closure Glaucoma
Chronic Glaucoma
Uveitis
Cataract
Retinal Detachment
Vitreous Hemorrhage
Age-Related Macular Degeneration
Central & Branch Retinal Vein Occlusions
Central & Branch Retinal Artery Occlusions
Transient Monocular Blindness
Retinal Disorders Associated with Systemic Diseases
Ischemic Optic Neuropathy
Optic Neuritis
Optic Disk Swelling
Ocular Motor Palsies
Dysthyroid Eye Disease
Orbital Cellulitis
Ocular Trauma
Ultraviolet Keratitis (Actinic Keratitis)
Chemical Conjunctivitis & Keratitis
Treatment of Ocular Disorders
Precautions in Management of Ocular Disorders
Adverse Ocular Effects of Systemic Drugs
 8.   Ear, Nose & Throat Disorders
Lawrence R. Lustig, MD, & Joshua S. Schindler, MD
Diseases of the Ear
Diseases of the Nose & Paranasal Sinuses
Diseases of the Oral Cavity & Pharynx
Diseases of the Salivary Glands
Diseases of the Larynx
Tracheotomy & Cricothyrotomy
Foreign Bodies in the Upper Aerodigestive Tract
Diseases Presenting as Neck Masses
 9.   Pulmonary Disorders
Mark S. Chesnutt, MD, & Thomas J. Prendergast, MD
Disorders of the Airways
Pulmonary Infections
Pulmonary Neoplasms
Interstitial Lung Disease (Diffuse Parenchymal Lung Disease)
Disorders of the Pulmonary Circulation
Environmental & Occupational Lung Disorders
Pleural Diseases
Disorders of Control of Ventilation
Acute Respiratory Failure
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
10.   Heart Disease
Thomas M. Bashore, MD, Christopher B. Granger, MD,
Patrick Hranitzky, MD, & Manesh R. Patel, MD
Congenital Heart Disease
Valvular Heart Disease
Coronary Heart Disease (Atherosclerotic CAD, Ischemic
Heart Disease)
Disorders of Rate & Rhythm
Bradycardias & Conduction Disturbances
Congestive Heart Failure
Myocarditis & the Cardiomyopathies
Rheumatic Fever
Diseases of the Pericardium
Pulmonary Hypertension & Pulmonary Heart Disease
Neoplastic Diseases of the Heart
Cardiac Involvement in Miscellaneous Systemic Diseases
Traumatic Heart Disease
The Cardiac Patient & Surgery
Heart Disease & Pregnancy
Cardiovascular Screening of Athletes
11.   Systemic Hypertension
Michael Sutters, MD, MRCP (UK)
How Is Blood Pressure Measured and Hypertension
Diagnosed?
Prehypertension
Approach to Hypertension
Drug Therapy: Current Antihypertensive Agents
Resistant Hypertension
Hypertensive Urgencies & Emergencies
12.   Blood Vessel & Lymphatic Disorders
Joseph H. Rapp, MD, Christopher D. Owens, MD, MSc,
& Meshell D. Johnson, MD
Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular Disease
Nonatherosclerotic Vascular Disease
Arterial Aneurysms
Venous Diseases
Diseases of the Lymphatic Channels
Shock
13.   Blood Disorders
Charles A. Linker, MD, & Lloyd E. Damon, MD
Anemias
Neutropenia
Leukemias & Other Myeloproliferative Disorders
Lymphomas
Stem Cell Transplantation
Blood Transfusions
14.   Disorders of Hemostasis, Thrombosis, & Antithrombotic
Therapy
Patrick F. Fogarty, MD, & Tracy Minichiello, MD
Platelet Disorders
Disorders of Coagulation
Antithrombotic Therapy
15.   Gastrointestinal Disorders
Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD
Symptoms & Signs of Gastrointestinal Disease
Diseases of the Peritoneum
Diseases of the Esophagus
Diseases of the Stomach & Duodenum
Diseases of the Small Intestine
Diseases of the Colon & Rectum
Anorectal Diseases
16.   Liver, Biliary Tract, & Pancreas Disorders
Lawrence S. Friedman, MD
Jaundice
Diseases of the Liver
Diseases of the Biliary Tract
Diseases of the Pancreas
17.   Breast Disorders
Armando E. Giuliano, MD, & Sara A. Hurvitz, MD
Benign Breast Disorders
Fibrocystic Condition
Fibroadenoma of the Breast
Nipple Discharge
Fat Necrosis
Breast Abscess
Disorders of the Augmented Breast
Carcinoma of the Female Breast
Carcinoma of the Male Breast
18.   Gynecologic Disorders
H. Trent MacKay, MD, MPH
Abnormal Premenopausal Bleeding
Postmenopausal Vaginal Bleeding
Premenstrual Syndrome (Premenstrual Tension)
Dysmenorrhea
Vaginitis
Cervical Polyps
Cyst & Abscess of Bartholin Duct Cervical Intraepithelial
Neoplasia (Dysplasia of the Cervix)
Carcinoma of the Cervix
Leiomyoma of the Uterus (Fibroid Tumor)
Carcinoma of the Endometrium
Carcinoma of the Vulva
Endometriosis
Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (Salpingitis, Endometritis)
Ovarian Cancer & Ovarian Tumors
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
Female Sexual Dysfunction
Infertility
Contraception
Rape
Menopausal Syndrome
19.   Obstetrics & Obstetric Disorders
Vanessa L. Rogers, MD, & Kevin C. Worley, MD
Diagnosis of Pregnancy
Essentials of Prenatal Care
Nutrition in Pregnancy
Prevention of Rhesus Alloimmunization
Lactation
Travel & Immunizations during Pregnancy
Obstetric Complications of the First & Second Trimester
Vomiting of Pregnancy (Morning Sickness) & Hyperemesis
Gravidarum (Pernicious Vomiting of Pregnancy)
Spontaneous Abortion
Recurrent (Habitual) Abortion
Ectopic Pregnancy
Gestational Trophoblastic Disease (Hydatidiform Mole &
Choriocarcinoma)
Obstetric Complications of the Second & Third Trimester
Preeclampsia-Eclampsia
Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy
Preterm (Premature) Labor
Third-Trimester Bleeding
Obstetric Complications of the Peripartum Period
Puerperal Mastitis
Chorioamnionitis & Metritis
Medical Conditions Complicating Pregnancy
Anemia
Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Thyroid Disease
Diabetes Mellitus
Chronic Hypertensive Disease
Heart Disease
Asthma
Seizure Disorders
Infectious Conditions Complicating Pregnancy
Urinary Tract Infection
Group B Streptococcal Infection
Varicella
Tuberculosis
HIV/AIDS during Pregnancy
Maternal Hepatitis B & C Carrier State
Herpes Genitalis
Syphilis, Gonorrhea, & Chlamydia trachomatis Infection
Surgical Complications during Pregnancy
Cholelithiasis, Cholecystitis, & Intrahepatic Cholestasis of
Pregnancy
Appendicitis
Carcinoma of the Breast
Ovarian Tumors
20.   Musculoskeletal & Immunologic Disorders
David B. Hellmann, MD, MACP, & John B. Imboden,
Jr., MD
Diagnosis & Evaluation
Degenerative & Crystal-Induced Arthritis
Pain Syndromes
Autoimmune Diseases
Vasculitis Syndromes
Seronegative Spondyloarthropathies
Infectious Arthritis
Infections of Bones
Other Rheumatic Disorders
Allergic Diseases
Atopic Disease
Primary Immunodeficiency Disorders
21.   Electrolyte & Acid-Base Disorders
Kerry C. Cho, MD
Disorders of Sodium Concentration
Hyperosmolar Disorders & Osmolar Gaps
Disorders of Potassium Concentration
Disorders of Calcium Concentration
Disorders of Phosphorus Concentration
Disorders of Magnesium Concentration
Acid–Base Disorders
Fluid Management
22.   Kidney Disease
Suzanne Watnick, MD, & Tonja Dirkx, MD
Assessment of Kidney Disease
Acute Kidney Injury (Acute Renal Failure)
Chronic Kidney Disease
Glomerular Diseases
Nephrotic Spectrum Disease in Primary Renal Disorders
Nephrotic Spectrum Disease from Systemic Disorders
Tubulointerstitial Diseases
Cystic Diseases of the Kidney
Multisystem Diseases with Variable Kidney Involvement
23.   Urologic Disorders
Maxwell V. Meng, MD, FACS, Marshall L. Stoller, MD,
& Thomas J. Walsh, MD, MS
Hematuria
Genitourinary Tract Infections
Acute Cystitis
Acute Pyelonephritis
Acute Bacterial Prostatitis
Chronic Bacterial Prostatitis
Nonbacterial Prostatitis
Prostatodynia
Acute Epididymitis
Interstitial Cystitis
Urinary Stone Disease
Male Erectile Dysfunction & Sexual Dysfunction
Male Infertility
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
24.   Nervous System Disorders
Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP, & Geoffrey A.
Kerchner, MD, PhD
Headache
Facial Pain
Epilepsy
Dysautonomia
Sensory Disturbances
Weakness & Paralysis
Transient Ischemic Attacks
Stroke
Intracranial & Spinal Mass Lesions
Nonmetastatic Neurologic Complications of Malignant
Disease
Pseudotumor Cerebri (Benign Intracranial Hypertension)
Selected Neurocutaneous Diseases
Movement Disorders
Dementia
Multiple Sclerosis
Neuromyelitis Optica
Vitamin E Deficiency
Spasticity
Myelopathies in AIDS
Myelopathy of Human T Cell Leukemia Virus Infection
Subacute Combined Degeneration of the Spinal Cord
Wernicke Encephalopathy
Stupor & Coma
Head Injury
Spinal Trauma
Syringomyelia
Degenerative Motor Neuron Diseases
Peripheral Neuropathies
Polyneuropathies & Mononeuritis Multiplex
Mononeuropathies
Bell Palsy
Discogenic Neck Pain
Brachial & Lumbar Plexus Lesions
Disorders of Neuromuscular Transmission
Myopathic Disorders
Periodic Paralysis Syndromes
25.   Psychiatric Disorders
Stuart J. Eisendrath, MD, & Jonathan E. Lichtmacher,
MD
Common Psychiatric Disorders
Substance Use Disorders (Drug Dependency, Drug Abuse)
Delirium & Other Cognitive Disorders (Formerly: Organic
Brain Syndrome)
Psychiatric Problems Associated with Hospitalization & Illness
26.   Endocrine Disorders
Paul A. Fitzgerald, MD
Diseases of the Hypothalamus & Pituitary Gland
Diseases of the Thyroid Gland
Diseases of the Parathyroids
Metabolic Bone Disease
Diseases of the Adrenal Cortex
Pheochromocytoma & Paraganglioma
Pancreatic & Duodenal Neuroendocrine Tumors
Diseases of the Testes & Male Breast
Amenorrhea & Menopause
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia
Clinical Use of Corticosteroids
27.   Diabetes Mellitus & Hypoglycemia
Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP(UK)
Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetic Coma
The Hypoglycemic States
28.   Lipid Disorders
Robert B. Baron, MD, MS
Lipoproteins & Atherogenesis
Lipid Fractions & the Risk of Coronary Heart Disease
Therapeutic Effects of Lowering Cholesterol
Secondary Conditions that Affect Lipid Metabolism
Clinical Presentations
Screening for High Blood Cholesterol
Treatment of High Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
High Blood Triglycerides
29.   Nutritional Disorders
Robert B. Baron, MD, MS
Protein-Energy Malnutrition
Obesity
Eating Disorders
Disorders of Vitamin Metabolism
Diet Therapy
Nutritional Support
30.   Common Problems in Infectious Diseases &
Antimicrobial Therapy
Peter V. Chin-Hong, MD, & B. Joseph Guglielmo,
PharmD
Common Problems in Infectious Diseases
Fever of Unknown Origin
Infections in the Immunocompromised Patient
Health Care–Associated Infections
Infections of the Central Nervous System
Animal & Human Bite Wounds
Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Infections in Drug Users
Acute Infectious Diarrhea
Infectious Diseases in the Returning Traveler
Traveler's Diarrhea
Antimicrobial Therapy
Selected Principles of Antimicrobial Therapy
Hypersensitivity Tests & Desensitization
Immunization Against Infectious Diseases
Recommended Immunization of Infants, Children, &
Adolescents
Recommended Immunization for Adults
Recommended Immunization for Travelers
Vaccine Safety
31.   HIV Infection & AIDS
Andrew R. Zolopa, MD, & Mitchell H. Katz, MD
Epidemiology
Etiology
Pathogenesis
Pathophysiology
Clinical Findings
Differential Diagnosis
Prevention
Treatment
Course & Prognosis
When to Refer
When to Admit
32.   Viral & Rickettsial Infections
Shruti Patel, MD, & Wayne X. Shandera, MD
Viral Diseases
Human Herpesviruses
Major Vaccine-Preventable Viral Infections
Other Neurotropic Viruses
Other Systemic Viral Diseases
Common Viral Respiratory Infections
Adenovirus Infections
Other Exanthematous Viral Infections
Viruses & Gastroenteritis
Enteroviruses that Produce Several Syndromes
Rickettsial Diseases
Typhus Group
Spotted Fevers
Other Rickettsial & Rickettsial-Like Diseases
Kawasaki Disease
33.   Bacterial & Chlamydial Infections
Brian S. Schwartz, MD
Infections Caused by Gram-Positive Bacteria
Infective Endocarditis
Infections Caused by Gram-Negative Bacteria
Actinomycosis
Nocardiosis
Infections Caused by Mycobacteria
Infections Caused by Chlamydiae
34.   Spirochetal Infections
Susan S. Philip, MD, MPH
Syphilis
Non-Sexually Transmitted Treponematoses
Selected Spirochetal Diseases
Relapsing Fever
Rat-Bite Fever
Leptospirosis
Lyme Disease (Lyme Borreliosis)
35.   Protozoal & Helminthic Infections
Philip J. Rosenthal, MD
Protozoal Infections
African Trypanosomiasis (Sleeping Sickness)
American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease)
Leishmaniasis
Malaria
Babesiosis
Toxoplasmosis
Amebiasis
Infections with Pathogenic Free-Living Amebas
Coccidiosis (Cryptosporidiosis, Isosporiasis,
Cyclosporiasis, Sarcocystosis) & Microsporidiosis
Giardiasis
Other Intestinal Flagellate Infections
Trichomoniasis
Helminthic Infections
Trematode (Fluke) Infections
Liver, Lung, & Intestinal Flukes
Cestode Infections
Intestinal Nematode (Roundworm) Infections
Invasive Nematode (Roundworm) Infections
Filariasis
36.   Mycotic Infections
Samuel A. Shelburne, MD, & Richard J. Hamill, MD
Candidiasis
Histoplasmosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Pneumocystosis (Pneumocystis jiroveci Pneumonia)
Cryptococcosis
Aspergillosis
Mucormycosis
Blastomycosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis (South American Blastomycosis)
Sporotrichosis
Penicillium marneffei Infections
Chromoblastomycosis (Chromomycosis)
Mycetoma (Maduromycosis & Actinomycetoma)
Other Opportunistic Mold Infections
Antifungal Therapy
37.   Disorders Related to Environmental Factors
Jacqueline A. Nemer, MD, FACEP
Cold & Heat
Burns
Electrical Injury
Radiation Exposure
Near Drowning
Other Disorders Related to Environmental Factors
38.   Poisoning
Kent R. Olson, MD
Initial Evaluation: Poisoning or Overdose
The Symptomatic Patient
Antidotes & Other Treatment
Diagnosis of Poisoning
Selected Poisonings
39.   Cancer
Patricia A. Cornett, MD, & Tiffany O. Dea, PharmD
Etiology
Modifiable Risk Factors
Staging
The Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Types of Cancer
Lung Cancer
Hepatobiliary Cancers
Alimentary Tract Cancers
Cancers of the Genitourinary Tract
Cancer Complications & Emergencies
Primary Cancer Treatment
Systemic Cancer Therapy
Toxicity & Dose Modification of Chemotherapeutic Agents
Prognosis
40.   Clinical Genetic Disorders
Reed E. Pyeritz, MD, PhD
Acute Intermittent Porphyria
Alkaptonuria
Down Syndrome
Fragile X Mental Retardation
Gaucher Disease
Disorders of Homocysteine Metabolism
Klinefelter Syndrome
Marfan Syndrome
Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia
41.   Sports Medicine & Outpatient Orthopedics
Anthony Luke, MD, MPH, & C. Benjamin Ma, MD
General Approach to Musculoskeletal Injuries
Shoulder
Subacromial Impingement Syndrome
Rotator Cuff Tears
Shoulder Dislocation & Instability
Adhesive Capsulitis (“Frozen Shoulder”)
Spine Problems
Low Back Pain
Spinal Stenosis
Lumbar Disk Herniation
Neck Pain
Upper Extremity
Lateral & Medial Epicondylosis
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Hip
Hip Fractures
Osteoarthritis
Knee
Knee Pain
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury
Collateral Ligament Injury
Posterior Cruciate Ligament Injury
Meniscus Injuries
Patellofemoral Pain
Osteoarthritis
Ankle Injuries
Inversion Ankle Sprains
Eversion (“High”) Ankle Sprains
Appendix: Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, Pharmacogenetic
Testing, & Laboratory Reference Intervals
C. Diana Nicoll, MD, PhD, MPA, & Chuanyi Mark Lu,
MD, PhD
Index
ONLINE-ONLY CHAPTERS
www.AccessMedicine.com/CMDT
Anti-infective Chemotherapeutic & Antibiotic Agents
B. Joseph Guglielmo, PharmD
Penicillins
Cephalosporins
Other β-Lactam Drugs
Erythromycin Group (Macrolides)
Ketolides
Tetracycline Group
Glycylcyclines
Chloramphenicol
Aminoglycosides
Polymyxins
Antituberculous Drugs
Alternative Drugs in Tuberculosis Treatment
Rifamycins
Sulfonamides & Antifolate Drugs
Sulfones Used in the Treatment of Leprosy
Specialized Drugs Used Against Bacteria
Streptogramins
Oxazolidinediones
Daptomycin
Telavancin
Quinolones
Pentamidine & Atovaquone
Urinary Antiseptics
Antifungal Drugs
Antiviral Chemotherapy
Basic Genetics
Reed E. Pyeritz, MD, PhD
Introduction to Medical Genetics
Genes & Chromosomes
Mutation
Genes in Individuals
Genes in Families
Disorders of Multifactorial Causation
Chromosomal Aberrations
The Techniques of Medical Genetics
Family History & Pedigree Analysis
Cytogenetics & Cytogenomics
Biochemical Genetics
DNA Analysis
Prenatal Diagnosis
Neoplasia: Cytogenomic & DNA Analysis
Diagnostic Testing & Medical Decision Making
C. Diana Nicoll, MD, PhD, MPA, Michael Pignone,
MD, MPH, & Chuanyi Mark Lu, MD, PhD
Benefits, Costs, & Risks
Performance of Diagnostic Tests
Test Characteristics
Use of Tests in Diagnosis & Management
Odds-Likelihood Ratios
Information Technology in Patient Care
Russ Cucina, MD, MS
Information Security & Patient Care
Clinical Uses of E-mail
Electronic Health Records
Computerized Provider Order Entry
Clinical Decision Support Systems
Social Media & The World Wide Web
Mobile Computing for Clinicians
Telemedicine
Complementary & Alternative Medicine
Kevin Barrows, MD
Botanical Medicines
Dietary Supplements
Acupuncture
Mind-Body Medicine
Women's Health Issues
Megan McNamara, MD, MSc, & Judith Walsh, MD,
MPH
Preventive Health Care
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention
Cancer Prevention
Osteoporosis Prevention
Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections
Depression Screening
Specific Issues & Conditions
Intimate Partner Violence
Eating Disorders
Sexuality & Sexual Health
Chronic Pelvic Pain
Mastalgia
The Palpable Breast Mass
Nipple Discharge
Female Pattern Hair Loss
Treatment of Varicose Veins
Age-Related Facial Changes
Authors
 
Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP
Professor and Executive Vice Chair, Department of Neurology,
University of California, San Francisco; Attending Physician,
University of California Medical Center, San Francisco
aminoffm@neurology.ucsf.edu
Nervous System Disorders
David M. Barbour, PharmD, BCPS
Pharmacist, Denver, Colorado
dbarbour99@gmail.com
Drug References
Robert B. Baron, MD, MS
Professor of Medicine; Associate Dean for Graduate and
Continuing Medical Education; Vice Chief, Division of General
Internal Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
baron@medicine.ucsf.edu
Lipid Disorders; Nutritional Disorders
Kevin Barrows, MD
Associate Clinical Professor of Family and Community Medicine,
Medical Director, Osher Center for Integrative Medicine;
Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco
barrowsk@ocim.ucsf.edu
CMDT Online—Complementary & Alternative Medicine
Thomas M. Bashore, MD
Professor of Medicine; Clinical Chief, Division of Cardiology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
thomas.bashore@duke.edu
Heart Disease
Timothy G. Berger, MD
Professor of Clinical Dermatology, Department of Dermatology,
University of California, San Francisco
bergert@derm.ucsf.edu
Dermatologic Disorders
Ranjan Chanda, MD, MPH
Transplant Nephrology Fellow, Division of Nephrology,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
References
Bonnie Chen, MD
Chief Medical Resident, Ambulatory Care, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
References
Hugo Q. Cheng, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Hospital Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco; Director, Medical
Consultation Service, University of California Medical Center, San
Francisco
quinny@medicine.ucsf.edu
Preoperative Evaluation & Perioperative Management
Mark S. Chesnutt, MD
Clinical Professor, Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, Dotter
Interventional Institute, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon; Director, Critical Care, Portland Veterans
Affairs Medical Center
chesnutm@ohsu.edu
Pulmonary Disorders
Peter V. Chin-Hong, MD
Associate Professor, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
phong@php.ucsf.edu
Common Problems in Infectious Diseases & Antimicrobial
Therapy
Kerry C. Cho, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Nephrology,
University of California, San Francisco
kerry.cho@ucsf.edu
Electrolyte & Acid-Base Disorders
Leslie R. Cockerham, MD
Chief Medical Resident, Moffitt-Long Hospital, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
References
Denise M. Connor, MD
Chief Medical Resident, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco
References
Patricia A. Cornett, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco;
Chief, Hematology/Oncology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, San Francisco, California
patricia.cornett@va.gov
Cancer
Russ Cucina, MD, MS
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Hospital Medicine;
Associate Medical Director, Information Technology, UCSF
Medical Center; University of California, San Francisco
rcucina@medicine.ucsf.edu
CMDT Online—Information Technology in Patient Care
Lloyd E. Damon, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division
of Hematology/Oncology; Director of Adult Hematologic
Malignancies and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of
California, San Francisco
damonl@medicine.ucsf.edu
Blood Disorders
Tiffany O. Dea, PharmD
Oncology Pharmacist, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California; Adjunct Professor, Thomas J. Long School
of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Stockton, California
tiffany.dea@va.gov
Cancer
Tonja Dirkx, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Nephrology,
Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Sciences University,
Portland, Oregon; Renal Clinic Director, Portland Veterans Affairs
Medical Center
dirkxt@ohsu.edu
Kidney Disease
Stuart J. Eisendrath, MD
Professor of Psychiatry; Director of Clinical Services and The
UCSF Depression Center, Langley Porter Psychiatric Hospital and
Clinics, University of California, San Francisco
stuart.eisendrath@ucsf.edu
Psychiatric Disorders
Paul A. Fitzgerald, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division
of Endocrinology, University of California, San Francisco
paul.fitzgerald@ucsf.edu
Endocrine Disorders
Patrick F. Fogarty, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine;
Director, Penn Comprehensive Hemophilia and Thrombosis
Program, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
patrick.fogarty@uphs.upenn.edu
Disorders of Hemostasis, Thrombosis, & Antithrombotic
Therapy
Lawrence S. Friedman, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Professor of
Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts; Chair, Department of Medicine, Newton-Wellesley
Hospital, Newton, Massachusetts; Assistant Chief of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
lfriedman@partners.org
Liver, Biliary Tract, & Pancreas Disorders; Hepatobiliary
Cancers (in Chapter 39)
Armando E. Giuliano, MD
Chief of Science and Medicine, John Wayne Cancer Institute;
Director, John Wayne Cancer Institute Breast Center, Saint John's
Health Center, Santa Monica, California
giulianoa@jwci.org
Breast Disorders
Ralph Gonzales, MD, MSPH
Professor of Medicine; Professor of Epidemiology & Biostatistics,
Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco
ralphg@medicine.ucsf.edu
Common Symptoms
Christopher B. Granger, MD
Professor of Medicine; Director, Cardiac Care Unit, Duke
University Medical Center, Duke Clinical Research Institute,
Durham, North Carolina
grang001@mc.duke.edu
Heart Disease
B. Joseph Guglielmo, PharmD
Professor and Chair, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of
Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco
guglielmoj@pharmacy.ucsf.edu
Common Problems in Infectious Diseases & Antimicrobial
Therapy; CMDT Online—Anti-infective Chemotherapeutic &
Antibiotic Agents
Richard J. Hamill, MD
Professor, Division of Infectious Diseases, Departments of
Medicine and Molecular Virology & Microbiology, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas
richard.hamill@med.va.gov
Mycotic Infections
G. Michael Harper, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco School of Medicine; Associate Chief of
Staff for Geriatrics, Palliative and Extended Care, San Francisco
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California
michael.harper3@med.va.gov
Geriatric Disorders
David B. Hellmann, MD, MACP
Aliki Perroti Professor of Medicine; Vice Dean for Johns Hopkins
Bayview; Chairman, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
Bayview Medical Center, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
hellmann@jhmi.edu
Musculoskeletal & Immunologic Disorders
Patrick Hranitzky, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine; Director, Clinical Cardiac
Electrophysiology; Director, Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology
Fellowship Program, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina
patrick.hranitzky@duke.edu
Heart Disease
Sara A. Hurvitz, MD
Assistant Professor; Director, Breast Oncology Program, Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles
shurvitz@mednet.ucla.edu
Breast Disorders
John B. Imboden, Jr., MD
Alice Betts Endowed Chair for Arthritis Research; Professor of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco; Chief, Division of
Rheumatology, San Francisco General Hospital
jimboden@medsfgh.ucsf.edu
Musculoskeletal & Immunologic Disorders
Meshell D. Johnson, MD
Assistant Professor, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco
meshell.johnson@ucsf.edu
Blood Vessel & Lymphatic Disorders
C. Bree Johnston, MD, MPH
Professor of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics, Department of
Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco
bree.johnston@ucsf.edu
Geriatric Disorders
Mitchell H. Katz, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine, Epidemiology & Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco; Director of Health, San
Francisco Department of Public Health
mitch.katz@sfdph.org
HIV Infection & AIDS
Robin K. Kelley, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology,
University of California, San Francisco; Staff Physician, San
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center
katie.kelley@ucsf.edu
Alimentary Tract Cancers (in Chapter 39)
Geoffrey A. Kerchner, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford Center for Memory Disorders, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, California
kerchner@stanford.edu
Nervous System Disorders
Gregory M. Ku, MD, PhD
Clinical Instructor, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
University of California, San Francisco
References
C. Seth Landefeld, MD
Professor; Chief, Division of Geriatrics; Director, UCSF-Mt. Zion
Center on Aging, University of California, San Francisco; Director,
Quality Scholars Fellowship Program, San Francisco Veterans
Affairs Medical Center
sethl@medicine.ucsf.edu
Geriatric Disorders
Christina A. Lee, MD
Chief Resident, Moffitt-Long Hospital, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco
References
Jonathan E. Lichtmacher, MD
Health Sciences Clinical Professor of Psychiatry; Director, Adult
Psychiatry Clinic, Langley Porter Hospitals and Clinics, University
of California, San Francisco
jonathanl@lppi.ucsf.edu
Psychiatric Disorders
Charles A. Linker, MD
Professor of Medicine Emeritus, University of California, San
Francisco
linkerc@medicine.ucsf.edu
Blood Disorders
Chuanyi Mark Lu, MD, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco; Chief, Hematology and
Hematopathology, Laboratory Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, San Francisco, California
mark.lu@va.gov
Appendix: Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, Pharmacogenetic
Testing, & Laboratory Reference Intervals; CMDT Online—
Diagnostic Testing & Medical Decision Making
Anthony Luke, MD, MPH
Associate Professor, Department of Orthopaedics; Director, UCSF
Primary Care Sports Medicine; Director, Human Performance
Center at the Orthopaedic Institute, University of California, San
Francisco
LukeA@orthosurg.ucsf.edu
Sports Medicine & Outpatient Orthopedics
Lawrence R. Lustig, MD
Francis A. Sooy, MD Professor of Otolaryngology—Head &
Neck Surgery; Division Chief of Otology & Neurotology,
Department of Otolaryngology—Head & Neck Surgery, University
of California, San Francisco
llustig@ohns.ucsf.edu
Ear, Nose, & Throat Disorders
C. Benjamin Ma, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery;
Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, University of
California, San Francisco
MaBen@orthosurg.ucsf.edu
Sports Medicine & Outpatient Orthopedics
H. Trent MacKay, MD, MPH
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland; Staff
Physician, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National
Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland
mackayt@mail.nih.gov
Gynecologic Disorders
Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK)
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
umesh.masharani@ucsf.edu
Diabetes Mellitus & Hypoglycemia
Megan McNamara, MD, MSc
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio; Women's Health
Medical Director, Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans Affairs
Medical Center
Megan.Mcnamara@va.gov
CMDT Online—Women's Health Issues
Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco; Chief, Gastroenterology Section, San Francisco
Veterans Affairs Medical Center
kenneth.mcquaid@med.va.gov
Gastrointestinal Disorders; Alimentary Tract Cancers (in
Chapter 39)
Maxwell V. Meng, MD, FACS
Associate Professor, Department of Urology, University of
California, San Francisco
mmeng@urology.ucsf.edu
Urologic Disorders; Cancers of the Genitourinary Tract (in
Chapter 39)
Tracy Minichiello, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco; Chief, Anticoagulation and Thrombosis Services, San
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center
minichie@medicine.ucsf.edu
Disorders of Hemostasis, Thrombosis, & Antithrombotic
Therapy
Paul L. Nadler, MD
Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine; Director, Screening and
Acute Care Clinic, Division of General Internal Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
nadler@medicine.ucsf.edu
Common Symptoms
Jacqueline A. Nemer, MD, FACEP
Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine, Department of
Emergency Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
jacqueline.nemer@ucsf.edu
Disorders Related to Environmental Factors
C. Diana Nicoll, MD, PhD, MPA
Clinical Professor and Vice Chair, Department of Laboratory
Medicine; Associate Dean, University of California, San Francisco;
Chief of Staff and Chief, Laboratory Medicine Service, San
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center
diana.nicoll@va.gov
Appendix: Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, Pharmacogenetic
Testing, & Laboratory Reference Intervals; CMDT Online—
Diagnostic Testing & Medical Decision Making
Grace J. No, MD
Fellow, Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco
References
Kent R. Olson, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine, Pediatrics, and Pharmacy,
University of California, San Francisco; Medical Director, San
Francisco Division, California Poison Control System
kent.olson@ucsf.edu
Poisoning
Robert Osterhoff, MD
Fellow, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco
References
Christopher D. Owens, MD, MSc
Assistant Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular and
Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco
christopher.owens@ucsfmedctr.org
Blood Vessel & Lymphatic Disorders
Steven Z. Pantilat, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Department of Medicine; Alan M.
Kates and John M. Burnard Endowed Chair in Palliative Care;
Director, Palliative Care Program, University of California, San
Francisco
stevep@medicine.ucsf.edu
Palliative Care & Pain Management
Manesh R. Patel, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina
patel017@notes.duke.edu
Heart Disease
Shruti Patel, MD
Fellow, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
shrutip@bcm.tmc.edu
Viral & Rickettsial Infections
Susan S. Philip, MD, MPH
Assistant Clinical Professor, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco;
Director, STD Prevention and Control Section, San Francisco
Department of Public Health, San Francisco, California
susan.philip@sfdph.org
Spirochetal Infections
Michael Pignone, MD, MPH
Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
pignone@med.unc.edu
Disease Prevention & Health Promotion; CMDT Online—
Diagnostic Testing & Medical Decision Making
Thomas J. Prendergast, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science
University; Section Chief, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Portland, Oregon
thomas.prendergast@va.gov
Pulmonary Disorders
Reed E. Pyeritz, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine and Genetics; Vice-Chair for Academic
Affairs, Department of Medicine, Raymond and Ruth Perelman
School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
reed.pyeritz@uphs.upenn.edu
Clinical Genetic Disorders; CMDT Online—Basic Genetics
Gene R. Quinn, MD, MS
Resident Physician, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco
References
Michael W. Rabow, MD, FAAHPM
Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine,
Department of Medicine; Director, Symptom Management Service,
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco
mrabow@medicine.ucsf.edu
Palliative Care & Pain Management
Joseph H. Rapp, MD
Professor of Surgery in Residence, University of California,
San Francisco; Chief, Vascular Surgery Service, Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, San Francisco, California
rappj@surgery.ucsf.edu
Blood Vessel & Lymphatic Disorders
Paul Riordan-Eva, FRCS, FRCOphth
Consultant Ophthalmologist, King's College Hospital;
Honorary Senior Lecturer (Teaching), King's College London
School of Medicine at Guy's, King's College, and St. Thomas’
Hospitals, London, United Kingdom
paulreva@doctors.org.uk
Disorders of the Eyes & Lids
Vanessa L. Rogers, MD
Assistant Professor, Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
vanessa.rogers@utsouthwestern.edu
Obstetrics & Obstetric Disorders
Philip J. Rosenthal, MD
Professor, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco; San Francisco General
Hospital
prosenthal@medsfgh.ucsf.edu
Protozoal & Helminthic Infections
René Salazar, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor, Division of General Internal Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
salazarr@medicine.ucsf.edu
Disease Prevention & Health Promotion
Joshua S. Schindler, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Otolaryngology, Oregon Health
& Science University, Portland, Oregon; Medical Director, OHSU-
Northwest Clinic for Voice and Swallowing
schindlj@ohsu.edu
Ear, Nose, & Throat Disorders
Brian S. Schwartz, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
brian.schwartz@ucsf.edu
Bacterial & Chlamydial Infections
Wayne X. Shandera, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
shandera@bcm.tmc.edu
Viral & Rickettsial Infections
Samuel A. Shelburne, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
samuels@bcm.tmc.edu
Mycotic Infections
Jenny Siegel, MD
Chief Resident, San Francisco General Hospital, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
References
Marshall L. Stoller, MD
Professor and Vice Chairman, Department of Urology, University
of California, San Francisco
mstoller@urology.ucsf.edu
Urologic Disorders
Michael Sutters, MD, MRCP(UK)
Attending Nephrologist, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle,
Washington; Affiliate Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of
Nephrology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
Washington
michael.sutters@vmmc.org
Systemic Hypertension
Adam Templeton, MD
Chief Medical Resident, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco
References
Philip Tiso
Principal Editor, Division of General Internal Medicine, University
of California, San Francisco
References
Judith Walsh, MD, MPH
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of General Internal
Medicine, Women's Health Center of Excellence, University of
California, San Francisco
Judith.Walsh@ucsf.edu
CMDT Online—Women's Health Issues
Thomas J. Walsh, MD, MS
Assistant Professor, Department of Urology, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington
walsht@u.washington.edu
Urologic Disorders
Sunny Wang, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of Hematology
and Oncology, University of California, San Francisco; San
Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center
sunny.wang@ucsf.edu
Lung Cancer (in Chapter 39)
Suzanne Watnick, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and
Hypertension, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland;
Director, Dialysis Unit, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Portland, Oregon
watnicks@ohsu.edu
Kidney Disease
Kevin C. Worley, MD
Assistant Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
Kevin.Worley@UTSouthwestern.edu
Obstetrics & Obstetric Disorders
Andrew R. Zolopa, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases
and Geographic Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California
azolopa@stanford.edu
HIV Infection & AIDS
Preface
 
Current Medical Diagnosis & Treatment 2012 is the 51st edition
of this single-source reference for practitioners in both hospital and
ambulatory settings. The book emphasizes the practical features of
clinical diagnosis and patient management in all fields of internal
medicine and in specialties of interest to primary care practitioners
and to subspecialists who provide general care.
INTENDED AUDIENCE
House officers, medical students, and all other health professions
students will find the descriptions of diagnostic and therapeutic
modalities, with citations to the current literature, of everyday
usefulness in patient care.
Internists, family physicians, hospitalists, nurse practitioners,
physicians’ assistants, and all primary care providers will appreciate
CMDT as a ready reference and refresher text. Physicians in other
specialties, pharmacists, and dentists will find the book a useful
basic medical reference text. Nurses, nurse-practitioners, and
physicians’ assistants will welcome the format and scope of the
book as a means of referencing medical diagnosis and treatment.
Patients and their family members who seek information about
the nature of specific diseases and their diagnosis and treatment may
also find this book to be a valuable resource.
NEW IN THIS EDITION
•    New data outlining criteria for axillary node dissection in
breast cancer
•    New topics: Snoring; and a selection of common
musculoskeletal 
problems 
including 
subacromial
impingement syndrome, rotator cuff tear, anterior cruciate
ligament and meniscus injuries, patellofemoral pain
syndrome, and inversion and eversion ankle sprains
•    Revised discussion on radiation exposure from medical
procedures
•    Recommendations for dabigatran anticoagulation
therapy
•    Extensive revision of Kidney Disease chapter
•    Substantial revision on medical and surgical
complications during pregnancy
•    Significant update on the safety of thiazolidinediones
and the role of bariatric surgery in patients with diabetes
mellitus
•    Updated section on evaluating infertility in women
•    Update on antiemetics and use and safety of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
•    Updated section on immunization requirements
•    Inclusion of Sports Medicine & Outpatient Orthopedics
chapter
•    New CMDT Online chapter on Women's Health Issues
OUTSTANDING FEATURES
•    Medical advances up to time of annual publication
•    Detailed presentation of all primary care topics,
including 
gynecology, 
obstetrics, 
dermatology,
ophthalmology, otolaryngology, psychiatry, neurology,
toxicology, urology, geriatrics, orthopedics, preventive
medicine, and palliative care
•    Concise format, facilitating efficient use in any practice
setting
•    More than 1000 diseases and disorders
•    Only text with annual update on HIV infection and AIDS
•    Specific disease prevention information
•    Easy access to drug dosages, with trade names
indexed and costs updated in each edition
•    Recent references, with unique identifiers (PubMed,
PMID numbers) for rapid downloading of article abstracts
and, in some instances, full-text reference articles
•    ICD-9 codes listed on the inside covers
 
CMDT Online (www.AccessMedicine.com) provides full electronic
access to CMDT 2012 plus expanded basic science information
and six additional chapters. The six online-only chapters (Anti-
infective Chemotherapeutic & Antibiotic Agents, Basic Genetics,
Diagnostic Testing & Medical Decision Making, Information
Technology in Patient Care, Complementary & Alternative
Medicine, and Women's Health Issues) are available at
www.AccessMedicine.com/CMDT.
CMDT Online is updated throughout the year and includes a
dedicated Media Gallery as well as links to related Web sites.
Subscribers also receive access to Diagnosaurus with 1000+
differential diagnoses, Pocket Guide to Diagnostic Tests, Quick
Answers, and CURRENT Practice Guidelines in Primary Care.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank our associate authors for participating once again
in the annual updating of this important book. We are especially
grateful to two authors who are leaving CMDT this year: Susan
Cox, MD and Gail Morrison, MD. These authors have contributed
hours upon hours of work in culling and distilling the literature in
their specialty areas and we have all benefited from their clinical
wisdom and commitment.
Many students and physicians also have contributed useful
suggestions to this and previous editions, and we are grateful. We
continue to welcome comments and recommendations for future
editions in writing or via electronic mail. The editors’ and authors’
institutional and e-mail addresses are given in the Authors section.
Stephen J. McPhee, MD
smcphee@medicine.ucsf.edu
Maxine A. Papadakis, MD
papadakM@medsch.ucsf.edu
Michael W. Rabow, MD
mrabow@medicine.ucsf.edu
San Francisco, California
September 2011
From inability to let alone; from too much zeal for the new and
contempt for what is old; from putting knowledge before wisdom,
and science before art and cleverness before common sense; from
treating patients as cases; and from making the cure of the disease
more grievous than the endurance of the same, Good Lord, deliver
us.
—Sir Robert Hutchison
 
 
Disease Prevention &
Health Promotion
Michael Pignone, MD, MPH,
& René Salazar, MD
GENERAL APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT
 
The medical interview serves several functions. It is used to collect
information to assist in diagnosis (the “history” of the present
illness), to assess and communicate prognosis, to establish a
therapeutic relationship, and to reach agreement with the patient
about further diagnostic procedures and therapeutic options. It also
serves as an opportunity to influence patient behavior, such as in
motivational discussions about smoking cessation or medication
adherence. Interviewing techniques that avoid domination by the
clinician increase patient involvement in care and patient satisfaction.
Effective clinician-patient communication and increased patient
involvement can improve health outcomes.
Patient Adherence
For many illnesses, treatment depends on difficult fundamental
behavioral changes, including alterations in diet, taking up exercise,
giving up smoking, cutting down drinking, and adhering to
medication regimens that are often complex. Adherence is a
problem in every practice; up to 50% of patients fail to achieve full
adherence, and one-third never take their medicines. Many patients
with medical problems, even those with access to care, do not seek
appropriate care or may drop out of care prematurely. Adherence
rates for short-term, self-administered therapies are higher than for
long-term therapies and are inversely correlated with the number of
interventions, their complexity and cost, and the patient's perception
of overmedication.
As an example, in HIV-infected patients, adherence to
antiretroviral therapy is a crucial determinant of treatment success.
Studies have unequivocally demonstrated a close relationship
between patient adherence and plasma HIV RNA levels, CD4 cell
counts, and mortality. Adherence levels of > 95% are needed to
maintain virologic suppression. However, studies show that over
60% of patients are < 90% adherent and that adherence tends to
decrease over time.
Patient reasons for nonadherence include simple forgetfulness,
being away from home, being busy, and changes in daily routine.
Other reasons include psychiatric disorders (depression or
substance abuse), uncertainty about the effectiveness of treatment,
lack of knowledge about the consequences of poor adherence,
regimen complexity, and treatment side effects.
Patients seem better able to take prescribed medications than to
adhere to recommendations to change their diet, exercise habits, or
alcohol intake or to perform various self-care activities (such as
monitoring blood glucose levels at home). A 2008 review on the
effectiveness of interventions to improve medication adherence
found that for short-term regimens, adherence to medications can
be improved by giving clear instructions. Writing out advice to
patients, including changes in medication, may be helpful. Because
low functional health literacy is common (almost half of English-
speaking US patients are unable to read and understand standard
health education materials), other forms of communication—such as
illustrated simple text, videotapes, or oral instructions—may be
more effective. For non–English-speaking patients, clinicians and
health care delivery systems can work to provide culturally and
linguistically appropriate health services.
To help improve adherence to long-term regimens, clinicians can
work with patients to reach agreement on the goals for therapy,
provide information about the regimen, ensure understanding by
using the “teach-back” method, counsel about the importance of
adherence and how to organize medication-taking, reinforce self-
monitoring, provide more convenient care, prescribe a simple
dosage regimen for all medications (preferably one or two doses
daily), suggest ways to help in remembering to take doses (time of
day, mealtime, alarms) and to keep appointments, and provide
ways to simplify dosing (medication boxes). Single-unit doses
supplied in foil wrappers can increase adherence but should be
avoided for patients who have difficulty opening them. Medication
boxes with compartments (eg, Medisets) that are filled weekly are
useful. Microelectronic devices can provide feedback to show
patients whether they have taken doses as scheduled or to notify
patients within a day if doses are skipped. Reminders, including cell
phone text messages, are another effective means of encouraging
adherence. The clinician can also enlist social support from family
and friends, recruit an adherence monitor, provide a more
convenient care environment, and provide rewards and recognition
for the patient's efforts to follow the regimen. Collaborative
programs that utilize pharmacists to help ensure adherence have
also been shown to be effective.
Adherence is also improved when a trusting doctor-patient
relationship has been established and when patients actively
participate in their care. Clinicians can improve patient adherence
by inquiring specifically about the behaviors in question. When
asked, many patients admit to incomplete adherence with
medication regimens, with advice about giving up cigarettes, or with
engaging only in “safer sex” practices. Although difficult, sufficient
time must be made available for communication of health messages.
Medication adherence can be assessed generally with a single
question: “In the past month, how often did you take your
medications as the doctor prescribed?” Other ways of assessing
medication adherence include pill counts and refill records;
monitoring serum, urine, or saliva levels of drugs or metabolites;
watching 
for 
appointment 
nonattendance 
and 
treatment
nonresponse; and assessing predictable drug effects such as weight
changes with diuretics or bradycardia from β-blockers. In some
conditions, even partial adherence, as with drug treatment of
hypertension and diabetes mellitus, improves outcomes compared
with nonadherence; in other cases, such as HIV antiretroviral
therapy or treatment of tuberculosis, partial adherence may be
worse than complete nonadherence.
 Guiding Principles of Care
Ethical decisions are often called for in medical practice, at both the
“micro” level of the individual patient-clinician relationship and at the
“macro” level of the allocation of resources. Ethical principles that
guide the successful approach to diagnosis and treatment are
honesty, beneficence, justice, avoidance of conflict of interest, and
the pledge to do no harm. Increasingly, Western medicine involves
patients in important decisions about medical care, including how far
to proceed with treatment of patients who have terminal illnesses
(see Chapter 5).
The clinician's role does not end with diagnosis and treatment.
The importance of the empathic clinician in helping patients and their
families bear the burden of serious illness and death cannot be
overemphasized. “To cure sometimes, to relieve often, and to
comfort always” is a French saying as apt today as it was five
centuries ago—as is Francis Peabody's admonition: “The secret of
the care of the patient is in caring for the patient.” Training to
improve mindfulness and enhance patient-centered communication
increases patient satisfaction and may also improve clinician
satisfaction.
Haynes RB et al. Interventions for enhancing medication
adherence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Apr
16;(2):CD000011. [PMID: 18425859]
 
Krasner MS et al. Association of an educational program in
mindful communication with burnout, empathy and attitudes among
primary care physicians. JAMA. 2009 Sep 23; 302(12):1284–93.
[PMID: 19773563]
 
Lester RT et al. Effects of a mobile phone short message service
on antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): a
randomised trial. Lancet. 2010 Nov 27;376(9755): 1838–45.
[PMID: 21071074]
 
Weber CA et al. Pharmacist-physician co-management of
hypertension and reduction in 24-hour ambulatory blood
pressures. Arch Intern Med. 2010 Oct 11;170(18):1634–9.
[PMID: 20937921]
 
HEALTH MAINTENANCE &
DISEASE PREVENTION
 
Preventive medicine can be categorized as primary, secondary, or
tertiary. Primary prevention aims to remove or reduce disease risk
factors (eg, immunization, giving up or not starting smoking).
Secondary prevention techniques promote early detection of
disease or precursor states (eg, routine cervical Papanicolaou
screening to detect carcinoma or dysplasia of the cervix). Tertiary
prevention measures are aimed at limiting the impact of established
disease (eg, partial mastectomy and radiation therapy to remove
and control localized breast cancer). Tables 1–1 and 1–2 give
leading causes of death in the United States and estimates of deaths
from preventable causes.
Many effective preventive services are underutilized, and few
adults receive all of the most strongly recommended services. The
three highest-ranking services in terms of potential health benefits
and cost-effectiveness include discussing aspirin use with high-risk
adults, tobacco-use screening and brief interventions, and
immunizing children. Other high-ranking services with data with
substantial room for improvement in utilization are screening adults
aged 50 and older for colorectal cancer, immunizing adults aged 65
and older against pneumococcal disease, and screening young
women for Chlamydia.
Several methods, including the use of provider or patient
reminder systems, reorganization of care environments, and possibly
provision of financial incentives, can increase utilization of preventive
services, but such methods have not been widely adopted.
 
Table 1–1. Leading causes of death in the United States, 2008.
 
 
 
Category
Estimate
All causes
2,472,699
1. Diseases of the heart
617,527
2. Malignant neoplasms
566,137
3. Chronic lower respiratory diseases
141,075
4. Cerebrovascular diseases
133,750
5. Accidents (unintentional injuries)
121,207
6. Alzheimer disease
82,476
7. Diabetes mellitus
70,601
8. Influenza and pneumonia
56,335
9. Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and
nephrosis
48,283
10. Septicemia
35,961
Source: National Center for Health Statistics 2010.
 
Table 1–2. Deaths from all causses attributable to common
preventable risk factors. (Numbers given in the thousands.)
 
 
BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; LDL, low-density lipoprotein.
Note: Numbers of deaths cannot be summed across categories.
Used, with permission, from Danaei G et al. The preventable causes of
death in the United States: comparative risk assessment of dietary,
lifestyle, 
and 
metabolic 
risk 
factors. 
PLoS 
Med. 
2009 Apr
28;6(4):e1000058.
Danaei G et al. The preventable causes of death in the United
States: comparative risk assessment of dietary, lifestyle, and
metabolic risk factors. PLoS Med. 2009 Apr 28;6(4):e1000058.
[PMID: 19399161]
 
Gavagan TF et al. Effect of financial incentives on improvement in
medical quality indicators for primary care. J Am Board Fam Med.
2010 Sep–Oct;23(5):622–31. [PMID: 20823357]
 
Maciosek MV et al. Priorities among effective clinical preventive
services: results of a systematic review and analysis. Am J Prev
Med. 2006 Jul;31(1):52–61. [PMID: 16777543]
 
Shenson D et al. Delivery of preventive services to adults aged 50-
64: monitoring performance using a composite measure, 1997–
2004. J Gen Intern Med. 2008 Jun;23(6):733–40. [PMID:
18317846]
 
PREVENTION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Much of the decline in the incidence and fatality rates of infectious
diseases is attributable to public health measures—especially
immunization, improved sanitation, and better nutrition.
Immunization remains the best means of preventing many
infectious diseases. Recommended immunization schedules for
children 
and 
adolescents 
can 
be 
found 
online 
at
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/rec/schedules, and the schedule for adults is
outlined in Table 30–12. Thimerosal-free hepatitis B vaccination is
available for newborns and infants, and despite the disproved
relationship between vaccines and autism, thimerosal-free vaccines
are available for pregnant women. Substantial vaccine-preventable
morbidity and mortality continue to occur among adults from
vaccine-preventable diseases, such as hepatitis A, hepatitis B,
influenza, and pneumococcal infections. For example, in adults in
the United States, there are an estimated 50,000–70,000 deaths
annually from influenza, hepatitis B, and invasive pneumococcal
disease. Strategies to enhance vaccinations include increasing
community demand for vaccinations; enhancing access to
vaccination services; and provider- or system-based interventions,
such as reminder systems.
Evidence suggests annual influenza vaccination is safe and
effective with potential benefit in all age groups, and the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends routine
influenza vaccination for all persons aged 6 months and older, which
is an expansion of previous recommendations for annual vaccination
of all adults aged 19–49 years. When vaccine supply is limited,
certain groups should be given priority, such as adults 50 years and
older, individuals with chronic illness or immunosuppression, and
pregnant women. An alternative high-dose inactivated vaccine for
adults 65 years and older is available. This inactivated trivalent
vaccine contains 60 mcg of hemagglutinin antigen per influenza
vaccine virus strain (Fluzone High-Dose [Sanofi Pasteur]). Adults
65 years and older can receive either the standard dose or high-
dose vaccine, whereas those younger than 65 years should receive
a standard-dose preparation.
Increasing reports of pertussis among US adolescents, adults,
and their infant contacts have stimulated vaccine development for
older age groups. In 2010, several states reported an increase in the
number of pertussis cases, including California where more than
7000 cases were reported. A safe and effective tetanus-diphtheria
5-component acellular pertussis vaccine (Tdap) is available for use
in adolescents and in adults younger than 65 years. Compared with
DTaP, which is used in children under the age of 7, Tdap has a
reduced dose of the diphtheria and pertussis vaccines. The ACIP
recommends routine use of a single dose of Tdap for adults aged
19–64 years to replace the next booster dose of tetanus and
diphtheria toxoids vaccine (Td). Due to increasing reports of
pertussis in the United States, clinicians may choose to give Tdap to
persons aged 65 years and older despite limited published data on
the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in this age group.
Both hepatitis A vaccine and immune globulin provide
protection against hepatitis A; however, administration of immune
globulin may provide a modest benefit over vaccination in some
settings. A recombinant protein hepatitis E vaccine has been
developed that has proven safe and efficacious in preventing
hepatitis E among high-risk populations (such as those in Nepal).
Human papillomavirus (HPV) virus-like particle (VLP)
vaccines have demonstrated effectiveness in preventing persistent
HPV infections, and thus may impact the rate of cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) II–III. The American Cancer Society
and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends
routine HPV vaccination for girls aged 11–12 years. The AAP also
recommends that all unvaccinated girls and women ages 13–26
years receive the HPV vaccine. Trials demonstrate efficacy of
bivalent HPV (16/18) or quadrivalent HPV (6/11/16/18) L1 virus-
like particle vaccines in preventing new HPV infection and cervical
lesions but not in women with preexisting infection. It is estimated
that routine use of HPV vaccination of females at 11 to 12 years of
age and catch-up vaccination of females at age 13–16 (with
vaccination of girls age 9 and 10 at the discretion of the physician)
could prevent 95% to 100% of CIN and adenocarcinoma in situ,
99% of genital warts and approximately 70% of cervical cancer
cases worldwide; thus, the role of HPV testing will need
redefinition. Despite the effectiveness of the vaccine, rates of
immunization are low. Interventions addressing personal beliefs and
system barriers to vaccinations may help address the slow adoption
of this vaccine.
Persons traveling to countries where infections are endemic
should take precautions described in Chapter 30. Immunization
registries—confidential, 
population-based, 
computerized
information systems that collect vaccination data about all residents
of a geographic area—can be used to increase and sustain high
vaccination coverage.
Skin testing for tuberculosis and treating selected patients
reduce the risk of reactivation tuberculosis (see Table 9–11). Two
blood tests, which are not confounded by prior BCG (bacille
Calmette-Guérin) vaccination, have been developed to detect
tuberculosis infection by measuring in vitro T-cell interferon-gamma
release in response to two antigens (the enzyme-linked immunospot
[ELISpot], [T-SPOT.TB] and the other, a quantitative ELISA
[QuantiFERON-TBGold] test). These T-cell–based assays have an
excellent specificity that is higher than tuberculin skin testing in
BCG-vaccinated populations. The rate of tuberculosis in the United
States has been declining since 1992. In 2009, the US tuberculosis
rate was 3.8 cases per 100,000 population, a decrease of 11.4%
from the 2008 rate (4.2 per 100,000). This represents the greatest
single-year decrease ever recorded and was the lowest recorded
rate since national tuberculosis surveillance began in 1953.
The Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis has
called for a renewed commitment to eliminating tuberculosis in the
United States, and the Institute of Medicine has published a detailed
plan for achieving that goal. Patients with HIV infection are at an
especially high risk for tuberculosis, and tuberculosis preventive
therapy in the era of HIV will require further work to overcome
implementation barriers and to identify optimal duration of
preventive therapy and treatment approach for individuals receiving
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
Treatment of tuberculosis poses a risk of hepatotoxicity and thus
requires close monitoring of liver transaminases. Alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) monitoring during the treatment of latent
tuberculosis infection is recommended for certain individuals
(preexisting liver disease, pregnancy, chronic alcohol consumption).
ALT should be monitored in HIV-infected patients during treatment
of tuberculosis disease and should be considered in patients over
the age of 35. Symptomatic patients with an ALT elevation three
times the upper limit of normal (ULN) or asymptomatic patients
with an elevation five times the ULN should be treated with a
modified or alternative regimen.
HIV infection is now the major infectious disease problem in the
world, and it affects 850,000–950,000 persons in the United
States. Since sexual contact is a common mode of transmission,
primary prevention relies on eliminating unsafe sexual behavior by
promoting abstinence, later onset of first sexual activity, decreased
number of partners, and use of latex condoms. Appropriately used,
condoms can reduce the rate of HIV transmission by nearly 70%.
In one study, couples with one infected partner who used condoms
inconsistently had a considerable risk of infection: the rate of
seroconversion was estimated to be 13% after 24 months. No
seroconversions were noted with consistent condom use.
Unfortunately, as many as one-third of HIV-positive persons
continue unprotected sexual practices after learning that they are
HIV-infected. Tailored group educational intervention focused on
practicing “safer sex” can reduce their transmission-risk behaviors
with partners who are not HIV-positive. Other approaches to
prevent HIV infection include treatment of sexually transmitted
diseases, development of vaginal microbicides, and vaccine
development. Increasingly, cases of HIV infection are transmitted
by injection drug use. HIV prevention activities should include
provision of sterile injection equipment for these individuals.
With regard to secondary prevention, many HIV-infected
persons in the United States receive the diagnosis at advanced
stages of immunosuppression, and almost all will progress to AIDS
if untreated. On the other hand, HAART substantially reduces the
risk of clinical progression or death in patients with advanced
immunosuppression. Screening tests for HIV are extremely (>
99%) accurate. While the benefits of HIV screening appear to
outweigh its harms, current screening is generally based on
individual patient risk factors. Such screening can identify persons at
risk for AIDS but misses a substantial proportion of those infected.
Nonetheless, the yield from screening higher prevalence populations
is substantially greater than that from screening the general
population, and more widespread screening of the population
remains controversial.
In 
immunocompromised 
patients, 
live 
vaccines 
are
contraindicated but many killed or component vaccines are safe and
recommended. Asymptomatic HIV-infected patients have not
shown adverse consequences when given live MMR and influenza
vaccinations as well as tetanus, hepatitis B, H influenza type b and
pneumococcal vaccinations—all should be given. However, if
poliomyelitis immunization is required, the inactivated poliomyelitis
vaccine is indicated. In symptomatic HIV-infected patients, live
virus vaccines such as MMR should generally be avoided, but
annual influenza vaccination is safe.
Whenever possible, immunizations should be completed before
procedures that require or induce immunosuppression (organ
transplantation or chemotherapy), or that reduce immunogenic
responses (splenectomy). However, if this is not possible, the
patient may mount only a partial immune response, yet even this
partial response can be beneficial. Patients who undergo allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation lose preexisting immunities and should
be revaccinated. In many situations, family members should also be
vaccinated to protect the immunocompromised patient, although
oral live polio vaccine should be avoided because of the risk of
infecting the patient.
New cases of poliomyelitis have been reported in the United
States, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic recently, slowing its
eradication in the Western Hemisphere. Worldwide eradication of
poliovirus, including endemic areas such as India, remains
challenging.
During March and April 2009, a new influenza A (H1N1)
virus was determined to be the cause of an outbreak of respiratory
illness in Mexico; during the same time, two children in the United
States became infected with the same virus. By June 2009, the
World Health Organization (WHO) declared a worldwide
pandemic. In August 2010, the WHO International Health
Regulations Emergency Committee declared an end to the 2009
H1N1 pandemic globally.
Herpes zoster, caused by reactivation from previous varicella
zoster virus (VZV) infection, affects many older adults and people
with immune system dysfunction. Whites are at higher risk than
other ethnic groups and the incidence in adults age 65 and older
may be higher than previously described. It can cause postherpetic
neuralgia, a potentially debilitating chronic pain syndrome. A
varicella vaccine is available for the prevention of herpes zoster.
Several clinical trials have shown that this vaccine (Zostavax) is
safe, elevates VZV-specific cell-mediated immunity, and
significantly reduces the incidence of herpes zoster and postherpetic
neuralgia in persons older than 60 years. In one randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial among more than 38,000
older adults, the vaccine reduced the incidence of postherpetic
neuralgia by 66% and the incidence of herpes zoster by 51%. The
ACIP recommends routine zoster vaccination, administered as a
one-time subcutaneous dose (0.65 mL), of all persons aged 60
years or older. Persons who report a previous episode of zoster
can be vaccinated; however, the vaccine is contraindicated in
immunocompromised (primary or acquired) individuals. The
durability of vaccine response and whether any booster vaccination
is needed are still uncertain. The cost effectiveness of the vaccine
varies substantially, and the patient's age should be considered in
vaccine recommendations. One study reported a cost-effectiveness
exceeding $100,000 per quality-adjusted life year saved. Despite
its availability, uptake of the vaccine remains low at 2–7%
nationally. Financial barriers (cost, limited knowledge of
reimbursement) have had a significant impact on its underutilization.
In 2008, the United States Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) reviewed evidence to reaffirm its recommendation on
limiting screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults. New
evidence was reviewed, which continues to support routine
screening in pregnant women but not in other groups of adults.
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Recommended
adult immunization schedule: United States, 2009. Ann Intern
Med. 2009 Jan 6;150(1):40–4. [PMID: 19124819]
 
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious
Diseases. Prevention of human papillomavirus infection: provisional
recommendations for immunization of girls and women with
quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccine. Pediatrics. 2007
Sep;120(3):666–8. [PMID: 17766541]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2009 H1N1
Flu Situation Update, 2010. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Decrease in
reported tuberculosis cases - United States, 2009. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Mar 19;59(10):289–94. [PMID:
20300055]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Pertussis
(Whooping Cough) Outbreaks, 2010. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/outbreaks.html
 
Chaves SS et al. Chickenpox exposure and herpes zoster disease
incidence in older adults in the U.S. Public Health Rep. 2007
Mar–Apr;122(2):155–9. [PMID: 17357357]
 
Churchyard GJ et al. Tuberculosis preventive therapy in the era of
HIV infection: overview and research priorities. J Infect Dis. 2007
Aug 15;196(Suppl 1):S52–62. [PMID: 17624827]
 
Fiore AE et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Prevention and control of influenza with vaccines:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP), 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Aug
6;59(RR-8):1–62. [PMID: 20689501]
 
FUTURE II Study Group. Quadrivalent vaccine against human
papillomavirus to prevent high-grade cervical lesions. N Engl J
Med. 2007 May 10;356(19):1915–27. [PMID: 17494925]
 
Garland SM et al. Quadrivalent vaccine against human
papillomavirus to prevent anogenital diseases. N Engl J Med. 2007
May 10;356(19):1928–43. [PMID: 17494926]
 
Gershon AA et al. Varicella vaccine in the United States: a decade
of prevention and the way forward. J Infect Dis. 2008 Mar 1;
197(Suppl 2):S39–40. [PMID: 18419405]
 
Gidengil CA et al. Tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis
vaccination of adults in the USA. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2008 Jul;
7(5):621–34. [PMID: 18564017]
 
Harpaz R et al; Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Prevention of herpes zoster: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm
Rep. 2008 Jun 6;57(RR-5):1–30. [PMID: 18528318]
 
Hurley LP et al. Barriers to the use of herpes zoster vaccine. Ann
Intern Med. 2010 May 4;152(9):555–60. [PMID: 20439573]
 
Kahn JA et al. Rates of human papillomavirus vaccination,
attitudes about vaccination, and human papillomavirus prevalence
in young women. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 May;111(5): 1103–10.
[PMID: 18448742]
 
Lalvani A. Diagnosing tuberculosis infection in the 21st century:
new tools to tackle an old enemy. Chest. 2007 Jun 131(6):1898–
906. [PMID: 17565023]
 
Lin K et al; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for
asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults: evidence for the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Jul 1;149(1):W20–4. [PMID:
18591632]
 
Paavonen J et al. Efficacy of a prophylactic adjuvanted bivalent LI
virus-like-particle vaccine against infection with human
papillomavirus types 16 and 18 in young women: an interim
analysis of a phase III double-blind, randomized controlled trial.
Lancet. 2007 Jun 30:369(9580):2161–70. [PMID: 17602732]
 
Pai M et al. Systematic review: T-cell-based assays for the
diagnosis of latent tuberculosis infection: an update. Ann Intern
Med. 2008 Aug 5;149(3):177–84. [PMID: 18593687]
 
Rambout L. Prophylactic vaccination against human papillomavirus
infection and disease in women: a systemic review of randomized
controlled trials. CMAJ. 2007 Aug 28;177(5): 469–79. [PMID:
17671238]
 
Rothberg MB et al. Cost-effectiveness of a vaccine to prevent
herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia in older adults. Clin Infect
Dis. 2007 May 15;44(10):1280–8. [PMID: 17443464]
 
Saslow D et al. American Cancer Society Guideline for human
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine use to prevent cervical cancer and
its precursors. CA Cancer J Clin. 2007 Jan–Feb;57(1):7–28.
[PMID: 17237032]
 
Saukkonen JJ et al. An official ATS statement: hepatotoxicity of
antituberculosis therapy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Oct
15;174(8):935–52. [PMID: 17021358]
 
Schiffman M. Integration of human papillomavirus vaccination,
cytology and human papillomavirus testing. Cancer. 2007 Jun
25;111(3):145–53. [PMID: 17448822]
 
Shrestha MP et al. Safety and efficacy of a recombinant hepatitis E
vaccine. N Engl J Med. 2007 Mar 1;356(9):895–903. [PMID:
17329696]
 
Thompson KM et al. Eradication versus control for poliomyelitis:
an economic analysis. Lancet. 2007 Apr 21;369(9570):1363–71.
[PMID: 17448822]
 
Victor JC et al. Hepatitis A vaccine versus immune globulin for
postexposure prophylaxis. N Engl J Med. 2007 Oct 25;357(17):
1685–94. [PMID: 17947390]
 
Zimmerman RK. HPV vaccine and its recommendations, 2007. J
Fam Pract. 2007 Feb;56 (2 Suppl Vaccines):S1–5, C1. [PMID:
17270106]
 
PREVENTION OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
Cardiovascular diseases, including coronary heart disease (CHD)
and stroke, represent two of the most important causes of morbidity
and mortality in developed countries. Several risk factors increase
the risk for coronary disease and stroke. These risk factors can be
divided into those that are modifiable (eg, lipid disorders,
hypertension, cigarette smoking) and those that are not (eg, gender,
age, family history of early coronary disease). Impressive declines in
age-specific mortality rates from heart disease and stroke have been
achieved in all age groups in North America during the past two
decades, in large part through improvement of modifiable risk
factors: reductions in cigarette smoking, improvements in lipid
levels, and more aggressive detection and treatment of
hypertension. This section considers the role of screening for
cardiovascular risk and the use of effective therapies to reduce such
risk. Key recommendations for cardiovascular prevention are
shown in Table 1–3.
Kahn R et al. The impact of prevention on reducing the burden of
cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2008 Jul 29;118(5): 576–85.
[PMID: 18606915]
 
 Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
One-time screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) by
ultrasonography in men aged 65–75 years is associated with a
significant reduction in AAA-related mortality (odds ratio, 0.56
[95% CI, 0.44 to 0.72]). With long-term (7-15 years) follow-up,
the reduction in AAA-related mortality is sustained, and screening
appears to produce a reduction in all-cause mortality (OR = 0.94,
95% CI 0.92, 0.97). Women do not appear to benefit from
screening, and most of the benefit in men appears to accrue among
current or former smokers. Recent analyses suggest that screening
men aged 65 years and older is highly cost-effective.
Lindholt JS et al. Long-term benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis
of screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms from a randomized
controlled trial. Br J Surg. 2010 Jun;97(6):826–34. [PMID:
20473995]
 
Lindholt JS et al. Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm reduces
overall mortality in men. A meta-analysis of the mid-and long-term
effects of screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg. 2008 Aug;36(2):167–71. [PMID: 18485756]
 
Thompson SG et al. Screening men for abdominal aortic aneurysm:
10 year mortality and cost effectiveness results from the
randomised Multicentre Aneurysm Screening Study. BMJ. 2009
Jun 24;338:b2307. [PMID: 19553269]
 
 Cigarette Smoking
Cigarette smoking remains the most important cause of preventable
morbidity and early mortality. In 2000, there were an estimated 4.8
million premature deaths in the world attributable to smoking, 2.4
million in developing countries and 2 million in industrialized
countries. More than three-quarters (3.8 million) of these deaths
were in men. The leading causes of death from smoking were
cardiovascular diseases (1.7 million deaths), chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) (1 million deaths), and lung cancer (0.9
million deaths). Cigarettes are responsible for one in every four
deaths in the United States. Fortunately, US smoking rates are
declining. Currently, 20% of US adults and 21.6% of adolescents in
12th grade are smokers.
 
Table 1–3 Expert recommendations for cardiovascular prevention
methods: US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).1
 
 
 
Prevention
Method
Recommendation
Screening
for
abdominal
aortic
aneurysm
Recommends one-time screening for
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) by
ultrasonography in men aged 65 to 75 who
have ever smoked. (B)
No recommendation for or against screening
for AAA in men aged 65 to 75 who have
never smoked. (C)
Recommends against routine screening for
AAA in women. (D)
Aspirin use
Recommends the use of aspirin for men age
45 to 79 years when the potential benefit due
to a reduction in myocardial infarctions
outweighs the potential harm due to an
increase in gastrointestinal hemorrhage. (A)
Recommends the use of aspirin for women
age 55 to 79 years when the potential benefit
of a reduction in ischemic strokes outweighs
the potential harm of an increase in
gastrointestinal hemorrhage. (A)
Current evidence is insufficient to assess the
balance of benefits and harms of aspirin for
cardiovascular disease prevention in men
and women 80 years or older. (I)
Recommends against the use of aspirin for
stroke prevention in women younger than 55
years and for myocardial infarction
prevention in men younger than 45.
Blood
pressure
screening
Recommends screening for high blood
pressure in adults aged 18 and older. (A)
Serum lipid
screening
Strongly recommends screening men aged
35 and older for lipid disorders. (A)
Recommends screening men aged 20 to 35
for lipid disorders if they are at increased
risk for coronary heart disease. (B)
Strongly recommends screening women
aged 45 and older for lipid disorders if they
are at increased risk for coronary heart
disease. (A)
Recommends screening women aged 20 to
45 for lipid disorders if they are at increased
risk for coronary heart disease. (B)
No recommendation for or against routine
screening for lipid disorders in men aged 20
to 35, or in women aged 20 and older who
are not at increased risk for coronary heart
disease. (C)
Counseling
about
healthy diet
Evidence is insufficient to recommend for or
against routine behavioral counseling to
promote a healthy diet in unselected patients
in primary care settings. (I)
Recommends intensive behavioral dietary
counseling for adult patients with
hyperlipidemia and other known risk factors
for cardiovascular and diet-related chronic
disease. Intensive counseling can be
delivered by primary care clinicians or by
referral to other specialists, such as
nutritionists or dietitians. (B)
Screening
for diabetes
Recommends screening for type 2 diabetes
in asymptomatic adults with sustained blood
pressure (either treated or untreated) >
135/80 mm Hg. (B)
Current evidence is insufficient to assess the
balance of benefits and harms of screening
for type 2 diabetes in asymptomatic adults
with blood pressure of 135/80 mm Hg or
lower. (I)
Counseling
to promote
physical
activity
Evidence is insufficient to recommend for or
against behavioral counseling in primary
care settings to promote physical activity. (I)
Screening
for smoking
and
counseling
to promote
cessation
Recommends that clinicians ask all adults
about tobacco use and provide tobacco
cessation interventions for those who use
tobacco products. (A)
1Recommendation A: The USPSTF strongly recommends that clinicians
routinely provide the service to eligible patients. (The USPSTF found good
evidence that the service improves important health outcomes and
concludes that benefits substantially outweigh harms.)
Recommendation B: The USPSTF recommends that clinicians routinely
provide the service to eligible patients. (The USPSTF found at least fair
evidence that the service improves important health outcomes and
concludes that benefits substantially outweigh harms.)
Recommendation C: The USPSTF makes no recommendation for or
against routine provision of the service.
Recommendation D: The USPSTF recommends against routinely
providing the service to asymptomatic patients. (The USPSTF found at
least fair evidence that the service is ineffective or that harms outweigh
benefits.)
Recommendation I: The USPSTF concludes that the evidence is
insufficient to recommend for or against routinely providing the service.
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/ 3rduspstf/ratings.htm
Nicotine is highly addictive, raises brain levels of dopamine, and
produces withdrawal symptoms on discontinuation.
Smokers die 5–8 years earlier than never-smokers. They have
twice the risk of fatal heart disease, 10 times the risk of lung cancer,
and several times the risk of cancers of the mouth, throat,
esophagus, pancreas, kidney, bladder, and cervix; a twofold to
threefold higher incidence of stroke and peptic ulcers (which heal
less well than in nonsmokers); a twofold to fourfold greater risk of
fractures of the hip, wrist, and vertebrae; four times the risk of
invasive pneumococcal disease; and a twofold increase in cataracts.
In the United States, over 90% of cases of COPD occur among
current or former smokers. Both active smoking and passive
smoking are associated with deterioration of the elastic properties
of the aorta (increasing the risk of aortic aneurysm) and with
progression of carotid artery atherosclerosis. Smoking has also
been associated with increased risks of leukemia, of colon and
prostate cancers, of breast cancer among postmenopausal women
who are slow acetylators of N-acetyltransferase-2 enzymes,
osteoporosis, and Alzheimer disease. In cancers of the head and
neck, lung, esophagus, and bladder, smoking is linked to mutations
of the P53 gene, the most common genetic change in human cancer.
Patients with head and neck cancer who continue to smoke during
radiation therapy have lower rates of response than those who do
not smoke. Olfaction and taste are impaired in smokers, and facial
wrinkles are increased. Heavy smokers have a 2.5 greater risk of
age-related macular degeneration.
The children of smokers have lower birth weights, are more likely
to be mentally retarded, have more frequent respiratory infections
and less efficient pulmonary function, have a higher incidence of
chronic ear infections than children of nonsmokers, and are more
likely to become smokers themselves.
In addition, exposure to environmental tobacco smoke has been
shown to increase the risk of cervical cancer, lung cancer, invasive
pneumococcal disease, and heart disease; to promote endothelial
damage and platelet aggregation; and to increase urinary excretion
of tobacco-specific lung carcinogens. The incidence of breast
cancer may be increased as well. Of approximately 450,000
smoking-related deaths in the United States annually, as many as
53,000 are attributable to environmental tobacco smoke. Annual
costs of smoking-related health care is approximately $96 billion
per year in the United States, with another $97 billion in
productivity losses.
Smoking cessation reduces the risks of death and of myocardial
infarction in people with coronary artery disease; reduces the rate of
death and acute myocardial infarction in patients who have
undergone percutaneous coronary revascularization; lessens the risk
of stroke; slows the rate of progression of carotid atherosclerosis;
and is associated with improvement of COPD symptoms. On
average, women smokers who quit smoking by age 35 add about 3
years to their life expectancy, and men add more than 2 years to
theirs. Smoking cessation can increase life expectancy even for
those who stop after the age of 65.
Although tobacco use constitutes the most serious common
medical problem, it is undertreated. Almost 40% of smokers
attempt to quit each year, but only 4% are successful. Persons
whose clinicians advise them to quit are 1.6 times as likely to
attempt quitting. Over 70% of smokers see a physician each year,
but only 20% of them receive any medical quitting advice or
assistance.
Factors associated with successful cessation include having a rule
against smoking in the home, being older, and having greater
education. Several effective interventions are available to promote
smoking cessation, including counseling, pharmacotherapy, and
combinations of the two. The five steps for helping smokers quit are
summarized in Table 1–4.
Common elements of supportive smoking cessation treatments
are reviewed in Table 1–5. A system should be implemented to
identify smokers, and advice to quit should be tailored to the
patient's level of readiness to change. Pharmacotherapy to reduce
cigarette consumption is ineffective in smokers who are unwilling or
not ready to quit. Conversely, all patients trying to quit should be
offered 
pharmacotherapy 
except 
those 
with 
medical
contraindications, women who are pregnant or breast-feeding, and
adolescents. Weight gain occurs in most patients (80%) following
smoking cessation. For many, it averages 2 kg, but for others (10–
15%) major weight gain—over 13 kg—may occur. Planning for the
possibility of weight gain, and means of mitigating it, may help with
maintenance of cessation.
Several pharmacologic therapies have been shown to be effective
in promoting cessation. Nicotine replacement therapy doubles the
chance of successful quitting. The nicotine patch, gum, and lozenges
are available over-the-counter, and nicotine nasal spray and inhalers
by prescription. The sustained-release antidepressant drug
bupropion (150–300 mg/d orally) is an effective smoking cessation
agent and is associated with minimal weight gain, although seizures
are a contraindication. It acts by boosting brain levels of dopamine
and norepinephrine, mimicking the effect of nicotine. More recently,
varenicline, a partial nicotinic acetylcholine-receptor agonist, has
been shown to improve cessation rates; however, its adverse
effects, particularly its effects on mood, are not incompletely
understood and warrant careful use. No single pharmacotherapy is
clearly more effective than others, so patient preferences should be
taken into account in selecting a treatment.
Clinicians should not show disapproval of patients who failed to
stop smoking or who are not ready to make a quit attempt.
Thoughtful advice that emphasizes the benefits of cessation and
recognizes common barriers to success can increase motivation to
quit and quit rates. An intercurrent illness such as acute bronchitis or
acute myocardial infarction may motivate even the most addicted
smoker to quit.
Individualized or group counseling is very cost-effective, even
more so than treating hypertension. Smoking cessation counseling
by telephone (“quitlines”) has proved effective. An additional
strategy is to recommend that any smoking take place out of doors
to limit the effects of passive smoke on housemates and coworkers.
This can lead to smoking reduction and quitting.
 
Table 1–4 Actions and strategies for the primary care clinician to
help patients quit smoking.
 
 
 
Action
Strategies for Implementation
Step 1. Ask—Systematically Identify
All Tobacco Users at Every Visit
Implement an
officewide
system that
ensures that
for every
patient at
every clinic
visit, tobacco-
use status is
queried and
documented1
Expand the vital signs to include tobacco
use.
Data should be collected by the health
care team.
The action should be implemented using
preprinted progress note paper that
includes the expanded vital signs, a vital
signs stamp or, for computerized records,
an item assessing tobacco-use status.
Alternatives to the vital signs stamp are to
place tobacco-use status stickers on all
patients’ charts or to indicate smoking
status using computerized reminder
systems.
Step 2. Advise—Strongly Urge All
Smokers to Quit
In a clear,
strong, and
personalized
manner, urge
every smoker
to quit
Advice should be
Clear “I think it is important for you to quit
smoking now, and I will help you. Cutting
down while you are ill is not enough.”
Strong “As your clinician, I need you to
know that quitting smoking is the most
important thing you can do to protect your
current and future health.”
Personalized Tie smoking to current
health or illness and/or the social and
economic costs of tobacco use,
motivational level/readiness to quit, and
the impact of smoking on children and
others in the household.
Encourage clinic staff to reinforce the
cessation message and support the
patient's quit attempt.
Step 3. Attempt—Identify Smokers
Willing to Make a Quit Attempt
Ask every
smoker if he
If the patient is willing to make a quit
attempt at this time, provide assistance
(see step 4).
If the patient prefers a more intensive
treatment or the clinician believes more
or she is
willing to
make a quit
attempt at this
time
intensive treatment is appropriate, refer
the patient to interventions administered
by a smoking cessation specialist and
follow up with him or her regarding quitting
(see step 5).
If the patient clearly states he or she is not
willing to make a quit attempt at this time,
provide a motivational intervention.
Step 4. Assist—Aid the Patient in
Quitting
A. Help the
patient with a
quit plan
Set a quit date. Ideally, the quit date
should be within 2 weeks, taking
patient preference into account.
Help the patient prepare for quitting.
The patient must:
Inform family, friends, and coworkers of
quitting and request understanding and
support.
Prepare the environment by removing
cigarettes from it. Prior to quitting, the
patient should avoid smoking in places
where he or she spends a lot of time (eg,
home, car).
Review previous quit attempts. What
helped? What led to relapse?
Anticipate challenges to the planned quit
attempt, particularly during the critical first
few weeks.
B. Encourage
nicotine
replacement
therapy except
in special
circumstances
Encourage the use of the nicotine patch or
nicotine gum therapy for smoking
cessation
C. Give key
advice on
successful
quitting
Abstinence Total abstinence is essential.
Not even a single puff after the quit date.
Alcohol Drinking alcohol is highly
associated with relapse. Those who stop
smoking should review their alcohol use
and consider limiting or abstaining from
alcohol use during the quit process.
Other smokers in the household: The
presence of other smokers in the
household, particularly a spouse, is
associated with lower success rates.
Patients should consider quitting with their
significant others and/or developing
specific plans to maintain abstinence in a
household where others still smoke.
D. Provide
supplementary
materials
Source Federal agencies, including the
National Cancer Institute and the Agency
for Health Care Policy and Research;
nonprofit agencies (American Cancer
Society, American Lung Association,
American Heart Association); or local or
state health departments.
Selection concerns: The material must
be culturally, racially, educationally, and
age appropriate for the patient.
Location Readily available in every clinic
office.
Step 5. Arrange—Schedule Follow-Up
Contact
Schedule
follow-up
contact, either
in person or
via telephone1
Timing Follow-up contact should occur
soon after the quit date, preferably during
the first week. A second follow-up contact
is recommended within the first month.
Schedule further follow-up contacts as
indicated.
Actions during follow-up: Congratulate
success. If smoking occurred, review the
circumstances and elicit recommitment to
total abstinence. Remind the patient that a
lapse can be used as a learning
experience and is not a sign of failure.
Identify the problems already encountered
and anticipate challenges in the
immediate future. Assess nicotine
replacement therapy use and problems.
Consider referral to a more intense or
specialized program.
1Repeated assessment is not necessary in the case of the adult who has
never smoked or not smoked for many years and for whom the information
is clearly documented in the medical record.
Adapted and reproduced, with permission, from: The Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research. Smoking Cessation Clinical Practice Guideline.
JAMA. 1996 Apr 24;275(16):1270–80. Copyright © 1996 American Medical
Association. All rights reserved.
The clinician's role in smoking cessation is summarized in Table
1–4. Public policies, including higher cigarette taxes and more
restrictive public smoking laws, have also been shown to encourage
cessation, as have financial incentives directed to patients.
 
Table 1–5. Common elements of supportive smoking treatments.
 
 
 
Component
Examples
Encouragement of the
patient in the quit
attempt
Note that effective cessation
treatments are now available.
Note that half the people who have
ever smoked have now quit.
Communicate belief in the
patient's ability to quit.
Communication of
caring and concern
Ask how the patient feels about
quitting.
Directly express concern and a
willingness to help.
Be open to the patient's
expression of fears of quitting,
difficulties experienced, and
ambivalent feelings.
Encouragement of the
patient to talk about
the quitting process
Ask about:
Reasons that the patient wants to
quit.
Difficulties encountered while
quitting.
Success the patient has achieved.
Concerns or worries about
quitting.
Provision of basic
information about
smoking and
successful quitting
Inform the patient about:
The nature and time course of
withdrawal.
The addictive nature of smoking.
The fact that any smoking (even a
single puff) increases the
likelihood of full relapse.
 
Adapted, with permission, from: The Agency for Health Care Policy and
Research. Smoking Cessation Clinical Practice Guideline. JAMA. 1996 Apr
24;275(16):1270–80. Copyright © 1996 American Medical Association. All
rights reserved.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Smoking-
attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity
losses–United States, 2000–2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2008 Nov 14;57(45):1226–8. [PMID: 19008791]
 
Eisenberg MJ et al. Pharmacotherapies for smoking cessation: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. CMAJ. 2008 Jul
15;179(2):135–44. [PMID: 18625984]
 
Lee CW et al. Factors associated with successful smoking
cessation in the United States, 2000. Am J Public Health. 2007
Aug; 97(8):1503–9. [PMID: 17600268]
 
Moore D et al. Effectiveness and safety of nicotine replacement
therapy assisted reduction to stop smoking: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ. 2009 Apr 2;338:b1024. [PMID: 19342408]
 
Mottillo S et al. Behavioural interventions for smoking cessation: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Heart J. 2009
Mar;30(6):718–30. [PMID: 19109354]
 
Myung SK et al. Effects of Web- and computer-based smoking
cessation programs: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Arch Intern Med. 2009 May 25;169(10):929–37. [PMID:
19468084]
 
Stead LF et al. Physician advice for smoking cessation. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2008 Apr 16;(2):CD000165. [PMID:
18253970]
 
Volpp KG et al. A randomized, controlled trial of financial incenA
randomized, controlled trial of financial incentives for smoking
cessation. N Engl J Med. 2009 Feb 12;360(7):699–709. [PMID:
19213683]
 
 Lipid Disorders
Higher low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol concentrations
and lower high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels are associated with
an increased risk of CHD. Cholesterol lowering therapy reduces the
relative risk of CHD events, with the degree of reduction
proportional to the reduction in LDL cholesterol achieved. The
absolute benefits of screening for—and treating—abnormal lipid
levels depend on the presence and number of other cardiovascular
risk factors, including hypertension, diabetes, smoking, age, and
gender. If other risk factors are present, cardiovascular risk is
higher and the benefits of therapy are greater. Patients with known
cardiovascular disease are at higher risk and have larger benefits
from reduction in LDL cholesterol.
Evidence for the effectiveness of statin-type drugs is better than
for the other classes of lipid-lowering agents or dietary changes
specifically for improving lipid levels. Multiple large randomized,
placebo-controlled trials have demonstrated important reductions in
total mortality, major coronary events, and strokes with lowering
levels of LDL cholesterol by statin therapy for patients with known
cardiovascular disease. Statins also reduce cardiovascular events
for patients with diabetes mellitus. For patients with no previous
history of cardiovascular events or diabetes, the 2008 JUPITER
trial showed that statins reduce coronary events relatively similarly
for both men and women.
Guidelines for therapy are discussed in Chapter 28.
Brugts JJ et al. The benefits of statins in people without established
cardiovascular disease but with cardiovascular risk factors: meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2009 Jun
30;338:b2376. [PMID: 19567909]
 
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators, Kearney
PM et al. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in 18,686
people with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-
analysis. Lancet. 2008 Jan 12;371(9607):117–25. [PMID:
18191683]
 
Ridker PM et al; JUPITER Study Group. Rosuvastatin to prevent
vascular events in men and women with elevated C-reactive
protein. N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 20;359(21):2195–207. [PMID:
18997196]
 
 Hypertension
Over 43 million adults in the United States have hypertension, but
31% are unaware of their elevated blood pressure; 17% are aware
but untreated; 29% are being treated but have not controlled their
blood pressure (still greater than 140/90 mm Hg); and only 23%
are well controlled. In every adult age group, higher values of
systolic and diastolic blood pressure carry greater risks of stroke
and congestive heart failure. Systolic blood pressure is a better
predictor of morbid events than diastolic blood pressure. Home
monitoring is better correlated with target organ damage than clinic-
based values. Clinicians can apply specific blood pressure criteria,
such as those of the Joint National Committee, along with
consideration of the patient's cardiovascular risk, to decide at what
levels treatment should be considered in individual cases. Table 11–
1 presents a classification of hypertension based on blood
pressures.
Primary prevention of hypertension can be accomplished by
strategies aimed at both the general population and special high-risk
populations. The latter include persons with high-normal blood
pressure or a family history of hypertension, blacks, and individuals
with various behavioral risk factors such as physical inactivity;
excessive consumption of salt, alcohol, or calories; and deficient
intake of potassium. Effective interventions for primary prevention
of hypertension include reduced sodium and alcohol consumption,
weight loss, and regular exercise. Potassium supplementation lowers
blood pressure modestly, and a diet high in fresh fruits and
vegetables and low in fat, red meats, and sugar-containing
beverages also reduces blood pressure. Interventions of unproven
efficacy include pill supplementation of potassium, calcium,
magnesium, fish oil, or fiber; macronutrient alteration; and stress
management.
Improved identification and treatment of hypertension is a major
cause of the recent decline in stroke deaths. Because hypertension
is usually asymptomatic, screening is strongly recommended to
identify patients for treatment. Despite strong recommendations in
favor of screening and treatment, hypertension control remains
suboptimal. An intervention that included patient education and
provider education was more effective than provider education
alone in achieving control of hypertension, suggesting the benefits of
patient participation; another trial found that home monitoring
combined with telephone-based nurse support was more effective
than home monitoring alone for blood pressure control.
Pharmacologic management of hypertension is discussed in Chapter
11.
Bosworth HB et al. Two self-management interventions to improve
hypertension control: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2009
Nov 17;151(10):687–95. [PMID: 19920269]
 
Wolff T et al. Evidence for the reaffirmation of the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation on screening for high blood
pressure. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Dec 4;147(11):787–91. [PMID:
18056663]
 
 Chemoprevention
As discussed in Chapters 10 and 24, regular use of low-dose
aspirin (81–325 mg) can reduce the incidence of myocardial
infarction in men. Low-dose aspirin reduces stroke but not
myocardial infarction in middle-aged women. Based on its ability to
prevent cardiovascular events, aspirin use is cost-effective for men
and women who are at increased cardiovascular risk, which can be
defined as 10-year risk over 10%. Results from a meta-analysis
suggest that aspirin may also reduce the incidence of several
common types of cancer.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may reduce the incidence
of colorectal adenomas and polyps but may also increase heart
disease and gastrointestinal bleeding, and thus are not
recommended for colon cancer prevention in average risk patients.
Antioxidant vitamin (vitamin E, vitamin C, and beta-carotene)
supplementation produced no significant reductions in the 5-year
incidence of—or mortality from—vascular disease, cancer, or other
major outcomes in high-risk individuals with coronary artery
disease, other occlusive arterial disease, or diabetes mellitus.
Antithrombotic Trialists’ (ATT) Collaboration; Baigent C et al.
Aspirin in the primary and secondary prevention of vascular
disease: collaborative meta-analysis of individual participant data
from randomised trials. Lancet. 2009 May 30;373(9678): 1849–
60. [PMID: 19482214]
 
Greving JP et al. Cost-effectiveness of aspirin treatment in the
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease events in subgroups
based on age, gender, and varying cardiovascular risk. Circulation.
2008 Jun 3;117(22):2875–83. [PMID: 18506010]
 
Rothwell PM et al. Long-term effect of aspirin on colorectal
cancer incidence and mortality: 20-year follow-up of five
randomised trials. Lancet. 2010 Nov 20;376(9754):1741–50.
[PMID: 20970847]
 
Wolff T et al. Aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular
events: an update of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Mar 17;150(6): 405–10.
[PMID: 19293073]
 
PREVENTION OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Osteoporosis, characterized by low bone mineral density, is
common and associated with an increased risk of fracture. The
lifetime risk of an osteoporotic fracture is approximately 50% for
women and 30% for men. Osteoporotic fractures can cause
significant pain and disability. As such, research has focused on
means of preventing osteoporosis and related fractures. Primary
prevention strategies include calcium supplementation, vitamin D
supplementation, and exercise programs. A 2007 systematic review
and meta-analysis found that calcium supplementation of 1200 mg
per day or more (with or without vitamin D) could decrease fracture
risk for adults (mainly women were studied) over age 50. Vitamin D
supplements alone do not appear to reduce fracture risk.
Screening for osteoporosis on the basis of low bone mineral
density is also recommended for women over age 60, based on
indirect evidence that screening can identify women with low bone
mineral density and that treatment of women with low bone density
with bisphosphonates is effective in reducing fractures. However,
real-world adherence to pharmacologic therapy for osteoporosis is
low: one-third to one-half of patients do not take their medication as
directed. The effectiveness of screening for osteoporosis in younger
women and in men has not been established. Concern has been
raised that bisphosphonates may increase the risk of certain types of
fractures and osteonecrosis of the jaw, making consideration of the
benefits and risks of therapy important when considering screening.
Avenell A et al. Vitamin D and vitamin D analogues for preventing
fractures associated with involutional and post-menopausal
osteoporosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr 15;(2):
CD000227. [PMID: 19370554]
 
Giusti A et al. Atypical fractures of the femur and bisphosphonate
therapy: a systematic review of case/case series studies. Bone.
2010 Aug;47(2):169–80. [PMID: 20493982]
 
Hiligsmann M et al. Cost-effectiveness of osteoporosis screening
followed by treatment: the impact of medication adherence. Value
Health. 2010 Jun–Jul;13(4):394–401. [PMID: 20102558]
 
Kanis JA et al; European Society for Clinical and Economic
Aspects of Osteoporosis and Osteoarthritis (ESCEO). European
guidance for the diagnosis and management of osteoporosis in
postmenopausal women. Osteoporos Int. 2008 Apr;19(4):399–
428. [PMID: 18266020]
 
Tang BM. Use of calcium or calcium in combination with vitamin D
supplementation to prevent fractures and bone loss in people aged
50 years and older: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2007 Aug
25;370(9588):657–66. [PMID: 17720017]
 
Wang L et al. Systematic review: Vitamin D and calcium
supplementation in prevention of cardiovascular events. Ann Intern
Med. 2010 Mar 2;152(5):315–23. [PMID: 20194238]
 
PREVENTION OF PHYSICAL INACTIVITY
Lack of sufficient physical activity is the second most important
contributor to preventable deaths, trailing only tobacco use. A
sedentary lifestyle has been linked to 28% of deaths from leading
chronic diseases. The US Department of Health and Human
Services and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
recommends that adults and older adults engage in 150 minutes of
moderate-intensity (such as brisk walking) or 75 minutes of
vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (such as jogging or running) or an
equivalent mix of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity
each week. In addition to the activity recommendations, the CDC
recommends activities to strengthen all major muscle groups
(abdomen, arms, back, chest, hips, legs, and shoulders) at least
twice a week.
Patients who engage in regular moderate to vigorous exercise
have a lower risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, diverticular disease, and
osteoporosis. Evidence supports the recommended guidelines of 30
minutes of moderate physical activity on most days of the week in
p y
y
y
both the primary and secondary prevention of CHD.
In older nonsmoking men, walking 2 miles or more per day is
associated with an almost 50% lower age-related mortality. The
relative risk of stroke was found to be less than one-sixth in men
who exercised vigorously compared with those who were inactive;
the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus was about half among men who
exercised five or more times weekly compared with those who
exercised once a week. Glucose control is improved in diabetics
who exercise regularly, even at a modest level. In sedentary
individuals with dyslipidemia, high amounts of high-intensity exercise
produce significant beneficial effects on serum lipoprotein profiles.
Physical activity is associated with a lower risk of colon cancer
(although not rectal cancer) in men and women and of breast and
reproductive organ cancer in women. Finally, weight-bearing
exercise (especially resistance and high-impact activities) increases
bone mineral content and retards development of osteoporosis in
women and contributes to a reduced risk of falls in older persons.
Resistance training has been shown to enhance muscular strength,
functional capacity, and quality of life in men and women with and
without CHD and is endorsed by the American Heart Association.
Exercise may also confer benefits on those with chronic illness.
Men and women with chronic symptomatic osteoarthritis of one or
both knees benefited from a supervised walking program, with
improved self-reported functional status and decreased pain and
use of pain medication. Exercise produces sustained lowering of
both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in patients with mild
hypertension. In addition, physical activity can help patients maintain
ideal body weight. Individuals who maintain ideal body weight have
a 35–55% lower risk for myocardial infarction than with those who
are obese. Physical activity reduces depression and anxiety;
improves adaptation to stress; improves sleep quality; and enhances
mood, self-esteem, and overall performance.
In longitudinal cohort studies, individuals who report higher levels
of leisure time physical activity are less likely to gain weight.
Conversely, individuals who are overweight are less likely to stay
active. However, at least 60 minutes of daily moderate-intensity
physical activity may be necessary to maximize weight loss and
prevent significant weight regain. Moreover, adequate levels of
physical activity appear to be important for the prevention of weight
gain and the development of obesity. Physical activity also appears
to have an independent effect on health-related outcomes such as
development of type 2 diabetes mellitus in patients with impaired
glucose tolerance when compared with body weight, suggesting that
adequate levels of activity may counteract the negative influence of
body weight on health outcomes.
Only about 20% of adults in the United States are active at the
moderate level—and only 8% currently exercise at the more
vigorous level—recommended for health benefits. Instead, 60%
report irregular or no leisure time physical activity.
Increased activity increases the risk of musculoskeletal injuries,
which can be minimized by proper warm-up and stretching and by
gradual rather than sudden increase in activity. In insulin-requiring
diabetic patients who undertake vigorous exercise, the need for
insulin is reduced; hypoglycemia may be a consequence. Physical
exertion can rarely trigger the onset of acute myocardial infarction,
particularly in persons who are habitually sedentary. Other potential
complications of exercise include angina pectoris, arrhythmias,
sudden death, and asthma.
The value of routine electrocardiography stress testing prior to
initiation of an exercise program in middle-aged or older adults
remains controversial. Patients with ischemic heart disease or other
cardiovascular disease require medically supervised, graded
exercise programs. Medically supervised exercise prolongs life in
patients with congestive heart failure. Exercise should not be
prescribed for patients with decompensated congestive heart failure,
complex ventricular arrhythmias, unstable angina pectoris,
hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis, or significant aortic
aneurysm. Five- to 10-minute warm-up and cool-down periods,
stretching exercises, and gradual increases in exercise intensity help
prevent musculoskeletal and cardiovascular complications.
Physical activity can be incorporated into any person's daily
routine. For example, the clinician can advise a patient to take the
stairs instead of the elevator, to walk or bike instead of driving, to
do housework or yard work, to get off the bus one or two stops
earlier and walk the rest of the way, to park at the far end of the
parking lot, or to walk during the lunch hour. The basic message
should be the more the better and anything is better than nothing.
To be more effective in counseling about exercise, clinicians can
also incorporate motivational interviewing techniques, adopt a
whole practice approach (eg, use practice nurses to assist), and
establish linkages with community agencies. Clinicians can
incorporate the “5 As” approach:
 
1. Ask (identify those who can benefit).
2. Assess (current activity level).
3. Advise (individualize plan).
4. Assist (provide a written exercise prescription and
support material).
5. Arrange (appropriate referral and follow-up).
Such interventions have a moderate effect on self-reported
physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness, even if they do not
always help patients achieve a predetermined level of physical
activity. In their counseling, clinicians should advise patients about
both the benefits and risks of exercise, prescribe an exercise
program appropriate for each patient, and provide advice to help
prevent injuries or cardiovascular complications.
Although primary care providers regularly ask patients about
physical activity and advise them with verbal counseling, few
providers provide written prescriptions or perform fitness
assessments. Tailored interventions may potentially help increase
physical activity in individuals. Exercise counseling with a
prescription, eg, for walking at either a hard intensity or a moderate
intensity-high frequency, can produce significant long-term
improvements in cardiorespiratory fitness. To be effective, exercise
prescriptions must include recommendations on type, frequency,
intensity, time, and progression of exercise and must follow disease-
specific guidelines. In addition, published research suggests that
getting patients to change physical activity levels requires
motivational strategies beyond simple exercise instruction including
patient education about goal-setting, self-monitoring, and problem-
solving. For example, helping patients identify emotionally rewarding
and physically appropriate activities, meet contingencies, and find
social support will increase rates of exercise continuation.
Some physical activity is always preferable to a sedentary
lifestyle. For home-bound elderly who have limited mobility and
strength, such physical activity could focus on “functional fitness,”
such as mobility, transfers, and performing activities of daily living.
Exercise-based rehabilitation can protect against falls and fall-
related injuries and improve functional performance.
Ford ES et al. Explaining the decrease in U.S. deaths from
coronary disease, 1980–2000. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jun
7;356(23): 2388–98. [PMID: 17554120]
 
Gill JM et al. Physical activity and prevention of type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Sports Med. 2008;38(10):807–24. [PMID: 18803434]
 
Kruger J et al. The prescribed amount of physical activity in
randomized clinical trials in older adults. Gerontologist. 2009
Jun;49(Suppl 1):S100–7. [PMID: 19525210]
 
Ogilvie D et al. Interventions to promote walking: systematic
review. BMJ. 2007 Jun 9;334(7605):1204. [PMID: 17540909]
 
Petrella RJ et al. Physical activity counseling and prescription
among Canadian primary care physicians. Arch Intern Med. 2007
Sep 10;167(16):1774–81. [PMID: 17846397]
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical
activity guidelines for Americans. Available at:
http://www.health.gov/PAGuidelines/
 
Williams MA et al. Resistance exercise in individuals with and
without cardiovascular disease: 2007 update: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association Council on Clinical
Cardiology and Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and
Metabolism. Circulation. 2007 Jul 31;116(5):572–84. [PMID:
17638929]
 
PREVENTION OF OVERWEIGHT & OBESITY
Obesity is now a true epidemic and public health crisis that both
clinicians and patients must face. Normal body weight is defined as
a body mass index (BMI), calculated as the weight in kilograms
divided by the height in meters squared, of < 25 kg/m2; overweight
is defined as a BMI = 25.0–29.9 kg/m2, and obesity as a BMI >
30 kg/m2. Over the last several years, the prevalence of obesity in
the US population has increased dramatically. Among US adults,
rates of obesity have risen from 15.9% in 1995 to 27.2% in 2009.
There is significant variation in rates of obesity by race. Between
2006 and 2008, blacks (35.7%) had 51% greater prevalence of
obesity and Hispanics (28.7%) had 21% greater prevalence when
compared with non-Hispanic whites (23.7%). This trend has been
linked both to declines in physical activity and to increased caloric
intake in diets rich in fats and carbohydrates.
Adequate levels of physical activity appear to be important for
the prevention of weight gain and the development of obesity.
Despite this, only 49% of Americans are physically active at a
moderate level and 20% at a more vigorous level. In addition, only
3% of Americans meet four of the five recommendations for the
intake of grains, fruits, vegetables, dairy products, and meat of the
Food Guide Pyramid. Only one of four Americans eats the
recommended five or more fruits and vegetables per day.
Risk assessment of the overweight and obese patient begins with
determination of BMI, waist circumference for those with a BMI of
35 or less, presence of comorbid conditions, and a fasting blood
glucose and lipid panel. Obesity is clearly associated with type 2
diabetes 
mellitus, 
hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, 
cancer,
osteoarthritis, cardiovascular disease, obstructive sleep apnea, and
asthma. One of the most important sequelae of the rapid surge in
prevalence of obesity has been a dramatic increase in the
prevalence of diabetes. From 1980 through 2007, the number of
Americans with diabetes tripled (from 5.6 million to 17.9 million). In
addition, almost one-quarter of the US population currently has the
metabolic syndrome, putting them at high risk for the development
of CHD. Metabolic syndrome is defined as the presence of any
three of the following: waist measurement of 40 inches or more for
men and 35 inches or more for women, triglyceride levels of 150
mg/dL or above, HDL cholesterol level < 40 mg/dL for men and 50
mg/dL for women, blood pressure of 130/85 mm Hg or above,
fasting blood glucose levels of 100 mg/dL or above.
The relationship between overweight and obesity and diabetes,
hypertension, and coronary artery disease is thought to be due to
insulin resistance and compensatory hyperinsulinemia. Persons with
a BMI ≥ 40 have death rates from cancers that are 52% higher for
men and 62% higher for women than the rates in men and women
of normal weight. Significant trends of increasing risk of death with
higher BMIs are observed for cancers of the stomach and prostate
in men and for cancers of the breast, uterus, cervix, and ovary in
women, and for cancers of the esophagus, colon and rectum, liver,
gallbladder, pancreas, and kidney, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and
multiple myeloma in both men and women.
In the Framingham Heart Study, overweight and obesity were
associated with large decreases in life expectancy. For example,
40-year-old female nonsmokers lost 3.3 years and 40-year-old
male nonsmokers lost 3.1 years of life expectancy because of
overweight, and 7.1 years and 5.8 years of life expectancy,
respectively, because of obesity. Obese female smokers lost 7.2
years and obese male smokers lost 6.7 years of life expectancy
compared with normal-weight smokers, and 13.3 years and 13.7
years, respectively, compared with normal-weight nonsmokers.
Clinicians must work to identify and provide the best prevention and
treatment strategies for patients who are overweight and obese.
Patients with abdominal obesity (high waist to hip size ratio) are at
particularly increased risk. Control of visceral obesity in addition to
other cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, insulin resistance,
and dyslipidemia) is essential to reducing cardiovascular risk.
Prevention of overweight and obesity involves both increasing
physical activity and dietary modification to reduce caloric intake.
Clinicians can help guide patients to develop personalized eating
plans to reduce energy intake, particularly by recognizing the
contributions of fat, concentrated carbohydrates, and large portion
sizes (see Chapter 29). Patients typically underestimate caloric
content, especially when consuming food away from home.
Providing patients with caloric and nutritional information may help
address the current obesity epidemic. To prevent the long-term
chronic disease sequelae of over-weight or obesity, clinicians must
work with patients to modify other risk factors, eg, by smoking
cessation (see above) and strict glycemic and blood pressure
control (see Chapters 11 and 27).
Lifestyle modification, including diet, physical activity, and
behavior therapy has been shown to induce clinically significant
weight loss. Other treatment options for obesity include
pharmacotherapy and surgery. In overweight and obese persons, at
least 60 minutes of moderate-high intensity physical activity may be
necessary to maximize weight loss and prevent significant weight
regain. Counseling interventions or pharmacotherapy can produce
modest (3–5 kg) sustained weight loss over 6–12 months.
Pharmacotherapy appears safe in the short term; long-term safety is
still not established. Counseling appears to be most effective when
intensive and combined with behavioral therapy. Maintenance
strategies can help preserve weight loss.
In dietary therapy, a 2008 study comparing various diets
revealed that Mediterranean (moderate fat, restricted calorie) and
low-carbohydrate (non-restricted calorie) diets are effective
alternatives to low-fat diets. In a randomized trial comparing low
carbohydrate and low fat diets combined with behavioral treatment,
there was no difference in weight loss at 2 years (7%).
Weight loss strategies using dietary, physical activity, or
behavioral interventions can produce significant improvements in
weight among persons with prediabetes and a significant decrease in
diabetes incidence. Multicomponent interventions including very-
low-calorie or low-calorie diets hold promise for achieving weight
loss in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Bariatric surgical procedures, eg, vertical banded gastroplasty
and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, are reserved for patients with
morbid obesity whose BMI exceeds 40, or for less severely obese
patients (with BMIs between 35 and 40) with high-risk comorbid
conditions such as life-threatening cardiopulmonary problems (eg,
severe sleep apnea, Pickwickian syndrome, and obesity-related
cardiomyopathy) or severe diabetes mellitus. In selected patients,
surgery can produce substantial weight loss (10 to 159 kg) over 1
to 5 years, with rare but sometimes severe complications.
Nutritional deficiencies are one complication of bariatric surgical
procedures and close monitoring of a patient's metabolic and
nutritional status is essential.
Clinicians seem to share a general perception that almost no one
succeeds in long-term maintenance of weight loss. However,
research demonstrates that approximately 20% of overweight
individuals are successful at long-term weight loss (defined as losing
≥ 10% of initial body weight and maintaining the loss for ≥ 1 year).
National Weight Control Registry members who lost an average of
33 kg and maintained the loss for more than 5 years have provided
useful information about how to maintain weight loss. Members
report engaging in high levels of physical activity (approximately 60
min/d), eating a low-calorie, low-fat diet, eating breakfast regularly,
self-monitoring weight, and maintaining a consistent eating pattern
from weekdays to weekends. The development and implementation
of innovative public health strategies is essential in the fight against
obesity. Lessons learned from smoking cessation campaigns may be
helpful in the battle against this significant public health concern.
Alberti KG et al. Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint
interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task
Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and
p
gy
;
,
g,
Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart
Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International
Association for the Study of Obesity. Circulation. 2009 Oct
20;120(16):1640–5. [PMID: 19805654]
 
Berman M et al. Obesity prevention in the information age: caloric
information at the point of purchase. JAMA. 2008 Jul
23;300(4):433–5. [PMID: 18647987]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey Data. Prevalence and
trends data: Overweight and Obesity (BMI), 2009. Available at:
http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/brfss/list.asp?
cat=OB&yr=2009&qkey=4409&state=All
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Differences in
prevalence of obesity among black, white and Hispanic adults-
United States, 2006–2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2009 Jul 17;58(27):740–4. [PMID: 19609247]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2007
National diabetes fact sheet: general information and national
estimates on diabetes in the United States. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/factsheet07.htm
 
Flegal KM et al. Prevalence and trends in obesity among US
adults, 1999–2008. JAMA. 2010 Jan 20;303(3):235–41. [PMID:
20071471]
 
Foster GD et al. Weight and metabolic outcomes after 2 years on
a low-carbohydrate versus low-fat diet: a randomized trial. Ann
Intern Med. 2010 Aug 3;153(3):147–57. [PMID: 20679559]
 
Garson A Jr et al. Attacking obesity: lessons learned from
smoking. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Apr 24;49(16):1673–5.
[PMID: 17448367]
 
Ritz E. Total cardiovascular risk management. Am J Cardiol. 2007
Aug 6;100(3A):53J–60J. [PMID: 17666199]
 
Shai I et al; Dietary Intervention Randomized Controlled Trial
(DIRECT) Group. Weight loss with a low-carbohydrate,
Mediterranean, or low-fat diet. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jul
17;359(3):229–41. [PMID: 18635428]
 
Tucker ON et al. Nutritional consequences of weight-loss surgery.
Med Clin North Am. 2007 May;91(3):499–514. [PMID:
17509392]
Wadden TA et al. Lifestyle modification for the management of
obesity. Gastroenterology. 2007 May;132(6):2226–38. [PMID:
17498514]
 
CANCER PREVENTION
 Primary Prevention
Cancer mortality rates continue to decrease in the United States;
part of this decrease results from reductions in tobacco use, since
cigarette smoking is the most important preventable cause of
cancer. Preventive health examinations and preventive gynecologic
examinations are among the most common reasons for ambulatory
care visits, although the use and content of these types of visits
remains controversial. Primary prevention of skin cancer consists of
restricting exposure to ultraviolet light by wearing appropriate
clothing and use of sunscreens. In the past 2 decades, there has
been a threefold increase in the incidence of squamous cell
carcinoma and a fourfold increase in melanoma in the United States.
Persons who engage in regular physical exercise and avoid obesity
have lower rates of breast and colon cancer. Prevention of
occupationally induced cancers involves minimizing exposure to
carcinogenic substances such as asbestos, ionizing radiation, and
benzene compounds. Chemoprevention has been widely studied for
primary cancer prevention (see above Chemoprevention section
and Chapter 39). Use of tamoxifen, raloxifene, and aromatase
inhibitors for breast cancer prevention is discussed in Chapters 17
a nd 39. Hepatitis B vaccination can prevent hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), and screening and vaccination programs may be
cost-effective and useful in preventing HCC in high-risk groups such
as Asians and Pacific Islanders. The use of HPV vaccine to prevent
cervical cancer is discussed above in the Prevention of Infectious
Disease section.
Hutton DW et al. Cost-effectiveness of screening and vaccinating
Asian and Pacific Islander adults for hepatitis B. Ann Intern Med.
2007 Oct 2;147(7):460–9. [PMID: 17909207]
 
Jemal A et al. Cancer statistics, 2010. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010
Sep–Oct;60(5):277–300. [PMID: 20610543]
 
Mehrotra A et al. Preventive health examinations and preventive
gynecological examinations in the United States. Arch Intern Med.
2007 Sep 24;167(17):1876–83. [PMID: 17893309]
 
 Screening & Early Detection
Screening prevents death from cancers of the breast, colon, and
cervix. Current cancer screening recommendations from the
USPSTF are shown in Table 1–6.
The appropriate form and frequency of screening for breast
cancer is controversial. In 2009, the USPSTF updated its
recommendation statement on breast cancer screening in the general
population. One change, which generated discussion from many
groups, was its recommendation against routine screening
mammography in women aged 40–49 years. Although evidence
suggests mammography reduces breast cancer mortality, there
appears to be a greater absolute reduction for women aged 50–74
years than for women age 40–49. The differences in benefit
between these two groups were included in the rational for the
updated recommendation. Mammography guidelines from other
organizations vary. For example, the American Cancer Society
recommends yearly screening mammograms starting at age 40. A
suggested approach to the use of screening mammography in
women aged 40–49 is for clinicians to discuss the risks and benefits
with each patient and consider individual patient preferences when
deciding when to begin screening.
Digital mammography is more sensitive in women with dense
breasts and younger women; however, studies exploring outcomes
are lacking. The use of MRI is not currently recommended for
general screening, although the American Cancer Society does
recommend screening MRI for women at high risk (≥ 20–25%),
including those with a strong family history of breast or ovarian
cancer. A 2008 systematic review reported that screening with both
MRI and mammography might be superior to mammography alone
in ruling out cancerous lesions in women with an inherited
predisposition to breast cancer. Although delays to following up an
abnormal mammogram exist, the use of patient navigation programs
to reduce such delays appears beneficial, especially among poor
and minority populations.
All current recommendations call for cervical and colorectal
cancer screening. Prostate cancer screening, however, is
controversial, as no completed studies have answered the question
whether early detection and treatment after screen detection
produce sufficient benefits to outweigh harms of treatment. A 2009
published study of 76,000 US men comparing annual screening
(prostate-specific antigen [PSA] and digital rectal examination) to
usual care did not reveal a difference in mortality. A 2008 USPSTF
review of current evidence on benefits and harm of screening
asymptomatic men for prostate cancer with PSA testing revealed
that PSA screening is associated with increased psychological harm
with uncertain potential benefits. Providers and patients are advised
to discuss how to proceed in light of this uncertainty. Whether early
detection through screening and subsequent treatment alters the
natural course of the disease remains to be seen. Unlike the
American College of Physicians, the American Cancer Society
recommends that providers offer annual PSA testing for men over
age 50. Screening is not recommended by any group for men who
have estimated life expectancies of less than 10 years. Decision aids
have been developed to help men weigh the arguments for and
against PSA screening.
 
Table 1–6. Cancer screening recommendations for average-risk
adults: US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).1
 
 
 
Test
USPSTF Recommendations
Breast self-
examination
Recommends against teaching breast
self-examination (D).
Clinical breast
examination
Insufficient evidence to recommend for or
against.
Mammography
Recommends biennial screening
mammography for women aged 50 to 74
years (B).
Decision to start biennial screening
before the age of 50 should be an
individual one and take patient context
into account, including the patient's values
regarding specific benefits and harms
(C).
Papanicolaou
test
Strongly recommends screening for
cervical cancer in sexually active women
who have a cervix (A).
Recommends against routinely screening
women older than age 65 if they have had
adequate recent screening with normal
Pap tests and are not otherwise at high
risk for cervical cancer (D).
Colorectal
cancer (CRC)
screening
Recommends CRC screening using fecal
occult blood testing,2 sigmoidoscopy, or
colonoscopy, in adults, beginning at age
50 years and continuing until age 75
years (A).
Recommends against routine screening
in adults age 76–85 years (C).
Recommends against screening in adults
older than age 85 years (D).
Prostate
cancer
screening
Insufficient evidence to recommend for or
against.
Recommends against screening in
screening
men<75 years
1United States Preventive Services Task Force recommendations
available at http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/pocketgd1011/gcp10s2.htm.
2Home test with three samples.
Recommendation A: The USPSTF strongly recommends that clinicians
routinely provide the service to eligible patients. (The USPSTF found good
evidence that the service improves important health outcomes and
concludes that benefits substantially outweigh harms.)
Recommendation B: The USPSTF recommends that clinicians routinely
provide the service to eligible patients. (The USPSTF found at least fair
evidence that the service improves important health outcomes and
concludes that benefits substantially outweigh harms.)
Recommendation C: The USPSTF recommends against routinely
providing the service. There may be considerations that support providing
the service in an individual patient. There is at least moderate certainty that
the net benefit is small.
Recommendation D: The USPSTF recommends against routinely
providing the service to asymptomatic patients. (The USPSTF found at
least fair evidence that the service is ineffective or that harms outweigh
benefits.)
Annual or biennial fecal occult blood testing reduces mortality
from colorectal cancer by 16–33%. The risk of death from colon
cancer among patients undergoing at least one sigmoidoscopic
examination is reduced by 60–80% compared with that among
those not having sigmoidoscopy. Colonoscopy has also been
advocated as a screening examination. It is more accurate than
flexible sigmoidoscopy for detecting cancer and polyps, but its value
in reducing colon cancer mortality has not been studied directly. CT
colonography (virtual colonoscopy) is a noninvasive option in
screening for colorectal cancer. It has been shown to have a high
safety profile and performance similar to colonoscopy.
Screening for cervical cancer with a Papanicolaou smear is
indicated in sexually active adolescents and in adult women every
1–3 years. Screening for vaginal cancer with a Papanicolaou smear
is not indicated in women who have undergone hysterectomies for
benign disease with removal of the cervix—except in
diethylstilbestrol (DES)-exposed women (see Chapter 18). Women
over age 70 who have had normal results on three or more previous
Papanicolaou smears may elect to stop screening.
Observational clinical trials suggest that chest CT is significantly
more sensitive that chest radiography in identifying small
asymptomatic lung cancers. The National Lung Screening Trial
(NLST), a controlled randomized clinical trial of over 50,000 heavy
smokers, revealed a 20% reduction in lung cancer mortality in those
who were screened with yearly chest CTs for 3 years compared
with those who had chest radiographs.
Andriole GL et al; PLCO Project Team. Mortality results from a
randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl J Med. 2009
Mar 26;360(13):1310–9. [PMID: 19297565]
 
Battaglia TA. Improving follow-up to abnormal breast cancer
screening in an urban population. A patient navigation intervention.
Cancer. 2007 Jan 15;109(2 Suppl):359–67. [PMID: 17123275]
 
Johnson CD. CT colonography: coming of age. AJR Am J
Roentgenol. 2009 Nov;193(5):1239–42. [PMID: 19843736]
 
Johnson CD et al. Accuracy of CT colonography for detection of
large adenomas and cancers. N Engl J Med. 2008 Sep 18;
359(12):1207–17. [PMID: 18799557]
 
Lin K et al; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Benefits and
harms of prostate-specific antigen screening for prostate cancer: an
evidence update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann
Intern Med. 2008 Aug 5;149(3):192–9. [PMID: 18678846]
 
Lopes Pegna A et al. Lung cancer screening update. Curr Opin
Pulm Med. 2009 Jul;15(4):327–33. [PMID: 19395971]
 
National Lung Screening Trial Research Team. The National Lung
Screening Trial: overview and study design. Radiology. 2010 Nov
2. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21045183]
 
Nelson HD et al; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening
for breast cancer: an update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Nov 17;151(10):727–37, W237–
42. [PMID: 19920273]
 
Saslow D et al. American Cancer Society guidelines for breast
screening with MRI as an adjunct to mammography. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2007 Mar–Apr;57(2):75–89. [PMID: 17392385]
 
US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for breast cancer:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2009 Nov 17;151(10):716–26, W-236. [PMID:
19920272]
 
Warner E et al. Systematic review: using magnetic resonance
imaging to screen women at high risk for breast cancer. Ann Intern
Med. 2008 May 6;148(9):671–9. [PMID: 18458280]
 
Yau G et al. Systematic review of baseline low-dose CT lung
cancer screening. Lung Cancer. 2007 Nov;58(2):161–70. [PMID:
17723250]
 
PREVENTION OF INJURIES & VIOLENCE
Injuries remain the most important cause of loss of potential years of
life before age 65. Homicide and motor vehicle accidents are a
major cause of injury-related deaths among young adults, and
accidental falls are the most common cause of injury-related death
in the elderly. Other causes of injury-related deaths include suicide
and accidental exposure to smoke, fire, and flames.
Motor vehicle accident deaths per miles driven continue to
decline in the United States, and the rate of seat-belt use has
increased from 69% in 1998 to 88% in 2009. Each year in the
United States, more than 500,000 people are nonfatally injured
while riding bicycles. The rate of helmet use by bicyclists and
motorcyclists is significantly increased in states with helmet laws.
Young men appear most likely to resist wearing helmets. Clinicians
should try to educate their patients about seat belts, safety helmets,
the risks of using cellular telephones while driving, drinking and
driving—or using other intoxicants or long-acting benzodiazepines
and then driving—and the risks of having guns in the home.
Long-term alcohol abuse adversely affects outcome from trauma
and increases the risk of readmission for new trauma. Alcohol and
illicit drug use are associated with an increased risk of violent death.
Males aged 16–35 are at especially high risk for serious injury
and death from accidents and violence, with blacks and Latinos at
greatest risk. For 16- and 17-year-old drivers, the risk of fatal
crashes increases with the number of passengers. Deaths from
firearms have reached epidemic levels in the United States and will
soon surpass the number of deaths from motor vehicle accidents.
Having a gun in the home increases the likelihood of homicide nearly
threefold and of suicide fivefold. In 2007, an estimated 34,500
suicides occurred in the United States. Educating clinicians to
recognize and treat depression as well as restricting access to lethal
methods have been found to reduce suicide rates.
Finally, clinicians have a critical role in detection, prevention, and
management of intimate partner violence. Inclusion of a single
question in the medical history—“At any time, has a partner ever hit
you, kicked you, or otherwise physically hurt you?”—can increase
identification of this common problem. Another screen consists of
three questions: (1) “Have you ever been hit, kicked, punched, or
otherwise hurt by someone within the past year? If so, by whom?”
(2) “Do you feel safe in your current relationship?” (3) “Is there a
partner from a previous relationship who is making you feel unsafe
now?” Assessment for abuse and offering of referrals to community
resources creates potential to interrupt and prevent recurrence of
domestic violence and associated trauma. Screening patients in
emergency departments for intimate partner violence appears to
have no adverse effects related to screening and may lead to
increased patient contact with community resources. Clinicians
should take an active role in following up with patients whenever
possible, since intimate partner violence screening with passive
referrals to services may not be adequate. A randomized control
trial to assess the impact of intimate partner violence screening on
violence reduction and health outcomes in women revealed no
difference in violence occurrence between screened and
nonscreened women. Evaluation of services for patients after
identification of intimate partner violence should be a priority.
Physical and psychological abuse, exploitation, and neglect of
older adults are serious underrecognized problems. Clues to elder
mistreatment include the patient's appearance, recurrent urgent-care
visits, missed appointments, suspicious physical findings, and
implausible explanations for injuries.
Amstadter AB et al. Prevalence and correlates of poor self-rated
health in the United States: the national elder mistreatment study.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010 Jul;18(7):615–23. [PMID:
20220579]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Alcohol-
Related Disease Impact (ARDI). Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/ardi.html
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Web- based
Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS).
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/injury /wisqars/index.html
 
Gillespie LD et al. Interventions for preventing falls in older people
living in the community. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr
15; (2):CD007146. [PMID: 19370674]
 
Houry D et al. Does screening in the emergency department hurt
or help victims of intimate partner violence? Ann Emerg Med.
2008 Apr;51(4):433–42. [PMID: 18313800]
 
Koroukian SM et al. Analysis of injury- and violence-related
fatalities in the Ohio Medicaid population: identifying opportunities
for prevention. J Trauma. 2007 Apr;62(4):989–95. [PMID:
17426588]
 
MacMillan HL et al; McMaster Violence Against Women
Research Group. Screening for intimate partner violence in health
care settings: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2009 Aug 5;
302(5):493–501. [PMID: 19654384]
 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). Fatality
Analysis Reporting System: national statistics summary, 2010.
Available at: http://www-fars. nhtsa.dot.gov/Main/index.aspx
 
National Institute of Mental Health (NIHM). Suicide in the U.S.:
statistics and prevention. Available at: http://www.mental-
health.gov/health/ publications/suicide-in-the-us-statistics-and-
prevention/ index.shtml
 
National Safety Council. Seat belts: your single most effective
safety step. Available at: http://www.nsc.org/safety_road
/DriverSafety/Pages /SeatBelts.aspx
 
Rahmani P et al. Prevention of osteoporosis-related fractures
among postmenopausal women and older men. CMAJ. 2009 Nov
24;181(11):815–20. [PMID: 19841053]
 
PREVENTION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE: ALCOHOL &
ILLICIT DRUGS
Substance abuse is a major public health problem in the United
States. The lifetime prevalence of alcohol abuse is approximately
18%, whereas the lifetime prevalence of alcohol dependence is near
13%. Rates appear to be higher in men, whites, and younger and
unmarried individuals. Approximately two-thirds of high school
seniors are regular users of alcohol. Alcohol dependence often
coexists with other substance disorders as well as with mood,
anxiety, and personality disorders. Underdiagnosis and treatment of
alcohol abuse is substantial, both because of patient denial and lack
of detection of clinical clues. Treatment rates for alcohol
dependence have slightly declined over the last several years. Only
a quarter of alcohol-dependent patients have ever been treated.
As with cigarette use, clinician identification and counseling about
alcoholism may improve the chances of recovery. About 10% of all
adults seen in medical practices are problem drinkers. An estimated
15–30% of hospitalized patients have problems with alcohol abuse
or dependence, but the connection between patients’ presenting
complaints and their alcohol abuse is often missed. The CAGE test
(Table 1–7) is both sensitive and specific for chronic alcoholism.
However, it is less sensitive in detecting heavy or binge drinking in
elderly patients and has been criticized for being less applicable to
minority groups or to women. Others recommend asking three
questions: (1) How many days per week do you drink (frequency)?
(2) On a day when you drink alcohol, how many drinks do you
have in one day (quantity)? (3) On how many occasions in the last
month did you drink more than five drinks (binge drinking)? The
Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT) consists of
questions on the quantity and frequency of alcohol consumption, on
alcohol dependence symptoms, and on alcohol-related problems
(Table 1–7). The AUDIT questionnaire is a cost-effective and
efficient diagnostic tool for routine screening of alcohol use
disorders in primary care settings. Choice of therapy remains
controversial. However, use of screening procedures and brief
intervention methods (Table 1–8; see Chapter 25) can produce a
10–30% reduction in long-term alcohol use and alcohol-related
problems. However, brief advice and counseling without regular
follow-up and reinforcement cannot sustain significant long-term
reductions in unhealthy drinking behaviors.
 
Table 1–7. Screening for alcohol abuse.
 
1Source: Mayfield D et al. The CAGE questionnaire: validation of a new
alcoholism screening instrument. Am J Psychiatry. 1974;131:1121.
2Adapted, with permission, from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. and Piccinelli
M et al. Efficacy of the alcohol use disorders identification test as a
screening tool for hazardous alcohol intake and related disorders in
primary care: a validity study. BMJ. 1997 Feb 8;314(7078):420–4.
 
Table 1–8. Basic counseling steps for patients who abuse alcohol.
 
Establish a therapeutic relationship
Make the medical office or clinic off-limits for substance
abuse
Present information about negative health consequences
Emphasize personal responsibility and self-efficacy
Convey a clear message and set goals
Involve family and other supports
Establish a working relationship with community treatment
resources
Provide follow-up
 
Reproduced from the United States Department of Health Human
Services, U.S. Public Health Service, Office of Disease Prevention Health
Promotion. Clinician's Handbook of Preventive Services: Put Prevention
Into Practice. U.S. Government Printing Office, 1994.
Several pharmacologic agents are effective in reducing alcohol
consumption. In acute alcohol detoxification, standard treatment
regimens use long-acting benzodiazepines, the preferred
medications for alcohol detoxification, because they can be given on
a fixed schedule or through “front-loading” or “symptom-triggered”
regimens. Adjuvant sympatholytic medications can be used to treat
hyperadrenergic symptoms that persist despite adequate sedation.
Three drugs are FDA approved for treatment of alcohol
dependence—disulfiram, naltrexone, and acamprosate. Disulfiram,
an aversive agent, has significant adverse effects and consequently,
compliance difficulties have resulted in no clear evidence that it
increases abstinence rates, decreases relapse rates, or reduces
cravings. Persons who receive short-term treatment with naltrexone
have a lower chance of alcoholism relapse. Compared with
placebo, naltrexone can lower the risk of treatment withdrawal in
alcohol-dependent 
patients, 
and 
long-acting 
intramuscular
formulation of naltrexone has been found to be well-tolerated and to
reduce drinking significantly among treatment-seeking alcoholics
over a 6-month period. In a randomized, controlled trial, patients
receiving medical management with naltrexone, a combined
behavioral intervention, or both, fared better on drinking outcomes,
whereas acamprosate showed no evidence of efficacy with or
without combined behavioral intervention. Topiramate is a
promising treatment for alcohol dependence. A 6-month
randomized trial of topiramate versus naltrexone revealed a greater
reduction of alcohol intake and cravings in participants receiving
topiramate. Topiramate's side effect profile is favorable, and the
benefits appear to increase over time. Clinicians should be aware
that although topiramate appears to be an effective treatment for
alcohol dependence, the manufacturer has not pursued FDA
approval for this indication.
Use of illegal drugs—including cocaine, methamphetamine, and
so-called “designer drugs”—either sporadically or episodically
remains an important problem. Lifetime prevalence of drug abuse is
approximately 8% and is generally greater among men, young and
unmarried individuals, Native Americans, and those of lower
socioeconomic status. As with alcohol, drug abuse disorders often
coexist with personality, anxiety, and other substance abuse
disorders.
Abuse of anabolic-androgenic steroids has been associated with
use of other illicit drugs, alcohol, and cigarettes and with violence
and criminal behavior. As with alcohol abuse, the lifetime treatment
rate for drug abuse is low (8%). The recognition of drug abuse
presents special problems and requires that the clinician actively
consider the diagnosis. Clinical aspects of substance abuse are
discussed in Chapter 25.
Currently, evidence does not support the use of carbamazepine,
disulfiram, mazindol, phenytoin, nimodipine, lithium, antidepressants,
or dopamine agonists in the treatment of cocaine dependence.
Buprenorphine has potential as a medication to ameliorate the
symptoms and signs of withdrawal from opioids and has been
shown to be effective in reducing concomitant cocaine and opiate
abuse. A stepped treatment program for heroin dependence using
buprenorphine/naloxone, escalated to methadone if needed, has
been shown to be equally effective as methadone maintenance
therapy. Cessation of methadone maintenance is possible using
buprenorphine by transfer from methadone to buprenorphine and
subsequent buprenorphine reductions. Evidence does not support
the use of naltrexone in maintenance treatment of opioid addiction.
Rapid opioid detoxification with opioid antagonist induction using
general anesthesia has emerged as an approach to treat opioid
dependence. 
However, 
a 
randomized 
comparison 
of
buprenorphine-assisted rapid opioid detoxification with naltrexone
induction and clonidine-assisted opioid detoxification with delayed
naltrexone induction found no significant differences in rates of
completion of inpatient detoxification, treatment retention, or
proportions of opioid-positive urine specimens, and the anesthesia
procedure was associated with more potentially life-threatening
adverse events. Finally, cognitive behavior therapy, contingency
management, couples and family therapy, and other types of
behavioral treatment have been shown to be effective interventions
for drug addiction.
Anton RF. Naltrexone for the management of alcohol dependence.
N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 14;359(7):715–21. [PMID: 18703474]
 
Anton RF et al; COMBINE Study Research Group. Combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol
dependence: the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2006 May 3;295(17):2003–17. [PMID: 16670409]
 
Compton WM et al. Prevalence, correlates, disability, and
comorbidity of DSM-IV drug abuse and dependence in the United
States: results from the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol
and related conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007
May;64(5):566–76. [PMID: 17485608]
 
Drummond C et al. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a
stepped care intervention for alcohol use disorders in primary care:
pilot study. Br J Psychiatry. 2009 Nov;195(5):448–56. [PMID:
19880936]
 
Flórez G et al. Topiramate for the treatment of alcohol
dependence: comparison with naltrexone. Eur Addict Res. 2011;
17(1):29–36. [PMID: 20975274]
 
Hasin DS et al. Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity
of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence in the United States:
results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007 Jul;64(7):830–42.
[PMID: 17606817]
 
Johnson BA. Update on neuropharmacological treatments for
alcoholism: scientific basis and clinical findings. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2008 Jan 1;75(1):34–56. [PMID: 17880925]
 
Kakko J et al. A stepped care strategy using buprenorphine and
methadone versus conventional methadone maintenance in heroin
dependence: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry. 2007
May;164(5):797–803. [PMID: 17475739]
 
Kenna GA et al. Review of topiramate: an antiepileptic for the
treatment of alcohol dependence. Curr Drug Abuse Rev. 2009
May;2(2):135–42. [PMID: 19630744]
 
 
 
Common Symptoms
Ralph Gonzales, MD, MSPH, &
Paul L. Nadler, MD
COUGH
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Age.
 Duration of cough.
 Dyspnea (at rest or with exertion).
 Tobacco use history.
 Vital signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, body temperature).
 Chest examination.
 Chest radiography when unexplained cough lasts more than 3–6
weeks.
 
 General Considerations
Cough adversely affects personal and work-related interactions,
disrupts sleep, and often causes discomfort of the throat and chest
wall. Most people seeking medical attention for acute cough desire
symptom relief; few are worried about serious illness. Cough results
from stimulation of mechanical or chemical afferent nerve receptors
in the bronchial tree. Effective cough depends on an intact afferent–
efferent reflex arc, adequate expiratory and chest wall muscle
strength, and normal mucociliary production and clearance.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
Distinguishing acute (< 3 weeks), persistent (> 3 weeks), and
chronic (> 8 weeks) cough illness syndromes is a useful first step in
evaluation. Postinfectious cough lasting 3–8 weeks has also been
referred to as subacute cough to distinguish this common, distinct
clinical entity from acute and chronic cough.
1. Acute cough—In healthy adults, most acute cough syndromes
are due to viral respiratory tract infections. Additional features of
infection such as fever, nasal congestion, and sore throat help
confirm the diagnosis. Dyspnea (at rest or with exertion) may reflect
a more serious condition, and further evaluation should include
assessment of oxygenation (pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas
measurement), airflow (peak flow or spirometry), and pulmonary
parenchymal disease (chest radiography). The timing and character
of the cough have not been found to be very useful in establishing
the cause of acute cough syndromes, although cough-variant asthma
should be considered in adults with prominent nocturnal cough, and
persistent cough with phlegm increases the patient's likelihood of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Uncommon causes
of acute cough illness should be suspected in those with heart
disease (congestive heart failure [CHF]) or hay fever (allergic
rhinitis) and those with environmental risk factors (such as farm
workers).
2. Persistent and chronic cough—Cough due to acute
respiratory tract infection resolves within 3 weeks in the vast
majority of patients (over 90%). Pertussis infection should be
considered in adolescents and adults who present with persistent or
severe cough lasting more than 3 weeks. In selected geographic
areas, the prevalence of pertussis approaches 20% when cough has
persisted beyond 3 weeks, although the exact prevalence of
pertussis is difficult to ascertain due to the limited sensitivity of
diagnostic tests.
When angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy,
acute respiratory tract infection, and chest radiograph abnormalities
are absent, the majority of cases of persistent and chronic cough are
due to or exacerbated by postnasal drip, asthma, or
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). A history of nasal or sinus
congestion, wheezing, or heartburn should direct subsequent
evaluation and treatment, though these conditions frequently cause
persistent cough in the absence of typical symptoms. Dyspnea at
rest or with exertion is not commonly reported among patients with
persistent cough. The report of dyspnea requires assessment for
other evidence of chronic lung disease, CHF, or anemia.
Bronchogenic carcinoma is suspected when cough is
accompanied by unexplained weight loss and fevers with night
sweats, particularly in persons with significant tobacco or
occupational exposures. Persistent and chronic cough accompanied
by excessive mucus secretions increases the likelihood of COPD,
particularly among smokers, or bronchiectasis in a patient with a
history of recurrent or complicated pneumonia; chest radiographs
are helpful in diagnosis.
B. Physical Examination
Examination can direct subsequent diagnostic testing for acute and
persistent cough. Pneumonia is suspected when acute cough is
accompanied by vital sign abnormalities (tachycardia, tachypnea,
fever). Findings suggestive of airspace consolidation (rales,
decreased breath sounds, fremitus, egophony) are significant
predictors of community-acquired pneumonia but are present in the
minority of cases. Purulent sputum is associated with bacterial
infections in patients with structural lung disease (eg, COPD, cystic
fibrosis), but it is a poor predictor of pneumonia in the otherwise
healthy adult. Wheezing and rhonchi are frequent findings in adults
with acute bronchitis and do not represent adult-onset asthma in
most cases.
Physical examination of patients with persistent cough should
look for evidence of chronic sinusitis, contributing to postnasal drip
syndrome or asthma. Chest and cardiac signs may help distinguish
COPD from CHF. In patients with cough and dyspnea, a normal
match test (ability to blow out a match from 25 cm away) and
maximum laryngeal height > 4 cm (measured from the sternal notch
to the cricoid cartilage at end expiration) substantially decrease the
likelihood of COPD. Similarly, normal jugular venous pressure and
negative hepatojugular reflux decrease the likelihood of biventricular
CHF.
C. Diagnostic Studies
1. Acute cough—Chest radiography should be considered for any
adult with acute cough who shows abnormal vital signs or in whom
the chest examination is suggestive of pneumonia. The relationship
between specific clinical findings and the probability of pneumonia is
shown in Figure 2–1. In patients with dyspnea, pulse oximetry and
peak flow help exclude hypoxemia or obstructive airway disease.
However, a normal pulse oximetry value (eg, > 93%) does not rule
out a significant alveolar–arterial (A–a) gradient when patients have
effective respiratory compensation. During documented influenza
outbreaks, the positive predictive value of the clinical diagnosis of
influenza approaches 70% and usually obviates the usefulness of
rapid diagnostic tests.
 
Figure 2–1. Revised pneumonia probabilities based on history
and physical examination findings. (Reproduced, with permission,
from Metlay JP et al. Testing strategies in the initial management of
patients with community-acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med.
2003 Jan 21;138:109-118.)
 
2. Persistent and chronic cough—Chest radiography is indicated
when ACE inhibitor therapy–related and postinfectious cough are
excluded by history or further diagnostic testing. If pertussis
infection is suspected, testing should be performed using
polymerase chain reaction on a nasopharyngeal swab or nasal wash
specimen—keeping in mind that the ability to detect pertussis
decreases as the duration of cough increases. When the chest film is
normal, postnasal drip, asthma, and GERD are the most likely
causes. The presence of typical symptoms of these conditions
directs further evaluation or empiric therapy, though typical
symptoms are often absent. Definitive procedures for determining
the presence of each are available (Table 2–1). However, empiric
treatment with a maximum-strength regimen for postnasal drip,
asthma, or GERD for 2–4 weeks is one recommended approach
since documenting the presence of postnasal drip, asthma, and
GERD does not mean they are the cause of the cough illness.
Alternative approaches to identifying patients who have
corticosteroid-responsive cough include examining induced sputum
for increased eosinophil counts (> 3%); measuring increased
exhaled nitric oxide levels; or providing an empiric trial of
prednisone, 30 mg daily for 2 weeks. Spirometry may help identify
large airway obstruction in patients who have persistent cough and
wheezing and who are not responding to asthma treatment. When
empiric treatment trials are not helpful, additional evaluation with pH
manometry, endoscopy, barium swallow, sinus CT or high-
resolution chest CT may identify the cause.
 Differential Diagnosis
A. Acute Cough
Acute cough may be a symptom of acute respiratory tract infection,
asthma, allergic rhinitis, and CHF, as well as a myriad of other less
common causes.
B. Persistent and Chronic Cough
Causes of persistent cough include environmental exposures
(cigarette smoke, air pollution), pertussis infection, postnasal drip
syndrome (or upper airway cough syndrome), asthma (including
cough-variant asthma), GERD, COPD, bronchiectasis, eosinophilic
bronchitis, tuberculosis or other chronic infection, interstitial lung
disease, and bronchogenic carcinoma. COPD is a common cause
of persistent cough among patients > 50 years of age. Persistent
cough may also be psychogenic.
 
Table 2–1. Empiric treatments or tests for persistent cough.
 
 
 
 
Suspected Step 1 (Empiric Step 2 (Diagnostic
Condition Therapy)
Testing)
Postnasal
drip
Therapy for
allergy or chronic
sinusitis
ENT referral; sinus CT
scan
Asthma
β2-Agonist
Spirometry; consider
methacholine challenge if
normal
GERD
Proton pump
inhibitors
Esophageal pH
monitoring
ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
 Treatment
A. Acute Cough
Treatment of acute cough should target the underlying etiology of
the illness, the cough reflex itself, and any additional factors that
exacerbate the cough. When influenza is diagnosed, treatment with
amantadine, rimantadine, oseltamivir, or zanamivir is equally
effective (1 less day of illness) when initiated within 30–48 hours of
illness onset, although treatment is recommended regardless of
illness duration when patients present with severe illness requiring
hospitalization. Furthermore, in the setting of H1N1 influenza,
neuraminidase inhibitors are the preferred treatment due to
resistance to amantadine/rimantidine. In the setting of Chlamydia or
Mycoplasma-documented infection or outbreaks, first-line
antibiotics include erythromycin, 250 mg orally four times daily for 7
days, or doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. In
patients diagnosed with acute bronchitis, inhaled β2-agonist therapy
reduces severity and duration of cough in some patients. Evidence
supports a modest benefit of dextromethorphan, but not codeine,
on cough severity in adults with cough due to acute respiratory tract
infections. Treatment of postnasal drip (with antihistamines,
decongestants, or nasal corticosteroids) or GERD (with H2-
blockers or proton-pump inhibitors), when accompanying acute
cough illness, can also be helpful. There is good evidence that
vitamin C and echinacea are not effective in reducing the severity of
acute cough illness after it develops; however, evidence does
support vitamin C (at least 1 g daily) for prevention of colds among
persons with major physical stressors (eg, post-marathon) or
malnutrition. Treatment with zinc lozenges does not reduce the
duration of cold symptoms.
B. Persistent and Chronic Cough
Evaluation and management of persistent cough often requires
multiple visits and therapeutic trials, which frequently lead to
frustration, anger, and anxiety. When pertussis infection is suspected
or confirmed, treatment with macrolide antibiotics is appropriate to
reduce shedding and transmission of the organism. When pertussis
infection has lasted more than 7–10 days, antibiotic treatment does
not affect the duration of cough, which can last up to 6 months.
Early identification and treatment of patients who work or live with
persons at high-risk for complications from pertussis is encouraged
(pregnant women, infants [particularly younger than 1 year], and
immuno-suppressed individuals). There is no evidence to guide how
long treatment for persistent cough due to postnasal drip, asthma, or
GERD should be continued.
 When to Refer
 
•    Failure to control persistent or chronic cough following
empiric treatment trials. The small percentage of patients
with idiopathic persistent cough should be managed in
consultation with an otolaryngologist or a pulmonologist;
treatment options include nebulized lidocaine therapy and
morphine sulfate, 5–10 mg orally twice daily.
•    Patients with recurrent symptoms should be referred to
an otolaryngologist or a pulmonologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patient at high risk for tuberculosis for whom
compliance with respiratory precautions is uncertain.
•    Need for urgent bronchoscopy, such as suspected
foreign body.
•    Smoke or toxic fume inhalational injury.
•    Intractable cough despite treatment, when cough
impairs gas exchange or in patients at high risk for
barotraumas (eg, recent pneumothorax).
Broekhuizen BD et al. Undetected chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and asthma in people over 50 years with persistent cough.
Br J Gen Pract. 2010 Jul;60(576):489–94. [PMID: 20594438]
 
Call SA et al. Does this patient have influenza? JAMA. 2005 Feb
23;293(8):987–97. [PMID: 15728170]
 
Chung KF et al. Prevalence, pathogenesis and causes of chronic
cough. Lancet. 2008 Apr 19;371(9621):1364–74. [PMID:
18424325]
 
Cornia PB et al. Does this coughing adolescent or adult patient
have pertussis? JAMA. 2010 Aug 25;304(8):890–6. [PMID:
20736473]
 
Metlay JP et al. Testing strategies in the initial management of
patients with community-acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med.
2003 Jan 21;138(2):109–18. [PMID: 12529093]
 
Morice AH et al. Opiate therapy in chronic cough. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med. 2007 Feb 15;175(4):312–5. [PMID: 17122382]
 
Pratter MR et al. An empiric integrative approach to the
management of cough: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines. Chest. 2006 Jan;129(1 Suppl):222S–231S. [PMID:
16428715]
 
Wenzel RP et al. Acute bronchitis. N Engl J Med. 2006 Nov
16;355(20):2125–30. [PMID: 17108344]
 
Yu L et al. Clinical benefit of sequential three-step empirical
therapy in the management of chronic cough. Respirology. 2008
May;13(3):353–8. [PMID: 18399856]
 
DYSPNEA
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Fever.
 Cough.
 Chest pain.
 Vital sign measurements; pulse oximetry.
 Cardiac and chest examination.
 Chest radiography.
 Arterial blood gas measurement.
 
 General Considerations
Dyspnea is a subjective experience or perception of uncomfortable
breathing. However, the relationship between level of dyspnea and
the severity of underlying disease varies widely across individuals.
Dyspnea can result from conditions that increase the mechanical
effort of breathing (eg, COPD, restrictive lung disease, respiratory
muscle weakness), from conditions that produce compensatory
tachypnea (eg, hypoxemia or acidosis), or from psychogenic
origins. Rate of onset, previous dyspnea, medications,
comorbidities, psychological profile, and severity of underlying
disorder play a role in how and when persons present with
dyspnea. In patients with established COPD, the patient-reported
severity of dyspnea is superior to forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) in predicting quality of life and 5-year mortality.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
The duration, severity, and periodicity of dyspnea influence the
tempo of the clinical evaluation. Rapid onset, severe dyspnea in the
absence of other clinical features should raise concern for
pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, or increased left ventricular
end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP). Spontaneous pneumothorax is
usually accompanied by chest pain and occurs most often in thin,
young males, or in those with underlying lung disease. Pulmonary
embolism should always be suspected when a patient with new
dyspnea reports a recent history (previous 4 weeks) of prolonged
immobilization, estrogen therapy, or other risk factors for deep
venous 
thrombosis 
(DVT) 
(eg, 
previous 
history 
of
thromboembolism, cancer, obesity, lower extremity trauma) and
when the cause of dyspnea is not apparent. Silent myocardial
infarction, which occurs more frequently in diabetic persons and
women, can result in acute heart failure and dyspnea.
Accompanying symptoms provide important clues to various
etiologies of dyspnea. When cough and fever are present,
pulmonary disease (particularly infections) is the primary concern,
although myocarditis, pericarditis, and septic emboli can also
present in this manner. Chest pain should be further characterized as
acute or chronic, pleuritic or exertional. Although acute pleuritic
chest pain is the rule in acute pericarditis and pneumothorax, most
patients with pleuritic chest pain in the outpatient clinic have pleurisy
due to acute viral respiratory tract infection. Periodic chest pain that
precedes the onset of dyspnea is suspicious for myocardial ischemia
as well as pulmonary embolism. When associated with wheezing,
most cases of dyspnea are due to acute bronchitis; however, when
acute bronchitis seems unlikely, the clinician should also consider
new-onset asthma, foreign body, and vocal cord dysfunction.
When a patient reports prominent dyspnea with mild or no
accompanying features, consider noncardiopulmonary causes of
impaired oxygen delivery (anemia, methemoglobinemia, cyanide
ingestion, carbon monoxide), metabolic acidosis due to a variety of
conditions, panic disorder, and chronic pulmonary embolism.
 
Table 2–2. Clinical findings suggesting obstructive airway disease.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adjusted Likelihood
Ratios
Factor
Factor
Present
Absent
> 40 pack-years smoking
11.6
0.9
Age ≥ 45 years
1.4
0.5
Maximum laryngeal height ≤
4 cm
3.6
0.7
All three factors
58.5
0.3
 
Reproduced, with permission, from Straus SE et al. The accuracy of patient
history, wheezing, and laryngeal measurements in diagnosing obstructive
airway disease. CARE-COAD1 Group. Clinical Assessment of the
Reliability of the Examination—Chronic Obstructive Airways Disease.
JAMA. 2000 Apr 12;283(14):1853–7.
B. Physical Examination
A focused physical examination should include evaluation of the
head and neck, chest, heart, and lower extremities. Visual
inspection of the patient's respiratory pattern can suggest
obstructive airway disease (pursed-lip breathing, use of extra
respiratory 
muscles, 
barrel-shaped 
chest), 
pneumothorax
(asymmetric excursion), or metabolic acidosis (Kussmaul
respirations). Patients with impending upper airway obstruction (eg,
epiglottitis, foreign body), or severe asthma exacerbation,
sometimes assume a tripod position. Focal wheezing raises the
suspicion for a foreign body or other bronchial obstruction.
Maximum laryngeal height (the distance between the top of the
thyroid cartilage and the suprasternal notch at end expiration) is a
measure of hyperinflation. Obstructive airway disease is virtually
nonexistent when a nonsmoking patient younger than 45 years has a
maximum laryngeal height ≤ 4 cm (Table 2–2). Absent breath
sounds suggests a pneumothorax. An accentuated pulmonic
component of the second heart sound (loud P2) is a sign of
pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary embolism.
A systematic review has identified several clinical predictors of
increased LVEDP useful in the evaluation of dyspneic patients with
no prior history of CHF (Table 2–3). When none is present, there is
a very low probability (< 10%) of increased LVEDP, and when
two or more are present, there is a very high probability (> 90%) of
increased LVEDP.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Causes of dyspnea that can be managed without chest radiography
are few: ingestions causing lactic acidosis, methemoglobinemia, and
carbon monoxide poisoning. The diagnosis of pneumonia should be
confirmed by chest radiography in most patients. When COPD
exacerbation is severe enough to require hospitalization, results of
chest radiography can influence management decisions in up to 20%
of patients. Chest radiography is fairly sensitive and specific for
new-onset CHF (represented by redistribution of pulmonary venous
circulation) and can help guide treatment decisions in patients with
dyspnea secondary to cardiac disease. End-expiratory chest
radiography enhances detection of a small pneumothorax.
 
Table 2–3. Clinical findings suggesting increased left ventricular
end-diastolic pressure.
 
Tachycardia
Systolic hypotension
Jugular venous distention (> 5–7 cm H2O)1
Hepatojugular reflux (> 1 cm)2
Crackles, especially bibasilar
Third heart sound3
Lower extremity edema
Radiographic pulmonary vascular redistribution or
cardiomegaly1
1These findings are particularly helpful.
2Proper abdominal compression for evaluating hepatojugular reflux
requires > 30 seconds of sustained right upper quadrant abdominal
compression.
3Cardiac auscultation of the patient at 45-degree angle in left lateral
decubitus position doubles the detection rate of third heart sounds.
Source: Badgett RG et al. Can the clinical examination diagnose left-sided
heart failure in adults? JAMA. 1997 Jun 4;277(21):1712–9.
A normal chest radiograph has substantial diagnostic value.
When there is no physical examination evidence of COPD or CHF
and the chest radiograph is normal, the major remaining causes of
dyspnea include pulmonary embolism, upper airway obstruction,
foreign body, anemia, and metabolic acidosis. If a patient has
tachycardia and hypoxemia but a normal chest radiograph and
electrocardiogram (ECG), then further tests to exclude pulmonary
emboli are warranted (see Chapter 9), provided blood tests
exclude significant anemia or metabolic acidosis. High-resolution
chest CT is particularly useful in the evaluation of pulmonary
embolism and has the added benefit of providing information about
interstitial and alveolar lung disease.
Serum or whole blood brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) testing
can be useful in distinguishing cardiac from non-cardiac causes of
dyspnea in the emergency department, since elevated BNP levels
are both sensitive and specific for increased LVEDP in symptomatic
persons.
Persistent uncertainty following clinical examination and routine
diagnostic testing warrants arterial blood gas measurement. With
two notable exceptions (carbon monoxide poisoning and cyanide
toxicity), arterial blood gas measurement distinguishes increased
mechanical effort causes of dyspnea (respiratory acidosis with or
without hypoxemia) from compensatory tachypnea (respiratory
alkalosis with or without hypoxemia or metabolic acidosis) from
psychogenic dyspnea (respiratory alkalosis). Carbon monoxide and
cyanide impair oxygen delivery with minimal alterations in Po2;
percent carboxyhemoglobin identifies carbon monoxide toxicity.
Cyanide poisoning should be considered in a patient with profound
lactic acidosis following exposure to burning vinyl (such as a theater
fire or industrial accident). Suspected carbon monoxide poisoning
or methemoglobinemia can also be confirmed with venous
carboxyhemoglobin or methemoglobin levels.
Because arterial blood gas testing is impractical in most
outpatient settings, pulse oximetry has assumed a central role in
the office evaluation of dyspnea. Oxygen saturation values above
96% almost always correspond with a Po2 > 70 mm Hg, and
values < 94% almost always represent clinically significant
hypoxemia. Important exceptions to this rule include carbon
monoxide toxicity, which leads to a normal oxygen saturation (due
to 
the 
similar 
wavelengths 
of 
oxyhemoglobin 
and
carboxyhemoglobin), and methemoglobinemia, which results in an
oxygen saturation of about 85% that fails to increase with
supplemental oxygen. A delirious or obtunded patient with
obstructive lung disease warrants immediate measurement of arterial
blood gases to exclude hypercapnia and the need for intubation,
regardless of the oxygen saturation. When pulse oximetry yields
equivocal results, assessment of desaturation with ambulation (eg, a
brisk walk around the clinic) can be a useful finding (eg, when
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is suspected) for confirming
impaired gas exchange.
Episodic dyspnea can be challenging if an evaluation cannot be
performed during symptoms. Life-threatening causes include
recurrent pulmonary embolism, myocardial ischemia, and reactive
airway disease. When associated with audible wheezing, vocal cord
dysfunction should be considered, particularly in a young woman
who does not respond to asthma therapy. Spirometry is very helpful
in further classifying patients with obstructive airway disease but is
rarely needed in the initial or emergent evaluation of patients with
acute dyspnea.
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute dyspnea, particularly as the chief complaint, demands urgent
evaluation. Urgent and emergent conditions causing acute dyspnea
include pneumonia, COPD, asthma, pneumothorax, pulmonary
embolism, cardiac disease (eg, CHF, acute myocardial infarction,
valvular dysfunction, arrhythmia, cardiac shunt), metabolic acidosis,
cyanide toxicity, methemoglobinemia, and carbon monoxide
poisoning.
 Treatment
The treatment of urgent or emergent causes of dyspnea should aim
to relieve the underlying cause. Pending diagnosis, patients with
hypoxemia should be immediately provided supplemental oxygen
unless significant hypercapnia is present or strongly suspected
pending arterial blood gas measurement. Dyspnea frequently occurs
in patients nearing the end of life; whereas opioid therapy can
provide substantial relief independent of the severity of hypoxemia,
oxygen therapy appears to be most beneficial to patients with
significant hypoxemia (see Chapter 5). A recent randomized trial
showed no benefit of supplemental oxygen when patients with life-
limiting illness have Pao2 > 55 mm Hg. In patients with severe
COPD, oxygen therapy improves mortality and exercise
performance. Pulmonary rehabilitation programs are another
therapeutic option for patients with moderate to severe COPD or
interstitial pulmonary fibrosis.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with advanced COPD should be referred to a
pulmonologist, and patients with CHF or valvular heart
disease should be referred to a cardiologist following acute
stabilization.
•    Cyanide toxicity should be managed in conjunction with
a toxicologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Impaired gas exchange from any cause or high risk of
pulmonary embolism pending definitive diagnosis.
•    Suspected cyanide poisoning.
Cranston JM et al. Oxygen therapy for dyspnoea in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Jul 16; (3):CD004769.
[PMID: 18646110]
 
Hildebrandt P et al. Amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
testing to assist the diagnostic evaluation of heart failure in
symptomatic primary care patients. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Feb
4;101(3A):25–8. [PMID: 18243854]
 
Kapoor JR et al. Diagnostic and therapeutic approach to acute
decompensated heart failure. Am J Med. 2007 Feb;120(2): 121–
7. [PMID: 17275448]
 
Karnani NG et al. Evaluation of chronic dyspnea. Am Fam
Physician. 2005 Apr 15;71(8):1529–37. [PMID: 15864893]
 
Nonoyama ML et al. Effect of oxygen on health quality of life in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with transient
exertional hypoxemia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Aug
15;176(4):343–9. [PMID: 17446339]
 
Voll-Aanerud M et al. Changes in respiratory symptoms and
health-related quality of life. Chest. 2007 Jun;131(6):1890–7.
[PMID: 17505046]
 
HEMOPTYSIS
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Smoking history.
 Fever, cough, and other symptoms of lower respiratory tract
infection.
 Nasopharyngeal or gastrointestinal bleeding.
 Chest radiography and complete blood count.
 
 General Considerations
Hemoptysis is the expectoration of blood that originates below the
vocal cords. It is commonly classified as trivial, mild, or massive—
the latter defined as more than 200–600 mL (about 1–2 cups) in 24
hours. The dividing lines are arbitrary, since the amount of blood is
rarely quantified with precision. Massive hemoptysis can be usefully
defined as any amount that is hemodynamically significant or
threatens ventilation, in which case the initial management goal is not
diagnostic but therapeutic.
The lungs are supplied with a dual circulation. The pulmonary
arteries arise from the right ventricle to supply the pulmonary
parenchyma in a low-pressure circuit. The bronchial arteries arise
from the aorta or intercostal arteries and carry blood under systemic
pressure to the airways, blood vessels, hila, and visceral pleura.
Although the bronchial circulation represents only 1–2% of total
pulmonary blood flow, it can increase dramatically under conditions
of chronic inflammation—eg, chronic bronchiectasis—and is
frequently the source of hemoptysis.
The causes of hemoptysis can be classified anatomically. Blood
may arise from the airways in COPD, bronchiectasis, and
bronchogenic carcinoma; from the pulmonary vasculature in left
ventricular failure, mitral stenosis, pulmonary embolism, and
arteriovenous malformations; or from the pulmonary parenchyma in
pneumonia, inhalation of crack cocaine, or granulomatosis with
polyangiitis [formerly Wegener granulomatosis]). Diffuse alveolar
hemorrhage is due to small vessel bleeding usually caused by
autoimmune or hematologic disorders and results in alveolar
infiltrates on chest radiography. Most cases of hemoptysis
presenting in the outpatient setting are due to infection (eg, acute or
chronic bronchitis, pneumonia, tuberculosis). Hemoptysis due to
lung cancer increases with age, accounting for up to 20% of cases
among the elderly. Less commonly (< 10% of cases), pulmonary
venous hypertension (eg, mitral stenosis, pulmonary embolism)
causes hemoptysis. Most cases of hemoptysis that have no visible
cause on CT scan or bronchoscopy will resolve within 6 months
without treatment, with the notable exception of patients at high risk
for lung cancer (smokers older than 40 years). Iatrogenic
hemorrhage 
may 
follow 
transbronchial 
lung 
biopsies,
anticoagulation, or pulmonary artery rupture due to distal placement
of a balloon-tipped catheter. No cause is identified in up to 15–
30% of cases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
Blood-tinged sputum in the setting of an upper respiratory tract
infection in an otherwise healthy, young (age < 40 years)
nonsmoker does not warrant an extensive diagnostic evaluation if
the hemoptysis subsides with resolution of the infection. However,
hemoptysis is frequently a sign of serious disease, especially in
patients with a high prior probability of underlying pulmonary
pathology. One should not distinguish between blood-streaked
sputum and cough productive of blood alone with regard to the
evaluation plan. The goal of the history is to identify patients at risk
for one of the disorders listed above. Pertinent features include past
or current tobacco use, duration of symptoms, and the presence of
respiratory infection. Nonpulmonary sources of hemorrhage—from
the nose or the gastrointestinal tract—should also be excluded.
B. Physical Examination
Elevated pulse, hypotension, and decreased oxygen saturation
suggest large volume hemorrhage that warrants emergent evaluation
and stabilization. The nares and oropharynx should be carefully
inspected to identify a potential upper airway source of bleeding.
Chest and cardiac examination may reveal evidence of CHF or
mitral stenosis.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Diagnostic evaluation should include a chest radiograph and
complete blood count. Kidney function tests, urinalysis, and
coagulation studies are appropriate in specific circumstances.
Hematuria that accompanies hemoptysis may be a clue to
Goodpasture syndrome or vasculitis. Flexible bronchoscopy reveals
endobronchial cancer in 3–6% of patients with hemoptysis who
have a normal (non-lateralizing) chest radiograph. Nearly all of
these patients are smokers over the age of 40, and most will have
had symptoms for more than 1 week. Bronchoscopy is indicated in
such patients. High-resolution chest CT scan complements
bronchoscopy and should be strongly considered in patients with
normal chest radiograph and low risk for malignancy. It can
visualize 
unsuspected 
bronchiectasis 
and 
arteriovenous
malformations and will show central endobronchial lesions in many
cases. High-resolution chest CT scanning is the test of choice for
suspected small peripheral malignancies. Helical CT pulmonary
angiography has become the initial test of choice for evaluating
patients with suspected pulmonary embolism, although caution
should be taken to avoid large contrast loads in patients with even
mild chronic kidney disease (serum creatinine > 2.0 g/dL or rapidly
rising creatinine in normal range).
 Treatment
The management of mild hemoptysis consists of identifying and
treating the specific cause. Massive hemoptysis is life-threatening.
The airway should be protected with endotracheal intubation,
ventilation ensured, and effective circulation maintained. If the
location of the bleeding site is known, the patient should be placed
in the decubitus position with the involved lung dependent.
Uncontrollable hemorrhage warrants rigid bronchoscopy and
surgical consultation. In stable patients, flexible bronchoscopy may
localize the site of bleeding, and angiography can embolize the
involved bronchial arteries. Embolization is effective initially in 85%
of cases, although rebleeding may occur in up to 20% of patients
over the following year. The anterior spinal artery arises from the
bronchial artery in up to 5% of people, and paraplegia may result if
it is inadvertently cannulated.
 When to Refer
 
•    When bronchoscopic evaluation of lower respiratory
tract is required, refer patients to a pulmonologist.
•    Patients should be referred to an otolaryngologist for
evaluation of upper respiratory tract bleeding source.
•    Patients with severe coagulopathy complicating
management should be referred to a hematologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    To stabilize bleeding process in patients at risk for or
experiencing massive hemoptysis.
•    To correct disordered coagulation (clotting factors or
platelets, or both).
•    To stabilize gas exchange.
Bidwell JL et al. Hemoptysis: diagnosis and management. Am Fam
Physician. 2005 Oct 1;72(7):1253–60. [PMID: 16225028]
 
Fartoukh M et al. Aetiology, diagnosis and management of
infective causes of severe haemoptysis in intensive care units. Curr
Opin Pulm Med. 2008 May;14(3):195–202. [PMID: 18427242]
 
Fartoukh M et al. An integrated approach to diagnosis and
management of severe haemoptysis in patients admitted to the
intensive care unit: a case series from a referral centre. Respir Res.
2007 Feb 15;8:11. [PMID: 17302979]
 
Jeudy J et al; Expert Panel on Thoracic Imaging. ACR
Appropriateness Criteria hemoptysis. J Thorac Imaging. 2010
Aug;25(3):W67–9. [PMID: 20711032]
Jones R et al. Alarm symptoms in early diagnosis of cancer in
primary care: cohort study using General Practice Research
Database. BMJ. 2007 May 19;334(7602):1040. [PMID:
17493982]
 
Shigemura N et al. Multidisciplinary management of life-threatening
massive hemoptysis: a 10-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg.
2009 Mar;87(3):849–53. [PMID: 19231404]
 
Tsoumakidou M et al. A prospective analysis of 184 hemoptysis
cases: diagnostic impact of chest X-ray, computed tomography,
bronchoscopy. Respiration. 2006;73(6):808–14. [PMID:
16446530]
 
CHEST PAIN
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Chest pain onset, character, location/size, duration, periodicity,
and exacerbators.
 Shortness of breath.
 Vital signs.
 Chest and cardiac examination.
 Electrocardiography.
 Biomarkers of myocardial necrosis.
 
 General Considerations
Chest pain (or chest discomfort) is a common symptom that can
occur as a result of cardiovascular, pulmonary, pleural, or
musculoskeletal disease, esophageal or other gastrointestinal
disorders, or anxiety states. The frequency and distribution of life-
threatening causes of chest pain, such as acute coronary syndrome
(ACS), pericarditis, aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism,
pneumonia, and esophageal perforation, vary substantially between
clinical settings. Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis,
and HIV are conditions that confer a strong risk for coronary artery
disease. Because pulmonary embolism can present with a wide
variety of symptoms, consideration of the diagnosis and rigorous
risk factor assessment for venous thromboembolism (VTE) is
critical. Classic VTE risk factors include cancer, trauma, recent
surgery, prolonged immobilization, pregnancy, oral contraceptives,
and family history and prior history of VTE. Other conditions
associated with increased risk of pulmonary embolism include CHF
and COPD. Although uncommon in the office setting, delays in
diagnosing life-threatening causes of chest pain can result in serious
morbidity and mortality.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
Myocardial ischemia is usually described as dull, aching sensation of
“pressure,” “tightness,” “squeezing,” or “gas,” rather than as sharp
or spasmodic. Ischemic symptoms usually subside within 5–20
minutes but may last longer. Progressive symptoms or symptoms at
rest may represent unstable angina. Prolonged chest pain episodes
might represent myocardial infarction, although up to one-third of
patients with acute myocardial infarction do not report chest pain.
When present, pain due to myocardial ischemia is commonly
accompanied by a sense of anxiety or uneasiness. The location is
usually retrosternal or left precordial. Because the heart lacks
somatic innervation, precise localization of pain due to cardiac
ischemia is difficult; the pain is commonly referred to the throat,
lower jaw, shoulders, inner arms, upper abdomen, or back.
Ischemic pain may be precipitated or exacerbated by exertion, cold
temperature, meals, stress, or combinations of these factors and is
usually relieved by rest. However, many episodes do not conform
to these patterns; and atypical presentations of ACS are more
common in the elderly, women, and persons with diabetes. Other
symptoms that are associated with ACS include shortness of
breath; dizziness; a feeling of impending doom; and vagal
symptoms, such as nausea and diaphoresis. In the elderly, fatigue is
a common presenting complaint of ACS. Likelihood ratios for
cardinal symptoms considered in the evaluation of acute myocardial
infarction are summarized in Table 2–4.
Hypertrophy of either ventricle or aortic stenosis may also give
rise to chest pain with less typical features. Pericarditis may produce
pain that is greater when supine than upright and may increase with
respiration, coughing, or swallowing. Pleuritic chest pain is usually
not ischemic, and pain on palpation may indicate a musculoskeletal
cause. Aortic dissection classically produces an abrupt onset of
tearing pain of great intensity that often radiates to the back;
however, this classic presentation occurs in a small proportion of
cases. Anterior aortic dissection can also lead to myocardial or
cerebrovascular ischemia.
Pulmonary embolism has a wide range of clinical presentations,
with chest pain present in only 75% of cases. The chief objective in
evaluating patients with suspected pulmonary embolism is to assess
the patient's clinical risk for VTE based on medical history and
associated signs and symptoms (see above and Chapter 9).
Esophageal perforation of the thoracic region is another cause of
chest pain, with most cases resulting from medical procedures of the
esophagus.
 
Table 2–4. Likelihood ratios (LRs) for clinical features associated
with acute myocardial infarction.
 
 
 
Clinical Feature
LR+ (95%
CI)
History
      Chest pain that radiates to the left arm
2.3 (1.7–3.1)
      Chest pain that radiates to the right
shoulder
2.9 (1.4–3.0)
      Chest pain that radiates to both arms
7.1 (3.6–
14.2)
      Pleuritic chest pain
0.2 (0.2–0.3)
      Sharp or stabbing chest pain
0.3 (0.2–0.5)
      Positional chest pain
0.3 (0.2–0.4)
      Chest pain reproduced by palpation
0.2–0.41
      Nausea or vomiting
1.9 (1.7–2.3)
      Diaphoresis
2.0 (1.9–2.2)
Physical examination
      Systolic blood pressure ≤ 80 mm Hg
3.1 (1.8–5.2)
      Pulmonary crackles
2.1 (1.4–3.1)
      Third heart sound
3.2 (1.6–6.5)
Electrocardiogram
      Any ST segment elevation (≥ 1 mm)
11.2 (7.1–
17.8)
      Any ST segment depression
3.2 (2.5–4.1)
      Any Q wave
3.9 (2.7–7.7)
      Any conduction defect
2.7 (1.4–5.4)
      New ST segment elevation (≥ 1 mm)
5.7–53.91
      New ST segment depression
3.0–5.21
      New Q wave
5.3–24.81
      New conduction defect
6.3 (2.5–
15.7)
1Heteregenous studies do not allow for calculation of a point estimate.
Adapted, with permission, from Panju AA et al. The rational clinical
examination. Is this patient having a myocardial infarction? JAMA. 1998 Oct
14;280(14):1256–63.
B. Physical Examination
Findings on physical examination can occasionally yield important
clues to the underlying cause of chest pain; however, a normal
physical examination should never be used as the sole basis for
ruling-out most diagnoses, particularly ACS and aortic dissection.
Vital sign measurement, including pulse oximetry, is always the first
step for assessing the urgency and tempo of the subsequent
examination and diagnostic work-up.
Findings that increase the likelihood of ACS include diaphoresis,
hypotension, S3 or S4 gallop, pulmonary crackles, or elevated
jugular venous pressure (see Table 2–4). Although chest pain that is
reproducible or worsened with palpation strongly suggests a
musculoskeletal cause, up to 15% of patients with ACS will have
reproducible chest wall tenderness. Pointing to the location of the
pain with one finger has been shown to be highly correlated with
nonischemic chest pain. Aortic dissection can result in differential
blood pressures (> 20 mm Hg), pulse amplitude deficits, and new
diastolic murmurs. Although hypertension is considered the rule in
patients with aortic dissection, systolic blood pressure < 100 mm
Hg is present in up to 25% of patients.
A cardiac friction rub represents pericarditis until proven
otherwise. It can best be heard with the patient sitting forward at
end-expiration. Tamponade should be excluded in all patients with a
clinical diagnosis of pericarditis by assessing pulsus paradoxus (a
decrease in systolic blood pressure during inspiration > 10 mm Hg)
and inspection of jugular venous pulsations. Subcutaneous
emphysema is common following cervical esophageal perforation
but present in only about one-third of thoracic perforations (ie,
those most commonly presenting with chest pain).
The absence of physical examination findings in patients with
suspected pulmonary embolism usually serves to increase the
likelihood of pulmonary embolism, although a normal physical
examination is also compatible with the much more common
conditions of panic/anxiety disorder and musculoskeletal disease.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Unless a competing diagnosis can be confirmed, an ECG is
warranted in the initial evaluation of most patients with acute chest
pain to help exclude ACS. ST segment elevation is the ECG finding
that is the strongest predictor of acute myocardial infarction (see
Table 2–4); however, up to 20% of patients with ACS can have a
normal ECG. A 2007 study concluded that patients with suspected
ACS can be safely removed from cardiac monitoring in the
emergency department if they are pain-free at initial physician
assessment and have a normal or nonspecific ECG. This decision
rule had 100% sensitivity for serious arrhythmia (95% confidence
interval, 80–100%), but deserves further validation. Clinically stable
patients with cardiovascular disease risk factors, normal ECG,
normal cardiac biomarkers and no alternative diagnosis should be
followed-up with a timely exercise stress test that includes perfusion
imaging. The ECG can also provide evidence for alternative
diagnoses, such as pericarditis and pulmonary embolism. Chest
radiography is often useful in the evaluation of chest pain, and is
always indicated when cough or shortness of breath accompanies
chest pain. Findings of pneumomediastinum or new pleural effusion
are consistent with esophageal perforation. Sixty-four–slice CT
coronary angiography has been studied for diagnosing acute
coronary syndromes and predicting outcomes in the emergency
department. One study of 58 patients found a high positive
predictive value for diagnosing acute coronary syndromes, and a
negative predictive value of 97%. Another study found that it
compared favorably with stress nuclear imaging in the detection and
exclusion of ACS in low-risk chest pain patients. CT is the study of
choice at most centers for the diagnosis of esophageal perforation
as well as for aortic dissection (helical CT). Current generation
highly-sensitive assays for cardiac troponin I have been studied in
an effort to more rapidly prognosticate outcomes in patients
presenting with suspected ACS. Patients presenting to the
emergency department with chest pain of intermediate or high
probability for ACS without electrocardiographic or biomarker
evidence of a myocardial infarction can be safely discharged from
an observation unit after stress cardiac magnetic imaging.
The role of computed tomographic coronary calcium assessment
in the evaluation of chest pain in the emergency department is still
being defined.
In the evaluation of pulmonary embolism, diagnostic test
decisions and results must be interpreted in the context of the
clinical likelihood of VTE. A negative D-dimer test is helpful for
excluding pulmonary embolism in patients with low clinical
probability of VTE (3 month incidence = 0.5%); however, the 3-
month risk of VTE among patients with intermediate and high risk of
VTE is sufficiently high in the setting of a negative D-dimer test
(3.5% and 21.4%, respectively) to warrant further imaging given the
life-threatening nature of this condition if left untreated. CT
angiography (with helical or multidetector CT imaging) has replaced
ventilation-perfusion scanning as the preferred diagnostic test for
pulmonary embolism, having approximately 90–95% sensitivity and
95% specificity for detecting pulmonary embolism (compared with
pulmonary angiography). However, according to guidelines
published by the American Academy of Family Physicians and the
American College of Physicians (AAFP/ACP), the sensitivity of
helical CT is probably not sufficiently high to exclude pulmonary
embolism among patients with high clinical probability of VTE, in
whom lower extremity ultrasound or pulmonary angiogram may be
appropriate. When ventilation-perfusion scanning is performed, only
results that are normal or high probability are useful for improving
one's clinical assessment of pulmonary embolism.
Panic disorder is a common cause of chest pain, accounting for
up to 25% of cases that present to emergency departments and a
higher proportion of cases presenting in primary care office
practices. Features that correlate with an increased likelihood of
panic disorder include absence of coronary artery disease, atypical
quality of chest pain, female sex, younger age, and a high level of
self-reported anxiety.
 Treatment
Treatment of chest pain should be guided by the underlying etiology.
The term “noncardiac chest pain” is used to describe patients who
evade diagnosis after receiving extensive work-up. Although under-
studied, one small trial of patients with noncardiac chest pain found
that about half fulfilled criteria for anxiety or depression and almost
half reported symptom improvement with high-dose proton-pump
inhibitor therapy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Refer patients with poorly controlled, noncardiac chest
pain to a pain specialist.
•    Refer patients with sickle cell anemia to a hematologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Failure to adequately exclude (to a sufficient degree)
life-threatening 
causes 
of 
chest 
pain, 
particularly
myocardial 
infarction, 
dissecting 
aortic 
aneurysm,
pulmonary embolism, and esophageal rupture.
•    Pain control for rib fracture that impairs gas exchange.
Bonaca M et al. Prospective evaluation of the prognostic
implications of improved assay performance with a sensitive assay
for cardiac troponin I. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 May 11;
55(19):2118–24. [PMID: 20447535]
 
Chow BJ et al. Usefulness of computed tomographic coronary
angiography in patients with acute chest pain with and without
high-risk features. Am J Cardiol. 2010 Aug 15;106(4):463–9.
[PMID: 20691302]
 
Dumville JC et al. Non-cardiac chest pain: a retrospective cohort
study of patients who attended a Rapid Access Chest Pain Clinic.
Fam Pract. 2007 Apr;24(2):152–7. [PMID: 17283218]
 
Gallagher MJ et al. The diagnostic accuracy of 64-slice computed
tomography coronary angiography compared with stress nuclear
imaging in emergency department low-risk chest pain patients. Ann
Emerg Med. 2007 Feb;49(2):125–36. [PMID: 16978738]
 
Gatien M et al. A clinical decision rule to identify which chest pain
patients can safely be removed from cardiac monitoring in the
emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 2007 Aug;50(2):136–
43. [PMID: 17498844]
 
Geersing GJ et al. Excluding venous thromboembolism using point
of care D-dimer tests in outpatients: a diagnostic meta-analysis.
BMJ. 2009 Aug 14;339:b2990. [PMID: 19684102]
 
Gottlieb I et al. The absence of coronary calcification does not
exclude obstructive coronary artery disease or the need for
revascularization in patients referred for conventional coronary
angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Feb 16;55(7):627–34.
[PMID: 20170786]
 
Laudon DA et al. Computed tomographic coronary artery calcium
assessment for evaluating chest pain in the emergency department:
long-term outcome of a prospective blind study. Mayo Clin Proc.
2010 Apr;85(4):314–22. [PMID: 20360291]
 
Miller CD et al. Stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with
observation unit care reduces cost for patients with emergent chest
pain: a randomized trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2010 Sep;56(3):209–
219.e2. [PMID: 20554078]
 
Min JK et al. Determinants of coronary calcium conversion among
patients with a normal coronary calcium scan: what is the
“warranty period” for remaining normal? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010
Mar 16;55(11):1110–7. [PMID: 20223365]
 
Skinner JS et al; Chest Pain Guideline Development Group. NICE
guidance. Chest pain of recent onset: assessment and diagnosis of
recent onset chest pain or discomfort of suspected cardiac origin.
Heart. 2010 Jun;96(12):974–8.[PMID: 20538674]
 
van Belle A et al. Effectiveness of managing suspected pulmonary
embolism using an algorithm combining clinical probability, D-dimer
testing, and computed tomography. JAMA. 2006 Jan
11;295(2):172–9. [PMID: 16403929]
 
Wilson SR et al. Detection of myocardial injury in patients with
unstable angina using a novel nanoparticle cardiac troponin I assay:
observations from the PROTECT-TIMI 30 Trial. Am Heart J.
2009 Sep;158(3):386–91. [PMID: 19699861]
 
Winters ME et al. Identifying chest pain emergencies in the primary
care setting. Prim Care. 2006 Sep;33(3):625–42. [PMID:
17088152]
 
Woo KM et al. High-risk chief complaints I: chest pain–the big
three. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2009 Nov;27(4):685–712.
[PMID: 19932401]
 
PALPITATIONS
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Forceful, rapid, or irregular beating of the heart.
 Rate, duration, and degree of regularity of heart beat.
 Age at first episode.
 Factors that precipitate or terminate episodes.
 Light-headedness or syncope.
 Neck pounding.
 Chest pain.
 
 General Considerations
Palpitations are defined as an unpleasant awareness of the forceful,
rapid, or irregular beating of the heart. They are a common
presenting complaint and are usually benign; however, they are
occasionally the symptom of a life-threatening arrhythmia. To avoid
missing a dangerous cause of the patient's symptom, clinicians
sometimes pursue expensive and invasive testing when a
conservative diagnostic evaluation is sufficient. The converse is also
true; in one study, 54% of patients with supraventricular tachycardia
were initially wrongly diagnosed with panic, stress, or anxiety
disorder. A disproportionate number of these misdiagnosed patients
are women.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
Although described by patients in a myriad of ways, guiding the
patient through a careful description of their palpitations may
indicate a mechanism and narrow the differential diagnosis. Pertinent
questions include the age at first episode; precipitants; and the rate,
duration, and degree of regularity of the heart beat during the
subjective palpitations. The examiner can ask the patient to “tap
out” the rhythm with their fingers. The circumstances associated
with onset and termination can also be helpful in determining the
cause. Palpitations that start and stop abruptly suggest
supraventricular or ventricular tachycardias. Patient-terminated
palpitations using vagal maneuvers (such as the Valsalva maneuver)
suggests supraventricular tachycardia.
Three common descriptions of palpitations are (1) “flip-flopping”
(or “stop and start”), often caused by premature contraction of the
atrium or ventricle, with the perceived “stop” from the pause
following the contraction, and the “start” from the subsequent
forceful contraction; (2) rapid “fluttering in the chest,” with regular
“fluttering” suggesting supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmias
(including sinus tachycardia) and irregular “fluttering” suggesting
atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, or tachycardia with variable block; and
(3) “pounding in the neck” or neck pulsations, often due to
“cannon” A waves in the jugular venous pulsations that occur when
the right atrium contracts against a closed tricuspid valve.
Palpitations associated with chest pain suggests ischemic heart
disease, or if the chest pain is relieved by leaning forward,
pericardial disease is suspected. Palpitations associated with light-
headedness, presyncope, or syncope suggests hypotension and may
signify a life-threatening cardiac arrhythmia. Palpitations that occur
regularly with exertion suggests a rate-dependent bypass tract or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. If a benign etiology for these
concerning symptoms cannot be ascertained at the index visit, then
ambulatory monitoring or prolonged cardiac monitoring in the
hospital might be warranted.
Noncardiac symptoms should also be elicited since the
palpitations may be caused by a normal heart responding to a
metabolic or inflammatory condition. Weight loss may suggest
hyperthyroidism. Palpitations can be precipitated by vomiting or
diarrhea that leads to electrolyte disorders and hypovolemia.
Palpitations associated with hyperventilation, hand tingling, and
nervousness are common when anxiety or panic disorder is the root
cause.
B. Physical Examination
It is uncommon for the clinician to have the opportunity to examine
a patient during an episode of palpitations. However, careful
cardiovascular examination can find abnormalities that can increase
the likelihood of specific cardiac arrhythmias. The midsystolic click
of mitral valve prolapse can suggest the diagnosis of a
supraventricular arrhythmia as the cause for the palpitations. The
harsh holosystolic murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which
occurs along the left sternal border and increases with the Valsalva
maneuver, suggests atrial fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia. The
presence of dilated cardiomyopathy, suggested on examination by a
displaced and enlarged cardiac point-of-maximal impulse, increases
the likelihood of ventricular tachycardia and atrial fibrillation. In
patients with chronic atrial fibrillation, in-office exercise (eg, a brisk
walk in the hallway) may reveal an intermittent accelerated
ventricular response as the cause of the palpitations. The clinician
should also look for signs of hyperthyroidism, such as
tremulousness, brisk deep tendon reflexes, fine hand tremor, or
signs of stimulant drug use (such as dilated pupils or skin or nasal
septal lesions). The presence of visible neck pulsations (LR, 2.68;
95% CI, 1.25–5.78) in association with palpitations increases the
likelihood of atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia.
C. Diagnostic Studies
The two cardiac studies that are commonly used in the initial
evaluation of a patient with palpitations are the 12-lead ECG and
ambulatory monitoring devices, such as the Holter monitor or the
event recorder.
A 12-lead ECG should be performed on all patients reporting
palpitations because it can provide evidence for a wide variety of
causes. Although in most instances a specific arrhythmia will not be
detected on the tracing, a careful evaluation of the ECG can help
the clinician deduce a likely etiology in certain circumstances.
For instance, bradyarrhythmias and heart block can be
associated with ventricular ectopy or escape beats that may be
experienced as palpitations by the patient. Evidence of prior
myocardial infarction by history or on ECG (eg, Q waves) increases
the patient's risk for nonsustained or sustained ventricular
tachycardia. Ventricular preexcitation (Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome) is suggested by a short PR interval (< 0.20 ms) and
delta waves (upsloping PR segments). Left ventricular hypertrophy
with deep septal Q waves in I, AVL, and V4 through V6 is seen in
patients with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. The
presence of left atrial enlargement as suggested by a terminal P-
wave force in V1 more negative than 0.04 msec and notched in
lead II reflects a patient at increased risk for atrial fibrillation. A
prolonged QT interval and abnormal T-wave morphology suggests
the long-QT syndrome, which puts patients at increased risk for
ventricular tachycardia.
For high-risk patients (Table 2–5), further diagnostic studies are
warranted. A step-wise approach has been suggested—starting
with ambulatory monitoring devices (Holter monitoring if the
palpitations are expected to occur within the subsequent 72-hour
period, event monitoring if less frequent), followed by invasive
electrophysiologic testing if the ambulatory monitor records a
worrisome arrhythmia or if serious arrhythmias are strongly
suspected despite normal findings on an appropriate ambulatory
monitor.
In patients with a prior myocardial infarction, ambulatory cardiac
monitoring or signal-averaged-ECG are appropriate next steps to
assess ventricular tachycardia. ECG exercise testing is appropriate
in patients who have palpitations with physical exertion and patients
with suspected coronary artery disease. Echocardiography is useful
when physical examination or ECG suggests structural abnormalities
or decreased ventricular function.
 Differential Diagnosis
When assessing a patient with palpitations in an urgent care setting,
the clinician must ascertain whether the symptoms represent (1) an
arrhythmia that is minor and transient, (2) significant cardiovascular
disease, (3) a cardiac manifestation of a systemic disease such as
thyrotoxicosis, or (4) a benign somatic symptom that is amplified by
underlying psychosocial characteristics of the patient.
 
Table 2–5. Palpitations: Patients at high risk for a cardiovascular
cause.
 
Historical risk factors
      Family history of significant arrhythmias
      Personal or family history of syncope or resuscitated
sudden death
      History of myocardial infarction (and likely scarred
myocardium)
Physical examination findings
      Structural heart disease such as dilated or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathies
      Valvular disease (stenotic or regurgitant)
ECG findings
      Long QT syndrome
      Bradycardia
      Second- or third-degree heart block
      Sustained ventricular arrhythmias
Palpitations in patients with a known history of cardiac disease or
palpitations that occur during sleep increase the likelihood of a
cardiac arrhythmia. A history of panic disorder or palpitations that
last < 5 minutes make a cardiac arrhythmia slightly less likely.
Patients who seek medical attention in the emergency department
instead of a medical clinic are more likely to have a cardiac etiology
(47% versus 21%), while psychiatric causes are more common
among patients with palpitations who seek medical attention in
office practices (45% versus 27%). In a study of patients who went
to a university medical clinic with the chief complaint of palpitations,
etiologies were cardiac in 43%, psychiatric in 31%, and
miscellaneous in 10% (including illicit drugs, medications, anemia,
thyrotoxicosis, and mastocytosis).
Cardiac arrhythmias that can result in symptoms of palpitations
include sinus bradycardia; sinus, supraventricular, and ventricular
tachycardia; premature ventricular and atrial contractions; sick sinus
syndrome; and advanced atrioventricular block.
Nonarrhythmic cardiac causes of palpitations include valvular
heart diseases, such as aortic insufficiency or stenosis, atrial or
ventricular septal defect, cardiomyopathy, congenital heart disease,
and pericarditis.
Noncardiac causes of palpitations include fever, dehydration,
hypoglycemia, anemia, thyrotoxicosis, and pheochromocytoma.
Drugs such as cocaine, alcohol, caffeine, and pseudoephedrine can
precipitate palpitations, as can prescription medications, including
digoxin, phenothiazines, theophylline, and β-agonists as well as
ephedra-containing herbal remedies or supplements, which are
banned by the US Food and Drug Administration.
The most common psychiatric causes of palpitations are anxiety
and panic disorder. The release of catecholamines during a panic
attack or significant stress can trigger an arrhythmia. Asking a single
question, “Have you experienced brief periods, for seconds or
minutes, of an overwhelming panic or terror that was accompanied
by racing heartbeats, shortness of breath, or dizziness?” can help
identify patients with panic disorder.
 Treatment
After ambulatory monitoring, most patients with palpitations are
found to have benign atrial or ventricular ectopy and nonsustained
ventricular tachycardia. In patients with structurally normal hearts,
these arrhythmias are not associated with adverse outcomes.
Abstention from caffeine and tobacco may help. Often, reassurance
suffices. If not, or in very symptomatic patients, a trial of a β-
blocker may be prescribed. For treatment of specific atrial or
ventricular arrhythmias, see Chapter 10.
 When to Refer
 
•    For electrophysiologic studies.
•    For advice regarding treatment of atrial or ventricular
arrhythmias.
 When to Admit
 
•    Palpitations associated with syncope or near-syncope,
particularly when the patient is aged 75 years or older and
has an abnormal ECG, hematocrit < 30%, shortness of
breath, respiratory rate > 24/min, or a history of CHF.
•    Patients with risk factors for a serious arrhythmia.
Abbott AV. Diagnostic approach to palpitations. Am Fam
Physician. 2005;71(4):743–50. [PMID: 15742913]
 
Barsky AJ. Palpitations, arrhythmias, and awareness of cardiac
activity. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134(9 Pt 2):832–7. [PMID:
11346318]
 
Delacrétaz E. Clinical practice. Supraventricular tachycardia. N
Engl J Med. 2006 Mar 9;354(10):1039–51. [PMID: 16525141]
 
Ehlers A et al. Psychological and perceptual factors associated
with arrhythmias and benign palpitations. Psychosomat Med.
2000;62(5):693–702. [PMID: 11020100]
 
Giada F et al. Recurrent unexplained palpitations (RUP) study
comparison of implantable loop recorder versus conventional
diagnostic strategy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 May 15;49(19):
1951–6. [PMID: 17498580]
 
Hoefman E et al. Predictive value of history taking and physical
examination in diagnosing arrhythmias in general practice. Fam
Pract. 2007 Dec;24(6):636–41. [PMID: 17986627]
 
Lawless CE et al. Palpitations in athletes. Sports Med.
2008;38(8): 687–702. [PMID: 18620468]
 
Nobles MB et al. Clinical inquiries. Should you evaluate for CAD
in seniors with premature ventricular contractions? J Fam Pract.
2008 May;57(5):325–6. [PMID: 18460298]
 
Pittler MH et al. Adverse events of herbal food supplements for
body weight reduction: systematic review. Obes Rev. 2005; 6:93–
111. [PMID: 15836459]
 
Rao A et al. Ambulatory cardiac rhythm monitoring. Br J Hosp
Med (Lond). 2007;68:132–8. [PMID: 17419460]
 
Thavendiranathan P et al. Does this patient with palpitations have a
cardiac arrhythmia? JAMA. 2009 Nov 18;302(19): 2135–43.
[PMID: 19920238]
 
LOWER EXTREMITY EDEMA
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 History of venous thromboembolism.
 Symmetry.
 Pain.
 Dependence.
 Skin findings.
 
 General Considerations
Acute and chronic lower extremity edema present important
diagnostic and treatment challenges. Lower extremities can swell in
response to increased venous or lymphatic pressures, decreased
intravascular oncotic pressure, increased capillary leak, and local
injury or infection. Chronic venous insufficiency is by far the
most common cause, affecting up to 2% of the population, and the
incidence of venous insufficiency has not changed during the past 25
years. Venous insufficiency is a common complication of DVT;
however, only a small number of patients with chronic venous
insufficiency report a history of this disorder. Venous ulcer
formation commonly affects patients with chronic venous
insufficiency, and management of venous ulceration is labor-
intensive and expensive. Other causes of lower extremity edema
include cellulitis, musculoskeletal disorders (Baker cyst rupture,
gastrocnemius tear or rupture), lymphedema, CHF, cirrhosis, and
nephrotic syndrome as well as side effects from calcium channel
blockers, minoxidil, or thioglitazones.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Normal lower extremity venous pressure (in the erect position: 80
mm Hg in deep veins, 20–30 mm Hg in superficial veins) and
cephalad venous blood flow require competent bicuspid venous
valves, effective muscle contractions, and normal respirations.
When one or more of these components fail, venous hypertension
may result. Chronic exposure to elevated venous pressure by the
postcapillary venules in the legs leads to leakage of fibrinogen and
growth factors into the interstitial space, leukocyte aggregation and
activation, and obliteration of the cutaneous lymphatic network.
These changes account for the brawny, fibrotic skin changes
observed in patients with chronic venous insufficiency, and the
predisposition toward skin ulceration, particularly in the medial
malleolar area.
Among common causes of lower extremity swelling, DVT is the
most life-threatening. Clues suggesting DVT include a history of
cancer, recent limb immobilization, or confinement to bed for at
least 3 days following major surgery within the past month (Table
2–6). A search for alternative explanations is equally important in
excluding DVT. Bilateral involvement and significant improvement
upon awakening favor systemic causes (eg, venous insufficiency,
CHF, and cirrhosis). “Heavy legs” are the most frequent symptom
among patients with chronic venous insufficiency, followed by
itching. Pain, particularly if severe, is uncommon in uncomplicated
venous insufficiency. Lower extremity swelling and inflammation in a
limb recently affected by DVT could represent anticoagulation
failure and thrombus recurrence but more often are caused by
postphlebitic syndrome with valvular incompetence. Other causes
of a painful, swollen calf include ruptured popliteal cyst, calf strain
or trauma, and cellulitis.
Lower extremity swelling is a familiar complication of therapy
with calcium channel blockers (particularly felodipine and
amlodipine), thioglitazones, and minoxidil. Bilateral lower extremity
edema can be a presenting symptom of nephrotic syndrome or
volume overload caused by renal failure. Prolonged airline flights (>
10 hours) are associated with increased risk of edema. In those
with low to medium risk of thromboembolism (eg, women taking
oral contraceptives), long flights are associated with a 2% incidence
of asymptomatic popliteal DVT.
 
Table 2–6. Risk stratification of adults referred for ultrasound to
rule out DVT.
 
B. Physical Examination
Physical examination should include assessment of the heart, lungs,
and abdomen for evidence of pulmonary hypertension (primary, or
secondary to chronic lung disease), CHF, or cirrhosis. Some
patients with cirrhosis have pulmonary hypertension without lung
disease. There is a spectrum of skin findings related to chronic
venous insufficiency that depends on the severity and chronicity of
the disease, ranging from hyperpigmentation and stasis dermatitis to
abnormalities highly specific for chronic venous insufficiency:
lipodermatosclerosis (thick brawny skin; in advanced cases, the
lower leg resembles an inverted champagne bottle) and atrophie
blanche (small depigmented macules within areas of heavy
pigmentation). The size of both calves should be measured 10 cm
below the tibial tuberosity and elicitation of pitting and tenderness
performed. Swelling of the entire leg or swelling of one leg 3 cm
more than the other suggests deep venous obstruction. In normal
persons, the left calf is slightly larger than the right as a result of the
left common iliac vein coursing under the aorta.
An ulcer located over the medial malleolus is a hallmark of
chronic venous insufficiency but can be due to other causes.
Shallow, large, modestly painful ulcers are characteristic of venous
insufficiency, whereas small, deep, and more painful ulcers are more
apt to be due to arterial insufficiency, vasculitis, or infection
(including cutaneous diphtheria). Diabetic vascular ulcers, however,
may be painless. When an ulcer is on the foot or above the mid calf,
causes other than venous insufficiency should be considered.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Most causes of lower extremity swelling can be demonstrated with
color duplex ultrasonography. Patients without an obvious cause of
acute lower extremity swelling (eg, calf strain) should have an
ultrasound performed, since DVT is difficult to exclude on clinical
grounds. Recently, a predictive rule has been developed that allows
a clinician to exclude a lower extremity DVT in patients without an
ultrasound if the patient has low pretest probability for DVT and has
a negative sensitive D-dimer test (the “Wells rule”). Assessment of
the ankle-brachial pressure index (ABPI) is important in the
management of chronic venous insufficiency, since peripheral arterial
disease may be exacerbated by compression therapy. This can be
performed at the same time as ultra-sound. Caution is required in
interpreting the results of ABPI in older patients and diabetics due
to decreased compressibility of their arteries. A dipstick urine test
that is strongly positive for protein can suggest nephrotic syndrome,
and a serum creatinine can help estimate kidney function.
 Treatment
Treatment of lower extremity edema should be guided by the
underlying etiology. See relevant chapters for treatment of edema in
patients with CHF (Chapter 10), nephrosis (Chapter 22), cirrhosis
(Chapter 16), and lymphedema (Chapter 12). Edema resulting from
calcium channel blocker therapy responds to concomitant therapy
with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers.
In patients with chronic venous insufficiency without a comorbid
volume overload state (eg, CHF), it is best to avoid diuretic
therapy. These patients have relatively decreased intravascular
volume, and administration of diuretics may result in acute renal
insufficiency and oliguria. The most effective treatment involves (1)
leg elevation, above the level of the heart, for 30 minutes three to
four times daily, and during sleep; (2) compression therapy; and (3)
ambulatory exercise to increase venous return through calf muscle
contractions. A wide variety of stockings and devices are effective
in decreasing swelling and preventing ulcer formation. They should
be put on with awakening, before hydrostatic forces result in
edema. To control simple edema, 20-30 mm Hg is usually sufficient;
whereas, > 30-40 mm Hg is usually required to control moderate to
severe edema associated with ulcer formation. Horse chestnut seed
extract has been shown in several randomized trials to be equivalent
to compression stockings and can be quite useful in nonambulatory
patients. Patients with decreased ABPI should be managed in
concert with a vascular surgeon. Compression stockings (12–18
mm Hg at the ankle) are effective in preventing edema and
asymptomatic thrombosis associated with long airline flights in low-
to medium-risk persons. See Chapter 12 for treatment of venous
stasis ulcers.
 When to Refer
 
•    Chronic lower extremity ulcerations requiring specialist
wound care.
•    Nephrotic syndrome should be managed with
nephrology consultation.
•    When there is coexisting severe arterial insufficiency
(claudication) complicating treatment with compression
stockings.
 When to Admit
 
•    Pending definitive diagnosis in patients at high risk for
DVT with normal lower extremity ultrasound.
•    Concern for impending compartment syndrome.
•    Severe edema that impairs ability to ambulate or
perform activities of daily living.
Amsler F et al. Compression therapy for occupational leg
symptoms and chronic venous disorders—a meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008
Mar;35(3):366–72. [PMID: 18063393]
 
Bamigboye AA et al. Interventions for varicose veins and leg
oedema in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24;
(1):CD001066. [PMID: 17253454]
 
Bergan JJ et al. Chronic venous disease. N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug
3;355(5):488–98. [PMID: 16885552]
 
Deatrick KB et al. Chronic venous insufficiency: current
management of varicose vein disease. Am Surg. 2010 Feb;76(2):
125–32. [PMID: 20336886]
 
Mockler J et al. Clinical inquiries. What is the differential diagnosis
of chronic leg edema in primary care? J Fam Pract. 2008
Mar;57(3):188–9. [PMID: 18321457]
 
Raju S et al. Clinical practice. Chronic venous insufficiency and
varicose veins. N Engl J Med. 2009 May 28;360(22):2319-27.
[PMID: 19474429]
 
Wells PS et al. Does this patient have deep vein thrombosis?
JAMA. 2006 Jan 11;295(2):199–207. [PMID: 16403932]
 
Word R. Medical and surgical therapy for advanced chronic
venous insufficiency. Surg Clin North Am. 2010 Dec; 90(6):1195–
214. [PMID: 21074036]
 
FEVER & HYPERTHERMIA
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Age.
 Localizing symptoms.
 Weight loss.
 Joint pain.
 Injection substance use.
 Immunosuppression or neutropenia.
 History of cancer.
 Medications.
 Travel.
 
 General Considerations
The average normal oral body temperature taken in mid-morning is
36.7°C (range 36–37.4°C). This spectrum includes a mean and 2
standard deviations, thus encompassing 95% of a normal
population, measured in mid-morning (normal diurnal temperature
variation is 0.5–1°C). The normal rectal or vaginal temperature is
0.5°C higher than the oral temperature, and the axillary temperature
is correspondingly lower. Rectal temperature is more reliable than
oral temperature, particularly in patients who breathe through their
mouth or in tachypneic states.
Fever is a regulated rise to a new “set point” of body
temperature. When proper stimuli act on appropriate monocyte-
macrophages, these cells elaborate pyrogenic cytokines, causing
elevation of the set point through effects in the hypothalamus. These
cytokines include interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
interferon-γ, and interleukin-6 (IL-6). The elevation in temperature
results from either increased heat production (eg, shivering) or
decreased loss (eg, peripheral vasoconstriction). Body temperature
in cytokine-induced fever seldom exceeds 41.1°C unless there is
structural damage to hypothalamic regulatory centers.
1. Fever
Fever as a symptom provides important information about the
presence of illness—particularly infections—and about changes in
the clinical status of the patient. The fever pattern, however, is of
marginal value for most specific diagnoses except for the relapsing
fever of malaria, borreliosis, and occasional cases of lymphoma,
especially Hodgkin disease. Furthermore, the degree of temperature
elevation does not necessarily correspond to the severity of the
illness. In general, the febrile response tends to be greater in
children than in adults. In older persons, neonates, and in persons
receiving certain medications (eg, NSAIDs or corticosteroids), a
normal temperature or even hypothermia may be observed.
Markedly elevated body temperature may result in profound
metabolic disturbances. High temperature during the first trimester
of pregnancy may cause birth defects, such as anencephaly. Fever
increases insulin requirements and alters the metabolism and
disposition of drugs used for the treatment of the diverse diseases
associated with fever.
2. Hyperthermia
Hyperthermia—not mediated by cytokines—occurs when body
metabolic heat production or environmental heat load exceeds
normal heat loss capacity or when there is impaired heat loss; heat
stroke is an example. Body temperature may rise to levels (>
41.1°C) capable of producing irreversible protein denaturation and
resultant brain damage; no diurnal variation is observed.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare and potentially
lethal idiosyncratic reaction to major tranquilizers, particularly
haloperidol and fluphenazine; however, it has also been reported
with the atypical neuroleptics (such as olanzapine or risperidone).
Serotonin syndrome resembles neuroleptic malignant syndrome
but occurs within hours of ingestion of agents that increase levels of
serotonin in the central nervous system, including serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants,
meperidine, dextromethorphan, bromocriptine, tramadol, lithium,
and psychostimulants (such as cocaine, methamphetamine, and
MDMA). Clonus and hyperreflexia are more common in serotonin
syndrome whereas “lead pipe” rigidity is more common in
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Neuroleptic malignant and
serotonin syndromes share common clinical and pathophysiologic
features to malignant hyperthermia of anesthesia (see Chapters
25 and 38).
 Treatment
Discontinuation of the offending agent is mandatory. Treatment of
neuroleptic malignant syndrome includes dantrolene in combination
with bromocriptine or levodopa (see Chapter 25). Treatment of
serotonin syndrome includes administration of a central serotonin
receptor antagonist—cyproheptadine or chlorpromazine—alone or
in combination with a benzodiazepine (see Chapter 25). In patients
for whom it is difficult to distinguish which syndrome is present,
treatment with a benzodiazepine may be the safest therapeutic
option. Regardless of cause, alcohol sponges, cold sponges, ice
bags, ice-water enemas, and ice baths can also help lower body
temperature.
3. Fever of Undetermined Origin
(See Fever of Unknown Origin, Chapter 30)
Most febrile illnesses are due to common infections, are short-
lived, and are relatively easy to diagnose. In certain instances,
however, the origin of the fever may remain obscure (“fever of
undetermined origin,” FUO) even after protracted diagnostic
examination. In upper respiratory tract infections, fever typically
lasts no more than 3–5 days, beyond which additional evaluation
should be considered. The term “FUO” has traditionally been
reserved for unexplained cases of fever exceeding 38.3°C on
several occasions for at least 3 weeks in patients without
neutropenia or immunosuppression (see Chapter 30). Some authors
have advocated for changing the definition of FUO in frail elderly
nursing home patients to a persistent oral or tympanic membrane
temperature of 37.2°C (99°F) or greater, or persistent rectal
temperature of 37.5°C (99.5°F) or greater.
 Differential Diagnosis
See Table 2–7. The causes of FUO among elderly patients differ
from those in younger patients, and a definitive diagnosis can be
achieved in a larger proportion of elderly patients (up to 70%).
Although the general diagnostic approach and distribution of
infectious and noninfectious causes are roughly similar between age
groups, tuberculosis and temporal arteritis are particularly more
common causes of FUO in the elderly.
 Treatment
Most fever is well tolerated. When the temperature is > 40°C,
symptomatic treatment may be required. A reading over 41°C is
likely to be hyperthermia and thus not cytokine mediated, and
emergent management is indicated. (See Heat Stroke, Chapter 37.)
A. Measures for Removal of Heat
Alcohol sponges, cold sponges, ice bags, ice-water enemas, and
ice baths will lower body temperature. They are more useful in
hyperthermia, since patients with cytokine-related fever will attempt
to override these therapies.
 
Table 2–7. Differential diagnosis of fever and hyperthermia.
 
Fever—common causes
      Infections: bacterial, viral, rickettsial, fungal, parasitic
      Autoimmune diseases
      Central nervous system disease, including head
trauma and mass lesions
      Malignant disease, especially renal cell carcinoma,
primary or metastatic liver cancer, leukemia, and
lymphoma
Fever—less common causes
      Cardiovascular diseases, including myocardial
infarction, thrombo phlebitis, and pulmonary embolism
      Gastrointestinal diseases, including inflammatory
bowel disease, alcoholic hepatitis, and granulomatous
hepatitis
      Miscellaneous diseases, including drug fever,
sarcoidosis, familial Mediterranean fever, tissue injury,
hematoma, and factitious fever
Hyperthermia
      Peripheral thermoregulatory disorders, including heat
stroke, malignant hyperthermia of anesthesia, and
malignant neuroleptic syndrome
B. Antipyretic Drugs
Antipyretic therapy is not needed except for patients with marginal
hemodynamic status. Aspirin or acetaminophen, 325–650 mg every
4 hours, is effective in reducing fever. These drugs are best
administered continuously rather than as needed, since “prn” dosing
results in periodic chills and sweats due to fluctuations in
temperature caused by varying levels of drug.
C. Antimicrobial Therapy
In most febrile patients, empiric antibiotic therapy should be
deferred pending further evaluation. However, empiric antibiotic
therapy is sometimes warranted. Prompt broad-spectrum
antimicrobials are indicated for febrile patients who are clinically
unstable, even before infection can be documented. These include
patients with hemodynamic instability, those with neutropenia
(neutrophils < 500/mcL), others who are asplenic (surgically or
secondary to sickle cell disease) or immunosuppressed (including
individuals 
taking 
systemic 
corticosteroids, 
azathioprine,
cyclosporine, or other immunosuppressive medications) (Tables
30–4 and 30–9), and those who are HIV infected (see Chapter
31). For treatment of fever during neutropenia following
chemotherapy, outpatient parenteral antimicrobial therapy with an
agent such as ceftriaxone can be provided effectively and safely. If a
fungal infection is suspected in patients with prolonged fever and
neutropenia, fluconazole is an equally effective but less toxic
alternative to amphotericin B.
 When to Refer
Once the diagnosis of FUO is made, referral to infectious disease
specialist or rheumatologist may be appropriate to guide specific
additional tests.
 When to Admit
 
•    Malignant hyperthermia.
•    Heat stroke.
•    For measures to control temperature when it is > 41°C
or when associated with seizure or other mental status
changes.
Bleeker-Rovers CP et al. Fever of unknown origin. Semin Nucl
Med. 2009 Mar;39(2):81–7. [PMID: 19187801]
 
Bottieau E et al. Fever after a stay in the tropics: diagnostic
predictors of the leading tropical conditions. Medicine (Baltimore).
2007 Jan;86(1):18–25. [PMID: 17220752]
 
Norman DC et al. Fever of unknown origin in older persons. Infect
Dis Clin North Am. 2007 Dec;21(4):937–45. [PMID: 18061083]
 
Rusyniak DE et al. Toxin-induced hyperthermic syndromes. Med
Clin North Am. 2005 Nov;89(6):1277–96. [PMID: 16227063]
 
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Age.
 Caloric intake.
 Fever.
 Change in bowel habits.
 Secondary confirmation (eg, changes in clothing size).
 Substance use.
 Age-appropriate cancer screening history.
 
 General Considerations
Body weight is determined by a person's caloric intake, absorptive
capacity, metabolic rate, and energy losses. The metabolic rate can
be affected by a multitude of medical conditions through the release
of various cytokines such as cachectin and interleukins. Body
weight normally peaks by the fifth or sixth decade and then
gradually declines at a rate of 1–2 kg per decade. In NHANES II,
a national survey of community-dwelling elders (age 50–80 years),
recent involuntary weight loss (> 5% usual body weight) was
reported by 7% of respondents, and this was associated with a
24% higher mortality.
 Etiology
Involuntary weight loss is regarded as clinically significant when it
exceeds 5% or more of usual body weight over a 6- to 12-month
period and often indicates serious physical or psychological illness.
Physical causes are usually evident during the initial evaluation.
Cancer (about 30%), gastrointestinal disorders (about 15%), and
dementia or depression (about 15%) are the most common causes.
When an adequately nourished-appearing patient complains of
weight loss, inquiry should be made about exact weight changes
(with approximate dates) and about changes in clothing size. Family
members can provide confirmation of weight loss, as can old
documents such as driver's licenses. A mild, gradual weight loss
occurs in some older individuals. It is due to changes in body
composition, including loss of height and lean body mass and lower
basal metabolic rate, leading to decreased energy requirements.
However, rapid involuntary weight loss is predictive of morbidity
and mortality in any population. In addition to various disease
states, causes in older individuals include loss of teeth and
consequent difficulty with chewing, alcoholism, and social isolation.
 Clinical Findings
Once the weight loss is established, the history, medication profile,
physical examination, and conventional laboratory and radiologic
investigations (such as complete blood count, serologic tests
including HIV, thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] level, urinalysis,
fecal occult blood test, chest radiography, and upper gastrointestinal
series) usually reveal the cause. When these tests are normal, the
second phase of evaluation should focus on more definitive
gastrointestinal investigation (eg, tests for malabsorption;
endoscopy) and cancer screening (eg, Papanicolaou smear,
mammography, prostate specific antigen [PSA]).
If the initial evaluation is unrevealing, follow-up is preferable to
further diagnostic testing. Death at 2-year follow-up was not nearly
as high in patients with unexplained involuntary weight loss (8%) as
in those with weight loss due to malignant (79%) and established
non-malignant diseases (19%). Psychiatric consultation should be
considered when there is evidence of depression, dementia,
anorexia nervosa, or other emotional problems. Ultimately, in
approximately 15–25% of cases, no cause for the weight loss can
be found.
 Differential Diagnosis
Malignancy, 
gastrointestinal 
disorders 
(eg, 
malabsorption,
pancreatic insufficiency), dementia, depression, anorexia nervosa,
hyperthyroidism, alcoholism, and social isolation are all established
causes. “Meals on Wheels” is a useful mnemonic for remembering
the common treatable causes of involuntary weight loss in the
elderly (see box below).
 Treatment
Weight stabilization occurs in most surviving patients with both
established and unknown causes of weight loss through treatment of
the underlying disorder and caloric supplementation. Nutrient intake
goals are established in relation to the severity of weight loss, in
general ranging from 30 to 40 kcal/kg/d. In order of preference,
route of administration options include oral, temporary nasojejunal
tube, or percutaneous gastric or jejunal tube. Parenteral nutrition is
reserved for patients with serious associated problems. A variety of
pharmacologic agents have been proposed for the treatment of
weight loss. These can be categorized into appetite stimulants
(corticosteroids, progestational agents, dronabinol, and serotonin
antagonists); anabolic agents (growth hormone and testosterone
derivatives); and anticatabolic agents (omega-3 fatty acids,
pentoxifylline, hydrazine sulfate, and thalidomide).
 
MEALS ON WHEELS: A Mnemonic for Common Treatable
Causes of unintentional Weight Loss in the Elderly.
Medication effects
Emotional problems, especially depression
Anorexia tardive (nervosa), alcoholism
Late-life paranoia
Swallowing disorders
Oral factors (eg, poorly fitting dentures, cavities)
No money 
Wandering and other dementia-related behaviors
Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism,
hypoadrenalism
Enteric problems (eg, malabsorption)
Eating problems (eg, inability to feed self)
Low-salt, low-cholesterol diets
Social problems (eg, isolation, inability to obtain preferred
foods), gallstones
Adapted, with permission, from Morley JE et al. Nutritional issues in
nursing home care. Ann Intern Med. 1995 Dec 1; 123(11):850–9.
 When to Refer
 
•    Weight loss caused by malabsorption.
•    Persistent nutritional deficiencies despite adequate
supplementation.
•    Weight loss as a result of anorexia or bulimia.
 When to Admit
 
•    Severe protein-energy malnutrition, including the
syndromes of kwashiorkor and marasmus.
•    Vitamin deficiency syndromes.
•    Cachexia with anticipated progressive weight loss
secondary to unmanageable psychiatric disease.
•    To carefully manage electrolyte and fluid replacement in
protein-energy 
malnutrition 
and 
avoid 
“re-feeding
syndrome.”
Chapman IM. Nutritional disorders in the elderly. Med Clin North
Am. 2006 Sep;90(5):887–907. [PMID: 16962848]
 
Hopkinson JB et al. Management of weight loss and anorexia. Ann
Oncol. 2008 Sep;19(Suppl 7):vii289–93. [PMID: 18790968]
 
Jatoi A. Pharmacologic therapy for the cancer anorexia/weight loss
syndrome: A data-driven, practical approach. J Support Oncol.
2006 Nov–Dec;4(10):499–502. [PMID: 17136864]
 
Metalidis C et al. Involuntary weight loss. Does a negative baseline
evaluation provide adequate reassurance? Eur J Intern Med. 2008
Jul;19(5):345–9. [PMID: 18549937]
 
Morley JE. Weight loss in older persons: new therapeutic
approaches. Curr Pharm Des. 2007;13(35):3637–47. [PMID:
18220800]
 
Visvanathan R et al. Undernutrition and anorexia in the older
person. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;38(3): 393–409.
[PMID: 19699404]
 
FATIGUE & CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Weight loss.
 Fever.
 Sleep-disordered breathing.
 Medications.
 Substance use.
 
 General Considerations
Fatigue, as an isolated symptom, accounts for 1–3% of visits to
generalists. The symptom of fatigue is often poorly described and
less well defined by patients than symptoms associated with specific
dysfunction of organ systems. Fatigue or lassitude and the closely
related complaints of weakness, tiredness, and lethargy are often
attributed to overexertion, poor physical conditioning, sleep
disturbance, obesity, undernutrition, and emotional problems. A
history of the patient's daily living and working habits may obviate
the need for extensive and unproductive diagnostic studies.
 Clinical Findings
A. Fatigue
Clinically relevant fatigue is composed of three major components:
generalized weakness (difficulty in initiating activities); easy
fatigability (difficulty in completing activities); and mental fatigue
(difficulty with concentration and memory). Important diseases that
can cause fatigue include hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism,
CHF, infections (endocarditis, hepatitis), COPD, sleep apnea,
anemia, auto-immune disorders, irritable bowel syndrome, and
cancer. Alcoholism, side effects from such drugs as sedatives, and
β-blockers may be the cause. Psychological conditions, such as
insomnia, depression, anxiety, panic attacks, dysthmia, and
somatization disorder, may cause fatigue. Common outpatient
infectious causes include mononucleosis and sinusitis. These
conditions are usually associated with other characteristic signs, but
patients may emphasize fatigue and not reveal their other symptoms
unless directly asked. The lifetime prevalence of significant fatigue
(present for at least 2 weeks) is about 25%. Fatigue of unknown
cause or related to psychiatric illness exceeds that due to physical
illness, injury, medications, drugs, or alcohol.
B. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
A working case definition of chronic fatigue syndrome indicates that
it is not a homogeneous abnormality, and there is no single
pathogenic mechanism (Figure 2–2). No physical finding or
laboratory test can be used to confirm the diagnosis of this disorder.
With regard to its pathophysiology, researchers have proposed
retrovirus infection or an immune dysregulation mechanism, or both.
Persons with confirmed chronic fatigue syndrome report a much
greater frequency of childhood trauma and psychopathology and
demonstrate higher levels of emotional instability and self-reported
stress 
than 
non-fatigued 
controls. 
Neuropsychological,
neuroendocrine, and brain imaging studies have confirmed the
occurrence of neurobiologic abnormalities in most patients. Sleep
disorders have been reported in 40–80% of patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome, but their treatment has provided only modest
benefit, suggesting that it is an effect rather than a cause of the
fatigue. MRI scans may show brain abnormalities on T2-weighted
images—chiefly small, punctate, subcortical white matter
hyperintensities, predominantly in the frontal lobes. Veterans of the
Gulf War show a tenfold greater incidence of chronic fatigue
syndrome compared with nondeployed military personnel.
In evaluating chronic fatigue, after the history and physical
examination process is completed, standard investigation includes
complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum
chemistries—blood urea nitrogen (BUN), electrolytes, glucose,
creatinine, and calcium; liver and thyroid function tests—antinuclear
antibody, urinalysis, and tuberculin skin test; and screening
questionnaires for psychiatric disorders. Other tests to be
performed as clinically indicated are serum cortisol, rheumatoid
factor, immunoglobulin levels, Lyme serology in endemic areas, and
tests for HIV antibody. More extensive testing is usually unhelpful,
including antibody to Epstein-Barr virus. There may be an
abnormally high rate of postural hypotension; some of these patients
report response to increases in dietary sodium as well as
antihypotensive agents such as fludrocortisone, 0.1 mg/d.
 Treatment
A. Fatigue
Management of fatigue involves identification and treatment of
conditions that contribute to fatigue, such as cancer, pain,
depression, disordered sleep, weight loss, and anemia. Resistance
training and aerobic exercise lessens fatigue and improves
performance for a number of chronic conditions associated with a
high prevalence of fatigue, including CHF, COPD, arthritis, and
cancer. Continuous positive airway pressure is an effective
treatment for obstructive sleep apnea. Psychostimulants such as
methylphenidate have shown inconsistent results in randomized trials
of treatment of cancer-related fatigue.
 
Figure 2–2. Evaluation and classification of unexplained chronic
fatigue. (CBC, complete blood count; ESR, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; Ca2+, calcium;
Po43–, phosphate; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; TSH, thyroid-
stimulating hormone; UA, Urinalysis.) (Modified and reproduced,
with permission, from Fukuda K et al. The chronic fatigue
syndrome: a comprehensive approach to its definition and study.
Ann Intern Med. 1994 Dec 15; 121(12):953–9.)
 
B. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
A variety of agents and modalities have been tried for the treatment
of 
chronic 
fatigue 
syndrome. 
Acyclovir, 
intravenous
immunoglobulin, 
nystatin, 
and 
low-dose
hydrocortisone/fludrocortisone do not improve symptoms. There is
a greater prevalence of past and current psychiatric diagnoses in
patients with this syndrome. Affective disorders are especially
common, but fluoxetine alone, 20 mg daily, is not beneficial.
Patients with chronic fatigue syndrome have benefited from a
comprehensive multidisciplinary intervention, including optimal
medical management, treating any ongoing affective or anxiety
disorder pharmacologically, and implementing a comprehensive
cognitive-behavioral treatment program. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy, a form of nonpharmacologic treatment emphasizing self-
help and aiming to change perceptions and behaviors that may
perpetuate symptoms and disability, is helpful. Although few
patients are cured, the treatment effect is substantial. Response to
cognitive-behavioral therapy is not predictable on the basis of
severity or duration of chronic fatigue syndrome, although patients
with low interest in psychotherapy rarely benefit. Graded exercise
has also been shown to improve functional work capacity and
physical function. At present, intensive individual cognitive-
behavioral therapy administered by a skilled therapist and graded
exercise are the treatments of choice for patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome.
In addition, the clinician's sympathetic listening and explanatory
responses can help overcome the patient's frustrations and
debilitation by this still mysterious illness. All patients should be
encouraged to engage in normal activities to the extent possible and
should be reassured that full recovery is eventually possible in most
cases.
 When to Refer
 
•    Infections not responsive to standard treatment.
•    Difficult to control hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism.
•    Severe psychological disease.
•    Malignancy.
 When to Admit
 
•    Failure to thrive.
•    Fatigue severe enough to impair activities of daily living.
•    Fatigue combined with poor social support making it
unlikely for patient to comply with medical therapy or
reliably return for follow-up appointments.
de Lange FP et al. Increase in prefrontal cortical volume follow-
Increase in prefrontal cortical volume following cognitive
behavioural therapy in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome.
Brain. 2008 Aug;131(Pt 8):2172–80. [PMID: 18587150]
 
Evans WJ et al. Physiological basis of fatigue. Am J Phys Med
Rehabil. 2007 Jan;86(1 Suppl):S29–46. [PMID: 17370370]
 
Häuser W et al. Treatment of fibromyalgia syndrome with
antidepressants: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2009 Jan 14;301(2):
198–209. [PMID: 19141768]
 
Heim C et al. Early adverse experience and risk for chronic fatigue
syndrome: results from a population-based study. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;63(11):1258–66. [PMID: 17088506]
 
Kato K et al. Premorbid predictors of chronic fatigue. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;63(11):1267–72. [PMID: 17088507]
 
Knoop H et al. Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for
adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome: long-term follow-up of
a randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2008 Mar;121(3):
e619–25. [PMID: 18310181]
 
Lo SC et al. Detection of MLV-related virus gene sequences in
blood of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and healthy blood
donors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 7;107(36): 15874–
9. [PMID: 20798047]
 
Mikovits JA et al. Detection of an infectious retrovirus, XMRV, in
blood cells of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Virulence.
2010 Dec 22;1(5):386–90. [PMID: 21178474]
 
Nijrolder I et al. Prognosis of fatigue and functioning in primary
care: a 1-year follow-up study. Ann Fam Med. 2008 Nov–
Dec;6(6):519–27. [PMID: 19001304]
 
Prins JB et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome. Lancet. 2006 Jan
28;367(9507):346–55. [PMID: 16443043]
 
Viner R et al. Fatigue and somatic symptoms. BMJ. 2005 Apr
30;330(7498):1012–5. [PMID: 15860829]
 
Whiting P et al. Interventions for the treatment and management of
chronic fatigue syndrome: a systematic review. JAMA. 2001 Sep
19;286(11):1360–8. [PMID: 11560542]
 
Wolkove N et al. Sleep and aging: 2. Management of sleep
disorders in older people. CMAJ. 2007 May 8;176(10):1449–54.
[PMID: 17485699]
 
ACUTE HEADACHE
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Age > 50 years.
 Rapid onset and severe intensity (ie, “thunder clap” headache).
 Fever.
 Trauma.
 Vision changes.
 HIV infection.
 Current or past history of hypertension.
 Neurologic findings (mental status changes, motor or sensory
deficits).
 
 General Considerations
Headache is a common reason that adults seek medical care,
accounting for approximately 13 million visits each year in the
United States to physicians’ offices, urgent care clinics, and
emergency departments. A broad range of disorders can cause
headache. This chapter will deal only with the approach to the acute
nontraumatic headache in adolescents and adults. The challenge in
the initial evaluation of acute headache is to identify which patients
are presenting with an uncommon but life-threatening condition. In
the emergency department setting, approximately 1% of patients
seeking medical attention for acute headache will have a life-
threatening condition, whereas the prevalence of life-threatening
conditions in the office practice setting is considerably lower.
Regardless of the underlying cause, headache is currently
believed to occur as a result of the release of neuropeptides from
trigeminal nerve endings that encapsulate the blood vessels of the
pia mater and dura mater, resulting in neurogenic inflammation.
Because this represents a final common pathway for many
etiologies, diminution of headache in response to typical migraine
therapies (such as serotonin receptor antagonists or ketorolac) does
not rule out critical conditions such as subarachnoid hemorrhage or
meningitis as the underlying cause.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
A careful history and physical examination should aim to identify
causes of acute headache that require immediate treatment. These
causes can be broadly classified as imminent or completed
vascular events (intracranial hemorrhage, thrombosis, vasculitis,
malignant hypertension, arterial dissection, or aneurysm), infections
(abscess, encephalitis, meningitis), intracranial masses causing
intracranial hypertension, preeclampsia, and carbon monoxide
poisoning. Having the patient carefully describe the onset of
headache can be helpful in diagnosing a serious cause. Report of a
sudden-onset headache that reaches maximal and severe intensity
within seconds or a few minutes is the classic description of a
“thunderclap headache” and should precipitate workup for
subarachnoid hemorrhage, since the estimated prevalence of
subarachnoid hemorrhage in the setting of a thunderclap headache is
43%.
The general medical history can also guide the need for additional
work-up. A new headache in a patient over the age of 50 or with a
history of HIV disease under most circumstances (including a
normal neurologic examination) warrants neuroimaging immediately
(Table 2–8). When the patient has a medical history of hypertension
—particularly uncontrolled hypertension—a complete search for
criteria satisfying a diagnosis of “malignant hypertension” is
appropriate to determine the correct urgency level of hypertension
management 
(see Chapter 11). Headache and hypertension
associated with pregnancy may be due to preeclampsia. Episodic
headache associated with the triad of hypertension, heart
palpitations, and sweats is suggestive of pheochromocytoma. In the
absence of thunderclap headache, advanced age, and HIV disease,
a careful physical examination and detailed neurologic examination
will usually determine acuity of the work-up and need for further
diagnostic testing.
Patient symptoms can also be useful for diagnosing migraine
headache in the absence of the “classic” migraine pattern involving
scintillating scotoma followed by unilateral headache, photophobia,
and nausea and vomiting (Table 2–9). The presence of three or
more of these features can establish the diagnosis of migraine (in the
absence of other clinical features that warrant neuroimaging studies),
and the presence of none or one of these features (provided it is not
nausea) can help to rule out migraine.
 
Table 2–8. Clinical features associated with acute headache that
warrant urgent or emergent neuroimaging.
 
Prior to lumbar puncture
     Abnormal neurologic examination
     Abnormal mental status
     Abnormal funduscopic examination (papilledema; loss
of venous pulsations)
     Meningeal signs
Emergent (conduct prior to leaving office or emergency
department)
     Abnormal neurologic examination
     Abnormal mental status
     Thunderclap headache
Urgent (scheduled prior to leaving office or emergency
department)
     HIV-positive patient1
     Age > 50 years (normal neurologic examination)
1Use CT with or without contrast or MRI if HIV positive.
Source: American College of Emergency Physicians. Clinical Policy: critical
issues in the evaluation and management of patients presenting to the
emergency department with acute headache. Ann Emerg Med. 2002
Jan;39(1):108–22.
 
Table 2–9. Summary likelihood ratios (LRs) for individual clinical
features associated with migraine diagnosis.
 
 
 
 
Clinical Feature
LR+ (95%
CI)
LR– (95% CI)
Nausea
19 (15–25)
0.19 (0.18–
0.20)
Photophobia
5.8 (5.1–
6.6)
0.24 (0.23–
0.26)
Phonophobia
5.2 (4.5–
5.9)
0.38 (0.36–
0.40)
Exacerbation by physical
activity
3.7 (3.4–
4.0)
0.24 (0.23–
0.26)
B. Physical Examination
Critical components of the physical examination of the patient with
acute headache include vital sign measurements, neurologic
examination, and vision testing with funduscopic examination. The
finding of fever with acute headache warrants additional maneuvers
to elicit evidence of meningeal inflammation, such as Kernig and
Brudzinski signs. Besides malignant hypertension, significant
hypertension can also be a sign of intracranial hemorrhage,
preeclampsia, and pheochromocytoma. Patients over 60 years of
age should be examined for scalp or temporal artery tenderness.
Careful assessment of visual acuity, ocular gaze, visual fields,
pupillary defects, the optic disk, and retinal vein pulsations is crucial.
Diminished visual acuity is suggestive of glaucoma, temporal
arteritis, or optic neuritis. Ophthalmoplegia or visual field defects
may be signs of venous sinus thrombosis, tumor, or aneurysm.
Afferent pupillary defects can be due to intracranial masses or optic
neuritis. Ipsilateral ptosis and miosis suggest Horner syndrome and
in conjunction with acute headache may signify carotid artery
dissection. Finally, papilledema or absent retinal venous pulsations
are signs of elevated intracranial pressure—findings that should be
followed by neuroimaging prior to performing lumbar puncture
(Table 2–8).
Mental status and complete neurologic evaluations are also
critical and should include assessment of motor and sensory
systems, reflexes, gait, cerebellar function, and pronator drift. Any
abnormality on mental status or neurologic evaluation warrants
emergent neuroimaging (Table 2–8).
C. Diagnostic Studies
Guidance on when to perform neuroimaging is summarized in Table
2–8. Under most circumstances, a noncontrast head CT is sufficient
to exclude intracranial hypertension with impending herniation,
intracranial hemorrhage, and many types of intracranial masses
(notable exceptions include lymphoma and toxoplasmosis in HIV-
positive patients, herpes simplex encephalitis, and brain abscess).
When appropriate, a contrast study can often be ordered to follow
a normal noncontrast study. A normal neuroimaging study does not
sufficiently exclude subarachnoid hemorrhage and should be
followed by lumbar puncture. In patients for whom there is a high
level of suspicion for subarachnoid hemorrhage or aneurysm, a
normal CT and lumbar puncture should be followed by angiography
within the next few days (provided the patient is medically stable).
Lumbar puncture is also indicated to exclude infectious causes of
acute headache, particularly in patients with fever or meningeal
signs. Cerebrospinal fluid tests should routinely include Gram stain,
white blood cell count with differential, red blood cell count,
glucose, total protein, and bacterial culture. In appropriate patients,
also consider testing cerebrospinal fluid for VDRL (syphilis),
cryptococcal antigen (HIV-positive patients), acid-fast bacillus stain
and culture, and complement fixation and culture for
coccidioidomycosis. Storage of an extra tube with 5 mL of
cerebrospinal fluid is also prudent for conducting unanticipated tests
in the immediate future. Consultation with infectious disease experts
regarding local availability of polymerase chain reaction tests for
specific infectious pathogens (eg, herpes simplex 2) should also be
considered in patients with evidence of central nervous system
infection but no identifiable pathogen.
In addition to neuroimaging and lumbar puncture, additional
diagnostic tests for exclusion of life-threatening causes of acute
headache include erythrocyte sedimentation rate (temporal arteritis;
endocarditis), urinalysis (malignant hypertension; preeclampsia), and
sinus CT or radiograph (bacterial sinusitis, independently or as a
cause of venous sinus thrombosis).
 Treatment
Treatment should be directed at the cause of acute headache. In
patients in whom migraine or migraine-like headache has been
diagnosed, early treatment with NSAIDs or triptans can often abort
or provide significant relief of symptoms. The effectiveness of
NSAIDs and triptans appears to be equivalent, although
combination sumatriptan-naproxen appears to provide a greater
sustained response (2–24 hours) compared with monotherapy with
either agent alone. Nonoral medication administration is often
necessary for patients with significant nausea and vomiting, in which
case nasal and subcutaneous triptans and intramuscular ketorolac
are therapeutic options. Other causes of acute headache, such as
subarachnoid hemorrhage, intracranial mass, or meningitis, usually
require emergent treatment in the hospital.
 When to Refer
 
•    Frequent migraines not responsive to standard therapy.
•    Migraines with atypical features.
•    Chronic daily headaches due to medication overuse.
 When to Admit
 
•    Need for repeated doses of parenteral pain medication.
•    To facilitate an expedited work-up requiring a sequence
of procedures and neuroimaging.
•    Monitoring for progression of symptoms and neurologic
consultation when the initial emergency department work-
up is inconclusive.
•    Pain severe enough to impair activities of daily living or
limit participation in follow-up appointments or consultation.
Detsky ME et al. Does this patient with headache have a migraine
or need neuroimaging? JAMA. 2006 Sep 13;296(10):1274–83.
[PMID: 16968852]
 
Edlow JA et al. Clinical policy: critical issues in the evaluation and
management of adult patients presenting to the emergency
department with acute headache. Ann Emerg Med. 2008
Oct;52(4):407–36. [PMID: 18809105]
 
Evans RW. Diagnostic testing for migraine and other primary
headaches. Neurol Clin. 2009 May;27(2):393–415. [PMID:
19289222]
 
Perry JJ et al. High risk clinical characteristics for subarachnoid
haemorrhage in patients with acute headache: prospective cohort
study. BMJ. 2010 Oct 28;341:c5204. [PMID: 21030443]
 
van Gijn J et al. Subarachnoid hemorrhage. Lancet. 2007 Jan
27;369(9558):306–18. [PMID: 17258671]
 
Wilson JF. In the clinic. Migraine. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Nov
6;147(9):ITC11-1–ITC11-16. [PMID: 17975180]
 
DYSURIA
 ESSENTIAL INQUIRIES
 
 Fever.
 Nausea or vomiting.
 New back or flank pain.
 Vaginal discharge.
 Pregnancy risk.
 Structural abnormalities.
 Instrumentation of urethra or bladder.
 
 General Considerations
Dysuria (painful urination) is a common reason for adolescents and
adults to seek urgent medical attention. An inflammatory process
(eg, infection; autoimmune disorder) underlies most causes of
dysuria. In women, cystitis will be diagnosed in up to 50–60% of
cases and has an incidence of 0.5–0.7% per year in sexually active
young women. The key objective in evaluating women with dysuria
is to exclude serious upper urinary tract disease, such as acute
pyelonephritis, and sexually transmitted diseases. In elderly men,
dysuria may be a symptom of prostatitis. In contrast, in younger
men, urethritis accounts for the vast majority of cases of dysuria.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
Well-designed cohort studies have shown that some women can be
reliably diagnosed with uncomplicated cystitis without a physical
examination or urinalysis, and randomized controlled trials show that
telephone management of uncomplicated cystitis is safe and
effective. An increased likelihood of cystitis is present when women
report multiple irritative voiding symptoms (dysuria, urgency,
frequency), fever, or back pain (likelihood ratios = 1.6–2.0).
Inquiring about symptoms of vulvovaginitis is imperative. When
women report dysuria and urinary frequency, and deny vaginal
discharge and irritation, the likelihood ratio for culture-confirmed
cystitis is 24.5. In contrast, when vaginal discharge or irritation is
present, as well as dysuria or urinary frequency, the likelihood ratio
is 0.7. Gross hematuria in women with voiding symptoms usually
represents hemorrhagic cystitis but can also be a sign of bladder
cancer (particularly in older patients) or upper tract disease. Failure
of hematuria to resolve with antibiotic treatment should prompt
further evaluation of the bladder and kidneys. Chlamydial infection
should be strongly considered among women age 25 years or
younger who are sexually active and seeking medical attention for a
suspected urinary tract infection for the first time or have a new
partner.
Because fever and back pain, as well as nausea and vomiting, are
considered harbingers of (or clinical criteria for) acute
pyelonephritis, women with these symptoms should usually be
examined by a clinician prior to treatment in order to exclude
coexistent urosepsis, hydronephrosis, or nephrolithiasis. Other
major risk factors for acute pyelonephritis (among women 18–49
years of age) relate to sexual behaviors (frequency of sexual
intercourse three or more times per week, new sexual partner in
previous year, recent spermicide use), as well as diabetes mellitus
and recent urinary tract infection or incontinence. Finally,
pregnancy, underlying structural factors (polycystic kidney disease,
nephrolithiasis, neurogenic bladder), immunosuppression, diabetes,
and a history of recent bladder or urethral instrumentation usually
alter the treatment regimen (antibiotic choice or duration of
treatment, or both) of uncomplicated cystitis. In men, lower urinary
tract symptoms and depressive symptoms are strongly associated
and reciprocally related. Erectile dysfunction increases the odds of
both disorders.
B. Physical Examination
The presence of fever, tachycardia, or hypotension should alert the
clinician to the possibility of urosepsis and the potential need for
hospitalization. A focused examination in women, in uncomplicated
circumstances, could be limited to ascertainment of costovertebral
angle tenderness and to a lower abdominal and pelvic examination,
if the history suggests vulvovaginitis or cervicitis.
C. Diagnostic Studies
1. Urinalysis—Urinalysis is probably overutilized in the evaluation
of dysuria. The probability of culture-confirmed urinary tract
infection among women with a history and physical examination
compatible with uncomplicated cystitis is about 70–90%. Urinalysis
is most helpful when the woman with dysuria does not have other
typical features of cystitis. Dipstick detection (> trace) of
leukocytes, nitrites, or blood supports a diagnosis of cystitis. When
both leukocyte and nitrite tests are positive, the likelihood ratio is
4.2, and when both are negative, the likelihood ratio is 0.3. The
negative predictive value of urinalysis is not sufficient to exclude
culture-confirmed urinary tract infection in women with multiple and
typical symptoms; and randomized trial evidence shows that
antibiotic treatment is beneficial to women with typical symptoms
and negative urinalysis dipstick tests.
2. Urine culture—Urine culture should be considered for all
women with upper tract symptoms (prior to initiating antibiotic
therapy), as well as those with dysuria and a negative urine dipstick
test. In symptomatic women, a clean-catch urine culture is
considered positive when 102–103 colony-forming units/mL of a
uropathogenic organism is detected.
3. Renal imaging—When severe flank or back pain is present, the
possibility of complicated kidney infection (perinephric abscess,
nephrolithiasis) or of hydronephrosis should be considered.
Depending on local availability, acceptable imaging options to
assess for hydronephrosis include abdominal radiographs, renal
ultrasound, or CT scanning. To exclude nephrolithiasis, noncontrast
helical CT scanning is more accurate than intravenous urography
and is rapidly becoming the diagnostic test of choice for this
purpose. In a meta-analysis, the positive and negative likelihood
ratios of helical CT scanning for diagnosis of nephrolithiasis were
23.2 and 0.05, respectively.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of dysuria in women includes acute
cystitis, acute pyelonephritis, vaginitis (Candida, bacterial vaginosis,
Trichomonas, herpes simplex), urethritis/cervicitis (Chlamydia,
gonorrhea), and interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome.
Nucleic acid amplification tests from first-void urine or vaginal swab
specimens are highly sensitive for detecting chlamydial infection.
Other infectious pathogens associated with dysuria and urethritis in
men include Mycoplasma genitalium and Enterobacteriaceae.
 Treatment
Definitive treatment is directed to the underlying cause of the
dysuria. An evidence-informed algorithm for managing suspected
urinary tract infection in women is shown in Figure 2–3. This
algorithm supports antibiotic treatment of most women with multiple
and typical symptoms of urinary tract infection without performing
urinalysis or urine culture. Symptomatic relief can be provided with
phenazopyridine, a urinary analgesic that is available over-the-
counter; it is used in combination with antibiotic therapy (when a
urinary tract infection has been confirmed) but for no more than 2
days. Patients should be informed that phenazopyridine will cause
orange/red discoloration of their urine and other bodily fluids (eg,
some contact lens wearers have reported discoloration of their
lenses). Rare cases of methemoglobinemia and hemolytic anemia
have been reported, usually with overdoses or underlying renal
dysfunction.
 
Figure 2–3. Proposed algorithm for evaluating women with
symptoms of acute urinary tract infection (UTI). (Modified and
reproduced, with permission, from Bent S et al. Does this woman
have an acute uncomplicated urinary tract infection? JAMA. 2002
May 22–29;287(20):2701–10.)
 
In cases of interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome (see
Chapter 23), patients will often respond to a multimodal approach
that may include urethral/vesicular dilation, biofeedback, cognitive
behavioral therapy, antidepressants, dietary changes, vaginal
emollients, and other supportive measures.
 When to Refer
 
•    Anatomic abnormalities leading to repeated urinary
infections.
•    Infections associated with nephrolithiasis.
•    Persistent interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome.
When to Admit
 
•    Severe pain requiring parenteral medication or
impairing ambulation or urination (such as severe primary
herpes simplex genitalis).
•    Dysuria associated with urinary retention or obstruction.
Abrams P et al. Evaluation and treatment of lower urinary tract
symptoms in older men. J Urol. 2009 Apr;181(4):1779–87.
[PMID: 19233402]
 
Dimitrakov J et al. Pharmacologic management of painful bladder
syndrome/interstitial cystitis: a systematic review. Arch Intern Med.
2007 Oct 8;167(18):1922–9. [PMID: 17923590]
 
Little P et al. Validating the prediction of lower urinary tract
infection in primary care: sensitivity and specificity of urinary
dipsticks and clinical scores in women. Br J Gen Pract. 2010
Jul;60(576):495–500. [PMID: 20594439]
 
Mayer R. Interstitial cystitis pathogenesis and treatment. Curr Opin
Infect Dis. 2007 Feb;20(1):77–82. [PMID: 17197886]
 
Nicolle LE. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection in adults
including uncomplicated pyelonephritis. Urol Clin North Am. 2008
Feb;35(1):1–12. [PMID: 18061019]
 
Sholes D et al. Risk factors associated with acute pyelonephritis in
healthy women. Ann Intern Med. 2005 Jan 4;142(1):20–7.
[PMID: 15630106]
 
 
 
Preoperative Evaluation
&
Perioperative
Management
Hugo Q. Cheng, MD
EVALUATION OF THE ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
Patients without significant medical problems—especially those
under age 50—are at very low risk for perioperative complications.
Their preoperative evaluation should include a history and physical
examination. Special emphasis is placed on the assessment of
functional status, exercise tolerance, and cardiopulmonary
symptoms and signs in an effort to reveal previously unrecognized
disease (especially cardiopulmonary disorders) that may require
further evaluation prior to surgery. In addition, a directed bleeding
history (Table 3–1) should be taken to uncover coagulopathy that
could contribute to excessive surgical blood loss. Routine
preoperative testing of asymptomatic healthy patients under age 50
has not been found to help predict or prevent complications.
Patients who are older than 50 years and those with risk factors
for coronary artery disease should have a 12-lead ECG because
evidence of clinically silent coronary artery disease should prompt
further cardiac evaluation before surgery. Minor ECG abnormalities
such as bundle branch block, T wave changes, and premature
ventricular contractions do not predict adverse postoperative
outcomes. Of note, patients undergoing minor or minimally invasive
procedures (such as cataract surgery) may not require any routine
preoperative tests.
Gupta A. Preoperative screening and risk assessment in the
ambulatory surgery patient. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2009
Dec;22(6):705–11. [PMID: 19633545]
 
Laine C et al. In the clinic. Preoperative evaluation. Ann Intern
Med. 2009 Jul 7;151(1):ITC1–15. [PMID: 19581642]
 
CARDIAC RISK ASSESSMENT & REDUCTION
Cardiac complications of noncardiac surgery are a major cause of
perioperative morbidity and mortality. The most important
perioperative cardiac complications are myocardial infarction (MI)
and cardiac death. Other complications include congestive heart
failure (CHF), arrhythmias, and unstable angina. The principal
patient-specific risk factor is the presence of end-organ
cardiovascular disease. This includes not only coronary artery
disease and CHF, but also cerebrovascular disease and chronic
kidney disease if due to atherosclerosis. Diabetes mellitus,
especially if treated with insulin, is considered a cardiovascular
disease equivalent and has also been shown to increase the risk of
cardiac complications. Major abdominal, thoracic, and vascular
surgical procedures (especially abdominal aortic aneurysm repair)
carry a higher risk of postoperative cardiac complications, likely
due to their associated major fluid shifts, hemorrhage, and
hypoxemia. These risk factors were identified in a validated
multifactorial risk prediction tool: the Revised Cardiac Risk Index
(Table 3–2). The Revised Cardiac Risk Index has become a widely
used tool for assessing and communicating cardiac risk and has
been incorporated into perioperative management guidelines.
Limited exercise capacity (eg, the inability to walk for two blocks or
climb a flight of stairs without resting) and greater severity of cardiac
symptoms also predict higher cardiac risk. Emergency operations
are also associated with greater cardiac risk. However, emergency
operations should not be delayed by extensive cardiac evaluation.
Instead, patients facing emergency surgery should be medically
optimized for surgery as quickly as possible and closely monitored
for cardiac complications during the perioperative period.
 Role of Preoperative Noninvasive
Ischemia Testing
Most patients can be accurately risk-stratified by history, physical
examination, and electrocardiogram (ECG). Patients without clinical
predictors for cardiac complications (Table 3–2), who are
undergoing minor operations, or who have at least fair functional
capacity are at low risk for cardiac complications. Noninvasive
testing in these patients generally does not improve risk stratification
or management. Patients with poor functional capacity, or a high
Revised Cardiac Risk Index score are much more likely to suffer
cardiac complications. Stress testing prior to vascular surgery in
these patients can stratify them into low-risk and high-risk
subgroups. The absence of ischemia on dipyridamole scintigraphy
or dobutamine stress echocardiography is reassuring. Similarly, the
presence of only mild, limited ischemia in vascular surgery patients
with multiple Revised Cardiac Risk Index predictors, but who are
optimally managed with perioperative β-blockers, predicts a
generally acceptable risk of perioperative cardiac death or MI. In
contrast, extensive inducible ischemia in this population predicts a
very high risk of cardiac complications, which may not be
modifiable by either medical management or coronary
revascularization. An approach to perioperative cardiac risk
assessment and management in patients with known or suspected
stable coronary artery disease is shown in Figure 3–1.
 
Table 3–1. Findings suggestive of a bleeding disorder.
 
Unprovoked bruising on the trunk of > 5 cm in diameter
Frequent unprovoked epistaxis or gingival bleeding
Menorrhagia with iron deficiency
Hemarthrosis with mild trauma
Prior excessive surgical blood loss or reoperation for
bleeding
Family history of abnormal bleeding
Presence of severe kidney or liver disease
 Perioperative Management of Patients
with Coronary Artery Disease
Patients with acute coronary syndromes require immediate
management of their cardiac disease prior to any preoperative
evaluation (see Chapter 10). Patients with stable coronary artery
disease undergoing major surgery have a 1–5% risk of MI and
about a 1% mortality rate. Postoperative myocardial ischemia or
infarction often presents atypically or may be asymptomatic.
Symptoms and signs that should prompt consideration of
postoperative MI include unexplained hypotension, hypoxemia, or
delirium. However, current evidence is insufficient to formulate
specific recommendations for screening asymptomatic patients for
perioperative ischemia through the use of ECG or cardiac enzyme
monitoring.
 
Table 3–2. Revised cardiac risk index.
 
 
 
 
Independent Predictors of Postoperative Cardiac
Complications
1. Intrathoracic, intraperitoneal, or infrainguinal vascular
surgery
2. History of ischemic heart disease
3. History of congestive heart failure
4. Insulin treatment for diabetes mellitus
5. Serum creatinine level < 2 mg/dL
6. History of cerebrovascular disease
Scoring (Number of
Predictors Present)
Risk of Major Cardiac
Complications1
None
0.4%
One
0.9%
Two
7.0%
More than two
11%
1 Myocardial infarction, pulmonary edema, ventricular fibrillation, cardiac
arrest, and complete heart block.
Data from Lee TH et al. Derivation and prospective validation of a simple
index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery. Circulation.
1999 Sept 7; 100(10):1043–9.
A. Medications
Preoperative antianginal medications, including β-blockers, calcium
channel blockers, and nitrates, should be continued preoperatively
and during the postoperative period. Evidence for a
cardioprotective effect of perioperative β-adrenergic blockade has
been mixed. An early randomized trial in vascular surgery patients
with ischemia on dobutamine stress echocardiography found that
bisoprolol reduced the 30-day risk of cardiac mortality or nonfatal
MI from 34% to 3% in these high-risk patients. In contrast,
subsequent trials found less benefit and potential harm in lower risk
patients. In the largest of these studies, a high, fixed dose of β-
blocker (metoprolol succinate 100 mg given by mouth a few hours
before and after surgery) reduced the absolute risk of cardiac
complications by only 1.1% in patients with at least one Revised
Cardiac Risk Index predictor who underwent major surgery. This
was offset, however, by a 0.8% absolute increase in total mortality.
Hypotension and bradycardia were more common when patients
received β-blockers; in addition, the risk of stroke was higher in
these patients. In contrast, a subsequent study demonstrated a 6%
absolute risk reduction in cardiac mortality and nonfatal MI in
patients who received a more conservative, titrated dose of β-
blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg, started a median of 1 month prior to
surgery, and increased by 1.25-2.5 mg daily after surgery to a
maximum dose of 10 mg daily). Because of the uncertain benefit-to-
risk ratio of perioperative β-blockade, it should be reserved for
patients with a relatively high risk of cardiac complications.
Suggested indications for prophylactic β-blockade are presented in
Table 3–3 . Comparative trials between different β-blockers are
lacking, although all cardioselective agents (eg, metoprolol or
atenolol) are believed to be equivalent. Reasonable starting oral
doses for normotensive patients are atenolol 25 mg daily,
metoprolol 25 mg twice daily, or bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily. Ideally, β-
blockers should be started well in advance of surgery, to allow time
to gradually titrate up the dose without causing excessive
bradycardia or hypotension. The dose should be adjusted to
maintain a heart rate between 50 and 70 beats per minute while
keeping systolic blood pressure above 100 mm Hg. β-Blockers
should be continued for at least 3–7 days after surgery.
Observational studies show an association between the use of
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) during the perioperative
period and lower rates of mortality and postoperative MI. A
randomized trial in statin-naïve patients undergoing vascular surgery
found that extended-release fluvastatin 80 mg orally daily reduced
the 30-day risk of cardiac death or nonfatal MI from 10.1% to
4.8%. Statins should be considered in all patients undergoing
vascular surgery and other patients deemed to be at high risk for
cardiac complications, regardless of lipid levels. Patients already
taking statins should continue these agents during the perioperative
period.
 
Figure 3–1. Assessment and management of patients with
known or suspected stable coronary artery disease (CAD)
undergoing elective major noncardiac surgery. (OR, operating
room.)
 
B. Coronary Revascularization
Retrospective studies suggest that patients who had previously
undergone coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery or
percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) have a relatively low risk
of cardiac complications when undergoing subsequent noncardiac
surgery. However, one trial randomized over 500 patients with
angiographically proven coronary artery disease to either coronary
revascularization (with either CABG or PCI) or medical
management alone before vascular surgery. Postoperative nonfatal
MI, 30-day mortality, and long-term mortality did not differ,
suggesting that prophylactic revascularization before noncardiac
surgery does not prevent cardiac complications. Thus, current data
argue that preoperative CABG or PCI should only be performed
on patients who have indications for the procedure independent of
the planned noncardiac operation. In patients who have undergone
recent intracoronary stenting, observational studies suggest that
perioperative cardiac mortality rate may be very high if antiplatelet
therapy is stopped prematurely due to concern for surgical site
bleeding. The presumed mechanism of this increased mortality is
acute stent thrombosis that results from premature discontinuation of
antiplatelet therapy. Therefore, elective surgery should be deferred
for at least 1 month after placement of a bare-metal stent and for a
full year after placement of a drug-eluting stent if antiplatelet therapy
must be stopped perioperatively.
 
Table 3–3. Indications for prophylactic perioperative β-blockade.
 
Strong
indications
Patient already taking β-blocker to treat
ischemia, arrhythmia, or hypertension
Possible
indications
Patients with coronary artery disease
undergoing vascular or other major surgery
 
Patient with multiple clinical predictors (heart
failure, chronic kidney disease, diabetes
mellitus, or cerebrovascular disease)
undergoing vascular or other major surgery
 
The dose of β-blocker should be carefully titrated to keep heart rate < 70
bpm and systolic blood pressure > 100 mm Hg.
 CHF & Left Ventricular Dysfunction
An estimated one-third of perioperative cardiac deaths result from
CHF. Decompensated CHF, manifested by an elevated jugular
venous pressure, an audible third heart sound, or evidence of
pulmonary edema on physical examination or chest radiography,
significantly increases the risk of perioperative pulmonary edema
(roughly 15%) and cardiac death (2–10%). Elective surgery should
be postponed in patients with decompensated CHF until it can be
brought under control.
Patients with compensated left ventricular dysfunction are at
increased risk for perioperative pulmonary edema. One large study
found that patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of < 50%
had an absolute risk of 12% for postoperative CHF compared with
3% for patients with an ejection fraction > 50%. Such patients
should continue taking all medications for chronic heart failure up to
the day of surgery. Patients receiving digoxin and diuretics should
have serum electrolyte and digoxin levels measured prior to surgery
because abnormalities in these levels may increase the risk of
perioperative arrhythmias. Clinicians must be cautious not to give
too much diuretic, since the volume-depleted patient will be much
more susceptible to intraoperative hypotension. Preoperative
echocardiography or radionuclide angiography to assess left
ventricular function should be considered when there is suspicion of
left ventricular dysfunction and when the cause of left ventricular
dysfunction is in question. The surgeon and anesthesiologist should
be made aware of the presence and severity of left ventricular
dysfunction so that appropriate decisions can be made regarding
perioperative fluid management and intraoperative monitoring.
 Valvular Heart Disease
Candidates for valve replacement surgery or valvuloplasty
independent of the planned noncardiac surgery should have the
valve correction procedure performed first. There are few data
available regarding the perioperative risks of valvular heart disease
for noncardiac surgery independent of associated coronary artery
disease or CHF. The severity of valvular lesions should be
evaluated by echocardiography or cardiac catheterization before
noncardiac surgery to allow for appropriate fluid management and
consideration of invasive intraoperative monitoring. Patients with
severe symptomatic aortic stenosis are at markedly increased risk
for cardiac complications and should not undergo elective surgery.
In a series of patients with aortic stenosis who underwent
noncardiac surgery, death or nonfatal MI occurred in 31% in
patients with severe aortic stenosis (aortic valve area < 0.7 cm2), in
11% in those with moderate aortic stenosis (aortic valve area 0.7–
1.0 cm2), and in 2% in those without aortic stenosis. Other studies
have found that patients with asymptomatic aortic stenosis appeared
to be at lower risk than patients with symptomatic aortic stenosis.
Patients with mitral stenosis require heart rate control to maintain
diastolic filling time. Patients with aortic or mitral regurgitation likely
benefit from after-load reduction and careful attention to volume
status.
 Arrhythmias
The finding of a rhythm disturbance on preoperative evaluation
should prompt consideration of further cardiac evaluation,
particularly when the finding of structural heart disease would alter
perioperative management. Patients with a rhythm disturbance
without evidence of underlying heart disease are at low risk for
perioperative cardiac complications.
Management of patients with arrhythmias in the pre-operative
period should be guided by factors independent of the planned
surgery. In patients with atrial fibrillation or other supraventricular
arrhythmias, adequate rate control should be established prior to
surgery. Symptomatic ventricular tachycardia must be controlled
prior to surgery. There is no evidence that the use of antiarrhythmic
medications to suppress an asymptomatic arrhythmia alters
perioperative risk.
Patients who have indications for a permanent pacemaker should
have it placed prior to noncardiac surgery. When surgery is urgent,
these patients may be managed perioperatively with temporary
transvenous pacing. Patients with bundle branch block who do not
meet recognized criteria for a permanent pacemaker do not require
pacing during surgery. The anesthesiologist must be notified that a
patient has an implanted pacemaker or defibrillator so that steps
may be taken to prevent device malfunction caused by
electromagnetic interference from the intraoperative use of
electrocautery.
 Hypertension
Mild to moderate hypertension (systolic blood pressure below 180
mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure below 110 mm Hg) is
associated with intraoperative blood pressure lability and
asymptomatic myocardial ischemia but does not appear to be an
independent risk factor for cardiac complications. No evidence
supports delaying surgery in order to better control mild to
moderate hypertension. Most medications for chronic hypertension
should generally be continued up to and including the day of
surgery. Consideration should be given to holding angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers on
the day of surgery, as these agents may increase the risk of
intraoperative hypotension. Diuretic agents, if not needed to control
heart failure, are also frequently held on the day of surgery to
prevent hypovolemia and electrolyte disorders.
Severe hypertension, defined as a systolic pressure > 180 mm
Hg or diastolic pressure > 110 mm Hg, appears to be an
independent predictor of perioperative cardiac complications,
including MI and CHF. It seems wise to delay surgery in patients
with severe hypertension until blood pressure can be controlled,
although it is not known whether the risk of cardiac complications is
reduced with this approach.
Fleisher LA et al. 2009 ACCF/AHA focused update on
perioperative beta blockade incorporated into the ACC/AHA
2007 guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and
care for noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Nov
24;54(22):e13–e118. [PMID: 19926002]
 
Froehlich JB et al. Noncardiac surgery in the patient with heart
disease. Med Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;93(5):995–1016.
[PMID: 19665616]
 
POISE Study Group; Devereaux PJ et al. Effects of extended-
release metoprolol succinate in patients undergoing non-cardiac
surgery (POISE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008
May 31;371(9627):1839–47. [PMID: 18479744]
 
Rabitts JA et al. Cardiac risk of noncardiac surgery after
percutaneous coronary intervention with drug-eluting stents.
Anesthesiology. 2008 Oct;109(4):596–604. [PMID: 18813037]
 
PULMONARY EVALUATION IN NON–LUNG
RESECTION SURGERY
Pneumonia and respiratory failure requiring prolonged mechanical
ventilation are the most important postoperative pulmonary
complications and occur in 2–19% of surgical procedures. The
occurrence of a postoperative pulmonary complication has been
associated with a significant increase in hospital length of stay.
 Risk Factors for the Development of
Postoperative Pulmonary Complications
The risk of developing a pulmonary complication is highest in
patients undergoing cardiac, thoracic, and upper abdominal surgery,
with reported complication rates ranging from 9% to 19%. The risk
in patients undergoing lower abdominal or pelvic procedures ranges
from 2% to 5%, and for extremity procedures the range is < 1–3%.
The pulmonary complication rate for laparoscopic procedures
appears to be much lower than that for open procedures. In one
series of over 1500 patients who underwent laparoscopic
cholecystectomy, the pulmonary complication rate was < 1%.
Other procedure-related risk factors include prolonged anesthesia
time, need for general anesthesia, and emergency operations.
Among the many patient-specific risk factors for postoperative
pulmonary complications, the strongest predictor appears to be
advanced age. Surgical patients in their seventh decade had a
fourfold higher risk of pulmonary complications compared with
patients under age 50. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) or CHF have at least twice the risk compared
with patients without these conditions. In a large prospective cohort
of US military veterans, additional clinical risk factors for the
development of postoperative pneumonia included dependent
functional status, impaired sensorium, prior stroke, long-term
corticosteroid use, heavy alcohol consumption, and current cigarette
smoking.
Patients with asthma are at slightly increased risk for
bronchospasm during tracheal intubation and extubation and during
the postoperative period. However, if patients are at their optimal
pulmonary function (as determined by symptoms, physical
examination, or peak flow rate) at the time of surgery, they are not
at increased risk for other pulmonary complications. Mild or
moderate obesity also does not appear to increase the risk of
clinically important pulmonary complications, but postoperative
pneumonia was found to be twice as likely to develop in morbidly
obese patients—those weighing over 113 kg (250 lb)—than in
patients weighing less. Obese patients are prone to obstructive
sleep apnea. This condition has been associated with a variety of
postoperative complications, particularly in patients undergoing
bariatric surgery. A summary of risk factors for pulmonary
complications is presented in Table 3–4.
 
Table 3–4. Clinical risk factors for postoperative pulmonary
complications.
 
Upper abdominal or cardiothoracic surgery
Prolonged anesthesia time (> 4 hours)
Age > 60 years
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Congestive heart failure
Tobacco use (> 20 pack-years)
Impaired cognition or sensorium
Functional dependency or prior stroke
Morbid obesity
Low serum albumin level
Obstructive sleep apnea
 
Pulmonary 
Function 
Testing 
&
Laboratory Studies
Few data support the use of preoperative testing to assess
pulmonary risk. Pulmonary function testing (PFT) in unselected
patients is not helpful in predicting postoperative pulmonary
complications. The main role for preoperative PFT is to help
identify and characterize pulmonary disease in patients with
unexplained symptoms prior to major abdominal or cardiothoracic
surgery. In patients with diagnosed lung disease, PFT often adds
little information above clinical assessment. Furthermore, there is no
clear degree of PFT abnormality that can be used as an absolute
contraindication to non–lung resection surgery. Chest radiographs in
unselected patients also rarely add clinically useful information. In
one study, only 0.1% of routine preoperative chest radiographs
changed clinical management. They may be more useful in patients
over age 50 or in patients with cardiopulmonary disease who are
undergoing abdominal or thoracic surgery. Some experts have also
advocated polysomnography to diagnose obstructive sleep apnea
prior to bariatric surgery, but the benefits of this approach are
unproven. Abnormally low or high blood urea nitrogen levels
(indicating malnutrition and renal insufficiency, respectively) and
hypoalbuminemia have been found to predict postoperative
pulmonary complications and mortality. Arterial blood gas
measurement is not routinely recommended except in patients with
known lung disease and suspected hypoxemia or hypercapnia.
 Perioperative Management
The preoperative period may be an optimal time to initiate smoking
cessation efforts. A systematic review found that smoking cessation
programs started in a preoperative evaluation clinic increased the
odds of abstinence at 3–6 months by nearly 60%. Retrospective
studies have shown that smoking cessation reduced the incidence of
pulmonary complications, but only if it was initiated at least 1–2
months before surgery. In several randomized trials, preoperative
smoking cessation programs reduced surgical wound complications,
but these studies did not have adequate statistical power to detect
an impact on respiratory complications.
The incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications in
patients with COPD or asthma may be reduced by preoperative
optimization of pulmonary function. Patients who are wheezing
should receive preoperative therapy with bronchodilators and, in
certain cases, corticosteroids. Antibiotics may be beneficial for
patients who cough with purulent sputum if the sputum can be
cleared before surgery. On the other hand, the use of antibiotics in
unselected patients undergoing head and neck cancer surgery did
not reduce the occurrence of pulmonary complications. Patients
receiving oral theophylline should continue taking the drug
perioperatively. A serum theophylline level should be measured to
rule out toxicity. Most patients with COPD can be treated with
cardioselective β-blockers if indicated to prevent perioperative
cardiac complications without suffering respiratory compromise.
Postoperative risk reduction strategies have centered on
promoting lung expansion through the use of incentive spirometry,
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), intermittent positive-
pressure breathing (IPPB), and deep breathing exercises. Although
trial results have been mixed, all these techniques have been shown
to reduce the incidence of postoperative atelectasis and, in a few
studies, to reduce the incidence of postoperative pulmonary
complications. In most comparative trials, these methods were
equally effective. Given the higher cost of CPAP and IPPB,
incentive spirometry and deep breathing exercises are the preferred
methods for most patients. Incentive spirometry must be performed
for 15 minutes every 2 hours. Deep breathing exercises must be
performed hourly and consist of 3-second breath-holding, pursed
lip breathing, and coughing. These measures should be started
preoperatively and be continued for 1–2 days postoperatively.
Catheline JM et al. Preoperative cardiac and pulmonary
assessment in bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2008 Mar;18(3):271–
7. [PMID: 18204992]
 
Cropley M et al. The effectiveness of smoking cessation
interventions prior to surgery: a systematic review. Nicotine Tob
Res. 2008 Mar;10(3):407–12. [PMID: 18324557]
 
Guimarães MM et al. Incentive spirometry for prevention of
postoperative pulmonary complications in upper abdominal
surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8;
(3):CD006058. [PMID: 19588380]
 
Qaseem A et al; Clinical Efficacy Assessment Subcommittee of the
American College of Physicians. Risk assessment for and
strategies to reduce perioperative pulmonary complications for
patients undergoing noncardiothoracic surgery: a guideline from the
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2006 Apr
18;144(8):575–80. [PMID: 16618955]
 
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH LIVER DISEASE
Patients with serious liver disease are at increased risk for
perioperative morbidity and demise. Appropriate preoperative
evaluation requires consideration of the effects of anesthesia and
surgery on postoperative liver function and of the complications
associated with anesthesia and surgery in patients with preexisting
liver disease.
 The Effects of Anesthesia & Surgery
on Liver Function
Postoperative elevation of serum aminotransferase levels is a
relatively common finding after major surgery. Most of these
elevations are transient and not associated with hepatic dysfunction.
General anesthetic agents may cause deterioration of hepatic
function either via intraoperative reduction in hepatic blood flow
leading to ischemic injury or, in the case of inhalational agents, direct
hepatotoxicity. The latter effect, however, is rare with modern
anesthetic agents such as desflurane and sevoflurane. Medications
used for regional anesthesia produce similar reductions in hepatic
blood flow and thus may be equally likely to lead to ischemic liver
injury. Intraoperative hypotension, hemorrhage, and hypoxemia may
also contribute to liver injury.
 
Risk 
Factors 
for 
Surgical
Complications
Observational studies have found that surgery in patients with
serious liver disease is associated with a variety of complications,
including hemorrhage, infection, renal failure, and encephalopathy,
and with a substantial mortality rate. A key limitation in interpreting
these data is our inability to determine the contribution of the liver
disease to the observed complications independent of the surgical
procedure.
Acute hepatitis appears to increase surgical risk. In three small
series of patients with acute viral hepatitis who underwent
abdominal surgery, the mortality rate was roughly 10%. Cirrhotic
patients undergoing portosystemic shunt surgery who have evidence
of alcoholic hepatitis on the preoperative liver biopsy also have a
significantly increased surgical mortality rate compared with patients
without alcoholic hepatitis. Thus, elective surgery in patients with
acute viral or alcoholic hepatitis should be delayed until the acute
episode has resolved. These data are not sufficient to warrant
substantial delays in urgent or emergent surgery.
There are few data regarding the risks of surgery in patients with
chronic hepatitis. In a series of 272 patients with chronic hepatitis
undergoing a variety of surgical procedures for variceal hemorrhage,
the in-hospital mortality rate was < 2%. Patients with serum
aminotransferase levels > 150 units/L were excluded from this
analysis. In a study of patients undergoing hepatectomy for
hepatocellular carcinoma, patients with both cirrhosis and active
hepatitis on the preoperative liver biopsy had a fourfold increase in
mortality (8.7%) compared with patients with cirrhosis alone or
active hepatitis alone.
In patients with cirrhosis, postoperative complication rates
correlate with the severity of liver dysfunction. Traditionally, severity
of dysfunction has been assessed with the Child-Turcotte-Pugh
score (see Chapter 16). Patients with Child-Turcotte-Pugh class C
cirrhosis who underwent portosystemic shunt surgery, biliary
surgery, or trauma surgery during the 1970s and 1980s had a 50–
85% mortality rate. Patients with Child-Turcotte-Pugh class A or B
cirrhosis who underwent abdominal surgery during the 1990s,
however, had relatively low mortality rates (hepatectomy 0–8%,
open cholecystectomy 0–1%, laparoscopic cholecystectomy 0–
1%). A conservative approach would be to avoid elective surgery
in patients with Child-Turcotte-Pugh class C cirrhosis and pursue it
with great caution in class B patients. The Model for End-stage
Liver Disease (MELD) score (which incorporates bilirubin and
creatinine levels, and the prothrombin time expressed as the
International Normalized Ratio) also predicted surgical mortality
and outperformed the Child-Turcotte-Pugh classification in some
studies. A web-based risk assessment calculator incorporating age
and MELD score can predict both perioperative and long-term
mortality (mayoclinic.org/meld/mayomodel9.html). In addition,
when surgery is elective, it is prudent to attempt to reduce the
severity 
of 
ascites, 
encephalopathy, 
and 
coagulopathy
preoperatively.
Friedman LS. Surgery in the patient with liver disease. Trans Am
Clin Climatol Assoc. 2010;121:192–204. [PMID: 20697561]
 
O'Leary JG et al. Surgery in the patient with liver disease. Clin
Liver Dis. 2009 May;13(2):211–31. [PMID: 19442915]
 
Teh SH et al. Risk factors for mortality after surgery in patients
with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology. 2007 Apr;132(4):1261–9.
[PMID: 17408652]
 
PREOPERATIVE HEMATOLOGIC EVALUATION
Three of the more common clinical situations faced by the medical
consultant are the patient with preexisting anemia, the assessment of
bleeding risk, and the perioperative management of oral
anticoagulation.
The key issue in the anemic patient is to determine the need for
preoperative diagnostic evaluation and the need for transfusion.
When feasible, the diagnostic evaluation of the patient with
previously unrecognized anemia should be done prior to surgery
because certain types of anemia (particularly sickle cell disease and
immune hemolytic anemia) may have implications for perioperative
management. Preoperative anemia is common, with a prevalence of
43% in a large cohort of elderly veterans undergoing surgery. In this
cohort, morbidity and mortality increased as the preoperative
hemoglobin level decreased, even after adjusting for comorbidities.
No data exist to identify a specific preoperative hemoglobin level
that should prompt transfusion prior to surgery. It is also not known
whether such transfusions will improve postoperative outcomes.
Determination of the need for preoperative transfusion in an
individual patient must consider factors other than the absolute
hemoglobin level, including the presence of cardiopulmonary
disease, the type of surgery, and the likely severity of surgical blood
loss. The few studies that have compared different postoperative
transfusion thresholds failed to demonstrate improved outcomes
with a more aggressive transfusion strategy. One trial randomized
patients undergoing hip fracture repair to either transfusion to
maintain a hemoglobin level > 10 g/dL or transfusion for
symptomatic anemia. Patients receiving symptom-triggered
transfusion received far few units of packed red blood cells without
increased mortality or complication rates.
The most important component of the bleeding risk assessment is
a directed bleeding history (see Table 3–1). Patients who are
reliable historians and who reveal no suggestion of abnormal
bleeding on directed bleeding history and physical examination are
at very low risk for having an occult bleeding disorder. Laboratory
tests of hemostatic parameters in these patients are generally not
needed. When the directed bleeding history is unreliable or
incomplete or when abnormal bleeding is suggested, a formal
evaluation of hemostasis should be done prior to surgery and should
include measurement of the prothrombin time, activated partial
thromboplastin time, and platelet count (see Chapter 13).
Patients receiving long-term oral anticoagulation are at risk for
thromboembolic complications when an operation requires
interruption of this therapy. In a cohort study of 1293 interruptions
of warfarin therapy for invasive procedures, the 30-day
thromboembolic risk was 0.7%. There are insufficient data to
determine the excess risk incurred by holding warfarin therapy or
whether this risk may be mitigated through the practice of “bridging”
anticoagulation, where unfractionated or low-molecular-weight
heparin is administered parenterally while oral anticoagulants are
held until just prior to surgery. The bleeding risk associated with
bridging anticoagulation can be substantial. Patients in this cohort
who received bridging anticoagulation had a 13% incidence of
clinically significant bleeding, compared with 0.8% for patients who
did not receive bridging anticoagulation. Although firm evidence-
based guidelines for perioperative bridging are lacking, most experts
recommend bridging therapy only in patients at high risk for
thromboembolism. An approach to perioperative anticoagulation
management is shown in Table 3–5, but the recommendations must
be considered in the context of patient preference and hemorrhagic
risk.
Douketis JD et al; American College of Chest Physicians. The
perioperative management of antithrombotic therapy: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008 Jun;133 (6 Suppl):299S–
339S. [PMID: 18574269]
 
Karkouti K et al. Risk associated with preoperative anemia in
cardiac surgery: a multicenter cohort study. Circulation. 2008 Jan
29;117(4):478–84. [PMID: 18172032]
 
Vinik R et al. Periprocedural antithrombotic management: a review
of the literature and practical approach for the hospitalist physician.
J Hosp Med. 2009 Nov;4(9):551–9. [PMID: 20013858]
 
NEUROLOGIC EVALUATION
Delirium occurs after major surgery in 5–50% of patients over the
age of 50 years and is particularly common after hip fracture repair
and aortic surgery, occurring in 30–60% of such patients.
Postoperative delirium has been associated with higher rates of
major postoperative cardiac and pulmonary complications, poor
functional recovery, an increased length of hospital stay, an
increased risk of subsequent dementia and functional decline, and
increased mortality. Several preoperative and postoperative factors
have been associated with the development of postoperative
delirium, most notably age, preoperative functional or cognitive
impairment, preoperative psychotropic drug use, and derangements
of serum chemistry. Patients with multiple risk factors are at
especially high risk. Delirium occurred in half of the patients with at
least three of the risk factors listed in Table 3–6.
 
Table 3–5. Recommendations for perioperative anticoagulation
management.
 
 
 
Thromboembolic Risk without
Anticoagulation
Recommendation
Low (> 8% annual risk: eg, atrial
fibrillation with no more than two
other stroke risk factors,1
1. Stop oral
anticoagulation 4–5
days before surgery
2. Measure INR the
day before surgery to
confirm that it is <
1 6
mechanical bileaflet aortic valve
prosthesis with no more than one
other stroke risk factors, or single
venous thromboembolism > 3
months ago without
hypercoagulable condition2)
1.6
3. Resume oral
anticoagulation the
night of surgery, if
possible
4. No bridging with
parenteral
anticoagulants
before or after
surgery
High (> 8% annual risk: eg, atrial
fibrillation or mechanical heart valve
with prior stroke, mechanical mitral
valve prosthesis, caged-ball or
tilting disk valve prosthesis, or
venous thrombosis < 3 months ago
or associated with hypercoagulable
condition2)
1. Stop oral
anticoagulation 4–5
days before surgery
2. Begin therapeutic
dose UFH or LMWH
2 days after stopping
oral anticoagulation,
and discontinue it
12–24 hours before
surgery
3. Measure INR the
day before surgery to
confirm that it is <
1.6
4. Resume oral
anticoagulation the
night of surgery, if
possible
5. If procedure has a
low risk of bleeding,
consider therapeutic
dose UFH or LMWH
beginning 24-48
hours after surgery
and continuing until
the INR is
therapeutic
1Congestive heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, age > 75.
2Patients should receive venous thromboembolism prophylaxis after
surgery (see Chapter 14). LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; UFH,
unfractionated heparin.
Two types of delirium reducing interventions have been
evaluated: focused geriatric care and psychotropic medications. In a
randomized, controlled trial of hip fracture surgery patients, those
who received daily visits and targeted recommendations from a
geriatrician had a lower risk of postoperative delirium (32%) than
the control patients (50%). The most frequent interventions to
prevent delirium were maintenance of the hematocrit > 30%;
minimizing the use of benzodiazepines and anticholinergic
medications; maintenance of regular bowel function; and early
discontinuation of urinary catheters. Other studies comparing
postoperative care in specialized geriatrics units with standard
orthopedics wards have shown similar reductions in the incidence of
delirium. Limited data support the use of neuroleptic medications to
prevent postoperative delirium. A randomized trial in cardiac
surgery patients demonstrated that risperidone (1 mg sublingual
after regaining consciousness) reduced the incidence of
postoperative delirium compared with placebo (11.1% vs. 31.7%).
Another trial found that prophylactic oral haloperidol in orthopedic
surgery patients failed to prevent delirium but did reduce its severity
and duration.
 
Table 3–6. Risk factors for the development of postoperative
delirium.
 
Preoperative factors
     Age > 70 years
     Alcohol abuse
     Cognitive impairment
     Poor physical function status
     Markedly abnormal serum sodium, potassium, or
glucose level
     Aortic, thoracic, hip fracture surgery, or emergency
surgery
Postoperative factors
   Use of meperidine or benzodiazepines, anticholinergics,
antihistamines
 
   Postoperative hematocrit < 30%
 
   Use of urinary catheters
 
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction is defined as a reduction in
memory, language comprehension, visuospatial comprehension,
attention, or concentration. Postoperative cognitive dysfunction may
occur in up to 25% patients after cardiopulmonary bypass and in
15% of patients after major noncardiac surgery. The symptoms are
generally transient, lasting < 3 months. It is more common in older
patients and occurs with equal frequency after general or regional
anesthesia.
Stroke complicates < 1% of all surgical procedures but may
occur in 1–6% of patients undergoing cardiac or carotid artery
surgery. Most of the strokes in cardiac surgery patients are embolic
in origin, and about half occur within the first postoperative day.
Stroke after cardiac surgery is associated with significantly
increased mortality, up to 22% in some studies. A prediction model
for stroke after coronary artery bypass surgery includes the
following risk factors: age > 60 years, female sex, urgent or
emergency surgery, diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease,
peripheral vascular disease, and systolic dysfunction.
Symptomatic carotid artery stenosis is associated with a high risk
for stroke in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. In general,
symptomatic carotid lesions should be treated prior to elective
cardiac surgery. In contrast, most studies suggest that asymptomatic
carotid bruits and asymptomatic carotid stenosis are associated with
little or no increased risk of stroke in surgical patients. Prophylactic
carotid endarterectomy in patients with asymptomatic carotid artery
disease is unlikely to be beneficial in most patients, as the stroke
and risk of the carotid procedure likely out-weighs any risk
reduction it provides in a subsequent operation. On the other hand,
patients with carotid disease with independent indications for
carotid endarterectomy (see Chapter 12) should probably have the
carotid surgery prior to the elective surgery.
Deiner S et al. Postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction. Br
J Anaesth. 2009 Dec;103(Suppl 1):i41–46. [PMID: 20007989]
 
Flinn DR et al. Prevention, diagnosis, and management of
postoperative delirium in older adults. J Am Coll Surg. 2009
Aug;209(2):261–8. [PMID: 19632604]
 
Schrader SL et al. Adjunctive haloperidol prophylaxis reduces
postoperative delirium severity and duration in at-risk elderly
patients. Neurologist. 2008 Mar;14(2):134–7. [PMID:
18332845]
 
Selim M. Perioperative stroke. N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb
15;356(7): 706–13. [PMID: 17301301]
 
MANAGEMENT OF ENDOCRINE DISEASES
 Diabetes Mellitus
Patients with diabetes are at increased risk for postoperative
infections, particularly those involving the surgical site. Patients with
a preoperative hemoglobin A1c < 7% have roughly half the risk for
developing a postoperative infection compared with those with a
hemoglobin A1c > 7%. Furthermore, diabetic patients are at
increased risk for postoperative cardiac complications. The most
challenging issue in diabetic patients, however, is the maintenance of
glucose control during the perioperative period. The increased
secretion of cortisol, epinephrine, glucagon, and growth hormone
during surgery is associated with insulin resistance and
hyperglycemia in diabetic patients. The goal of management is the
prevention of severe hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia in the
perioperative period.
The ideal blood glucose level is not known. Tighter perioperative
glycemic control leads to better clinical outcomes in cardiac surgery
patients. In observational studies, cardiac surgery patients with
mean postoperative glucose levels < 180 mg/dL had fewer serious
surgical site infections, a lower risk of acute kidney failure, and a
shorter hospital stay than patients with higher mean levels. In a study
of 1200 patients in a critical care unit, most of whom had undergone
cardiac surgery, those randomized to strict normalization of serum
glucose (80–110 mg/dL) had significantly less morbidity and a
shorter length of stay in the critical care unit than patients who were
treated only for serum glucose > 215 mg/dL. These results do not
apply to other surgical patients, however, as a subsequent trial
demonstrated increased mortality with tight control in critically ill
surgical patients. The specific pharmacologic management of
diabetes during the perioperative period depends on the type of
diabetes (insulin-dependent or not), the level of glycemic control,
and the type and length of surgery. In general, all patients with type
1 diabetes and some with type 2 diabetes will need an intravenous
insulin infusion perioperatively. Patients with type 2 diabetes who
take oral agents may require insulin during major or prolonged
surgery. Perioperative management of all diabetic patients requires
frequent blood glucose monitoring to prevent hypoglycemia and to
ensure prompt treatment of hyperglycemia. Recommendations for
glycemic control in patients who generally do not need
intraoperative insulin are shown in Table 3–7. Perioperative use of
corticosteroids, common in neurosurgical and organ transplant
procedures, increases glucose intolerance. Patients receiving
corticosteroids often require additional regular insulin with meals,
while their fasting glucose levels may remain relatively unchanged.
 Corticosteroid Replacement
Perioperative complications (predominantly hypotension) resulting
from primary or secondary adrenocortical insufficiency are rare.
The common practice of administering high-dose corticosteroids
during the perioperative period in patients at risk for adrenocortical
insufficiency has not been rigorously studied. While definitive
recommendations regarding perioperative corticosteroid therapy
cannot be made, a conservative approach would be to consider any
patient to be at risk for having adrenocortical insufficiency who has
received either the equivalent of 20 mg of prednisone daily for 3
weeks or the equivalent of 7.5 mg of prednisone daily for 1 month
within the past year. A commonly used regimen is 50–100 mg of
hydrocortisone given intravenously every 8 hours beginning before
induction of anesthesia and continuing for 24–48 hours. Tapering
the dose is not necessary. Patients being maintained on long-term
corticosteroids should also continue their usual dose throughout the
perioperative period.
 Thyroid Disease
Severe symptomatic hypothyroidism has been associated with
several perioperative complications, including intraoperative
hypotension, CHF, cardiac arrest, and death. Elective surgery
should be delayed in patients with severe hypothyroidism until
adequate thyroid hormone replacement can be achieved. Similarly,
patients with symptomatic hyperthyroidism are at risk for
perioperative thyroid storm and should not undergo elective surgery
until their thyrotoxicosis is controlled. An endocrinologist should be
consulted if emergency surgery is needed in such patients.
Conversely, patients with asymptomatic or mild hypothyroidism
generally tolerate surgery well, with only a slight increase in the
incidence of intraoperative hypotension; surgery need not be
delayed for the month or more required to ensure adequate thyroid
hormone replacement.
 
Table 3–7. Perioperative management of diabetic patients who do
not need insulin.
 
 
 
Patient
Recommended Management
Diabetes well
controlled on diet
alone
Measure glucose every 4 hours
while fasting or NPO and give
subcutaneous regular insulin as
needed to maintain blood glucose <
130 mg/dL
 
 
Avoid glucose-containing solutions
during surgery
 
Diabetes well
controlled on an oral
sulfonylurea,
metformin, or a
thiazolidinedione
 
The last dose of medication should
be taken on the evening before
surgery
 
Measure glucose every 4 hours
while fasting or NPO and give
subcutaneous regular insulin as
needed to maintain blood glucose <
130 mg/dL
 
Measure blood glucose level every 4
hours (or more frequently as
indicated) during surgery
 
Resume oral hypoglycemic therapy
when the patient returns to baseline
diet
 
NPO, nothing by mouth.
Hanazaki K et al. Relationship between perioperative glycemic
control and postoperative infections. World J Gastroenterol. 2009
Sep 7;15(33):4122–5. [PMID: 19725144]
 
Kohl BA et al. Surgery in the patient with endocrine dysfunction.
Med Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;93(5):1031–47. [PMID:
19665618]
 
Lipshutz AK et al. Perioperative glycemic control: an evidence-
based review. Anesthesiology. 2009 Feb;110(2):408–21. [PMID:
19194167]
 
Yong SL et al. Supplemental perioperative steroids for surgical
patients with adrenal insufficiency. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2009 Oct 7; (4):CD005367. [PMID: 19821345]
 
KIDNEY DISEASE
Approximately 1% of patients suffer a significant reduction in kidney
function after major surgery. The risk is much higher, however, in
patients undergoing cardiac operations, where 10–30% of patients
develop acute kidney injury. The development of acute kidney
injury is an independent predictor of mortality, even if renal
dysfunction resolves. The mortality associated with the development
of perioperative acute kidney injury that requires dialysis exceeds
50%. Risk factors associated with postoperative deterioration in
kidney function are shown in Table 3–8. Several medications,
including “renal dose” dopamine, mannitol, N-acetylcysteine, and
furosemide, have been evaluated in an attempt to preserve kidney
function during the perioperative period. None of these have proved
effective in clinical trials and generally should not be used for this
indication. Maintenance of adequate intravascular volume is likely to
be the most effective method to reduce the risk of perioperative
deterioration in kidney function. Exposure to renal toxic agents such
as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and intravenous contrast
should be minimized or avoided. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers reduce renal perfusion
and may increase the risk of perioperative acute kidney injury.
Although firm evidence is lacking, it may be useful to temporarily
discontinue these medications in patients at risk for peri-operative
acute kidney injury.
 
Table 3–8. Risk factors for the development of postoperative acute
renal failure.
 
Preoperative chronic renal insufficiency
Aortic and major peripheral vascular surgery
Cardiac surgery
Severe heart failure
Preoperative jaundice
Age < 70 years
Diabetes mellitus
COPD requiring daily bronchodilator therapy
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Although the mortality rate for elective major surgery is low (1–
4%) in patients with dialysis-dependent chronic kidney disease, the
risk for perioperative complications, including postoperative
hyperkalemia, pneumonia, fluid overload, and bleeding, is
substantially increased. Postoperative hyperkalemia requiring
emergent hemodialysis has been reported to occur in 20–30% of
patients. Patients should undergo dialysis preoperatively within 24
hours before surgery, and their serum electrolyte levels should be
measured just prior to surgery and monitored closely during the
postoperative period.
Craig RG et al. Recent developments in the perioperative
management of adult patients with chronic kidney disease. Br J
Anaesth. 2008 Sep;101(3):296–310. [PMID: 18617576]
 
Stafford-Smith M et al. Cardiac surgery and acute kidney injury:
emerging concepts. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2009 Dec;15(6): 498–
502. [PMID: 19812485]
 
Zacharias M et al. Interventions for protecting renal function in the
perioperative period. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Oct 8;
(4):CD003590. [PMID: 18843647]
 
ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS OF SURGICAL SITE
INFECTIONS
There are an estimated 0.5–1 million surgical site infections annually
in the United States. Surgical site infection is estimated to occur in
roughly 4% of general or vascular operations. For most major
procedures, the use of prophylactic antibiotics has been
demonstrated to reduce the incidence of surgical site infections
significantly. For example, antibiotic prophylaxis in colorectal
surgery reduces the incidence of surgical site infection from 25–
50% to below 20%. In addition, in a case control study of
Medicare beneficiaries, the use of preoperative antibiotics within 2
hours of surgery was associated with a twofold reduction in 60-day
mortality.
Other strategies to prevent surgical site infections have proven to
be controversial. Evidence suggests that nasal carriage with
Staphylococcus aureus is associated with a twofold to ninefold
increased risk of surgical site and catheter-related infections in
surgical patients. Treatment of nasal carriers of S aureus with 2%
mupirocin ointment (twice daily intranasally for 3 days) prior to
cardiac surgery decreases the risk of surgical site infections.
However, in a 2008 cohort study, universal screening for
methicillin-resistant S aureus in surgical patients failed to reduce
infection rates from this pathogen. An early finding that high
concentration oxygen delivered in the immediate postoperative
period reduced surgical site infections was not verified in
subsequent trials. Thus, high-flow supplemental oxygen specifically
to prevent these infections is not recommended. Preoperative
bathing with antiseptic agents and preoperative hair removal are
common practices but have not demonstrated a reduction in surgical
site infections in randomized trials. The use of razors for hair
removal actually seems to increase the risk of surgical site infections
and is therefore specifically not recommended. If preoperative hair
removal is indicated, the use of clippers is preferred.
Guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis
in patients undergoing invasive procedures are presented in Chapter
33. The American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons
recommends consideration of prophylactic antibiotics in patients
with prosthetic joints on a case-by-case basis. More definitive or
evidence-based guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis against
prosthetic joint infection are lacking.
Casey AL et al. Progress in the prevention of surgical site infection.
Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2009 Aug;22(4):370–5. [PMID: 19448534]
 
Harbarth S et al. Universal screening for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus at hospital admission and nosocomial
infection in surgical patients. JAMA. 2008 Mar 12;299(10):
1149–57. [PMID: 18334690]
 
Patel NP et al. Antimicrobial agents for surgical infections. Surg
Clin North Am. 2009 Apr;89(2):327–47. [PMID: 19281887]
 
Weber WP et al. The timing of surgical antimicrobial prophylaxis.
Ann Surg. 2008 Jun;247(6):918–26. [PMID: 18520217]
 
 
 
Geriatric Disorders
C. Bree Johnston, MD, MPH, 
G. Michael Harper, MD, 
& C. Seth Landefeld, MD
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF GERIATRIC CARE
The following principles help in caring for older adults:
 
1. Many disorders are multifactorial in origin and are best
managed by multifactorial interventions.
2. Diseases often present atypically.
3. Not all abnormalities require evaluation and treatment.
4. Complex medication regimens, adherence problems,
and polypharmacy are common challenges.
ASSESSMENT OF THE OLDER ADULT
Comprehensive assessment addresses three topics in addition to
conventional assessment of symptoms and diseases: prognosis,
values and preferences, and ability to function independently.
Comprehensive assessment is warranted before major clinical
decisions (eg, whether major surgery should be performed, or
whether a patient should be treated for pneumonia at home or in the
hospital), and each topic merits at least brief consideration in each
clinical decision.
 Assessment of Prognosis
When an older person's life expectancy is > 10 years (ie, 50% of
similar persons live longer than 10 years), it is reasonable to
consider effective tests and treatments much as they are considered
in younger persons. When life expectancy is < 10 years (and
especially when it is much less), choices of tests and treatments
should be made on the basis of their ability to improve that
particular patient's prognosis and quality of life in the shorter term of
that patient's life expectancy. The relative benefits and harms of
tests and treatments often change as prognosis worsens.
When an older patient's clinical situation is dominated by a single
disease process (eg, lung cancer metastatic to brain), prognosis can
be estimated well with a disease-specific instrument. Even in this
situation, however, prognosis generally worsens with age (especially
age > 90 years) and with the presence of serious age-related
conditions, such as dementia, malnutrition, or impaired ability to
walk.
When an older patient's clinical situation is not dominated by a
single disease process, prognosis can be estimated initially by
considering the patient's age, gender, and general health (Figure 4–
1). For example, < 25% of men age 95 years will live 5 years,
whereas nearly 75% of women age 70 years will live 10 years.
The prognosis of older persons living at home can be estimated
by considering age, sex, comorbid conditions, and function (Table
4–1). The prognosis of older persons discharged from the hospital
is worse than that of those living at home and can be estimated by
considering gender, comorbid conditions, and function at discharge
(Table 4–2). The sum of risk points indicates the mortality rate for
similar patients.
 Assessment of Values & Preferences
Values and preferences are determined by speaking directly with a
patient or, when the patient cannot express preferences reliably,
with the patient's surrogate. Values and preferences can be
assessed most readily in the context of a specific medical decision.
For example, the clinician might ask a patient considering a hip
replacement, “How would you like your hip pain and function to be
different? Tell me about the risk and discomfort you are willing to
go through to achieve that improvement.”
In assessing values and preferences, it is important to keep in
mind the following:
 
1. Patients are experts about their preferences for
outcomes and experiences; however, they often do not
have 
adequate 
information 
to 
express 
informed
preferences for specific tests or treatments.
2. Patients’ preferences often change over time. For
example, some patients find living with a certain degree of
disability more acceptable than they thought before
experiencing the disability.
 Assessment of Function
People often lose function in multiple domains as they age, with the
results that they may not be able to do some activities as quickly or
capably and may need assistance with other activities. Assessment
of function improves prognostic estimates (see above). Assessment
of function is essential to determining an individual's needs in the
context of their values and preferences, and the possible effects of
prescribed treatment.
 
Figure 4–1. Median life expectancy of older women and men.
(Adapted, with permission, from Walter LC et al. Screening for
colorectal, breast, and cervical cancer in the elderly: a review of the
evidence. Am J Med. 2005 Oct;118(10):1078–86.) Copyright ©
Elsevier
 
About one-fourth of patients over 65 have impairments in their
IADLs (instrumental activities of daily living: transportation,
shopping, cooking, using the telephone, managing money, taking
medications, housecleaning, laundry) or ADLs (basic activities of
daily living: bathing, dressing, eating, transferring from bed to chair,
continence, toileting). Half of those persons older than 85 years
have these latter impairments.
In general, persons who need help only with IADLs can usually
live independently with minimal supports, such as financial services
(eg, a representative payee) or a chore worker. If institutional care
is needed, residential care, board-and-care, or assisted living is
usually sufficient. While many persons who need help with ADLs
may require a nursing home level of care, most live at home with
caregivers and other community services (eg, day care).
 Caregiver Issues
Most elders with functional impairment live in the community with
the help of an “informal” caregiver, most commonly a spouse or
daughter. The health and well-being of the patient and caregiver are
closely linked. High levels of functional dependency place an
enormous burden on a caregiver, and may result in caregiver
“burnout,” depression, morbidity, and even increased mortality.
 
Table 4–1. Prognostic factors, “risk points,” and 4-year mortality
rates for older persons living at home.
 
 
 
 
 
Prognostic Factor
Risk Points
Age
     60–64 years
1
     64–69 years
2
     70–74 years
3
     74–79 years
4
     80–84 years
5
     85 years and older
7
Male sex
2
Comorbid conditions reported by patients
     Diabetes mellitus
1
     Cancer
2
     Lung disease
2
     Heart failure
2
     Body mass index < 25
1
     Current smoker
2
Function
     Bathing difficulty
2
     Difficulty handling finances
2
     Difficulty walking several blocks
2
Sum of Risk Points
4-year Mortality Rate
             1–2
2%
             3–6
7%
           7–10
19%
            > 10
53%
Reprinted, with permission, from Lee SJ et al. Development and validation
of a prognostic index for 4-year mortality in older adults. JAMA. 2006 Feb
15;295(7):801–8. Copyright © 2006 American Medical Association. All
rights reserved.
An older patient's need for nursing home placement is often
better predicted from assessment of the caregiver characteristics
and stress than the severity of the patient's illness. Therefore, part of
caring for a frail elder involves paying attention to the well-being of
the caregiver. The older patient who is also a caregiver is at risk for
depression and should be screened for it. For the stressed
caregiver, a social worker may help identify programs such as
caregiver support groups, respite programs, adult day care, or hired
home health aides.
 
Table 4–2. Prognostic factors, “risk points,” and 1-year mortality
rates for patients discharged from the hospital after an acute medical
illness.
 
 
 
 
 
Prognostic Factor
Risk Points
Male sex
1
Comorbid conditions reported by patients
     Cancer, metastatic
8
     Cancer, not metastatic
3
     Serum creatinine > 3 mg/dL
2
     Albumin < 3 mg/dL
2
     Albumin 3.0–3.4 mg/dL
1
Function
     Dependent in 1–4 ADL1
2
     Dependent in 5 ADL
5
Sum of Risk Points
1-year Mortality Rate
0–1
  4%
2–3
19%
4–6
34%
< 6
64%
1ADL refers to five activities of daily living: bathing, dressing, transferring,
using the toilet, and eating.
Reprinted, with permission, from Walter LC et al. Development and
validation of a prognostic index for 1-year mortality in older adults after
hospitalization. JAMA. 2001 Jun 20;285(23):2987–94. Copyright © 2006
American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
 Functional Screening Instrument
Functional screening should include assessment of ADL and IADL
and questions to detect weight loss, falls, incontinence, depressed
mood, self neglect, fear for personal safety, and common serious
impairments (eg, hearing, vision, cognition, and mobility). Standard
functional screening measures may not be useful in capturing subtle
impairments in highly functional independent elders. One technique
for these patients is to identify and regularly ask about a target
activity, such as bowling or gardening. If the patient begins to have
trouble with or discontinues such an “advanced activity of daily
living,” it may indicate early impairment, such as dementia,
incontinence, or worsening hearing loss, which additional gentle
questioning or assessment may uncover.
Busy providers may find it more manageable to perform the
elements of functional geriatric assessment over three or four visits
or to train office personnel to perform some elements of the
assessment.
Chang HJ et al. JAMA patient page. Preventive care for older
adults. JAMA. 2009 Dec 23;302(24):2722. [PMID: 20040564]
 
Kane RL. Finding the right level of care: “We didn't realize that
there was any other option for him.” JAMA. 2011 Jan 19;
305(3):284–93. [PMID: 21245184]
 
Reuben DB. Medical care for the final years of life: “When you're
83, it's not going to be 20 years”. JAMA. 2009 Dec 23;302(24):
2686-94. [PMID: 20040557]
 
Studenski S et al. Gait speed and survival in older adults. JAMA.
2011 Jan 5;305(1):50–8. [PMID: 21205966]
 
Sudore RL et al. Redefining the “planning” in advance care
planning: preparing for end-of-life decision making. Ann Intern
Med. 2010 Aug 17;153(4):256–261. [PMID: 20713793]
 
MANAGEMENT OF COMMON GERIATRIC
PROBLEMS
1. Dementia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Progressive decline of intellectual function.
 Loss of short-term memory and at least one other cognitive
deficit.
 Deficit severe enough to cause impairment of function.
 Not delirious.
 
 General Considerations
Dementia is an acquired persistent and progressive impairment in
intellectual function, with compromise of memory and at least one
other cognitive domain, most commonly aphasia (typically, word
finding difficulty), apraxia (inability to perform motor tasks, such as
cutting a loaf of bread, despite intact motor function), agnosia
(inability to recognize objects), and impaired executive function
(poor abstraction, mental flexibility, planning, and judgment). The
diagnosis of dementia requires a significant decline in function that is
severe enough to interfere with work or social life.
Dementia has a prevalence that doubles every 5 years in the
older population, reaching 30–50% at age 85. Women suffer
disproportionately, both as patients and as care-givers. Alzheimer
disease accounts for roughly two-thirds of dementia cases in the
United States, with vascular dementia (either alone or combined
with Alzheimer disease) and dementia with Lewy bodies accounting
for much of the rest. Some of the risk factors for Alzheimer disease
are older age, family history, lower education level, and female sex.
Education, cognitive “exercises,” and social support may be
protective. Risk factors for vascular dementia are those for stroke,
ie, older age, hypertension, cigarette use, atrial fibrillation, diabetes
mellitus, and hyperlipidemia.
Depression and delirium are also common in elders, may coexist
with dementia, and may also present with cognitive impairment.
Depression is a common concomitant of early dementia. A patient
with depression and cognitive impairment whose intellectual function
improves with treatment of the mood disorder has an almost fivefold
greater risk of suffering irreversible dementia later in life. Delirium,
characterized by acute confusion, occurs much more commonly in
patients with underlying dementia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Screening
1. Cognitive impairment—Although there is no consensus at
present on whether older patients should be screened for dementia,
the benefits of early detection include identification of potentially
reversible causes, planning for the future (including discussing values
and completing advance care directives), and providing support and
counseling for the caregiver.
The combination of a clock drawing task with a three-item word
recall (also known as the “mini-cog”) is a simple screening test that
is fairly quick to administer. While different methods for
administering and scoring the clock draw test have been described,
the authors of this chapter favor the approach of pre-drawing a four
inch circle on a sheet of paper and instructing the patient to “draw a
clock” with the time set at 10 minutes after 11. Scores are classified
as normal, almost normal, or abnormal. When a patient is able to
draw a clock normally and can remember all 3 objects, dementia is
unlikely. When a patient fails this simple screen, further cognitive
evaluation with the Folstein Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) or
other instruments is warranted.
2. Decision-making capacity—It is common for a cognitively
impaired elder to face a serious medical decision and for the
clinicians involved in his care to ascertain whether the capacity
exists to make the choice. While no single test of capacity exists, the
following five elements should be considered in a thorough
assessment: (1) ability to express a choice; (2) understanding
relevant information about the risks and benefits of planned therapy
and the alternatives, in the context of one's values, including no
treatment; (3) comprehension of the problem and its consequences;
(4) ability to reason; and (5) consistency. A patient's choice should
follow rationally from an understanding of the consequences.
Cultural sensitivity must be used in applying these five
components to people of various cultural backgrounds. Decision-
making capacity varies over time: A delirious patient may regain his
capacity after an infection is treated, and so reassessments are often
appropriate. Furthermore, the capacity to make a decision is a
function of the decision in question. A woman with mild dementia
may lack the capacity to consent to coronary artery bypass grafting
yet retain the capacity to designate a surrogate decision maker.
B. Symptoms and Signs
The clinician can gather important information about the type of
dementia that may be present by asking about: (1) the rate of
progression of the deficits as well as their nature (including any
personality or behavioral change); (2) the presence of other
neurologic symptoms, particularly motor problems; (3) risk factors
for HIV; (4) family history of dementia; and (5) medications, with
particular attention to recent changes.
Work-up is directed at identifying any potentially reversible
causes of dementia. However, such cases are indeed rare. For a
detailed description of the different forms of dementia, see Chapter
24.
Alzheimer disease typically presents with early problems in
memory and visuospatial abilities (eg, becoming lost in familiar
surroundings, inability to copy a geometric design on paper), yet
social graces may be retained despite advanced cognitive decline.
Personality changes and behavioral difficulties (wandering,
inappropriate sexual behavior, and aggression) may develop as the
disease progresses. Hallucinations, delusions, and symptoms of
depression often occur as the dementia worsens. End-stage disease
is characterized by near-mutism; inability to sit up, hold up the head,
or track objects with the eyes; difficulty with eating and swallowing;
weight loss; bowel or bladder incontinence; and recurrent
respiratory or urinary infections.
“Subcortical” dementias (eg, the dementia of Parkinson
disease, and some cases of vascular dementia) are characterized by
psychomotor slowing, reduced attention, early loss of executive
function, and personality changes.
Dementia with Lewy bodies may be confused with delirium, as
fluctuating cognitive impairment is frequently observed. Rigidity and
bradykinesia are the primary signs, and tremor is rare. Response to
dopaminergic agonist therapy is poor. Complex visual hallucinations
—typically of people or animals—may be an early feature that can
help distinguish dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer disease.
These patients demonstrate a hypersensitivity to neuroleptic
therapy, and attempts to treat the hallucinations may lead to marked
worsening of extrapyramidal symptoms.
Frontotemporal dementias are a group of diseases that include
Pick disease, dementia associated with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, and others. Patients manifest personality change
(euphoria, disinhibition, apathy) and compulsive behaviors (often
peculiar eating habits or hyperorality). In contrast to Alzheimer
disease, visuospatial function is relatively preserved.
Dementia in association with motor findings, such as
extrapyramidal features or ataxia, may represent a less common
disorder (eg, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal
ganglionic degeneration, olivopontocerebellar atrophy).
C. Physical Examination
The neurologic examination emphasizes assessment of mental status
but should also include evaluation for sensory deficits, possible
previous strokes, parkinsonism, or peripheral neuropathy. The
remainder of the physical examination should focus on identifying
comorbid conditions that may aggravate the individual's disability.
D. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory studies should include a complete blood count,
electrolytes, calcium, creatinine, glucose, thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), and vitamin B12 levels. HIV testing, RPR (rapid
plasma reagin) test, heavy metal screen, and liver biochemical tests
may be informative in selected patients but should not be
considered part of routine testing.
E. Imaging
Most patients should receive neuroimaging as part of the diagnostic
work-up to rule out subdural hematoma, tumor, previous stroke,
and hydrocephalus (usually normal pressure). Those who are
younger and those who have focal neurologic symptoms or signs,
seizures, gait abnormalities, and an acute or subacute onset are
most likely to yield positive findings and most likely to benefit from
MRI scanning. In older patients with a more classic picture of
Alzheimer disease in whom neuroimaging is desired, a non-contrast
CT scan is sufficient.
 Differential Diagnosis
Older individuals experience occasional difficulty retrieving items
from memory (usually manifested as word-finding complaints) and
experience a slowing in their rate of information processing. Mild
cognitive impairment is an increasingly recognized condition in
which a patient complains of memory problems, demonstrates mild
deficits (most commonly in short-term memory) on formal testing,
but does not meet criteria for dementia. Dementia will develop in
more than half of people with mild cognitive impairment within 5
years. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have not consistently
demonstrated a delay in the progression of mild cognitive
impairment to Alzheimer disease. An elderly patient with intact
cognition but with severe impairments in vision or hearing commonly
becomes confused in an unfamiliar medical setting and consequently
may be falsely labeled as demented. Cognitive testing is best
performed after optimal correction of the sensory deficits.
Delirium can be distinguished from dementia by its acute onset,
fluctuating course, and deficits in attention rather than memory.
Because delirium and dementia often coexist, it may not be possible
to determine how much impairment is attributable to each condition
until the patient is fully recovered and back in their usual setting.
Many medications have been associated with delirium and other
types of cognitive impairment in older patients. Anticholinergic
agents, hypnotics, neuroleptics, opioids, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), anti-histamines (including H1 and
H2-antagonists), and corticosteroids are just some of the
medications that have been associated with cognitive impairment in
elders.
 Treatment
Soon after diagnosis, patients and families should be made aware of
the Alzheimer's Association (http://www.alz.org) as well as the
wealth of helpful community and online resources and publications
available. Caregiver support, education, and counseling can prevent
or delay nursing home placement. Education should include the
manifestations and natural history of dementia as well as the
availability of local support services such as respite care. Even
under the best of circumstances, caregiver stress can be substantial.
Collaborative care models and disease management programs
appear to improve the quality of care for patients with dementia.
A. Cognitive Impairment
Because demented patients have greatly diminished cognitive
reserve, they are at high risk for experiencing acute cognitive or
functional decline in the setting of new medical illness.
Consequently, fragile cognitive status may be best maintained by
ensuring that comorbid diseases such as congestive heart failure and
infections are detected and treated.
1. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors—Many experts recommend
considering a trial of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (eg, donepezil,
galantamine, rivastigmine) in most patients with mild to moderate
Alzheimer disease. These medications produce a modest
improvement in cognitive function that is not likely to be detected in
routine clinical encounters. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may also
have similarly modest cognitive benefits in patients with vascular
dementia 
or 
dementia 
with 
Lewy 
bodies. 
However,
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have not convincingly been shown to
delay institutionalization or functional decline.
Starting doses, respectively, of donepezil, galantamine, and
rivastigmine, are 5 mg orally once daily (maximum 10 mg once
daily), 4 mg orally twice daily (maximum 12 mg twice daily), and
1.5 mg orally twice daily (maximum 6 mg twice daily). The doses
are increased gradually as tolerated. The most bothersome side
effects include diarrhea, nausea, anorexia, weight loss, and syncope.
In those patients who have had no apparent benefit, experience side
effects, or for whom the financial outlay is a burden, the drug should
be discontinued.
2. Memantine—In clinical trials, patients with more advanced
disease have been shown to have statistical benefit from the use of
memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, with or
without concomitant use of an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. Long-
term and meaningful functional outcomes have yet to be
demonstrated.
B. Behavioral Problems
1. Nonpharmacologic approaches—Behavioral problems in
demented patients are often best managed with a nonpharmacologic
approach. Initially, it should be established that the problem is not
unrecognized delirium, pain, urinary obstruction, or fecal impaction.
It also helps to inquire whether the caregiver or institutional staff can
tolerate the behavior, as it is often easier to find ways to
accommodate to the behavior than to modify it. If not, the caregiver
is asked to keep a brief log in which the behavior is described along
with antecedent events and consequences. Recurring precipitants of
the behavior are often found to be present or it may be that the
behavior is rewarded—for example, by increased attention.
Caregivers are taught to use simple language when communicating
with the patient, to break down activities into simple component
tasks, and to use a “distract, not confront” approach when the
patient seems disturbed by a troublesome issue. Additional steps to
address behavioral problems include providing structure and
routine, discontinuing all medications except those considered
absolutely necessary, and correcting, if possible, sensory deficits.
2. Pharmacologic approaches—There is no clear consensus
about pharmacologic approaches to treatment of behavioral
problems 
in 
patients 
who 
have 
not 
benefited 
from
nonpharmacologic therapies. The target symptoms—depression,
anxiety, psychosis, mood lability, or pain—may suggest which class
of medications might be most helpful in a given patient. Patients with
depressive symptoms may show improvement with antidepressant
therapy. Patients with dementia with Lewy bodies have shown
clinically significant improvement in behavioral symptoms when
treated with rivastigmine (3–6 mg orally twice daily).
For those with Alzheimer disease and agitation, no agents have
demonstrated consistent efficacy. Despite the lack of strong
evidence, antipsychotic medications have remained a mainstay for
the treatment of behavioral disturbances, largely because of the lack
of alternatives. The newer atypical antipsychotic agents
(risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole, clozapine,
ziprasidone) are reported to be better tolerated than older agents
but should be avoided in patients with vascular risk factors due to
an increased risk of stroke; they can cause weight gain and are also
associated with hyperglycemia in diabetic patients and are
considerably more expensive. Both typical and atypical
antipsychotics in several short-term trials and one long-term trial
have been demonstrated to increase mortality compared with
placebo when used to treat elderly demented patients with
behavioral disturbances. When the choice is made to use these
agents, patients and caregivers should be carefully warned of the
risks. Starting and target dosages should be much lower than those
used in schizophrenia (eg, haloperidol, 0.5–2 mg orally; risperidone,
0.25–2 mg orally). Federal regulations require that if antipsychotic
agents are used in treatment of a nursing home patient, drug
reduction efforts must be made at least every 6 months.
C. Driving
A common yet vexing problem that providers are regularly asked to
assess is whether a patient with dementia is able to continue driving.
The consequences of a decision to either stop or continue driving
can be far-reaching for both the patient and the general public and
therefore every case requires careful consideration. Although
drivers with dementia are at an increased risk for motor vehicle
accidents, many patients continue to drive safely well beyond the
time of diagnosis, making the timing of when to recommend that a
patient stop driving particularly challenging.
There is no clear-cut evidence to suggest a single best approach
to determining an individual patient's risk, and there is no accepted
“gold standard” test. The result is that clinicians must consider
several factors upon which to base their judgment. For example,
determining the severity of dementia can be useful. Patients with
very mild or mild dementia according to the Clinical Dementia
Rating Scale were able to pass formal road tests at rates of 88%
and 69%, respectively. Experts agree that patients with moderately
severe or more advanced dementia should be counseled to stop
driving. Although not well studied, clinicians should also consider
the effects of comorbid conditions and medications and the role
each may play in contributing to the risk of driving by a patient with
dementia. Assessment of the ability to carry out IADLs may also
add to the determination of risk. Caregivers of patients with at least
a 30% decline in their IADL score were more likely to rate them as
unable to drive safely than other, less impaired patients. Finally, in
some cases of mild dementia, referral may be needed to a driver
rehabilitation specialist for evaluation. Although not standardized,
this evaluation often consists of both off- and on-road testing. The
cost for this assessment can be substantial, and it is typically not
covered by health insurance. Experts recommend such an
evaluation for patients with mild dementia, for those with dementia
for whom new impairment in driving skills is observed, and for those
with significant deficits in cognitive domains such as attention,
executive function, and visuospatial skills. At present, there is no
convincing evidence to support the use of interventions to improve
driving skills and driver safety.
Clinicians must also be aware of the reporting requirements in
their individual jurisdictions. Some states have mandatory reporting
laws for clinicians, but in other states, the decision to report an
unsafe driver with dementia is voluntary. When a clinician has made
the decision to report an unsafe driver to the Department of Motor
Vehicles, he or she must consider the impact as a potential breach
in confidentiality and must weigh and address, in advance when
possible, the consequences from the loss of driving independence.
 Prognosis
Life expectancy after a diagnosis of Alzheimer disease is typically
3–15 years; it may be shorter than previously reported. Other
neurodegenerative dementias, such as dementia with Lewy bodies,
show more rapid decline. Hospice is often appropriate for patients
with end-stage dementia.
 When to Refer
Referral for neuropsychological testing may be helpful in the
following circumstances: to distinguish dementia from depression, to
diagnose dementia in persons of very poor education or very high
premorbid intellect, and to aid diagnosis when impairment is mild.
Ballard C et al; DART-AD Investigators. The dementia
antipsychotic withdrawal trial (DART-AD): long-term follow-up of
a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2009
Feb;8(2):151–7. [PMID: 19138567]
 
Carr DB et al. The older adult driver with cognitive impairment:
“It's a very frustrating life”. JAMA. 2010 April 28;303(16): 1632–
41. [PMID: 20424254]
 
Gill SS et al. Syncope and its consequences in patients with
dementia receiving cholinesterase inhibitors: a population-based
cohort study. Arch Intern Med. 2009 May 11;169(9): 867-73.
[PMID: 19433698]
 
Iverson DJ et al. Practice parameter update: evaluation of and
management of driving risk in dementia; report of the Quality
Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2010 April 20;74(16):1316–24. [PMID: 20385882]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Dementia. JAMA. 2009 Aug
12;302(6):704. [PMID: 19671914]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Mild cognitive impairment.
JAMA. 2009 Jul 22;302(4):452. [PMID: 19622827]
 
2. Depression
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Depressed elders may not admit to depressed mood.
 Depression screening in elders should include a question about
anhedonia.
 
 General Considerations
Depressive symptoms—often related to loss, disease, and life
changes—may be present in more than 25% of elders; however,
the prevalence of major depression is similar in younger and older
populations. Depression is particularly common in hospitalized and
institutionalized elders. Older single men have the highest suicide
rate of any demographic group. Geriatric patients with depression
are more likely to have somatic complaints, less likely to report
depressed mood, and more likely to experience delusions than
younger patients. In addition, depression may be an early symptom
of a neurodegenerative condition such as dementia. Depressed
patients who have other comorbidities, such as congestive heart
failure or diabetes, have worse outcomes than their non-depressed
counterparts.
 Clinical Findings
A simple two-question screen—which consists of asking “During
the past 2 weeks, have you felt down, depressed, or hopeless?”
and “During the past 2 weeks, have you felt little interest or pleasure
in doing things?”—is highly sensitive for detecting major depression
in persons over age 65. Positive responses can be followed up with
more comprehensive, structured interviews, such as the Geriatric
Depression Scale (http://www.stanford.edu/~yesavage/GDS.html)
or the PHQ-9 (http://www.depression-primarycare.org).
Elderly patients with depressive symptoms should be questioned
about medication use, since many drugs (eg, benzodiazepines,
corticosteroids) may contribute to the clinical picture. Similarly,
several medical problems can cause fatigue, lethargy, or hypoactive
delirium, all of which may be mistaken for depression. Particularly
when delirium is the differential diagnosis, laboratory testing should
include a complete blood count; liver, thyroid, and kidney function
tests; serum calcium; urinalysis; and electrocardiogram.
 Treatment
Choice of antidepressant agent in elders is usually based on side
effect profile and cost. Citalopram and sertraline are often used as
first-line agents because of their low side-effect profiles. In general,
fluoxetine is avoided because of its long duration of action and
tricyclic antidepressants are avoided because of their high
anticholinergic side effects. Mirtazapine is often used for patients
with weight loss, anorexia, or insomnia. Venlafaxine can be useful in
patients who also have neuropathic pain. Regardless of the drug
chosen, many experts recommend starting elders at a relatively low
dose, titrating to full dose slowly, and continuing for a longer trial (at
least 9 weeks) before trying a different medication. Problem-solving
therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy can be effective alone or in
combination with medication therapy. Depressed elders may do
better with a collaborative care model that includes socialization and
other support elements than with usual care, and such models may
also improve comorbid conditions. Recurrence of major depression
is common in elders; any elder with a history of depression should
be closely monitored for recurrence and considered for longer-term
maintenance medication therapy.
 When to Refer
Referral should be considered for patients who have not responded
to an initial antidepressant drug trial and for patients with have
symptoms of mania, suicidality, or psychosis.
 When to Admit
Patients who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, or a danger to self
or others should be considered for acute psychiatric hospitalization.
Areán PA et al. Problem-solving therapy and supportive therapy in
older adults with major depression and executive dysfunction. Am
J Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;167(11):1391–8. [PMID: 20516155]
 
Katon WJ et al. Collaborative care for patients with depression
and chronic illnesses. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 30;363(27):
2611–20. [PMID: 21190455]
 
Small GW. Differential diagnoses and assessment of depression in
elderly patients. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;70(12):e47. [PMID:
20141704]
 
3. Delirium
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Rapid onset and fluctuating course.
 Primary deficit in attention rather than memory.
 May be hypoactive or hyperactive.
 Dementia frequently coexists.
 
 General Considerations
Delirium is an acute, fluctuating disturbance of consciousness,
associated with a change in cognition or the development of
perceptual disturbances (see also Chapter 25). It is the
pathophysiologic consequence of an underlying general medical
condition such as infection, coronary ischemia, hypoxemia, or
metabolic derangement. Delirium persists in up to 25% of patients
and is associated with worse clinical outcomes (higher in-hospital
and postdischarge mortality, longer lengths of stay, greater
probability of placement in a nursing facility).
Although the acutely agitated elderly patient often comes to mind
when considering delirium, many episodes are more subtle. Such
quiet, or hypoactive, delirium may only be suspected if one notices
new cognitive slowing or inattention.
Cognitive impairment is an important risk factor for delirium.
Approximately 25% of delirious patients are demented, and 40% of
demented hospitalized patients are delirious. Other risk factors are
male sex, severe illness, hip fracture, fever or hypothermia,
hypotension, malnutrition, polypharmacy and use of psychoactive
medications, sensory impairment, use of restraints, use of
intravenous lines or urinary catheters, metabolic disorders,
depression, and alcoholism.
 Clinical Findings
A key component of a delirium work-up is review of medications
because a large number of drugs, the addition of a new drug, or the
discontinuation of a medication known to cause withdrawal
symptoms, are all associated with the development of delirium.
Laboratory evaluation of most patients should include a complete
blood count, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum
creatinine, glucose, calcium, albumin, liver function studies,
urinalysis, and electrocardiography. In selected cases, serum
magnesium, serum drug levels, arterial blood gas measurements,
blood cultures, chest radiography, urinary toxin screen, head CT
scan, and lumbar puncture may be helpful.
 Prevention
Prevention is the best approach in the management of delirium.
Measures include improving cognition (frequent reorientation,
activities, socialization with family and friends, when possible), sleep
(massage, noise reduction, minimizing interruptions at night),
mobility, vision (visual aids and adaptive equipment), hearing
(portable amplifiers, cerumen disimpaction), and hydration status
(volume repletion).
 Treatment
Management of established episodes of delirium is largely
supportive and includes treatment of any underlying causes,
eliminating unnecessary medications, and avoidance of indwelling
catheters and restraints. Antipsychotic agents (such as haloperidol,
0.5–1 mg, or quetiapine, 25 mg, at bedtime or twice daily) are
considered the medication of choice when drug treatment of
delirium is necessary. In emergency situations, starting haloperidol at
0.5 mg orally or intramuscularly and repeating every 30 minutes until
the agitation is controlled may be necessary, but such treatment is
often followed by prolonged sedation or other complications. Other
medications (eg, trazodone, donepezil, mood stabilizers) have also
been used, but evidence in support of these approaches is weak.
Most episodes of delirium clear in a matter of days after
correction of the precipitant, but some patients suffer episodes of
longer duration, and a few never return to their former baseline level
of functioning. These individuals merit closer follow-up for the
development of dementia if not already diagnosed.
 When to Refer
If an initial evaluation does not reveal the cause of delirium or if
entities other than delirium are in the differential diagnosis, referral to
a neuropsychologist, neurologist, or geropsychiatrist should be
considered.
 When to Admit
Patients with delirium of unknown cause should be admitted for an
expedited work-up if consistent with the patient's goals of care.
Breitbart W et al. Agitation and delirium at the end of life: “We
couldn't manage him”. JAMA. 2008 Dec 24;300(24):2898-910.
[PMID: 19109118]
 
Fong TG et al. Delirium in elderly adults: diagnosis, prevention, and
treatment. Nat Rev Neurol. 2009 Apr;5(4):210–20. [PMID:
19347026]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Delirium. JAMA. 2008 Dec
24;300(24):2936. [PMID: 19109124]
 
4. Immobility
Although common in older people, reduced mobility is never normal
and is often treatable if its causes are identified. Bed rest is an
important cause of hospital-induced functional decline. Among
hospitalized medical patients over 70, about 10% experience a
decline in function, much of which results from preventable
reductions in mobility.
The hazards of bed rest in older adults are multiple, serious,
quick to develop, and slow to reverse. Deconditioning of the
cardiovascular system occurs within days and involves fluid shifts,
decreased cardiac output, decreased peak oxygen uptake, and
increased resting heart rate. More striking changes occur in skeletal
muscle, with loss of contractile velocity and strength. Pressure
sores, deep venous thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism are
additional serious risks. Within days after being confined to bed, the
risk of postural hypotension, falls, and skin breakdown rises rapidly
in the older patient. Moreover, recovery from these changes usually
takes weeks to months.
 Prevention & Treatment
When immobilization cannot be avoided, several measures can be
used to minimize its consequences. Skin, particularly areas over
pressure points, should be inspected at least daily. If the patient is
unable to shift position, staff should do so every 2 hours. To
minimize cardiovascular deconditioning, patients should be
positioned as close to the upright position as possible, several times
daily. To reduce the risks of contracture and weakness, range of
motion and strengthening exercises should be started immediately
and continued as long as the patient is in bed. Whenever possible,
patients should assist with their own positioning, transferring, and
self-care. As long as the patient remains immobilized, antithrombotic
measures should be used if that is consistent with the patient's goals
of care.
Avoiding restraints and discontinuing invasive devices
(intravenous lines, urinary catheters) may increase an elderly
patient's prospects for early mobility. Graduated ambulation should
begin as soon as it is feasible. Advice from a physical therapist is
often helpful both before and after discharge. Prior to discharge,
physical therapists can recommend appropriate exercises and
assistive devices; after discharge, they can recommend safety
modifications and maintenance exercises.
5. Falls & Gait Disorders
About one-third of people over age 65 fall each year, and the
frequency of falls increases markedly with advancing age. About
10% of falls result in serious injuries such as fractures, soft tissue
injuries, and traumatic brain injuries. Complications from falls are
the leading cause of death from injury in persons over age 65. Hip
fractures are common precursors to functional impairment, nursing
home placement, and death. Furthermore, fear of falling may lead
some elders to restrict their activities.
Every older person should be asked about falls; many will not
volunteer such information. Assessment of patients who fall should
include postural blood pressure and pulse, thorough cardiac
examination, evaluations of strength, range of motion, cognition, and
proprioception, and examination of feet and footwear. A thorough
gait assessment should be performed in all older people. Gait and
balance can be readily assessed by the “Up and Go Test,” in which
the patient is asked to stand up from a sitting position without use of
hands, walk 10 feet, turn around, walk back, and sit down. Patients
who take < 10 seconds are usually normal, patients who take
longer than 30 seconds tend to need assistance with many mobility
tasks, and those in between tend to vary widely with respect to gait,
balance, and function. The ability to recognize common patterns of
gait disorders is an extremely useful clinical skill to develop.
Examples of gait abnormalities and their causes are listed in Table
4–3.
 Causes of Falls
Balance and ambulation require a complex interplay of cognitive,
neuromuscular, and cardiovascular function. With age, balance
mechanisms can become compromised and postural sway
increases. These changes predispose the older person to a fall when
challenged by an additional insult to any of these systems.
A fall may be the clinical manifestation of an occult problem, such
as pneumonia or myocardial infarction, but much more commonly
falls are due to the interaction between an impaired patient and an
environmental risk factor. Falls in older people are rarely due to a
single cause, and effective intervention entails a comprehensive
assessment of the patient's intrinsic deficits (usually diseases and
medications), the activity engaged in at the time of the fall, and
environmental obstacles.
Intrinsic deficits are those that impair sensory input, judgment,
blood pressure regulation, reaction time, and balance and gait.
Dizziness may be closely related to the deficits associated with falls
and gait abnormalities. While it may be impossible to isolate a sole
“cause” or a “cure” for falls, gait abnormalities, or dizziness, it is
often possible to identify and ameliorate some of the underlying
contributory conditions and improve the patient's overall function.
As for most geriatric conditions, medication use is one of the
most common, significant, and reversible causes of falling. A meta-
analysis found that sedative/hypnotics, antidepressants, and
benzodiazepines were the classes of drugs most likely to be
associated with falling. The use of multiple medications
simultaneously has also been associated with an increased fall risk.
Other often overlooked but treatable contributors include postural
hypotension (including post-prandial, which peaks 30–60 minutes
after a meal), insomnia, use of multifocal lenses, and urinary
urgency.
Since most falls occur in or around the home, a visit by a visiting
nurse, physical therapist, or health care provider reaps substantial
benefits in identifying environmental obstacles and is generally
reimbursed by third-party payers, including Medicare.
 
Table 4–3. Evaluation of gait abnormalities.
 
 
 
Gait
Abnormality
Possible Cause
Inability to
stand without
use of hands
Deconditioning
Myopathy (hyperthyroidism, alcohol, statin-
induced)
Hip or knee pain
Unsteadiness
upon
standing
Orthostatic hypotension
Balance problem (peripheral neuropathy,
vision problem, vestibular, other central
nervous system causes)
Generalized weakness
Stagger with
eyes closed
Often indicates that vision is compensating
for another deficit
Short steps
Weakness
Parkinson disease or related condition
Asymmetry
Cerebrovascular accident
Focal pain or arthritis
Wide-based
gait
Fear, balance problems
Flexed knees Contractures, quadriceps weakness
Slow gait
Fear of falling, weakness, deconditioning,
peripheral vascular disease, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, congestive
heart failure, angina
 
Table 4–4. Fall risk factors and targeted interventions.
 
 
 
Risk Factor
Targeted Intervention
Postural hypotension (>
20 mm Hg drop in
systolic blood pressure,
or systolic blood
pressure > 90 mm Hg)
Behavioral recommendations,
such as hand clenching,
elevation of head of bed;
discontinuation or substitution of
high-risk medications
Use of benzodiazepine
or sedative-hypnotic
agent
Education about sleep hygiene;
discontinuation or substitution of
medications
Use of multiple
prescription medications Review of medications
Environmental hazards
Appropriate changes;
installation of safety equipment
(eg, grab bars)
Gait impairment
Gait training, assistive devices,
balance or strengthening
exercises
Impairment in transfer or
balance
Balance exercises, training in
transfers, environmental
alterations (eg, grab bars)
Impairment in leg or arm
muscle strength or limb
range of motion
Exercise with resistance bands
or putty, with graduated
increases in resistance
 Complications of Falls
The most common fractures resulting from falls are of the wrist, hip,
and vertebrae. There is a high mortality rate (approximately 20% in
1 year) in elderly women with hip fractures, particularly if they were
debilitated prior to the time of the fracture.
Fear of falling again is a common, serious, but treatable factor in
the elderly person's loss of confidence and independence. Referral
to a physical therapist for gait training with special devices is often
all that is required.
Chronic subdural hematoma is an easily overlooked complication
of falls that must be considered in any elderly patient presenting with
new neurologic symptoms or signs. Headache or known history of
trauma may both be absent.
Patients who are unable to get up from a fall are at risk for
dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, pressure sores, rhabdomyolysis,
and hypothermia.
 Prevention & Management
The risk of falling and consequent injury, disability, and potential
institutionalization can be reduced by modifying those factors
outlined 
in Table 4–4. Emphasis is placed on treating all
contributory medical conditions (eg, cataracts), minimizing
environmental hazards, and eliminating medications where the harms
may outweigh the benefits—particularly those that induce
orthostasis 
and 
parkinsonism 
(eg, 
α-blockers, 
nitrates,
antipsychotics). Also important are strength, balance, and gait
training as well as screening and treatment for osteoporosis, if
present. Falls and fractures may be prevented by prescribing
vitamin D at a dose of 800 international units daily or higher.
Assistive devices, such as canes and walkers, are useful for many
older adults but are often used incorrectly. Canes should be used on
the “good” side. The height of walkers and canes should generally
be about the level of the wrist. Physical therapists are invaluable in
assessing the need for an assistive device, selecting the best device,
and training a patient in its correct use.
Patients with repeated falls are often reassured by the availability
of phones at floor level, a portable phone, or a lightweight radio call
system. Their therapy should also include training in techniques for
arising after a fall. The clinical utility of anatomically designed
external hip protectors in reducing fractures is currently uncertain.
 When to Refer
Patients with a recent history of falls should be referred for physical
therapy, eye examination, and home safety evaluation.
 When to Admit
If the patient has new falls that are unexplained, particularly in
combination with a change in the physical examination,
hospitalization should be considered.
Chang HJ et al. JAMA patient page. Falls and older adults.
JAMA. 2010 Jan 20;303(3):288. [PMID: 20085959]
 
Michael YL et al. Primary care-relevant interventions to prevent
falling in older adults: a systematic evidence review for the US
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Dec
21;153(12):815–25. [PMID: 21173416]
 
Tinetti ME et al. The patient who falls: “It's always a trade-off”.
JAMA. 2010 Jan 20;303(3):258-66. [PMID: 20085954]
 
Woolcott JC et al. Meta-analysis of the impact of 9 medication
classes on falls in elderly persons. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Nov
23;169(21):1952-60. [PMID: 19933955]
 
6. Urinary Incontinence
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Involuntary loss of urine.
 Stress incontinence: leakage of urine upon coughing, sneezing, or
standing.
 Urge incontinence: urgency and inability to delay urination.
 Overflow incontinence: may have variable presentation.
 
General Considerations
Incontinence in older adults is common, and interventions can
improve most patients. Many patients fail to tell their providers
about it. A simple question about involuntary leakage of urine is a
reasonable screen: “Do you have a problem with urine leaks or
accidents?”
 Classification
Because continence requires adequate mobility, mentation,
motivation, and manual dexterity, problems outside the bladder
often result in geriatric incontinence. In general, the authors of this
chapter find it useful to differentiate between “transient” or
“potentially reversible” causes of incontinence and more
“established” causes.
A. Transient Causes
Use of the mnemonic “DIAPPERS” may be helpful in remembering
the categories of transient incontinence.
1. Delirium—A clouded sensorium impedes recognition of both
the need to void and the location of the nearest toilet. Delirium is the
most common cause of incontinence in hospitalized patients; once it
clears, incontinence usually resolves.
2. Infection—Symptomatic urinary tract infection commonly
causes or contributes to urgency and incontinence. Asymptomatic
bacteriuria does not.
3. Atrophic urethritis or vaginitis—Atrophic urethritis can
usually be diagnosed presumptively by the presence of vaginal
mucosal telangiectasia, petechiae, erosions, erythema, or friability.
Urethral inflammation, if symptomatic, may contribute to
incontinence in some women. Some experts suggest a trial of topical
estrogen in these cases.
4. Pharmaceuticals—Drugs are one of the most common causes
of transient incontinence. Typical offending agents include potent
diuretics, anticholinergics, psychotropics, opioid analgesics, α-
blockers (in women), α-agonists (in men), and calcium channel
blockers.
5. Psychological factors—Severe depression with psychomotor
retardation may impede the ability or motivation to reach a toilet.
6. Excess urinary output—Excess urinary output may overwhelm
the ability of an older person to reach a toilet in time. In addition to
diuretics, common causes include excess fluid intake; metabolic
abnormalities (eg, hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia, diabetes
insipidus); and disorders associated with peripheral edema, with its
associated heavy nocturia when previously dependent legs assume a
horizontal position in bed.
7. Restricted mobility—(See Immobility section, above.) If
mobility cannot be improved, access to a urinal or commode (eg, at
the bedside) may improve continence.
8. Stool impaction—This is a common cause of urinary
incontinence in hospitalized or immobile patients. Although the
mechanism is still unknown, a clinical clue to its presence is the
onset of both urinary and fecal incontinence. Disimpaction usually
restores urinary continence.
B. Established Causes
Causes of established incontinence should be addressed after the
transient causes have been uncovered and managed appropriately.
Risk factors for incontinence include older age, female sex,
increased body mass index, and limited physical activity.
1. Detrusor overactivity (urge incontinence)—Detrusor
overactivity refers to uninhibited bladder contractions that cause
leakage. It is the most common cause of established geriatric
incontinence, accounting for two-thirds of cases, and is usually
idiopathic. Women will complain of urinary leakage after the onset
of an intense urge to urinate that cannot be forestalled. In men, the
symptoms are similar, but detrusor overactivity commonly coexists
with urethral obstruction from benign prostatic hyperplasia. Because
detrusor overactivity also may be due to bladder stones or tumor,
the abrupt onset of otherwise unexplained urge incontinence—
especially if accompanied by perineal or suprapubic discomfort or
sterile hematuria—should be investigated by cystoscopy and
cytologic examination of a urine specimen.
2. Urethral incompetence (stress incontinence)—Urethral
incompetence is the second most common cause of established
urinary incontinence in older women. Stress incontinence is most
commonly seen in men after radical prostatectomy. Stress
incontinence is characterized by instantaneous leakage of urine in
response to a stress maneuver. It commonly coexists with detrusor
overactivity. Typically, urinary loss occurs with laughing, coughing,
or lifting heavy objects. Leakage is worse or occurs only during the
day, unless another abnormality (eg, detrusor over-activity) is also
present. To test for stress incontinence, have the patient relax her
perineum and cough vigorously (a single cough) while standing with
a full bladder. Instantaneous leakage indicates stress incontinence if
urinary retention has been excluded by postvoiding residual
determination using ultrasound. A delay of several seconds or
persistent leakage suggests that the problem is instead caused by an
uninhibited bladder contraction induced by coughing.
3. Urethral obstruction—Urethral obstruction (due to prostatic
enlargement, urethral stricture, bladder neck contracture, or
prostatic cancer) is a common cause of established incontinence in
older men but is rare in older women. It can present as dribbling
incontinence after voiding, urge incontinence due to detrusor
overactivity (which coexists in two-thirds of cases), or overflow
incontinence due to urinary retention. Renal ultrasound is required to
exclude hydronephrosis in men whose postvoiding residual urine
exceeds 150 mL.
4. Detrusor underactivity (overflow incontinence)—Detrusor
underactivity is the least common cause of incontinence. It may be
idiopathic or due to sacral lower motor nerve dysfunction. When it
causes incontinence, detrusor underactivity is associated with
urinary frequency, nocturia, and frequent leakage of small amounts.
The elevated postvoiding residual urine (generally over 450 mL)
distinguishes it from detrusor overactivity and stress incontinence,
but only urodynamic testing differentiates it from urethral obstruction
in men. Such testing usually is not required in women, in whom
obstruction is rarely present.
 Treatment
A. Transient Causes
Each identified transient cause should be treated regardless of
whether an established cause coexists. For patients with urinary
retention induced by an anticholinergic agent, discontinuation of the
drug should first be considered. If this is not feasible, substituting a
less anticholinergic agent (eg, sertraline instead of desipramine for
depression) may be useful.
B. Established Causes
1. Detrusor overactivity—The cornerstone of treatment is
bladder training. Patients start by voiding on a schedule based on
the shortest interval recorded on a bladder record. They then
gradually lengthen the interval between voids by 30 minutes each
week using relaxation techniques to postpone the urge to void.
Lifestyle modifications, including weight loss and caffeine reduction,
may also improve incontinence symptoms. For cognitively impaired
patients and nursing home residents who are unable to manage on
their own, timed and prompted voiding initiated by care-givers is
effective.
Pelvic floor muscle (“Kegel”) exercises, with or without
biofeedback, can reduce the frequency of incontinence episodes
when performed correctly and sustained. If behavioral approaches
prove insufficient, drug therapy with antimuscarinic agents may
provide additional benefit. The two oral drugs for which there is the
most experience are tolterodine and oxybutynin. Available regimens
of these drugs follow: short-acting tolterodine, 1–2 mg twice a day;
long-acting tolterodine, 2–4 mg daily; short-acting oxybutynin, 2.5–
5 mg twice or three times a day; long-acting oxybutynin, 5–15 mg
daily; and oxybutynin transdermal patch, 3.9 mg per day applied
twice weekly. All of these agents can produce delirium, dry mouth,
or urinary retention; long-acting preparations may be better
tolerated. Agents such as fesoterodine (4-8 mg orally once daily),
trospium chloride (20 mg orally once or twice daily), darifenacin
(7.5–15 mg orally daily), and solifenacin (5–10 mg orally daily)
appear to have similar efficacy and have not been clearly
demonstrated to be better tolerated than the older agents in long-
acting form.
The combination of behavioral therapy and antimuscarinics
appears to be more effective than either alone although one study in
a group of younger women showed that adding behavioral therapy
to individually titrated doses of extended-release oxybutynin was no
better than drug treatment alone.
In men with both benign prostatic hyperplasia and detrusor
overactivity and who have postvoid residual volumes of 150 mL or
less, an antimuscarinic agent added to an α-agonist may provide
additional relief of lower urinary tract symptoms.
2. Urethral incompetence (stress incontinence)—Lifestyle
modifications, including limiting caffeine intake and timed voiding,
may be helpful for some women, particularly women with mixed
stress/urge incontinence. Pelvic floor muscle exercises are effective
for women with mild to moderate stress incontinence; the exercises
can be combined, if necessary, with biofeedback, electrical
stimulation, or vaginal cones. Instruct the patient to pull in the pelvic
floor muscles and hold for 6-10 seconds and to perform three sets
of 8-12 contractions daily. Benefits may not be seen for 6 weeks.
Pessaries or vaginal cones may be helpful in some women but
should be prescribed by providers who are experienced with using
these modalities.
Although a last resort, surgery is the most effective treatment for
stress incontinence, resulting in a cure rate as high as 96% even in
older women. Drug therapy is limited. Clinical trials have shown that
duloxetine, a serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor,
reduces stress incontinence episodes in women but efficacy in older
women remains unknown. It is approved for use for this indication
in some countries but not the United States. Side effects, including
nausea, are common.
3. Urethral obstruction—Surgical decompression is the most
effective treatment for obstruction, especially in the setting of urinary
retention due to benign prostatic hyperplasia. A variety of less
invasive techniques make decompression feasible even for frail men.
For the nonoperative candidate with urinary retention, intermittent
or indwelling catheterization is used. For a man with prostatic
obstruction who does not require or desire immediate surgery,
treatment with α-blocking agents (eg, terazosin, 1–10 mg daily;
prazosin, 1–5 mg orally twice daily; tamsulosin, 0.4–0.8 mg daily)
can improve symptoms and delay obstruction. Finasteride, 5 mg
daily, can provide additional benefit to an α-blocking agent in men
with an enlarged prostate.
4. Detrusor underactivity—For the patient with a poorly
contractile bladder, augmented voiding techniques (eg, double
voiding, suprapubic pressure) often prove effective. If further
emptying is needed, intermittent or indwelling catheterization is the
only option. Antibiotics should be used only for symptomatic upper
urinary tract infection or as prophylaxis against recurrent
symptomatic infections in a patient using intermittent catheterization;
they should not be used as prophylaxis with an indwelling catheter.
 When to Refer
 
•    Men with urinary obstruction who do not respond to
medical therapy should be referred to a urologist.
•    Women who do not respond to medical and behavioral
therapy should be referred to a urogynecologist or
urologist.
Burgio KL et al. Combined behavioral and individualized drug
therapy versus individualized drug therapy alone for urge urinary
incontinence in women. J Urol. 2010 Aug;184(2): 598-603.
[PMID: 20639023]
 
Fink HA et al. Treatment interventions in nursing home residents
with urinary incontinence: a systemic review of randomized trials.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83(12):1332-43. [PMID: 19046552]
 
Goode PS et al. Incontinence in older women. JAMA. 2010 Jun
2;303(21):2172–81. [PMID: 20516418]
 
7. Undernutrition & Frailty
 General Considerations
Undernutrition affects substantial numbers of elderly. The degree of
unintended weight loss that deserves evaluation is not agreed upon,
although a reasonable threshold is loss of 5% of body weight in 1
month or 10% of body weight in 6 months.
“Frailty” is a term that may be clinically useful for describing a
subgroup of patients—almost always elders—who have delicate
health, are not robust, and have decreased functional reserve.
Although clinicians generally agree on most of the clinical
characteristics that define the frailty syndrome, there is not yet a
consensus definition of frailty. Frailty may be accompanied by
physiologic changes in inflammatory and neuroendocrine systems.
The label of “failure to thrive” is typically applied when some
triggering event—loss of social support, a bout of depression or
pneumonia, the addition of a new medication—pulls a struggling
elderly person below the threshold of successful independent living.
 Clinical Findings
Useful laboratory and radiologic studies for the patient with weight
loss include complete blood count, serum chemistries (including
glucose, TSH, creatinine, calcium), urinalysis, and chest radiograph.
These studies are intended to uncover an occult metabolic or
neoplastic cause but are not exhaustive. Exploring the patient's
social situation, cognition, mood, and dental health are at least as
important as looking for a purely medical cause of weight loss.
There is not yet a standard assessment tool for frailty. However,
the most widely recognized definition of frailty requires that the
patient exhibit at least three of the five following clinical criteria: (1)
slow gait speed; (2) low hand grip strength; (3) exhaustion; (4)
weight loss; and (5) low energy expenditure. Few physicians screen
for the syndrome, since an evidence-based treatment for frailty does
not yet exist. Patients who meet criteria for the frailty syndrome are
at increased risk for poor clinical outcomes.
 Treatment
Oral nutritional supplements of 200–1000 kcal/d can increase
weight and improve outcomes in malnourished hospitalized elders.
Megestrol acetate as an appetite stimulant has not been shown to
increase body mass or lengthen life in the elderly population. For
those who have lost the ability to feed themselves, assiduous hand
feeding may allow maintenance of weight. Although artificial
nutrition and hydration (“tube feeding”) may seem a more
convenient alternative, it deprives the patient of the taste and texture
of food as well as the social milieu typically associated with
mealtime; before this option is chosen, the patient or his or her
surrogate will wish to review the benefits and burdens of the
treatment in light of overall goals of care. If the patient makes
repeated attempts to pull out the tube during a trial of artificial
nutrition, the treatment burden becomes substantial, and the utility of
tube feeding should be reconsidered. Although commonly used,
there is no evidence that tube feeding prolongs life in patients with
end-stage dementia.
The ideal strategies for preventing the frailty syndrome are
unknown. At present, treatment is largely supportive, multifactorial,
and individualized based on patient goals, life expectancy, and
comorbidities. Sometimes, transitioning a patient to a palliative
approach or a hospice program is the most appropriate clinical
intervention.
Abellan van Kan G et al. The assessment of frailty in older adults.
Clin Geriatr Med. 2010 May;26(2):275–86. [PMID: 20497846]
 
Rocchiccioli JT et al. Revisiting geriatric failure to thrive: a complex
and compelling clinical condition. J Gerontol Nurs. 2009
Jan;35(1):18–24. [PMID: 19227099]
 
8. Pressure Ulcers
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Examine at-risk patients on admission to hospital and daily
thereafter.
 Pressure ulcers should be described by one of six stages:
 
  •  Blanchable hyperemia (stage I).
  •  Extension through epidermis (stage II).
  •  Full thickness skin loss (stage III).
  •  Full thickness wounds with extension into muscle,
bone, or supporting structures (stage IV).
  •  If eschar or slough overlies the wound, the wound is
unstageable.
  •  Suspected deep tissue injury is an area of discolored
or blistered skin.
 
 
 General Considerations
The majority of pressure ulcers develop during a hospital stay for an
acute illness. Incident rates range from 3% to 30% and vary
according to patient characteristics. The primary risk factor for
pressure ulcers is immobility. Other contributing risk factors include
reduced sensory perception, moisture (urinary and fecal
incontinence), poor nutritional status, and friction and shear forces.
In 2007, the National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel added two
stages to the original four pressure ulcer stages: suspected deep
tissue injury and unstageable. Ulcers in which the base is covered
by slough (yellow, tan, gray, green or brown) and/or eschar (tan,
brown or black) are considered unstageable. Suspected deep tissue
injury is an area of purple or maroon discolored intact skin or
blood-filled blister. The area may be preceded by tissue that is
painful, firm, mushy, boggy, warmer or cooler compared with
adjacent tissue.
A number of risk assessment instruments including the Braden
Scale and the Norton score can be used to assess the risk of
developing pressure ulcers; both have reasonable performance
characteristics. These instruments can be used to identify the highest
risk patients who might benefit most from scarce resources such as
mattresses that reduce or relieve pressure.
As of October 2008, Medicare will no longer reimburse for
hospital-acquired pressure ulcers. Pressure ulcers present on
admission will qualify for a higher reimbursement. The medical
record must contain documentation of pressure ulcers present on
admission, and coders are required to use physician documentation
as the basis for coding and reporting; therefore, physicians should
include a full skin assessment on every admission history and
physical.
 Prevention
Using specialized support surfaces (including mattresses, beds, and
cushions), patient repositioning, optimizing nutritional status, and
moisturizing sacral skin are strategies that have been shown to
reduce pressure ulcers. For moderate- to high-risk patients,
mattresses or overlays that reduce tissue pressure below a standard
mattress appear to be superior to standard mattresses. The
literature comparing specific products is sparse and inconclusive.
 Evaluation
Evaluation of pressure ulcers should include patient's risk factors
and goals of care, wound stage, size, depth, presence or absence of
exudate, type of exudate present, appearance of the wound bed,
and whether there appears to be surrounding infection, sinus
tracking, or cellulitis. In poorly healing or atypical pressure ulcers,
biopsy should be performed to rule out malignancy or other less
common lesions such as pyoderma gangrenosum.
 Treatment
Treatment is aimed toward removing necrotic debris and
maintaining a moist wound bed that will promote healing and
formation of granulation tissue. The type of dressing that is
recommended depends on the location and depth of the wound,
whether necrotic tissue or dead space is present, and the amount of
exudate (Table 4–5). Pressure-reducing devices (eg, air-fluid beds
and low air loss beds) are associated with improved healing rates.
Although poor nutritional status is a risk factor for the development
of pressure ulcers, the results of trials of nutritional supplementation
in the treatment of pressure ulcers have been disappointing.
Providers can become easily overwhelmed by the array of
products available for treatment of established pressure ulcers.
Most institutions should designate a wound care expert or wound
care team to select a streamlined wound care product line that has
simple guidelines. In a patient with end-stage disease who is
receiving palliative care, appropriate treatment might be directed
toward comfort (including minimizing dressing changes and odors)
rather than efforts directed at healing.
 
Table 4–5. Treatment of pressure ulcers.
 
 
 
Ulcer Type
Dressing Type and Considerations
Stage I and
suspected
deep tissue
injury
Polyurethane film
Hydrocolloid wafer
Semipermeable foam dressing
Stage II
Hydrocolloid wafers
Semipermeable foam dressing
Polyurethane film
Stage III/IV
For highly exudative wounds, use highly
absorptive dressing or packing, such as
calcium alginate
Wounds with necrotic debris must be
debrided
Debridement can be autolytic, mechanical
(wet to moist), or surgical
Shallow, clean wounds can be dressed
with hydrocolloid wafers, semipermeable
foam, or polyurethane film
Deep wounds can be packed with gauze;
if the wound is deep and highly exudative,
an absorptive packing should be used
Heel ulcer
Do not remove eschar on heel ulcers
because it can help promote healing
(eschar in other locations should be
debrided)
Unstageable Debride before deciding on further therapy
 Complications
Pressure ulcers are associated with increased mortality rates,
although a causal link has not been proven. Complications include
pain, cellulitis, osteomyelitis, systemic sepsis, and prolongation of
lengths of stay in the inpatient or nursing home setting.
 When to Refer
Ulcers that are large or nonhealing should be referred to a plastic or
general surgeon or dermatologist for biopsy, debridement, and
possible skin grafting.
 When to Admit
Patients with pressure ulcers should be admitted if the primary
residence is unable to provide adequate wound care or pressure
reduction, if the wound is infected, or for complex or surgical
wound care.
Langemo DK et al; National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel.
Pressure ulcers in individuals receiving palliative care: a National
Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel white paper. Adv Skin Wound
Care. 2010 Feb;23(2):59–72. [PMID: 20087072]
 
Lohi J et al. Local dressings for pressure ulcers: what is the best
tool to apply in primary and secondary care? Wound Care. 2010
Mar;19(3):123–7. [PMID: 20559190]
 
National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel Website:
http://www.npuap.org/pr2.htm
 
Reddy M et al. Treatment of pressure ulcers: a systematic review.
JAMA. 2008 Dec 10;300(22):2647–62. [PMID: 19066385]
 
9. Pharmacotherapy & Polypharmacy
There are several reasons for the greater incidence of iatrogenic
drug reactions in the elderly population, the most important of which
is the high number of medications that elders take. Drug metabolism
is often impaired in this group due to a decrease in glomerular
filtration rate as well as reduced hepatic clearance. The latter is due
to decreased activity of microsomal enzymes and reduced hepatic
perfusion with aging. The volume of distribution of drugs is also
affected. Since older adults have a decrease in total body water and
a relative increase in body fat, water-soluble drugs become more
concentrated and fat-soluble drugs have longer half-lives. Older
individuals often have varying responses to a given serum drug level.
Thus, they are more sensitive to some drugs (eg, opioids) and less
sensitive to others (eg, β-blocking agents).
 Precautions in Administering Drugs
Nonpharmacologic interventions can often be a first-line alternative
to drugs (eg, diet for mild hypertension or type 2 diabetes mellitus).
Therapy is begun with less than the usual adult dosage and the
dosage increased slowly, consistent with its pharmacokinetics in
older patients. However, age-related changes in drug distribution
and clearance are variable among individuals, and some require full
doses. After determining acceptable measures of success and
toxicity, the dose is increased until one or the other is reached.
Despite the importance of beginning new drugs in a slow,
measured fashion, all too often an inadequate trial is attempted (in
terms of duration or dose) before discontinuation. Antidepressants,
in particular, are frequently stopped before therapeutic dosages are
reached.
A number of simple interventions can help improve adherence to
the prescribed medical regimen. When possible, the provider should
keep the dosing schedule simple, the number of pills low, the
medication changes as infrequent as possible, and encourage the
patient to use a single pharmacy. Pillboxes or “medi-sets” help
some patients with adherence.
Having the patient or caregiver bring in all medications at each
visit can help the provider perform medication reconciliation and
reinforce reasons for drug use, dosage, frequency of administration,
and possible adverse effects. Medication reconciliation is
particularly important if the patient sees multiple providers.
Although serum drug levels may be useful for monitoring certain
drugs with narrow therapeutic windows (eg, digoxin), toxicity can
still occur even with “normal” therapeutic levels of many drugs. The
risk of toxicity goes up with the number of medications prescribed.
Certain combinations of medications (eg, warfarin and many types
of antibiotics, digoxin and clarithromycin, angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors and NSAIDs) are particularly likely to cause
drug-drug interactions, and should be watched carefully.
Trials of individual drug discontinuation should be considered
(including sedative-hypnotics, antipsychotic medications, digoxin,
proton pump inhibitors, NSAIDs) when the original indication is
unclear, the goals of care have changed, or the patient might be
experiencing side effects.
The Medicare prescription drug benefit in the United States
certainly helps many elders with burdensome prescription drug
costs. Passage of the Affordable Care Act simplifies rules for drug
coverage eligibility. However, its benefits are complex and difficult
to understand, particularly for those elders with limited cognition,
literacy, and Internet access. Reforms are being debated in
Congress that could alter the benefits. Information is available at
www.medicare.gov.
 When to Refer
Patients with poor or uncertain adherence may benefit from referral
to a pharmacist or a home health nurse.
Onder G et al. Development and validation of a score to assess
risk of adverse drug reactions among in-hospital patients 65 years
or older: the GerontoNet ADR risk score. Arch Intern Med. 2010
Jul 12;170(13):1142–8. [PMID: 20625022]
 
Steinman MA et al. Managing medications in clinically complex
elders: “There's got to be a happy medium”. JAMA. 2010 Oct
13;304(14):1592–601. [PMID: 20940385]
 
10. Vision Impairment
Although visual loss is not severe in many elders, visual impairment
is an independent risk factor for falls; it also has a significant impact
on quality of life. The prevalence of serious and correctable visual
disorders in elders is sufficient to warrant a complete eye
examination by an ophthalmologist or optometrist annually or
biannually for most elders. Many patients with visual loss benefit
from a referral to a low vision program, and primary care providers
should not assume that an ophthalmologist or optometrist will
automatically make this referral.
Rosenberg EA et al. The visually impaired patient. Am Fam
Physician. 2008 May 15;77(10):1431–6. [PMID: 18533377]
 
11. Hearing Impairment
Over one-third of persons over age 65 and half of those over age
85 have some hearing loss. This deficit is correlated with social
isolation and depression. A reasonable screen is to ask patients if
they have hearing impairment. Those who answer “yes” should be
referred for audiometry. Those who answer “no” may still have
hearing impairment and can be screened by a handheld audioscope
or the whispered voice test. The whispered voice test is
administered by standing 2 feet behind the subject, whispering three
random numbers, and simultaneously rubbing the external auditory
canal of the non-tested ear to mask the sound. If the patient is
unable to identify all three numbers, the test should be repeated with
different numbers, and if still abnormal, a referral should be made to
audiometry. To determine the degree to which hearing impairment
interferes with functioning, the provider may ask if the patient
becomes frustrated when conversing with family members, is
embarrassed when meeting new people, has difficulty watching TV,
or has problems understanding conversations. Caregivers or family
members often have important information on the impact of hearing
loss on the patient's social interactions.
Compliance with hearing amplification can be a challenge
because of the stigma associated with hearing aid use as well as the
cost of such devices, which are not paid for under most Medicare
plans. Special telephones, amplifiers for the television, and many
other devices are available to aid the person with hearing loss.
Portable amplifiers are pager-sized units with earphones
attached; they can be purchased inexpensively at many electronics
stores and can be useful in health care settings for improving
communication with hearing impaired patients. In general, facing the
patient and speaking slowly in a low tone is a more effective
communication strategy than yelling.
Begai A et al. Does this patient have hearing impairment? JAMA.
2006 Jan 25;295(4):416–28. [PMID: 16434632]
 
12. Elder Abuse
According to the best available estimates, between 1 and 2 million
Americans age 65 or older have been injured, exploited, or
otherwise mistreated by someone on whom they depended for care
or protection. Neglect, both by self and caregiver, are the most
common forms of abuse, followed by financial and emotional abuse.
Clues to the possibility of elder abuse include behavioral changes
in the presence of the caregiver, delays between occurrence of
injuries and sought treatment, inconsistencies between an observed
injury and associated explanation, lack of appropriate clothing or
hygiene, and not filling prescriptions. Many elders with cognitive
impairment become targets of financial abuse. Both elder abuse and
self-neglect are associated with an increased risk of mortality.
 
Table 4–6. Questions that may elicit a history of elder abuse.
 
1. Has anyone ever hurt you?
2. Has anyone ever touched you without your consent?
3. Has anyone ever made you do things you didn't want to
do?
4. Has anyone taken anything of yours without asking?
5. Has anyone ever scolded or threatened you?
6. Have you signed any papers that you didn't understand?
7. Is there anyone at home you are fearful of?
8. Are you alone much?
9. Has anyone ever refused to help you take care of
yourself when you needed help?
It is helpful to observe and talk with every older person alone for
at least part of a visit in order to question directly about possible
abuse and neglect (Table 4–6). The laws in most states require
health care providers to report suspected abuse or neglect. Adult
protective services (APS) agencies are available in all 50 states to
assist in cases of suspected elder abuse. The Web site for the
National Center for Elder Abuse is http://www.ncea.aoa.gov.
Dong X et al. Elder self-neglect and abuse and mortality risk in a
community-dwelling population. JAMA. 2009 Aug 5;302(5): 517-
26. [PMID: 19654386]
 
Hildreth CJ et al. JAMA patient page. Elder abuse. JAMA. 2009
Aug 5;302(5):588. [PMID: 19654394]
 
 
 
Palliative Care & Pain
Management
Michael W. Rabow, MD 
Steven Z. Pantilat, MD
DEFINITION & SCOPE OF
PALLIATIVE CARE
 
The focus of palliative care is to improve symptoms and quality of
life at any stage of illness, utilizing the expertise of an
interdisciplinary team. At the end of life, palliative care often
becomes the only focus of care, but palliative care alongside cure-
focused treatment is beneficial throughout the course of serious
chronic and terminal illnesses, regardless of prognosis, whether the
goal is to cure disease or manage chronic illness.
The World Health Organization defines palliative care as “an
approach that improves the quality of life of patients and their
families facing the problem associated with life-threatening illness,
through the prevention and relief of suffering by means of early
identification and impeccable assessment and treatment of pain and
other problems, physical, psychosocial and spiritual.” Palliative care
commonly involves management of pain and other symptoms,
including dyspnea, nausea and vomiting, constipation, and agitation;
emotional distress, such as depression, anxiety, and interpersonal
strain; and existential distress, such as spiritual crisis. While palliative
care has been recognized formally as a medical subspecialty by the
American Board of Medical Specialties and palliative care experts
are increasingly available in hospital and outpatient settings, all
clinicians should possess the basic skills to be able to manage pain;
treat dyspnea; identify possible depression; communicate about
important issues, such as prognosis and patient preferences for
care; and help address spiritual distress.
Symptoms that cause significant suffering are a medical
emergency that should be managed aggressively with frequent
elicitation, continuous reassessment, and individualized treatment.
While patients at the end of life may experience a host of distressing
symptoms, pain, dyspnea, and delirium are among the most feared
and burdensome. The palliation of these common symptoms is
described later in this chapter. The principles of palliative care
dictate that properly informed patients or their surrogates may
decide to pursue aggressive symptom relief at the end of life even if,
as a known but unintended consequence, the treatments preclude
further unwanted curative interventions or even hasten death. There
is a growing awareness and data from a randomized trial that
scrupulous symptom control for patients with end-stage illness may
even prolong life.
PAIN MANAGEMENT
 
PRINCIPLES OF PAIN MANAGEMENT
The experience of pain includes the patient's emotional reaction to it
and is influenced by many factors, including the patient's prior
experiences with pain, meaning given to the pain, emotional
stresses, and family and cultural influences. Pain is a subjective
phenomenon, and clinicians cannot reliably detect its existence or
quantify its severity without asking the patient directly. A useful
means of assessing pain and evaluating the effectiveness of analgesia
is to ask the patient to rate the degree of pain along a numeric or
visual pain scale (Table 5–1).
General guidelines for management of pain are recommended for
the treatment of all patients with pain (Table 5–2). Clinicians should
ask about the nature, severity, timing, location, quality, and
aggravating and relieving factors of the pain. Distinguishing between
neuropathic and nociceptive (somatic or visceral) pain is essential to
proper tailoring of pain treatments. The goal of pain management is
properly decided by the patient. Some patients may wish to be
completely free of pain even at the cost of significant sedation, while
others will wish to control pain to a level that still allows maximal
functioning.
Chronic severe pain should be treated continuously. For ongoing
pain, a long-acting analgesic can be given around the clock with a
short-acting medication as needed for “break-through” pain. For
patients near the end of life, the oral route of administration is
preferred because it is easier to administer at home, is not painful,
and imposes no risk from needle exposure. Rectal, transdermal, and
subcutaneous administration are also frequently used, as is
intravenous or, rarely, intrathecal administration when necessary.
Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) of intravenous medications can
achieve better analgesia faster with less medication use and its
principles have been adapted for use with oral administration.
When possible, the underlying cause of pain should be diagnosed
and treated, balancing the burden of diagnostic tests with the
patient's suffering. Treating the underlying cause of pain, such as
with radiation therapy for painful bone metastases or mechanical
stents for obstructing lesions, may obviate the need for ongoing
treatment with analgesics and their side effects. Regardless of
decisions about seeking and treating the underlying cause of pain,
every patient should be offered prompt relief.
 
Table 5–1. Pain assessment scales.
 
1Especially useful for patients who cannot read English and for pediatric
patients.
Reprinted, with permission, from Hockenberry M, Wilson D, Winkelstein
ML. Wong's Essentials of Pediatric Nursing, ed. 8. Copyright © 2009,
Mosby, St. Louis.
 
Table 5–2. Recommended clinical approach to pain management.
 
Ask about pain regularly. Assess pain systematically
(quality, description, location, intensity or severity,
aggravating and ameliorating factors, cognitive
responses). Ask about goals for pain control,
management preferences.
 
Believe the patient and family in their reports of pain and
what relieves it.
 
Choose pain control options appropriate for the patient,
family, and setting. Consider drug type, dosage, route,
contraindications, side effects. Consider
nonpharmacologic adjunctive measures.
 
Deliver interventions in a timely, logical, coordinated
manner.
 
Empower patients and their families. Enable patients to
control their course to the greatest extent possible.
 
Follow up to reassess persistence of pain, changes in
pain pattern, development of new pain.
 
 
Data from Jacox AK et al. Management of Cancer Pain: Quick Reference
Guide No. 9. AHCPR Publication No. 94–0593. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Health Care Policy and Research, Public Health Service, U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services. March 1994.
PAIN AT THE END OF LIFE
 Definition & Prevalence
Pain is a common problem for patients at the end of life. Up to 75%
of patients dying of cancer or other diseases experience pain, and
up to 50% of severely ill hospitalized patients spent half of their time
during the last 3 days of life in moderate to severe pain. Pain is what
many people say they fear most about dying and is routinely
undertreated. Joint Commission reviews of healthcare organizations
now include pain management standards.
 Barriers to Good Care
Deficiencies in pain management at the end of life have been
documented in many settings. Some clinicians refer pain
management to others when they believe that a patient's pain is not
due to the disease for which they are treating the patient. Even
oncologists often misperceive the origin of their patients’ pain and
inappropriately ignore complaints of pain.
Many clinicians have limited training and clinical experience with
pain management and thus are understandably reluctant to attempt
to manage severe pain. Lack of knowledge about the proper
selection and dosing of analgesic medications carries with it
attendant and typically exaggerated fears about the side effects of
pain medications, including the possibility of respiratory depression
from opioids. Most clinicians, however, can develop good pain
management skills, and nearly all pain, even at the end of life, can be
managed without hastening death through respiratory depression. In
rare instances, palliative sedation may be necessary to control
intractable suffering as an intervention of last resort.
A misunderstanding of the physiologic effects of opioids can lead
to unfounded concerns on the part of clinicians, patients, or family
members that patients will become addicted to opioids. While
physiologic tolerance (requiring increasing dosage to achieve the
same analgesic effect) and dependence (requiring continued dosing
to prevent symptoms of medication withdrawal) are expected with
regular opioid use, the use of opioids at the end of life for relief of
pain and dyspnea is not generally associated with a risk of
psychological addiction (misuse of a substance for purposes other
than one for which it was prescribed and despite negative
consequences in health, employment, or legal and social spheres).
The risk for problematic use of pain medications is higher, however,
in patients with a history of addiction. Yet even patients with such a
history need pain relief, albeit with closer monitoring. Some patients
who demonstrate behaviors associated with addiction (demand for
specific medications and doses, anger and irritability, poor
cooperation or disturbed interpersonal reactions) may have
pseudo-addiction, defined as exhibiting behaviors associated with
addiction but only because their pain is inadequately treated. Once
pain is relieved, these behaviors cease. In all cases, clinicians must
be prepared to use appropriate doses of opioids in order to relieve
distressing symptoms for patients at the end of life.
Some clinicians fear legal repercussions from prescribing the high
doses of opioids sometimes necessary to control pain at the end of
life. Some states have enacted special licensing and documentation
requirements for opioid prescribing, and the federal government is
considering other programs to improve the safety of opioid
prescribing. However, governmental and professional medical
groups, regulators, and the US Supreme Court have made it clear
that appropriate treatment of pain is the right of the patient and a
fundamental responsibility of the clinician. In fact, clinicians have
been successfully sued for under-treatment of pain. Although
clinicians may feel trapped between consequences of over- or
under-prescribing opioids, there remains a wide range of practice in
which clinicians can appropriately treat pain. Referral to pain or
palliative care experts is appropriate whenever pain cannot be
controlled expeditiously by the primary clinician.
PHARMACOLOGIC PAIN MANAGEMENT
STRATEGIES
In general, pain can be well controlled with analgesic medications—
both opioid and nonopioid—at any stage of illness. Evidence-based
summaries and guidelines are available from the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/bv.fcgi?rid=hstat1. chapter. 86205) and other organizations
(http://www.nccn.org/professionals/ 
physician_gls/PDF/pain.pdf).
For mild to moderate pain, acetaminophen, aspirin, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be sufficient.
For moderate to severe pain, these agents combined with opioids
may be helpful. Severe pain typically requires opioids.
 Acetaminophen & NSAIDs
Appropriate doses of acetaminophen may be just as effective an
analgesic and antipyretic as NSAIDs but without the risk of
gastrointestinal bleeding or ulceration. Acetaminophen can be given
at a dosage of 500–1000 mg orally every 6 hours, although it can
be taken every 4 hours as long as the risk of hepatotoxicity is kept
in mind. Hepatotoxicity is of particular concern because of how
commonly acetaminophen is also an ingredient in various over-the-
counter medications. Total acetaminophen doses should not exceed
4 g/d long-term or 2 g/d for older patients and for those with liver
disease. Some experts recommend even lower maximum dosages.
Aspirin (325–650 mg orally every 4 hours) is an effective
analgesic, 
antipyretic, 
and 
anti-inflammatory 
medication.
Gastrointestinal irritation and bleeding, bleeding from other sources,
allergy, and an association with Reye syndrome in children and
teenagers limit its use.
Commonly used NSAIDs and their dosages are listed in Table
5–3. Like aspirin, the NSAIDs are antipyretic, analgesic, and anti-
inflammatory. NSAIDs increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding
by 1.5 times normal. The risks of bleeding and nephrotoxicity from
NSAIDs are both increased in elders. Gastrointestinal bleeding and
ulceration may be prevented with the concurrent use of proton
pump inhibitors (eg, omeprazole, 20–40 mg orally daily) or with the
class of NSAIDs that inhibit only cyclooxygenase (COX)-2.
Because of concerns about an association of COX-2 inhibitors with
an increased risk of myocardial infarction, only celecoxib is still
available. Celecoxib (100 mg/d to 200 mg orally twice daily) should
be used with caution in patients with cardiac disease. The NSAIDs,
including COX-2 inhibitors, can lead to fluid retention and
exacerbations of congestive heart failure and should be used with
caution in patients with that condition.
 Opioid Medications
For many patients, opioids are the mainstay of pain management.
Opioids are appropriate for severe pain due to any cause, including
neuropathic pain. Opioid medications are listed in Table 5–4. Full
opioid agonists such as morphine, hydromorphone, oxycodone,
methadone, fentanyl, hydrocodone, and codeine are used most
commonly. Hydrocodone and codeine are typically combined with
acetaminophen or an NSAID. Short-acting formulations of oral
morphine sulfate (starting dosage 4–12 mg orally every 3–4 hours),
hydromorphone (1–2 mg orally every 3–4 hours), or oxycodone
(5–10 mg orally every 3–4 hours) are useful for acute pain not
controlled with other analgesics. These same oral medications, or
oral transmucosal fentanyl (200 mcg oralet dissolved in mouth) or
buccal fentanyl (100 mcg dissolved in the mouth), can be used for
“rescue” treatment for patients experiencing pain that breaks
through long-acting medications. For chronic stable pain, long-
acting medications are preferred, such as oral sustained-release
morphine (one to three times a day), oxycodone (two or three times
a day), or methadone (three or four times a day). Methadone is
inexpensive, available in a liquid formulation, and may have added
efficacy for neuropathic pain. However, equianalgesic dosing is
complex because it varies with the patient's opioid dose and caution
must be used at higher methadone doses (generally > 100–150
mg/d) because of the risk of QT prolongation. Consultation with a
palliative medicine or pain specialist may be appropriate.
 
Table 5–3. Acetaminophen, COX-2 inhibitors, and useful
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
 
1Acetaminophen and NSAID dosages for adults weighing < 50 kg should
be adjusted for weight.
2Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
3The adverse effects of headache, tinnitus, dizziness, confusion, rashes,
anorexia, 
nausea, 
vomiting, 
gastrointestinal 
bleeding, 
diarrhea,
nephrotoxicity, visual disturbances, etc, can occur with any of these drugs.
Tolerance and efficacy are subject to great individual variations among
patients. Note: All NSAIDs can increase serum lithium levels.
4Acetaminophen and celecoxib lack antiplatelet effects.
5May inhibit platelet aggregation for 1 week or more and may cause
bleeding.
6May have minimal antiplatelet activity.
7Administration with antacids may decrease absorption.
8Has the same gastrointestinal toxicities as oral NSAIDs.
9Coombs-positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia has been associated
with prolonged use.
OTC, over-the-counter; Rx, prescription; OA, osteoarthritis; RA, rheumatoid
arthritis.
Data from Jacox AK et al: Management of Cancer Pain: Quick Reference
Guide for Clinicians No. 9. AHCPR Publication No. 94–0593.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, Public Health
Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. March 1994.
 
Table 5–4. Useful opioid agonist analgesics.
 
1Published tables vary in the suggested doses that are equianalgesic to
morphine. Clinical response is the criterion that must be applied for each
patient; titration to clinical efficacy is necessary. Because there is not
complete cross-tolerance among these drugs, it is usually necessary to
use a lower than equianalgesic dose initially when changing drugs and to
retitrate to response.
2Conversion is conservative; therefore, do not use these equianalgesic
doses for converting back from fentanyl patch to other opioids because
they may lead to inadvertent overdose. Patients may require breakthrough
doses of short-acting opioids during conversion to transdermal fentanyl.
3Caution: For morphine, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone, rectal
administration is an alternative route for patients unable to take oral
medications. Equianalgesic doses may differ from oral and parenteral
doses. A short-acting opioid should normally be used for initial therapy.
4Not recommended for chronic pain. Doses listed are for brief therapy of
acute pain only. Switch to another opioid for long-term therapy.
5Methadone conversion varies depending on the equivalent total daily
dose of morphine. Consult with a pain management or palliative care
expert for conversion.
6Caution: Recommended doses do not apply for adult patients with kidney
or hepatic insufficiency or other conditions affecting drug metabolism.
7Caution: Doses of aspirin and acetaminophen in combination products
must also be adjusted to the patient's body weight.
8Caution: Doses of codeine above 60 mg often are not appropriate
because of diminishing incremental analgesia with increasing doses but
continually increasing nausea, constipation, and other side effects.
9Caution: Monitor total acetaminophen dose carefully, including any OTC
use. Total acetaminophen dose maximum 4 g/d. If liver impairment or
heavy alcohol use, maximum is 2 g/d.
Note: Average wholesale price (AWP, generic when available) for quantity
listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. AWP
may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide
contractual variations exist among institutions.
Data from Jacox AK et al. Management of Cancer Pain: Quick Reference
Guide for Clinicians No. 9. AHCPR Publication No. 94–0593. Rockville, MD.
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, Public Health Service, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. March 1994, and from Erstad
BL. A rational approach to the management of acute pain states. Hosp
Formul 1994;29 (8 Part 2):586.
Transdermal fentanyl is appropriate for patients already tolerant
to other opioids at a dose equivalent to at least 60 mg/d of oral
morphine (equivalent to transdermal fentanyl 25 mcg/h every 72
hours) but should not be used in the postoperative setting or be the
first opioid used. Medications that inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4,
such as ritonavir, ketoconazole, itraconazole, troleandomycin,
clarithromycin, nelfinavir, nefazodone, amiodarone, amprenavir,
aprepitant, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, and
verapamil, and grapefruit juice can cause increased levels and
duration of transdermal fentanyl. Since the fentanyl patch can
require 24–48 hours to achieve pharmacologic “steady state,”
patients should be given short-acting opioids while awaiting the full
analgesic effect of transdermal fentanyl.
Meperidine is not useful for chronic pain because it has a short
half-life and a toxic metabolite, normeperidine, which can cause
irritability and seizures. Partial agonists such as buprenorphine are
limited by a dose-related ceiling effect. Mixed agonist-antagonists
such as pentazocine and butorphanol tartrate also have a ceiling
effect and are contraindicated in patients already receiving full
agonist opioids since they may reverse the pain control achieved by
the full agonist and cause a withdrawal effect.
A useful technique for opioid management of chronic pain is
equianalgesic dosing (Table 5–4). The dosages of any full opioid
agonists used to control pain can be converted into an equivalent
dose of any other opioid. In this way, 24-hour opioid requirements
and dosing regimens established using shorter-acting opioid
medications can be converted into equivalent dosages of long-acting
medications or formulations. Cross-tolerance is often incomplete,
however, so less than the full calculated equianalgesic dosage is
generally administered initially when switching between opioid
formulations. Equianalgesic dosing for methadone is more complex
and varies by dose and duration of use.
While some clinicians and patients inexperienced with the
management of severe chronic pain may feel more comfortable with
combined nonopioid-opioid agents, full agonist opioids are typically
a better choice in patients with severe pain because the dose of
opioid is not limited by the toxicities of the acetaminophen, aspirin,
or NSAID component of combination preparations. There is no
maximal allowable or effective dose for full opioid agonists. The
dose should be increased to whatever is necessary to relieve pain,
remembering that certain types of pain, such as neuropathic pain,
may respond better to agents other than opioids, or to combinations
of opioids with co-analgesics (see below).
While physiologic tolerance is possible with opioids, failure of a
previously effective opioid dose to adequately relieve pain is usually
due to worsening of the underlying condition causing pain, such as
growth of a tumor or a new metastasis in a patient with cancer. In
this case, for moderate unrelieved pain, the dose of opioid can be
increased by 25–50%. For severe unrelieved pain, a dose increase
of 50–100% may be appropriate. The frequency of dosing should
be adjusted so that pain control is continuous. Long-term dosing
may then be adjusted by adding the average daily amount of short-
acting opioid necessary for breakthrough pain over the preceding
72–96 hours to the long-acting medication dose. In establishing or
reestablishing adequate dosing, frequent reassessment of the
patient's pain and medication side effects is necessary.
As opioids are titrated upwards, increasing difficulty with the side
effects can be expected. Constipation is common at any dose of
opioid, and tolerance to this side effect does not develop over time.
Opioid-induced constipation should be anticipated and prevented in
all patients (see below).
Sedation can be expected with opioids, although tolerance to this
effect typically develops within 24–72 hours at a stable dose.
Sedation typically appears well before significant respiratory
depression. If treatment for sedation is desired, dextroamphetamine
(2.5–7.5 mg orally at 8 AM and noon) or methylphenidate (2.5–10
mg orally at 8 AM and noon) may be helpful. Caffeinated beverages
can also help manage minor opioid sedation.
Although sedation is more common, patients may experience
euphoria when first taking opioids or when the dose is increased.
However, tolerance to this effect typically develops after a few days
at a stable dose. Opioid-induced neurotoxicity may develop in
patients who take high doses of opioids for a prolonged period.
This may be recognized with the onset of myoclonus, followed by
hyperalgesia, delirium with hallucinosis, and seizures. These
symptoms may resolve after lowering the dose or switching opioids,
especially to ones like fentanyl or methadone that do not have active
metabolites. While waiting for the level of the offending opioid to
fall, low doses of lorazepam, baclofen, or gabapentin may be helpful
for treating myoclonus; haloperidol may be useful for treating
delirium. Avoiding or correcting dehydration may be helpful for
prevention and treatment of opioid-induced neurotoxicity.
Nausea due to opioids may occur with initiation of therapy and
resolve after a few days. If it is severe or persistent, it can be
treated with haloperidol, 0.5-4 mg orally, subcutaneously, or
intravenously every 6 hours; prochlorperazine, 10 mg orally or
intravenously or 25 mg rectally every 6 hours; or metoclopramide,
5-20 mg orally, subcutaneously, or intravenously before meals and
bed. However, unrelieved constipation may be a more common
cause of nausea in the setting of opioid use than opioid-induced
nausea.
Although clinicians may worry about respiratory depression with
opioids, that side effect is uncommon when a low dose is given
initially and titrated upward slowly. Patients at particular risk for
respiratory depression include those with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and baseline CO2 retention, those with liver or
kidney or combined liver-kidney failure, and those with adrenal
insufficiency or frank myxedema. Yet, even patients with severe
pulmonary disease can tolerate low-dose opioids, but they should
be monitored carefully. Clinicians should not allow concerns about
respiratory depression to prevent them from treating pain
adequately.
True allergy (with urticaria) to opioids is rare. More commonly,
patients will describe intolerance due to side effects such as nausea,
pruritus, or urinary retention in response to a particular opioid. If
such symptoms develop, they can usually be relieved by lowering
the dose or switching to another opioid.
 Medications for Neuropathic Pain
It is essential when taking a patient's history to listen for descriptions
such as burning, shooting, pins and needles, or electricity, and for
pain associated with numbness. Such a history suggests neuropathic
pain, which is treated with some medications not typically used for
other types of pain. While opioids are effective for neuropathic pain,
a number of nonopioid medications have been found to be effective
in randomized trials (Table 5–5). The tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs) are good first-line therapy. They usually have an effect at
lower doses than are needed for an antidepressant effect.
Desipramine, 10–200 mg/d orally, and nortriptyline, 10–150 mg/d
orally, are good first choices because they cause less orthostatic
hypotension and have fewer anticholinergic effects than
amitriptyline. Start with a low dosage (10–25 mg orally daily) and
titrate upward every 4 or 5 days.
The calcium channel α2-δ ligands gabapentin and pregabalin are
also considered first-line therapy for neuropathic pain. Both
medications can cause sedation, dizziness, ataxia, and
gastrointestinal side effects but have no significant drug interactions.
Both drugs require dose adjustments in patients with kidney
dysfunction. Gabapentin should be started at low dosages of 100–
300 mg orally three times a day and titrated upward by 300 mg/d
every 4 or 5 days with a typical effective dose of 1800–3600 mg/d.
Pregabalin should be started at 150 mg/d in two or three divided
doses. If necessary, the dose of pregabalin can be titrated upward
to 300–600 mg/d in two or three divided doses. Both drugs are
relatively safe in accidental overdosage and may be preferred over
TCAs for a patient with a history of congestive heart failure or
arrhythmia or if there is a risk of suicide. Gabapentin plus morphine
in combination is more effective at lower doses of each drug than
when each is used as a single agent.
 
Table 5–5. Pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain.
 
1Begin at the starting dose and titrate up every 4 or 5 days.
2Begin with a low dose. Pain relief may be achieved at doses below
antidepressant doses, thereby minimizing adverse side effects.
3Avoid in elders because it has more severe anticholinergic effects.
4Common side effects include nausea, somnolence, and dizziness. Take
medication on a full stomach. Do not combine with serotonin or
norepinephrine uptake inhibitors, or with tricyclic antidepressants.
5Common side effects include dizziness, somnolence, peripheral edema,
and weight gain. Must adjust dose for kidney impairment.
6Caution: Can cause hypertension and ECG changes. Obtain baseline
ECG and monitor.
The selective serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
(SSNRIs), duloxetine (60 mg/d or 20 mg twice daily in elders), and
venlafaxine (150–225 mg/d) are also considered first-line
treatments for neuropathic pain. Patients should be advised to take
duloxetine on a full stomach because nausea is a common side
effect. Duloxetine should not be combined with other serotonin or
norepinephrine uptake inhibitors, but it can be combined with
gabapentin or pregabalin. Because venlafaxine can cause
hypertension and induce ECG changes, patients with cardiovascular
risk factors should be carefully monitored when starting this drug.
Opioids and tramadol are also effective for neuropathic pain.
Tramadol should be started at 50 mg orally daily and can be titrated
up to 100 mg orally four times daily.
The 5% lidocaine patch (1–4 patches at a time) is effective in
postherpetic neuralgia and may be effective in other types of
localized neuropathic pain. A new patch is applied to the painful
region daily for up to 12 hours.
Successful management of neuropathic pain often requires the
use of more than one effective medication.
 
Adjuvant 
Pain 
Medications 
&
Treatments
If pain cannot be controlled without uncomfortable medication side
effects, clinicians should consider using lower doses of multiple
medications, as is done commonly for neuropathic pain, rather than
larger doses of one or two medications. For bone pain, the anti-
inflammatory effect of NSAIDs can be particularly helpful.
Radiation therapy and bisphosphonates may also relieve bone pain.
For some patients, a nerve block can provide substantial relief, such
as a celiac plexus block for pain from pancreatic cancer. Intrathecal
pumps may be useful for patients with severe pain responsive to
opioids but who require such large doses that systemic side effects
(eg, sedation and constipation) become limiting. There is some
evidence for the use of cannabinoids as analgesics.
Chemotherapeutic agents can be used for symptom management
with palliative intent.
Corticosteroids such as dexamethasone or prednisone can be
helpful for patients with headache due to increased intracranial
pressure, pain from spinal cord compression, metastatic bone pain,
and neuropathic pain due to invasion or infiltration of nerves by
tumor. Because of the side effects of long-term corticosteroid
administration, they are most appropriate in patients with end-stage
disease. Low-dose intravenous or oral ketamine has been used
successfully for neuropathic and other pain syndromes poorly
responsive to opioids. Haloperidol and benzodiazepines may be
used prophylactically to minimize ketamine's psychotomimetic side
effects.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC TREATMENTS
Nonpharmacologic therapies are valuable in treating pain. Hot or
cold packs, massage, and physical therapy can be helpful for
musculoskeletal pain. Similarly, biofeedback, acupuncture,
chiropractic, meditation, music therapy, cognitive behavioral
therapy, guided imagery, cognitive distraction, and framing may be
of help in treating pain. Because mood and psychological issues
play an important role in the patient's perception of and response to
pain, psychotherapy, support groups, prayer, and pastoral
counseling can also help in the management of pain. Major
depression, which may be instigated by chronic pain or may alter
the response to pain, should be treated aggressively.
 When to Refer
 
•    Pain not responding to opioids at typical doses.
•    Neuropathic pain not responding to first-line treatments.
•    Complex methadone management issues.
•    Intolerable side effects from oral opioids.
•    Severe pain from bone metastases.
•    For a surgical or anesthesia-based procedure,
intrathecal pump, or nerve block.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients should be hospitalized for severe exacerbation
of pain that is not responsive to previous stable oral opioid
around-the-clock plus breakthrough doses.
•    Patients whose pain is so severe that they cannot be
cared for at home should be hospitalized.
•    Uncontrollable side effects from opioids, including
nausea, vomiting, and altered mental status, should prompt
hospitalization.
Bakitas M et al. Effects of a palliative care intervention on clinical
outcomes in patients with advanced cancer: the Project ENABLE
II randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009 Aug 19;302(7):741–
9. [PMID: 19690306]
 
Bengoechea I et al. Opioid use at the end of life and survival in a
Hospital at Home unit. J Palliat Med. 2010 Sep;13(9):1079–83.
[PMID: 20799903]
Dworkin RH et al. Recommendations for the pharmacological
management of neuropathic pain: an overview and literature
update. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010 Mar;85(3 Suppl):S3–14. [PMID:
20194146]
 
Krantz MJ et al. QTc interval screening in methadone treatment.
Ann Intern Med. 2009 Mar 17;150(6):387–95. [PMID:
19153406]
 
Martín-Sánchez E et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of
cannabis treatment for chronic pain. Pain Med. 2009 Nov;
10(8):1353–68. [PMID: 19732371]
 
Morrison RS et al. Cost savings associated with US hospital
palliative care consultation programs. Arch Intern Med. 2008 Sep
8;168(16):1783–90. [PMID: 18779466]
 
Temel JS et al. Early palliative care for patients with metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Aug 19;363(8):
733–42. [PMID: 20818875]
 
PALLIATION OF OTHER
COMMON SYMPTOMS
 
DYSPNEA
Dyspnea is the subjective experience of difficulty breathing and may
be characterized by patients as tightness in the chest, shortness of
breath, or a feeling of suffocation. Up to 50% of terminally ill
patients may experience severe dyspnea.
Treatment of dyspnea is usually first directed at the cause (see
Chapter 9). At the end of life, dyspnea is often treated
nonspecifically with opioids. Immediate-release morphine orally or
intravenously treats dyspnea effectively and typically at doses lower
than would be necessary for the relief of moderate pain.
Supplemental oxygen may be useful for the dyspneic patient who is
hypoxic and may provide subjective benefit to other dyspneic
patients as well, although evidence does not support its routine use
for refractory dyspnea at the end of life. However, a nasal cannula
and face mask are sometimes not well tolerated, and fresh air from
a window or fan may provide relief. Judicious use of
nonpharmacologic relaxation techniques such as meditation and
guided imagery may be beneficial for some patients.
Benzodiazepines may be useful for the anxiety associated with
dyspnea and may relieve dyspnea.
NAUSEA & VOMITING
Nausea and vomiting are common and distressing symptoms. As
with pain, the management of nausea may be maximized by regular
dosing. An understanding of the four major inputs to the vomiting
center may help direct treatment (see Chapter 15).
Vomiting associated with a particular opioid may be relieved by
dose reduction or substitution with an equianalgesic dose of another
opioid or a sustained-release formulation. In addition to the other
dopamine receptor antagonist antiemetics listed in Table 15–2 that
block the trigger zone, haloperidol (0.5–4 mg orally every 4–6
hours) is commonly used empirically.
Vomiting may be due to stimulation of peripheral afferent nerves
from the gut. Offering patients small amounts of food only when
they are hungry may prevent nausea and vomiting. Nasogastric
suction may provide rapid, short-term relief for vomiting associated
with constipation, gastroparesis, or gastric outlet obstruction, with
the addition of laxatives; prokinetic agents (only in the setting of
partial not complete obstruction), such as metoclopramide (5–20
mg orally or intravenously four times a day); scopolamine (1.5-mg
patch every 3 days); and high-dose corticosteroids as more
definitive treatment. Nausea often requires treatment with more than
one agent; when it is refractory to other treatments or due to
increased intracranial pressure, it may respond to high-dose
corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone, 20 mg orally or intravenously
daily in divided doses).
Vomiting due to disturbance of the vestibular apparatus may be
treated with anticholinergic and antihistaminic agents (including
diphenhydramine, 25 mg orally or intravenously every 8 hours, or
scopolamine, 1.5-mg patch every 3 days).
Benzodiazepines can be effective in preventing the anticipatory
nausea associated with chemotherapy but are otherwise not
indicated for nausea and vomiting. Finally, many patients find
medical marijuana or dronabinol (2.5–20 mg orally every 4–6
hours) helpful in the management of nausea and vomiting.
CONSTIPATION
Given the frequent use of opioids, poor dietary intake, and physical
inactivity, constipation is a common problem among the dying.
Clinicians must inquire about any difficulty with hard or infrequent
stools. Constipation is an easily preventable and treatable cause of
discomfort, distress, and nausea and vomiting (see Chapter 15).
Constipation may be prevented or relieved if patients can
increase their activity and their intake of fluids. Simple
considerations such as privacy, undisturbed toilet time, and a
bedside commode rather than a bedpan may be important for some
patients.
For patients taking opioids, anticipating and preventing
constipation is important. A prophylactic bowel regimen with a
stimulant laxative (bisacodyl or senna) should be started when
opioid treatment is begun. Table 15–4 lists other agents (including
polyethylene glycol) that can be added as needed. Docusate, a
stool softener, adds little to senna in hospitalized patients, has a
lingering bad taste that may suppress appetite, and thus is no longer
recommended. Methylnaltrexone, a subcutaneous medication, is a
peripherally acting mu-receptor antagonist and is available for
severe, unrelieved, opioid-induced constipation.
DELIRIUM & AGITATION
Many terminally ill patients die in a state of delirium—a disturbance
of consciousness and a change in cognition that develops over a
short time and is manifested by misinterpretations, illusions,
hallucinations, disturbances in the sleep-wake cycle, psychomotor
disturbances (eg, lethargy, restlessness), and mood disturbance (eg,
fear, anxiety). Delirium may be hyperactive, hypoactive, or mixed.
Agitated delirium at the end of life has been called terminal
restlessness.
Careful attention to patient safety and nonpharmaco-logic
strategies to help the patient remain oriented (clocks, calendars, a
familiar environment, reassurance and redirection from caregivers)
may be sufficient to prevent or manage minor delirium. Some
delirious patients may be “pleasantly confused,” and a decision by
the patient's family and the clinician not to treat delirium may be
justified.
More commonly, however, delirium at the end of life is
distressing to patients and family and requires treatment. Delirium
may interfere with the family's ability to feel comforting to the patient
and may prevent a patient from being able to recognize and report
important symptoms.
While there are many reversible causes of delirium (see Chapter
25), identifying and correcting the underlying cause at the end of life
is often complex because a patient may have many possible causes.
When the cause of delirium cannot be identified, treated, or
corrected rapidly enough, delirium may be treated symptomatically
with neuroleptics, such as haloperidol (1–10 mg orally,
subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or intravenously twice or three
times a day) or risperidone (1–3 mg orally twice a day). The
benefits of neuroleptics in the treatment of agitation must be
weighed carefully against potential harms, based on evidence
showing an association between antipsychotic medications and
increased mortality for older adults with dementia. When delirium is
refractory to treatment and remains intolerable, sedation may be
required to provide relief and may be achieved rapidly with
midazolam (0.5–5 mg/h subcutaneously or intravenously) or
barbiturates.
Abernethy AP et al. Effect of palliative oxygen versus room air in
relief of breathlessness in patients with refractory dyspnoea: a
double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Sep
4;376(9743):784–93. [PMID: 20816546]
 
Clemens KE et al. Is there a higher risk of respiratory depression
in opioid-naïve palliative care patients during symptomatic therapy
of dyspnea with strong opioids? J Palliat Med. 2008
Mar;11(2):204–16. [PMID: 18333735]
 
Bausewein C et al. Non-pharmacological interventions for
breathlessness in advanced stages of malignant and non-malignant
diseases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Apr 16;
(2):CD005623. [PMID: 18425927]
 
Hawley PH et al. A comparison of sennosides-based bowel
protocols with and without docusate in hospitalized patients with
cancer. J Palliat Med. 2008 May;11(4):575–81. [PMID:
18454610]
 
Iyer S et al. Opioid use patterns and health care resource utilization
in patients prescribed opioid therapy with and without constipation.
Manag Care. 2010 Mar;19(3):44–51. [PMID: 20361548]
 
Thomas J et al. Methylnaltrexone for opioid-induced constipation
in advanced illness. N Engl J Med. 2008 May 29;358(22): 2332–
43. [PMID: 18509120]
 
END-OF-LIFE CARE
 
In the United States, approximately 2.5 million people die each
year. Caring for patients at the end of life is an important
responsibility and a rewarding opportunity for clinicians. Clinicians
battling to prolong life must recognize when life is ending in order to
continue caring properly for their patients. Unfortunately, most
clinical practice guidelines do not include significant attention to end-
of-life care. End-of-life care refers to focusing care for those
approaching death on the goals of relieving distressing symptoms
and promoting quality of life rather than attempting to cure
underlying disease. From the medical perspective, the end of life
may be defined as that time when death—whether due to terminal
illness or acute or chronic illness—is expected within weeks to
months and can no longer be reasonably forestalled by medical
intervention.
 Prognosis at the End of Life
Clinicians must help patients understand when they are approaching
the end of life. This information influences patients’ treatment
decisions and may change how they spend their remaining time.
While certain diseases such as cancer are more amenable to
prognostic estimates regarding the time course to death, the other
common causes of mortality in the United States—including heart
disease, stroke, chronic lung disease, and dementia—have more
variable trajectories and difficult to predict prognoses. Even for
patients with cancer, clinician estimates of prognosis are often
inaccurate and generally overly optimistic. Nonetheless, clinical
experience, epidemiologic data, guidelines from professional
organizations (eg, the National Hospice and Palliative Care
Organization), and computer modeling and prediction tools (eg, the
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation [APACHE]
system, the Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for
Outcomes and Risks of Treatment [SUPPORT] model, or the
Palliative Performance Scale) may be used to help patients identify
the end period of their lives. Clinicians can also ask themselves
“Would I be surprised if this patient died in the next year?” to
determine whether a discussion of prognosis and focus on end-of-
life care would be appropriate. If the answer is “no,” then the
clinician should initiate a discussion. Recognizing that patients may
have different levels of comfort with prognostic information,
clinicians can introduce the topic by simply saying, “I have
information about the likely time course of your illness. Would you
like to talk about it?”
 Expectations About the End of Life
Patients’ experiences at the end of life are influenced by their
expectations about how they will die and the meaning of death.
Many people fear how they will die more than death itself. Patients
report fears of dying in pain or of suffocation, of loss of control,
indignity, isolation, and of being a burden to their families. All of
these anxieties may be ameliorated with good supportive care
provided by an attentive group of caretakers.
Death is often regarded by clinicians, patients, and families as a
failure of medical science. This attitude can create or heighten a
sense of guilt about the failure to prevent dying. Both the general
public and clinicians often are complicit in denying death, treating
dying persons merely as patients and death as an enemy to be
battled furiously in hospitals rather than as an inevitable outcome to
be experienced as a part of life at home. As a result, approximately
75–80% of people in the United States die in hospitals or long-term
care facilities.
Even when the clinician continues to pursue cure of potentially
reversible disease, offering comfort and helping the patient prepare
for death are foremost considerations. Patients at the end of life and
their families identify a number of elements as important to quality
end-of-life care: managing pain and other symptoms adequately,
avoiding inappropriate prolongation of dying, preserving dignity,
preparing for death, achieving a sense of control, relieving the
burden on others, and strengthening relationships with loved ones.
 Communication & Care of the Patient
Caring for patients at the end of life requires the same skills
clinicians use in other tasks of medical care: diagnosing treatable
conditions, providing patient education, facilitating decision-making,
and expressing understanding and caring. Communication skills are
vitally important. Higher-quality communication is associated with
greater satisfaction and awareness of patient wishes. When needed,
the use of a professional interpreter can facilitate clear
communication and help broker cultural issues. In particular,
clinicians must become proficient at delivering bad news and then
dealing with its consequences (Table 5–6).
 
Table 5–6. Suggestions for the delivery of bad news.
 
Prepare an appropriate place and time.
Address basic information needs.
Be direct; avoid jargon and euphemisms.
Allow for silence and emotional ventilation.
Assess and validate patient reactions.
Respond to immediate discomforts and risks.
Listen actively and express empathy.
Achieve a common perception of the problem.
Reassure about pain relief.
Ensure basic follow-up and make specific plans for the
future.
Three further obligations are central to the clinician's role at this
time. First, he or she must work to identify, understand, and relieve
suffering, which may include physical, psychological, social, or
spiritual distress. By assisting with redirection and growth, providing
support, assessing meaning, and fostering transcendence, clinicians
can help ameliorate their patients’ suffering and help the patient live
fully during this stage of life.
Second, clinicians can serve as facilitators or catalysts for hope.
While a particular outcome may be extremely unlikely (such as cure
of advanced cancer following exhaustive conventional and
experimental treatments), hope may be defined as the patient's
belief in what is still possible. Although expecting a “miraculous
cure” may be simplistic and even harmful, hope for relief of pain, for
reconciliation with loved ones, for discovery of meaning, and for
spiritual transformation is realistic at the end of life. With such
questions as “What is still possible now for you?” “When you look
to the future, what do you hope for?” “What good might come of
this?” clinicians can help patients uncover hope, explore meaningful
and realistic goals, and develop strategies to realize them.
Third, dying patients’ feelings of isolation and fear demand that
clinicians assert that care will continue to be provided throughout
the final stage of life. The promise of nonabandonment is perhaps
the central principle of end-of-life care and is a clinician's pledge to
an individual patient to serve as a caring partner, a resource for
creative problem-solving and relief of suffering, a guide during
uncertain times, and a witness to the patient's experiences—no
matter what happens. Clinicians can say to a patient, “I will care for
you whatever happens.” Dying patients need their clinicians to offer
their presence—not necessarily the ability to solve all problems but
rather a commitment to recognize and receive the patients’
difficulties and experiences with respect and empathy. At its best,
the patient-clinician relationship can be a covenant of compassion
and a recognition of common humanity.
 Caring for the Family
In caring for patients at the end of life, clinicians must appreciate the
central role played by family, friends, and romantic partners and
often must deal with strong emotions of fear, anger, shame, sadness,
and guilt experienced by those individuals. While significant others
may support and comfort a patient at the end of life, the threatened
loss of a loved one may also create or reveal dysfunctional or
painful family dynamics. Furthermore, clinicians must be attuned to
the potential impact of illness on the patient's family: substantial
physical caregiving responsibilities and financial burdens as well as
increased rates of anxiety, depression, chronic illness, and even
mortality. Family caregivers, typically women, commonly provide
the bulk of care for patients at the end of life, yet their work is often
not acknowledged or compensated.
 
Table 5–7. Clinician interventions helpful to families of dying
patients.
 
Excellent communication, including physician
willingness to talk about death, timely and clear
information, proactive guidance, listening, and empathic
responses
 
Advance care planning and clear decision-making,
including culturally sensitive communication, achieving
consensus among family members and an understanding
that surrogate decision-makers are trying to determine
what the patient would have wanted, not what the
surrogate would want
 
Support for home care, including orienting family
members to the scope and details of family caregiving,
providing clear direction about how to contact
professional caregivers, and informing patients and
families of the benefits of hospice care
 
Empathy for family emotions and relationships,
including recognizing and validating common positive and
negative feelings
 
Attention to grief and bereavement, including support
for anticipatory grief and follow-up with the family after the
patient's death
 
Data from Rabow MW et al. Supporting family caregivers at the end of life:
“they don't know what they don't know.” JAMA. 2004 Jan 28;291(4):483–91.
Clinicians can help families confront the imminent loss of a loved
one (Table 5–7) and often must negotiate amid complex and
changing family needs. Identifying a spokes-person for the family,
conducting family meetings, allowing all to be heard, and providing
time for consensus may help the clinician work effectively with the
family.
 Clinician Self-Care
Many clinicians find caring for patients at the end of life to be one of
the most rewarding aspects of practice. However, working with the
dying requires tolerance of uncertainty, ambiguity, and existential
challenges. Clinicians must recognize and respect their own
limitations and attend to their own needs in order to avoid being
overburdened, overly distressed, or emotionally depleted.
Apatira L et al. Hope, truth, and preparing for death: perspectives
of surrogate decision makers. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Dec
16;149(12):861–8. [PMID: 19075205]
 
Hudson PL et al. A systematic review of psychosocial
interventions for family carers of palliative care patients. BMC
Palliat Care. 2010 Aug 5;9:17. [PMID: 20687960]
 
Kearney MK et al. Self-care of physicians caring for patients at
the end of life: “Being connected… a key to my survival”. JAMA.
2009 Mar 18;301(11):1155–64. [PMID: 19293416]
 
Moss AH et al. Prognostic significance of the “surprise” question in
cancer patients. J Palliat Med. 2010 Jul;13(7):837–40. [PMID:
20636154]
 
Pantilat SZ. Communicating with seriously ill patients: better words
to say. JAMA. 2009 Mar 25;301(12):1279–81. [PMID:
19318656]
 
Wright AA et al. Associations between end-of-life discussions,
patient mental health, medical care near death, and caregiver
bereavement adjustment. JAMA. 2008 Oct 8;300(14):1665–73.
[PMID: 18840840]
 
Zhang B et al. Health care costs in the last week of life:
associations with end-of-life conversations. Arch Intern Med.
2009 Mar 9;169(5):480–8. [PMID: 19273778]
 
 
Decision-Making, 
Advance 
Care
Planning, & Advance Directives
Well-informed, competent adults have a right to refuse medical
intervention even if this is likely to result in death. Many are willing
to sacrifice some quantity of life to protect a certain quality of life. In
order to promote patient autonomy, clinicians are obligated to
inform patients about the risks, benefits, alternatives, and expected
outcomes of end-of-life medical interventions such as
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), mechanical ventilation,
vasopressor medication, hospitalization and ICU care, and nutrition
and hydration. Advance directives are oral or written statements
made by patients when they are competent that are intended to
guide care should they become incompetent. Advance directives
allow patients to project their autonomy into the future and are an
important part of advance care planning—a process whereby
clinicians help patients match treatments and care to their goals and
values. Advance directives take effect when the patient can no
longer communicate his or her preferences directly. While oral
statements about these matters are ethically binding, they are not
legally binding in all states. State-specific advance directive forms
are 
available 
from 
a 
number 
of 
sources, 
including
http://www.caringinfo.org.
In addition to documenting patient preferences for care, the
Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care (DPOA-HC) allows
the patient to designate a surrogate decision-maker. The DPOA-
HC is important since it is often difficult to anticipate what decisions
will need to be made. The responsibility of the surrogate is to
provide “substituted judgment”—to decide as the patient would,
not as the surrogate wants. Clinicians should encourage patients to
talk with their surrogates about their preferences generally and
about scenarios that are likely to arise, such as the need for
mechanical ventilation in a patient with end-stage emphysema. In the
absence of a designated surrogate, clinicians usually turn to family
members or next of kin. Clinicians should educate all patients—
ideally, well before the end of life—about the opportunity to
formulate an advance directive. Most patients with serious illness
have already thought about end-of-life issues, want to discuss them
with their clinician, want the clinician to bring up the subject, and
feel better for having had the discussion. Patients who have such
discussions with their clinicians are perceived by their family as
having a better quality of life at the end of life and their loved ones
are less likely to suffer from depression during bereavement.
Despite regulations requiring health care institutions to inform
patients of their rights to formulate an advance directive, only about
10% of people in the United States (including clinicians themselves)
actually have completed them.
 Do Not Attempt Resuscitation Orders
As part of advance care planning, clinicians can encourage patients
to express their preferences about the use of CPR. Most patients
and many clinicians are uninformed or misinformed about the nature
and success of CPR. Only about 15% of all patients who undergo
CPR in the hospital survive to hospital discharge. Moreover, among
certain populations—especially those with serious systemic
noncardiac disease, metastatic cancer, and sepsis—the likelihood of
survival to hospital discharge following CPR is virtually nil.
Patients may ask their clinician to write an order that CPR not be
attempted on them. Although this order initially was referred to as a
DNR (do not resuscitate) order, many clinicians prefer the term
“DNAR” (do not attempt resuscitation) to emphasize the low
likelihood of success.
Patients deciding about CPR preferences should also be
informed about the sequelae of surviving CPR. These may include
fractured ribs, lacerated internal organs, and neurologic disability,
and the frequent need for other aggressive interventions, such as
ICU care, if CPR is successful.
For some patients at the end of life, decisions about CPR may
not be about whether they will live but about how they will die.
Clinicians should correct the misconception that withholding CPR in
appropriate circumstances is tantamount to “not doing everything”
or “just letting someone die.” While respecting the patient's right
ultimately to make the decision—and keeping in mind their own
biases 
and 
prejudices—clinicians 
should 
offer 
explicit
recommendations about DNAR orders and protect dying patients
and their families from feelings of guilt and from the sorrow
associated with vain hopes. Clinicians should encourage patients
and their families to make proactive decisions about what is wanted
in end-of-life care rather than focusing only on what is not to be
done. For patients with internal cardiac defibrillators, clinicians must
also address issues of turning off these devices as death approaches
to prevent them from discharging during the dying process.
 Hospice & Other Palliative Care
Institutions
Hospice is an approach to end-of-life care where the most urgent
objective is to address the physical and emotional needs of the
dying. In the United States, 39% of people who die use hospice.
While some hospice care is provided in hospitals and institutional
residences, about 80% of patients receiving hospice care remain at
home where they can be cared for by their family and visiting
hospice staff. Hospice care focuses on the patient and family rather
than the disease and on providing comfort and pain relief rather than
on treating illness or prolonging life. Hospices provide intensive
caring with the goal of helping people live well until they die.
Hospice embodies the palliative care philosophy that emphasizes
individualized attention, human contact, and an interdisciplinary team
approach. Hospice care can include arranging for respite for family
caregivers and providing legal, financial, and other services. Primary
care clinicians are strongly encouraged to continue caring for their
patients during the time they are receiving hospice care.
Hospice care is highly rated by families and has been shown to
increase patient satisfaction, to reduce costs (depending on when
patients are referred to hospice care), and even to decrease family
caregiver mortality. Hospice care tends to be used very near the
end of life. The average length of stay in hospices in the United
States is 67 days, with 31% of patients dying within 7 days of
beginning hospice care.
Most hospice organizations require clinicians to estimate the
patient's probability of survival to be < 6 months, since this is a
criterion for eligibility to receive Medicare or other insurance
coverage. Regrettably, the hospice benefit can be difficult to
provide to people who are homeless or isolated or who have
terminal prognoses that are difficult to quantify.
 Cultural Issues
The individual patient's experience of dying occurs in the context of
a complex interaction of personal, philosophic, and cultural
influences. Various religious, ethnic, gender, class, and cultural
traditions help determine patients’ styles of communication, comfort
in discussing particular topics, expectations about dying and medical
interventions, and attitudes about the appropriate disposition of
dead bodies. There are differences in knowledge and beliefs
regarding advance directives, autopsy, organ donation, hospice
care, and withdrawal of life-sustaining interventions among patients
of different ethnic groups. Clinicians must appreciate recent
evidence suggesting that palliative care is susceptible to some of the
same racial biases previously documented in other medical
disciplines. While each patient is an individual, being sensitive to a
person's cultural beliefs and respecting ethnic traditions are
important responsibilities of the clinician caring for a patient at the
end of life, especially when the cultures of origin of the clinician and
patient differ. A clinician may ask a patient, “What do I need to
know about you and your beliefs that will help me take care of
you?”
Detering KM et al. The impact of advance care planning on end of
life care in elderly patients: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2010
Mar 23;340:c1345. [PMID: 20332506]
 
Ehlenbach WJ et al. Epidemiologic study of in-hospital
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the elderly. N Engl J Med. 2009
Jul 2;361(1):22–31. [PMID: 19571280]
 
Gomes B et al. Where people die (1974–2030): past trends,
future projections and implications for care. Palliat Med. 2008
Jan;22(1):33–41. [PMID: 18216075]
 
Siegel MD. End-of-life decision making in the ICU. Clin Chest
Med. 2009 Mar;30(1):181–94. [PMID: 19186289]
 
Smith AK et al. Palliative care for Latino patients and their families:
whenever we prayed, she wept. JAMA. 2009 Mar 11;
301(10):1047–57. [PMID: 19278947]
 
 Nutrition & Hydration
Individuals at the end of life have a right to refuse nutrition and
hydration. However, providing or withholding oral food and water
is not simply a medical decision because feeding may have profound
social and cultural significance for patients, families, and clinicians
themselves. Withholding artificial or supplemental enteral or
parenteral nutrition and hydration challenges the assumption that
offering food is an expression of compassion and love and invokes
distressing images of starvation. In fact, individuals at the end of life
who choose to forgo nutrition and hydration are unlikely to suffer
from hunger or thirst. Family and friends can be encouraged to
express their love and caring in ways other than intrusive attempts at
force feeding or hydration.
Tube feedings do not prevent aspiration pneumonia, and there is
debate about whether artificial nutrition prolongs life in the terminally
ill. In fact, there has been a growing awareness of the potential
medical benefits of forgoing unwanted or artificial nutrition and
hydration (including tube feedings, parenteral nutrition, and
intravenous hydration) at the end of life.
Eating when not hungry and artificial nutrition are associated with
a number of potential complications. Force feeding may cause
nausea and vomiting in ill patients, and eating will lead to diarrhea in
the setting of malabsorption. Nutrition may increase oral and airway
secretions and the risk of choking, aspiration, and dyspnea.
Nasogastric and gastrostomy tube feeding and parenteral nutrition
impose risks of infection, epistaxis, pneumothorax, electrolyte
imbalance, and aspiration—as well as the need to physically restrain
the delirious patient to prevent dislodgment of catheters and tubes.
Withholding nutrition at the end of life causes remarkably little
hunger or distress. The anorexia-cachexia syndrome is common in
patients with advanced cancer, and cachexia is a common and a
poor prognostic sign in patients with heart failure. Ill people often
have no hunger with total caloric deprivation, and the associated
ketonemia produces a sense of well-being, analgesia, and mild
euphoria. However, carbohydrate intake even in small amounts
(such as that provided by 5% intravenous dextrose solution) blocks
ketone production and may blunt the positive effects of total caloric
deprivation.
Withholding hydration may lead to death in a few days to a
month. The quality of life for those at the end of life may be
adversely affected by supplemental hydration because of its
contribution to oral and airway secretions (leading to aspiration or
the “death rattle”), polyuria, and the development or worsening of
ascites, pleural or other effusions, and peripheral and pulmonary
edema.
Although it is unclear to what extent withholding hydration at the
end of life creates an uncomfortable sensation of thirst, any such
sensation is usually relieved by simply moistening the dry mouth. Ice
chips, hard candy, swabs, popsicles, or minted mouthwash may be
effective.
 Withdrawal of Curative Efforts
Requests from appropriately informed and competent patients or
their surrogates for withdrawal of life-sustaining interventions must
be respected. In addition, clinicians may determine unilaterally that
particular interventions are medically inappropriate—eg, continuing
kidney dialysis in a patient dying of multiorgan failure. In such cases,
the clinician's intention to withdraw a specific intervention should be
communicated to the patient and family. If differences of opinion
persist about the appropriateness of what is being done, the
assistance of an institutional ethics committee should be sought.
Limitation of life support prior to death is an increasingly common
practice in intensive care units. The withdrawal of life-sustaining
interventions such as mechanical ventilation must be approached
carefully to avoid needless patient suffering and distress for those in
attendance. Clinicians should educate the patient and family about
the expected course of events and the difficulty of determining the
precise timing of death after withdrawal of interventions. Sedative
and analgesic agents should be administered to ensure patient
comfort even at the risk of respiratory depression or hypotension.
Scopolamine (10 mcg/h subcutaneously or intravenously, or a 1.5-
mg patch every 3 days), glycopyrrolate (1 mg orally every 4 hours),
or atropine (1% ophthalmic solution, 1 or 2 drops sublingually as
often as every hour) can be used for controlling airway secretions
and the resultant “death rattle.” A guideline for withdrawal of
mechanical ventilation is provided in Table 5–8.
 
Table 5–8. Guidelines for withdrawal of mechanical ventilation.
 
1. Stop neuromuscular blocking agents.
2. Administer opioids or sedatives to eliminate distress.
If not already sedated, begin with fentanyl 100 mcg (or
morphine sulfate 10 mg) by intravenous bolus and infusion
of fentanyl 100 mcg/h intravenously (or morphine sulfate 10
mg/h intravenously).
Distress is indicated by RR > 24, nasal flaring, use of
accessory muscles of respiration, HR increase > 20%,
MAP increase > 20%, grimacing, clutching.
3. Discontinue vasoactive agents and other agents
unrelated to patient comfort, such as antibiotics,
intravenous fluids, and diagnostic procedures.
4. Decrease Fio2 to room air and PEEP to 0 cm H2O.
5. Observe patient for distress.
If patient is distressed, increase opioids by repeating
bolus dose and increasing hourly infusion rate by 50 mcg
fentanyl (or 5 mg morphine sulfate),1 then return to
observation.
If patient is not distressed, place on T piece and observe.
If patient continues without distress, extubate patient and
continue to observe for distress.
1Ventilatory support may be increased until additional opioids have effect.
RR, respiratory rate; HR, heart rate; MAP, mean airway pressure; Fio2,
fraction of inspired oxygen; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure.
Adapted, with permission, from San Francisco General Hospital
Guidelines for Withdrawal of Mechanical Ventilation/Life Support.
 Psychological, Social, & Spiritual
Issues
Dying is not exclusively or even primarily a biomedical event. It is an
intimate personal experience with profound psychological,
interpersonal, and existential meanings. For many people at the end
of life, the prospect of impending death stimulates a deep and urgent
assessment of their identity, the quality of their relationships, and the
meaning and purpose of their existence.
A. Psychological Challenges
In 1969, Elisabeth Kübler-Ross identified five psychological stages
or patterns of emotions that patients at the end of life may
experience: denial and isolation, anger, bargaining, depression, and
acceptance. Not every patient will experience all these emotions,
and typically not in an orderly progression. In addition to these five
stages are the perpetual challenges of anxiety and fear of the
unknown. Simple information, listening, assurance, and support may
help patients with these psychological challenges. In fact, patients
and families rank emotional support as one of the most important
aspects of good end-of-life care. Psychotherapy and group support
may be beneficial as well.
Despite the significant emotional stress of facing death, clinical
depression is not normal at the end of life and should be treated.
Cognitive and affective signs of depression (such as hopelessness)
may help distinguish depression from the low energy and other
vegetative signs common with end-stage illness. Although traditional
anti-depressant treatments such as selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors are effective, more rapidly acting medications such as
dextroamphetamine or methylphenidate (in doses used for sedation
described earlier in this chapter) may be particularly useful when the
end of life is near or while waiting for other antidepressant
medication to take effect.
B. Social Challenges
At the end of life, patients should be encouraged to discharge
personal, professional, and business obligations. This might include
completing important work or personal projects, distributing
possessions, writing a will, and making funeral and burial
arrangements. The prospect of death often prompts patients to
examine the quality of their interpersonal relationships and to begin
the process of saying goodbye (Table 5–9). Dying may intensify a
patient's need to feel cared for by the doctor and the need for
clinician empathy and compassion. Concern about estranged
relationships or “unfinished business” with significant others and
interest in reconciliation may become paramount at this time.
 
Table 5–9. Five statements often necessary for the completion of
important interpersonal relationships.
 
(1) “Forgive me.” (An expression of regret)
(2) “I forgive you.” (An expression of acceptance)
(3) “Thank you.”
(An expression of gratitude)
(4) “I love you.”
(An expression of affection)
(5) “Goodbye.”
(Leave-taking)
Reprinted, with permission, from Byock I. Dying Well: Peace and
Possibilities at the End of Life. New York: Riverhead Books, 1997.
C. Spiritual Challenges
Spirituality is the attempt to understand or accept the underlying
meaning of life, one's relationships to oneself and other people,
one's place in the universe, and the possibility of a “higher power” in
the universe. Spirituality is distinguished from particular religious
practices or beliefs and is generally considered a universal human
concern.
Perhaps because of an inappropriately exclusive attention to the
biologic challenge of forestalling death or perhaps from feelings of
discomfort or incompetence, clinicians frequently ignore their
patients’ spiritual concerns or reflexively refer these important issues
to chaplains, psychiatrists or other caretakers (nurses, social
workers, clergy). However, the existential challenges of dying are
central to the well-being of people at the end of life and are the
proper concern of clinicians. Clinicians can help dying patients by
providing care to the whole person—by providing physical comfort
and social support and by helping patients discover their own
unique meaning in the world and an acceptance of death as a part of
life.
Unlike physical ailments such as infections and fractures, which
usually require a clinician's intervention to be treated, the patient's
spiritual concerns often require only a clinician's attention, listening,
and witness. Clinicians might choose to inquire about the patient's
spiritual concerns and ask whether the patient wishes to discuss
them. For example, asking, “How are you within yourself?”
communicates that the clinician is interested in the patient's whole
experience and provides an opportunity for the patient to share
perceptions about his or her inner life. Questions that might
constitute an existential “review of systems” are presented in Table
5–10.
 
Table 5–10. An existential review of systems.
 
Intrapersonal
What does your illness/dying mean to you?
What do you think caused your illness?
How have you been healed in the past?
What do you think is needed for you to be healed now?
What is right with you now?
What do you hope for?
Interpersonal
Who is important to you?
To whom does your illness/dying matter?
Do you have any unfinished business with significant
others
?
Transpersonal
What is your source of strength, help, or hope?
Do you have spiritual concerns or a spiritual practice?
If so, how does your spirituality relate to your illness/dying,
and how can I help integrate your spirituality into your
health care? What do you think happens after we die?
What purpose might your illness/dying serve?
What do you think is trying to happen here?
While dying may be a period of inevitable loss of physical
functioning, the end of life also offers an opportunity for
psychological, interpersonal, and spiritual development. Individuals
may grow—even achieve a heightened sense of well-being or
transcendence—in the process of dying. Through listening, support,
and presence, clinicians may help foster this learning and be a
catalyst for this transformation. Rather than thinking of dying simply
as the termination of life, clinicians and patients may be guided by a
developmental model of dying that recognizes a series of lifelong
developmental tasks and landmarks and allows for growth at the
end of life.
Cooper D et al; Pallium Spiritual Care Providers DACUM Group.
The competencies required by professional hospice palliative care
spiritual care providers. J Palliat Med. 2010 Jul;13(7):869–75.
[PMID: 20636158]
 
Harrington SE et al. The role of chemotherapy at the end of life:
“When is enough, enough?” JAMA. 2008 Jun 11;299(22): 2667–
78. [PMID: 18544726]
 
Puchalski C et al. Improving the quality of spiritual care as a
dimension of palliative care: the report of the Consensus
Conference. J Palliat Med. 2009 Oct;12(10):885–904. [PMID:
19807235]
 
Rayner L et al. Antidepressants for the treatment of depression in
palliative care: systematic review and meta-analysis. Palliat Med.
2010 Oct 8. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20935027]
 
TASKS AFTER DEATH
After the death of a patient, the clinician is called upon to perform a
number of tasks, both required and recommended. The clinician
must plainly and directly inform the family of the death, complete a
death certificate, contact an organ procurement organization, and
request an autopsy. Providing words of sympathy and reassurance,
time for questions and initial grief, and a quiet private room for the
family at this time is appropriate and much appreciated.
 
The 
Pronouncement 
& 
Death
Certificate
In the United States, state policies direct clinicians to confirm the
death of a patient in a formal process called “pronouncement.” The
clinician must verify the absence of spontaneous respirations and
cardiac activity. A note describing these findings and the time of
death is entered in the patient's chart. In many states, when a patient
whose death is expected dies outside of the hospital (at home or in
prisons, for example) nurses may be authorized to report the death
over the telephone to a physician who must then sign the death
certificate within 24 hours. For traumatic deaths, some states allow
emergency medical technicians to pronounce a patient dead at the
scene based on clearly defined criteria and with physician telephonic
or radio supervision.
While the pronouncement may often seem like an awkward and
unnecessary formality, clinicians may use this time to reassure the
patient's loved ones at the bedside that the patient died peacefully
and that all appropriate care had been given. Both clinicians and
families may use the ritual of the pronouncement as an opportunity
to begin to process emotionally the death of the patient.
Physicians are legally required to accurately report the underlying
cause of death on the death certificate. This reporting is important
both for patients’ families (for insurance purposes and the need for
an accurate family medical history) and for the epidemiologic study
of disease and public health. Physicians are untrained in and
unskilled at correctly completing death certificates. The physician
should be specific about the major cause of death being the
condition without which the patient would not have died (eg,
“decompensated cirrhosis”) and its contributory cause (eg,
“hepatitis B and hepatitis C infections and chronic alcoholic
hepatitis”) as well as any associated conditions (eg, “acute kidney
failure”)—and not simply put down “cardiac arrest” as the cause of
death.
 Autopsy & Organ Donation
Discussing the options and obtaining consent for autopsy and organ
donation with patients prior to death is usually the best practice.
This advances the principle of patient autonomy and lessens the
responsibilities of distressed family members during the period
immediately following the death. However, after a patient dies, or in
the case of brain death, designated organ transplant personnel are
more successful than the treating clinicians at obtaining consent for
organ donation from surviving family members. Federal regulations
require that a designated representative of an organ procurement
organization approach the family about organ donation. Most
people in the United States support the donation of organs for
transplants. Currently, however, organ transplantation is severely
limited by the availability of donor organs. Many potential donors
and the families of actual donors experience a sense of reward in
contributing, even through death, to the lives of others.
Clinicians must be sensitive to ethnic and cultural differences in
attitudes about autopsy and organ donation. Patients or their
families should be reminded of their right to limit autopsy or organ
donation in any way they choose, although such restriction may limit
the utility of autopsy. Pathologists can perform autopsies without
interfering with funeral plans or the appearance of the deceased.
The results of an autopsy may help surviving family members
(and clinicians) understand the exact cause of a patient's death and
foster a sense of closure. A clinician-family conference to review the
results of the autopsy provides a good opportunity for clinicians to
assess how well families are grieving and to answer questions.
Despite the advantages of conducting postmortem examinations,
autopsy rates have fallen drastically to < 15%. Families report
refusing autopsies out of fear of disfigurement of the body or delay
of the funeral—or say they were simply not asked. They allow
autopsies in order to advance medical knowledge, to identify the
exact cause of their loved one's death, and to be reassured that
appropriate care was given. Routinely addressing these issues when
discussing autopsy may help increase the autopsy rate; the most
important mistake is the failure to ask for permission to perform it.
 Follow-up & Grieving
Proper care of patients at the end of life includes following up with
surviving family members after the patient has died, although
clinicians often do not facilitate adequate bereavement services.
Following up by telephone enables the clinician to assuage any guilt
about decisions the family may have made, assess how families are
grieving, reassure them about the nature of normal grieving, and
identify complicated grief or depression. Clinicians can recommend
support groups and counseling as needed. A card or telephone call
from the clinician to the family days to weeks after the patient's
death (and perhaps on the anniversary of the death) allows the
clinician to express concern for the family and the deceased.
After a patient dies, the clinician too may need to grieve.
Although clinicians may be relatively unaffected by the deaths of
some patients, other deaths may cause distressing feelings of
sadness, loss, and guilt. These emotions should be recognized as the
first step toward processing them or preventing them in the future.
For clinicians, grieving the loss of a patient is normal. Each
clinician may find personal or communal resources that help with the
process of grieving. Shedding tears, the support of colleagues, time
for reflection, and traditional or personal mourning rituals all may be
effective. Attending the funeral of a patient who has died can be a
satisfying personal experience that is almost universally appreciated
by families and that may be the final element in caring well for
people at the end of life.
Chau NG et al. Bereavement practices of physicians in oncology
and palliative care. Arch Intern Med. 2009 May 25;169(10):
963–71. [PMID: 19468090]
 
Simpkin AL et al. Modifiable factors influencing relatives’ decision
to offer organ donation: systematic review. BMJ. 2009 Apr
21;338:b991. [PMID: 19383730]
 
Wittouck C et al. The prevention and treatment of complicated
grief: A meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev. 2011 Feb;31(1):69–78.
[PMID: 21130937]
 
 
 
Dermatologic Disorders
Timothy G. Berger, MD
Dermatologic diseases are diagnosed by the types of lesions they
cause. To make a diagnosis: (1) identify the type of lesion(s) the
patient exhibits by morphology establishing a differential diagnosis
(Table 6–1); and (2) obtain the elements of the history, physical
examination, and appropriate laboratory tests to confirm the
diagnosis. Unique clinical situations, such as the ill ICU patient, lead
to different diagnostic considerations.
PRINCIPLES OF DERMATOLOGIC THERAPY
 Frequently Used Treatment Measures
A. Bathing
Soap should be used only in the axillae and groin and on the feet by
persons with dry or inflamed skin. Soaking in water for 10–15
minutes before applying topical corticosteroids enhances their
efficacy (Soak and Smear). Bath oils can be used, but add little
above the use of moisturizers, and may make the tub slippery,
increasing the risk of falling.
B. Topical Therapy
Nondermatologists should become familiar with a representative
agent in each category for each indication (eg, topical
corticosteroid, topical retinoid, etc).
1. Corticosteroids—Topical corticosteroid creams, lotions,
ointments, gels, foams, and sprays are presented in Table 6–2.
Topical corticosteroids are divided into classes based on potency.
There is little (except price) to recommend one agent over another
within the same class. For a given agent, an ointment is more potent
than a cream. The potency of a topical corticosteroid may be
dramatically increased by applying an occlusive dressing over the
corticosteroid. Optimally, at least 4 hours of occlusion should be
prescribed to enhance penetration. Such dressings may include
gloves, plastic wrap, or plastic occlusive suits for patients with
generalized erythroderma or atopy. Caution should be used in
applying topical corticosteroids to areas of thin skin (face, scrotum,
vulva, skin folds). Topical corticosteroid use on the eyelids may
result in glaucoma or cataracts. One may estimate the amount of
topical corticosteroid needed by using the “rule of nines” (as in burn
evaluation; see Figure 37–2). In general, it takes an average of 20–
30 g to cover the body surface of an adult once. Systemic
absorption does occur, but adrenal suppression, diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, osteoporosis, and other complications of systemic
corticosteroids are very rare with topical corticosteroid therapy.
2. Emollients for dry skin (“moisturizers”)—Dry skin is not
related to water intake but to abnormal function of the epidermis.
Many types of emollients are available. Petrolatum, mineral oil,
Aquaphor, Vanicream, and Eucerin cream are the heaviest and
best. Emollients are most effective when applied to wet skin. If the
skin is too greasy after application, pat dry with a damp towel.
Vanicream is relatively allergen-free and can be used if allergic
contact dermatitis to topical products is suspected.
The scaly appearance of dry skin may be improved by urea,
lactic acid, or glycolic acid-containing products provided no
inflammation (erythema or pruritus) is present.
3. Drying agents for weepy dermatoses—If the skin is weepy
from infection or inflammation, drying agents may be beneficial. The
best drying agent is water, applied as repeated compresses for 15–
30 minutes, alone or with aluminum salts (Burow solution,
Domeboro tablets) or colloidal oatmeal (Aveeno).
4. Topical antipruritics—Lotions that contain 0.5% each of
camphor and menthol (Sarna) or pramoxine hydrochlo-ride 1%, are
effective antipruritic agents (with or without 0.5% menthol, eg, Prax,
PrameGel, Aveeno Anti-Itch lotion). Hydrocortisone, 1% or 2.5%,
may be incorporated for its anti-inflammatory effect (Pramosone
cream, lotion, or ointment). Doxepin cream 5% may reduce pruritus
but may cause drowsiness. Pramoxine and doxepin are most
effective when applied with topical corticosteroids. Monoamine
oxidase inhibitors should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before
treatment with doxepin. Topical capsaicin can be effective in some
forms of neuropathic itch. Ice in a plastic bag covered by a thin
cloth applied to itchy spots can be effective.
 
Table 6–1. Morphologic categorization of skin lesions and
diseases.
 
Pigmented
Freckle, lentigo, seborrheic keratosis,
nevus, blue nevus, halo nevus, atypical
nevus, melanoma
Scaly
Psoriasis, dermatitis (atopic, stasis,
seborrheic, chronic allergic contact or
irritant contact), xerosis (dry skin), lichen
simplex chronicus, tinea, tinea
versicolor, secondary syphilis, pityriasis
rosea, discoid lupus erythematosus,
exfoliative dermatitis, actinic keratoses,
Bowen disease, Paget disease,
intertrigo
Vesicular
Herpes simplex, varicella, herpes zoster,
dyshidrosis (vesicular dermatitis of
palms and soles), vesicular tinea,
dermatophytid, dermatitis herpetiformis,
miliaria, scabies, photosensitivity
Weepy or
encrusted
Impetigo, acute contact allergic
dermatitis, any vesicular dermatitis
Pustular
Acne vulgaris, acne rosacea, folliculitis,
candidiasis, miliaria, any vesicular
dermatitis
Figurate
(“shaped”)
erythema
Urticaria, erythema multiforme, erythema
migrans, cellulitis, erysipelas,
erysipeloid, arthropod bites
Bullous
Impetigo, blistering dactylitis,
pemphigus, pemphigoid, porphyria
cutanea tarda, drug eruptions, erythema
multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis
Hyperkeratotic: warts, corns, seborrheic
keratoses
Papular
Purple-violet: lichen planus, drug
eruptions, Kaposi sarcoma
Flesh-colored, umbilicated: molluscum
contagiosum
Pearly: basal cell carcinoma, intradermal
nevi
Small, red, inflammatory: acne, miliaria,
candidiasis, scabies, folliculitis
Pruritus1
Xerosis, scabies, pediculosis, bites,
systemic causes, anogenital pruritus
Nodular, cystic
Erythema nodosum, furuncle, cystic
acne, follicular (epidermal) inclusion cyst
Photodermatitis
(photodistributed
rashes)
Drug, polymorphic light eruption, lupus
erythematosus
Morbilliform
Drug, viral infection, secondary syphilis
Erosive
Any vesicular dermatitis, impetigo,
aphthae, lichen planus, erythema
multiforme
Ulcerated
Decubiti, herpes simplex, skin cancers,
parasitic infections, syphilis (chancre),
chancroid, vasculitis, stasis, arterial
disease
1Not a morphologic class but included because it is one of the most
common dermatologic presentations.
C. Systemic antipruritic drugs
1. Antihistamines—H1-blockers are the agents of choice for
pruritus when due to histamine, such as in urticaria. Otherwise, they
appear to relieve pruritus only by their sedating effects. Except in
the case of urticaria, nonsedating antihistamines are of limited value
in inflammatory skin diseases. At times, however, the combination
of antihistamines of different classes may lead to better control of
non-urticarial pruritus (for example, loratadine 10 mg orally twice
daily plus fexofenadine 180 mg orally daily plus hydroxyzine 25–50
mg orally nightly).
Hydroxyzine 25–50 mg nightly is typically used for its sedative
effect in pruritic diseases. Sedation can limit daytime use. The least
sedating antihistamines are loratadine and fexofenadine. Cetirizine
causes drowsiness in about 15% of patients. Some antidepressants,
such as doxepin, mirtazapine, sertraline, and paroxetine can be
effective antipruritics.
2. Systemic corticosteroids—(See Chapter 26.)
Patel T et al. Therapy of pruritus. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2010 Jul;11(10):1673–82. [PMID: 20426711]
 
Ständer S et al. Treatment of chronic pruritus with the selective
serotonin re-uptake inhibitors paroxetine and fluvoxamine: results
of an open-labelled, two-arm proof-of-concept study. Acta Derm
Venereol. 2009;89(1):45–51. [PMID: 19197541]
 
 Sunscreens
Protection from ultraviolet light should begin at birth and will reduce
the incidence of actinic keratoses, melanoma, and some
nonmelanoma skin cancers when initiated at any age. The best
protection is shade, but protective clothing, avoidance of direct sun
exposure during the peak hours of the day, and daily use of
chemical sunscreens are important.
Fair-complexioned persons should use a sunscreen with an SPF
(sun protective factor) of at least 15 and preferably 30–40 every
day. Sunscreens with high SPF values (> 30) usually afford some
protection against UVA as well as UVB and are helpful in managing
photosensitivity disorders. The actual SPF achieved is about one-
quarter or less than that listed on the product, since patients apply
only one-quarter as much sunscreen per unit area when compared
with the amount used in tests to determine the SPF listed on the
product. Aggressive sunscreen use should be accompanied by
vitamin D supplementation in persons at risk for osteopenia (eg,
organ transplant recipients).
Bodekaer M et al. Sun protection factor persistence during a day
with physical activity and bathing. Photodermatol Photoimmunol
Photomed. 2008 Dec;24(6):296–300. [PMID: 19000186]
 
 
Table 6–2. Useful topical dermatologic therapeutic agents.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost
because wide contractual variations exist among institutions. Source: Red
Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc.
2Topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus should only be used when other
topical treatments are ineffective. Treatment should be limited to an area
and duration to be as brief as possible. Treatment with these agents
should be avoided in persons with known immunosuppression, HIV
infection, bone marrow and organ transplantation, lymphoma, at high risk
for lymphoma, and those with a prior history of lymphoma. N/A, not
applicable; OTC, over-the-counter.
Green AC et al. Reduced melanoma after regular sunscreen use:
randomized trial follow-up. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan;29(3): 257–
263. [PMID: 21135266]
 
Schalka S et al. The influence of the amount of sunscreen applied
and its sun protection factor (SPF): evaluation of two sun-screens
including the same ingredients at different concentrations.
Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2009 Aug;25 (4):175–
80. [PMID: 19614894]
 
 
Complications 
of 
Topical
Dermatologic Therapy
Complications of topical therapy can be largely avoided. They fall
into several categories:
A. Allergy
Of the topical antibiotics, neomycin and bacitracin have the greatest
potential for sensitization. Diphenhydramine, benzocaine, vitamin E,
aromatic essential oils, and bee pollen are potential sensitizers in
topical medications. Preservatives and even the topical
corticosteroids themselves can cause allergic contact dermatitis.
B. Irritation
Preparations of tretinoin, benzoyl peroxide, and other acne
medications should be applied sparingly to the skin.
C. Overuse
Topical corticosteroids may induce acne-like lesions on the face
(steroid rosacea) and atrophic striae in body folds.
COMMON DERMATOSES
 
PIGMENTED LESIONS
MELANOCYTIC NEVI (Normal Moles)
In general, a benign mole is a small (< 6 mm) lesion with a well-
defined border and a single shade of pigment from beige or pink to
dark brown. The physical examination must take precedence over
the history.
Moles have a normal natural history. In the patient's first decade
of life, moles often appear as flat, small, brown lesions. They are
called junctional nevi because the nevus cells are at the junction of
the epidermis and dermis. Over the next 2 decades, these moles
grow in size and often become raised, reflecting the appearance of a
dermal component, giving rise to compound nevi (Figure 6–1).
Moles may darken and grow during pregnancy. As white patients
enter their seventh and eighth decades, most moles have lost their
junctional component and dark pigmentation. At every stage of life,
normal moles should be well-demarcated, symmetric, and uniform
in contour and color.
 
Figure 6–1. Benign, flat and macular compound nevus on the
arm. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission,
from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger
J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Marsden JR et al; British Association of Dermatologists (BAD)
Clinical Standards Unit. Revised UK guidelines for the
management of cutaneous melanoma 2010. J Plast Reconstr
Aesthet Surg. 2010 Sep;63(9):1401–19. [PMID: 20728418]
 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for skin cancer:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2009 Feb 3;150(3):188–93. [PMID: 19189908]
 
ATYPICAL NEVI
The term “atypical nevus” or “atypical mole” has supplanted
“dysplastic nevus.” The diagnosis of atypical moles is made clinically
and not histologically, and moles should be removed only if they are
suspected to be melanomas. Clinically, these moles are large (≥ 6
mm in diameter), with an ill-defined, irregular border and irregularly
distributed pigmentation (Figure 6–2). It is estimated that 5–10% of
the white population in the United States has one or more atypical
nevi. Studies have defined an increased risk of melanoma in the
following populations: patients with 50 or more nevi with one or
more atypical moles and one mole at least 8 mm or larger, and
patients with a few to many definitely atypical moles. These patients
deserve education and regular (usually every 6–12 months) follow-
up. Kindreds with familial melanoma (numerous atypical nevi and a
strong family history) deserve even closer attention, as the risk of
developing single or even multiple melanomas in these individuals
approaches 50% by age 50.
 
Figure 6–2. Atypical (dysplastic) nevus on the chest. (Courtesy
of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine
RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Cyr PR. Atypical moles. Am Fam Physician. 2008 Sep 15;78(6):
735–40. [PMID: 18819240]
 
de Snoo FA et al. From sporadic atypical nevi to familial
melanoma: risk analysis for melanoma in sporadic atypical nevus
patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 May;56(5):748–52. [PMID:
17276542]
 
BLUE NEVI
Blue nevi are small, slightly elevated, blue-black lesions (Figure 6–
3) that favor the dorsal hands. They are common in persons of
Asian descent, and an individual patient may have several of them.
If present without change for many years, they may be considered
benign, since malignant blue nevi are rare. However, blue-black
papules and nodules that are new or growing must be evaluated to
rule out nodular melanoma.
Bogart MM et al. Blue nevi: a case report and review of the
literature. Cutis. 2007 Jul;80(1):42–4. [PMID: 17725063]
 
Murali R et al. Blue nevi and related lesions: a review highlighting
atypical and newly described variants, distinguishing features and
diagnostic pitfalls. Adv Anat Pathol. 2009 Nov; 16(6):365–82.
[PMID: 19851128]
 
 
Figure 6–3. Blue nevus on the left cheek, with some
resemblance to a melanoma. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD;
used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ
Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
FRECKLES & LENTIGINES
Freckles (ephelides) and lentigines are flat brown spots. Freckles
first appear in young children, darken with ultra-violet exposure,
and fade with cessation of sun exposure. In adults lentigines
gradually appear in sun-exposed areas, particularly the dorsa of the
hands, upper back, and upper chest, starting in the fourth to fifth
decade of life. They are macular, usually 3-5 mm in diameter. On
the upper back, they may have a very irregular border (inkspot
lentigines). They do not fade with cessation of sun exposure. They
should be evaluated like all pigmented lesions: If the pigmentation is
homogeneous and they are symmetric and flat, they are most likely
benign. They can be treated with topical 0.1% tretinoin, 0.1%
tazarotene, 2% 4-hydroxyanisole with 0.01% tretinoin (Solage),
laser therapy, or cryotherapy.
Ortonne JP et al. Treatment of solar lentigines. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2006 May;54(5 Suppl 2):S262–71. [PMID:
16631967]
 
SEBORRHEIC KERATOSES
Seborrheic keratoses are benign plaques, beige to brown or even
black, 3–20 mm in diameter, with a velvety or warty surface (Figure
6–4). They appear to be stuck or pasted onto the skin. They are
extremely common—especially in the elderly—and may be
mistaken for melanomas or other types of cutaneous neoplasms.
Although they may be frozen with liquid nitrogen or curetted if they
itch or are inflamed, no treatment is needed.
Fink AM et al. Seborrhoeic keratoses in patients with internal
malignancies: a case-control study with prospective accrual of
patients. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2009 Nov;23(11):
1316–9. [PMID: 19309432]
 
 
Figure 6–4. Seborrheic keratosis with “stuck on appearance”
but irregular borders and color variation suspicious for possible
melanoma. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
MALIGNANT MELANOMA
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 May be flat or raised.
 Should be suspected in any pigmented skin lesion with recent
change in appearance.
 Examination with good light may show varying colors, including
red, white, black, and bluish.
 Borders typically irregular.
 
 General Considerations
Malignant melanoma is the leading cause of death due to skin
disease. In 2009, there were 58,094 cases of melanoma in the
United States, with 33,041 cases in men (representing 5% of all
cancers in men) and 25,053 cases in women (representing 4% of all
cancers in women). There were 8461 deaths from melanoma; of
those, 5506 were in men. One in four cases of melanoma occurs
before the age of 40. Increased detection of early melanomas has
led to increased survival, but melanoma fatalities continue to
increase, especially in elderly men.
Tumor thickness is the single most important prognostic factor.
Ten-year survival rates—related to thickness in millimeters—are as
follows: < 1 mm, 95%; 1–2 mm, 80%; 2–4 mm, 55%; and > 4
mm, 30%. With lymph node involvement, the 5-year survival rate is
30%; with distant metastases, it is < 10%.
 Clinical Findings
Primary malignant melanomas may be classified into various
clinicohistologic types, including lentigo maligna melanoma (arising
on chronically sun-exposed skin of older individuals); superficial
spreading malignant melanoma (two-thirds of all melanomas arising
on intermittently sun-exposed skin); nodular malignant melanoma;
acral-lentiginous melanomas (arising on palms, soles, and nail beds);
and malignant melanomas on mucous membranes. Clinical features
of pigmented lesions suspicious for melanoma are an irregular
notched border where the pigment appears to be leaking into the
normal surrounding skin; a topography that may be irregular, ie,
partly raised and partly flat (Figures 6–5 and 6–6). Color
variegation is present, and colors such as pink, blue, gray, white,
and black are indications for referral. A useful mnemonic is the
ABCD rule: “ABCD = Asymmetry, Border irregularity, Color
variegation, and Diameter > 6 mm.” “E” for Evolution can be
added. The history of a changing mole (evolution) is the single most
important historical reason for close evaluation and possible referral.
Bleeding and ulceration are ominous signs. A mole that stands out
from the patient's other moles deserves special scrutiny—the “ugly
duckling sign.” A patient with a large number of moles is statistically
at increased risk for melanoma and deserves careful and periodic
examination, particularly if the lesions are atypical. Referral of
suspicious pigmented lesions is always appropriate.
 
Figure 6–5. Malignant melanoma, with multiple colors and
classic “ABCDE” features. (Used, with permission, from Berger
TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
While superficial spreading melanoma is largely a disease of
whites, persons of other races are still at risk for this and other
types of melanoma, particularly acral lentiginous melanoma. These
occur as dark, sometimes irregularly shaped lesions on the palms
and soles and as new, often broad and solitary, darkly pigmented
longitudinal streaks in the nails. Acral lentiginous melanoma may be
a difficult diagnosis because benign pigmented lesions of the hands,
feet, and nails occur commonly in more darkly pigmented persons
and clinicians may hesitate to biopsy the palms, soles, and nail beds.
As a result, the diagnosis is often delayed until the tumor has
become clinically obvious and histologically thick. Clinicians should
give special attention to new or changing lesions in these areas.
Dermoscopy—use of a special magnifying device to evaluate
pigmented lesions—helps select suspicious lesions that require
biopsy. In experienced hands, the specificity is 85% and the
sensitivity 95%.
 
Figure 6–6. Melanoma resembling a seborrheic keratosis on the
lateral face of a man. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used,
with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr,
Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Treatment
Treatment of melanoma consists of excision. After histo-logic
diagnosis, the area is usually reexcised with margins dictated by the
thickness of the tumor. Thin low-risk and intermediate-risk tumors
require only conservative margins of 1–3 cm. More specifically,
surgical margins of 0.5 cm for melanoma in situ and 1 cm for lesions
< 1 mm in thickness are recommended.
Sentinel lymph node biopsy (selective lymphadenectomy) using
preoperative lymphoscintigraphy and intra-operative lymphatic
mapping is effective for staging melanoma patients with intermediate
risk without clinical adenopathy and is recommended for all patients
with lesions over 1 mm in thickness or with high-risk histologic
features. Referral of intermediate-risk and high-risk patients to
centers with expertise in melanoma is strongly recommended.
Garbe C et al. Diagnosis and treatment of melanoma: European
consensus-based interdisciplinary guideline. Eur J Cancer. 2010
Jan;46(2):270–83. [PMID: 19959353]
 
Gaudy-Marqueste C et al. Risk factors in elderly people for lentigo
maligna compared with other melanomas: a double case-control
study. Arch Dermatol. 2009 Apr;145(4):418–23. [PMID:
19380663]
 
Psaty EL et al. Defining the patient at high risk for melanoma. Int J
Dermatol. 2010 Apr;49(4):362–76. [PMID: 20465687]
 
Rigel DS et al. The evolution of melanoma diagnosis: 25 years
beyond the ABCDs. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010 Sep–Oct;60(5):
301–16. [PMID: 20671054]
 
Swetter SM et al. Melanoma in middle-aged and older men: a
multi-institutional survey study of factors related to tumor
thickness. Arch Dermatol. 2009 Apr;145(4):397–404. [PMID:
19380661]
 
Tucker MA. Melanoma epidemiology. Hematol Oncol Clin North
Am. 2009 Jun;23(3):383–95. [PMID: 19464592]
 
SCALING DISORDERS
ATOPIC DERMATITIS (Eczema)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pruritic, exudative, or lichenified eruption on face, neck, upper
trunk, wrists, and hands and in the antecubital and popliteal folds.
 Personal or family history of allergic manifestations (eg, asthma,
allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis).
 Tendency to recur.
 Onset in childhood in most patients. Onset after age 30 is very
uncommon.
 
 General Considerations
Atopic dermatitis looks different at different ages and in people of
different races. Diagnostic criteria for atopic dermatitis must include
pruritus, typical morphology and distribution (flexural lichenification,
hand eczema, nipple eczema, and eyelid eczema in adults), onset in
childhood, and chronicity. Also helpful are: (1) a personal or family
history of atopic disease (asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis),
(2) xerosis-ichthyosis, (3) facial pallor with infraorbital darkening,
(4) elevated serum IgE, and (5) repeated skin infections.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Itching may be severe and prolonged. Rough, red plaques usually
without the thick scale and discrete demarcation of psoriasis affect
the face, neck, and upper trunk. The flexural surfaces of elbows and
knees are often involved. In chronic cases, the skin is dry, leathery,
and lichenified. Pigmented persons may have poorly demarcated
hypopigmented patches (pityriasis alba) on the cheeks and
extremities. In black patients with severe disease, pigmentation may
be lost in lichenified areas. During acute flares, widespread redness
with weeping, either diffusely or in discrete plaques, is common.
B. Laboratory Findings
Food allergy is an uncommon cause of flares of atopic dermatitis in
adults. Radioallergosorbent tests (RASTs) or skin tests may suggest
dust mite allergy. Eosinophilia and increased serum IgE levels may
be present.
 Differential Diagnosis
Atopic dermatitis must be distinguished from seborrheic dermatitis
(less pruritic, frequent scalp and face involvement, greasy and scaly
lesions, and quick response to therapy). Secondary staphylococcal
infections may exacerbate atopic dermatitis, and should be
considered during hyperacute, weepy flares of atopic dermatitis.
Fissuring where the earlobe connects to the neck is a cardinal sign
of secondary infection. Since virtually all patients with atopic
dermatitis have skin disease before age 5, a new diagnosis of atopic
dermatitis in an adult over age 30 should be made cautiously and
only after consultation. Atopic-like dermatitis associated with
marked elevation of IgE; recurrent, sometimes cold, staphylococcal
abscesses; recurrent pneumonia with pneumatocele formation; and
retained primary dentition may indicate hyper-IgE syndrome.
 Treatment
Patient education regarding gentle skin care and exactly how to use
medications is critical in the successful management of atopic
dermatitis.
A. General Measures
Atopic patients have hyperirritable skin. Anything that dries or
irritates the skin will potentially trigger dermatitis. Atopic individuals
are sensitive to low humidity and often get worse in the winter.
Adults with atopic disorders should not bathe more than once daily.
Soap should be confined to the armpits, groin, scalp and feet.
Washcloths and brushes should not be used. After rinsing, the skin
should be patted dry (not rubbed) and then immediately—within
three minutes—covered with a thin film of an emollient such as
Aquaphor, Eucerin, petrolatum, Vanicream, or a corticosteroid as
needed. Vanicream can be used if contact dermatitis resulting from
additives in medication is suspected. Atopic patients may be
irritated by scratchy fabrics, including wools and acrylics. Cottons
are preferable, but synthetic blends also are tolerated. Other
triggers of eczema in some patients include sweating, ointments, hot
baths, and animal danders.
B. Local Treatment
Corticosteroids should be applied sparingly to the dermatitis once
or twice daily and rubbed in well. Their potency should be
appropriate to the severity of the dermatitis. In general, one should
begin with triamcinolone 0.1% or a stronger corticosteroid then
taper to hydrocortisone or another slightly stronger mild
corticosteroid (alclometasone, desonide). It is vital that patients
taper off corticosteroids and substitute emollients as the dermatitis
clears to avoid the side effects of corticosteroids. Tapering is also
important to avoid rebound flares of the dermatitis that may follow
their abrupt cessation. Tacrolimus ointment (Protopic 0.03% or
0.1%) and pimecrolimus cream (Elidel 1%) can be effective in
managing atopic dermatitis when applied twice daily. Burning on
application occurs in about 50% of patients using Protopic and in
10–25% of Elidel users, but it may resolve with continued
treatment. These medications do not appear to cause skin atrophy
or striae, and are safe for application on the face and even the
eyelids.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a
black box warning for both topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus due
to concerns about the development of T-cell lymphoma. The agents
should be used sparingly and only in locations where less expensive
corticosteroids cannot be used. Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus
should be avoided in patients at high risk for lymphoma (ie, those
with HIV, iatrogenic immunosuppression, prior lymphoma). The
treatment of atopic dermatitis is dictated by the pattern of the
dermatitis—acute/weepy, subacute/scaly, or chronic/lichenified.
1. Acute weeping lesions—Use water or aluminum subacetate
solution (Domeboro tablets, one in a pint of cool water) or colloidal
oatmeal (Aveeno; dispense one box, and use as directed on box) as
soothing or astringent soaks, baths, or wet dressings for 10–30
minutes two to four times daily. Lesions on extremities particularly
may be bandaged for protection at night. Use high-potency
corticosteroids after soaking but spare the face and body folds.
Tacrolimus is usually not tolerated at this stage. Systemic
corticosteroids may be required (see below).
2. Subacute or scaly lesions—At this stage, the lesions are dry
but still red and pruritic. Mid- to high-potency corticosteroids in
ointment form should be continued until scaling and elevated skin
lesions are cleared and itching is decreased substantially. At that
point, patients should begin a 2- to 4-week taper from twice-daily
to daily to alternate-day dosing with topical corticosteroids to
reliance on emollients, with occasional use of corticosteroids on
specific itchy areas. Instead of tapering the frequency of usage of a
more potent corticosteroid, it may be preferable to switch to a low-
potency corticosteroid. Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus are more
expensive alternatives and may be added if corticosteroids cannot
be stopped. They avoid the complications of long-term topical
corticosteroid use.
3. Chronic, dry, lichenified lesions—Thickened and usually well-
demarcated, they are best treated with high-potency to ultra-high-
potency corticosteroid ointments. Nightly occlusion for 2–6 weeks
may enhance the initial response. Occasionally, adding tar
preparations such as LCD (liquor carbonis detergens) 10% in
Aquaphor or 2% crude coal tar may be beneficial.
4. Maintenance treatment—Once symptoms have improved,
constant application of effective moisturizers is recommended to
prevent flares. In patients with moderate disease, weekend only use
of topical corticosteroids can prevent flares.
C. Systemic and Adjuvant Therapy
Systemic corticosteroids are indicated only for severe acute
exacerbations. Oral prednisone dosages should be high enough to
suppress the dermatitis quickly, usually starting with 40–60 mg daily
for adults. The dosage is then tapered to nil over a period of 2–4
weeks. Owing to the chronic nature of atopic dermatitis and the
side effects of chronic systemic corticosteroids, long-term use of
these agents is not recommended for maintenance therapy. Classic
anti-histamines may relieve severe pruritus. Hydroxyzine,
diphenhydramine, or doxepin may be useful—the dosage increased
gradually to avoid drowsiness. Oral naltrexone may benefit some
patients. Fissures, crusts, erosions, or pustules indicate
staphylococcal infection clinically. Antistaphylococcal antibiotics
given systemically—such as a first-generation cephalosporin or
doxycycline if methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is
suspected—may be helpful in management. Cultures to exclude
methicillin-resistant S aureus are recommended. Phototherapy can
be an important adjunct for severely affected patients, and the
properly selected patient with recalcitrant disease may benefit
greatly from therapy with UVB with or without coal tar or PUVA
(psoralen plus ultraviolet A). Oral cyclosporine, mycophenolate
mofetil, methotrexate, or azathioprine may be used for the most
severe and recalcitrant cases.
 Complications of Treatment
The clinician should monitor for skin atrophy. Eczema herpeticum,
a generalized herpes simplex infection manifested by monomorphic
vesicles, crusts, or scalloped erosions superimposed on atopic
dermatitis or other extensive eczematous processes, is treated
successfully with oral acyclovir, 200 mg five times daily, or
intravenous acyclovir in a dose of 10 mg/kg intravenously every 8
hours (500 mg/m2 every 8 hours). Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus
may increase the risk of eczema herpeticum.
Smallpox vaccination is absolutely contraindicated in patients
with atopic dermatitis or a history thereof because of the risk of
eczema vaccinatum (widespread vaccinia infection, preferentially in
areas of dermatitis). Generalized vaccinia may develop in patients
with atopic dermatitis who have contact with recent vaccine
recipients who still have pustular or crusted vaccination sites.
Eczema vaccinatum and generalized vaccinia are indications for
vaccinia immune globulin.
 Prognosis
Atopic dermatitis runs a chronic or intermittent course. Affected
adults may have only hand dermatitis. Poor prognostic factors for
persistence into adulthood in atopic dermatitis include onset early in
childhood, early generalized disease, and asthma. Only 40–60% of
these patients have lasting remissions.
Bieber T. Atopic dermatitis. N Engl J Med. 2008 Apr 3;358(14):
1483–94. [PMID: 18385500]
 
Boguniewicz M et al. Recent insights into atopic dermatitis and
implications for management of infectious complications. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2010 Jan;125(1):4–13. [PMID: 20109729]
 
Malekzad F et al. Efficacy of oral naltrexone on pruritus in atopic
eczema: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Eur Acad
Dermatol Venereol. 2009 Aug;23(8):948–50. [PMID: 19453814]
 
Simpson EL. Atopic dermatitis: a review of topical treatment
options. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Mar;26(3):633–40. [PMID:
20070141]
 
Williams HC et al. What's new in atopic eczema? An analysis of
systematic reviews published in 2007 and 2008. Part 1.
Definitions, causes and consequences of eczema. Clin Exp
Dermatol. 2010 Jan;35(1):12–5. [PMID: 19874343]
 
LICHEN SIMPLEX CHRONICUS (Circumscribed
Neurodermatitis)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic itching and scratching.
 Lichenified lesions with exaggerated skin lines overlying a
thickened, well-circumscribed scaly plaque.
 Predilection for nape of neck, wrists, external surfaces of
forearms, lower legs, scrotum, and vulva.
 
 General Considerations
Lichen simplex chronicus represents a self-perpetuating scratch-itch
cycle—a learned behavior that is hard to disrupt.
 
Figure 6–7. lichen simplex chronicus. (Used, with permission,
from Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Clinical Findings
Intermittent itching incites the patient to scratch the lesions. Itching
may be so intense as to interfere with sleep. Dry, leathery,
hypertrophic, lichenified plaques appear on the neck, ankles, or
perineum (Figure 6–7). The patches are rectangular, thickened, and
hyperpigmented. The skin lines are exaggerated.
 Differential Diagnosis
This disorder can be differentiated from plaque-like lesions such as
psoriasis (redder lesions having whiter scales on the elbows, knees,
and scalp and nail findings), lichen planus (violaceous, usually
smaller polygonal papules), and nummular (coin-shaped) dermatitis.
Lichen simplex chronicus may complicate chronic atopic dermatitis.
 Treatment
For lesions in extra-genital regions, superpotent topical
corticosteroids are effective, with or without occlusion, when used
twice daily for several weeks. In some patients, flurandrenolide
(Cordran) tape may be effective, since it prevents scratching and
rubbing of the lesion. The injection of triamcinolone acetonide
suspension (5–10 mg/mL) into the lesions may occasionally be
curative. Continuous occlusion with a flexible hydrocolloid dressing
for 7 days at a time for 1–2 months may also be helpful. The area
should be protected and the patient encouraged to become aware
of when he or she is scratching. For genital lesions, see the section
Pruritus Ani.
 Prognosis
The disease tends to remit during treatment but may recur or
develop at another site.
Engin B et al. The effect of transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation in the treatment of lichen simplex: a prospective study.
Clin Exp Dermatol. 2009 Apr;34(3):324–8. [PMID: 19175614]
 
Martín-Brufau R et al. Personality differences between patients
with lichen simplex chronicus and normal population: a study of
pruritus. Eur J Dermatol. 2010 May–Jun;20(3): 359–63. [PMID:
20388609]
 
PSORIASIS
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Silvery scales on bright red, well-demarcated plaques, usually on
the knees, elbows, and scalp.
 Nail findings including pitting and onycholysis (separation of the
nail plate from the bed).
 Mild itching (usually).
 May be associated with psoriatic arthritis.
 Psoriasis patients are at increased risk for Metabolic syndrome
and lymphoma.
 Histopathology is not often useful and can be confusing.
 
 General Considerations
Psoriasis is a common benign, chronic inflammatory skin disease
with both a genetic basis and known environmental triggers. Injury
or irritation of normal skin tends to induce lesions of psoriasis at the
site (Koebner phenomenon). Psoriasis has several variants—the
most common is the plaque type. Eruptive (guttate) psoriasis
consisting of myriad lesions 3–10 mm in diameter occurs
occasionally after streptococcal pharyngitis. Rarely, grave,
occasionally life-threatening forms (generalized pustular and
erythrodermic psoriasis) may occur. Plaque type or extensive
erythrodermic psoriasis with abrupt onset may accompany HIV
infection.
 
Figure 6–8. Nail pitting due to psoriasis. (Courtesy of Richard
P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith
MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Clinical Findings
There are often no symptoms, but itching may occur and be severe.
Favored sites include the scalp, elbows, knees, palms and soles,
and nails (Figure 6–8). The lesions are red, sharply defined plaques
covered with silvery scales (Figure 6–9). The glans penis and vulva
may be affected. Occasionally, only the flexures (axillae, inguinal
areas) are involved. Fine stippling (“pitting”) in the nails is highly
suggestive of psoriasis. Patients with psoriasis often have a pink or
red inter-gluteal fold. Not all patients have findings in all locations,
but the occurrence of a few may help make the diagnosis when
other lesions are not typical. Some patients have mainly hand or
foot dermatitis and only minimal findings elsewhere. There may be
associated arthritis that is most commonly distal and oligoarticular,
although the rheumatoid variety with a negative rheumatoid factor
may occur. The psychosocial impact of psoriasis is a major factor in
determining the treatment of the patient.
 Differential Diagnosis
The combination of red plaques with silvery scales on elbows and
knees, with scaliness in the scalp or nail findings, is diagnostic (see
Figure 6–8). Psoriasis lesions are well demarcated and affect
extensor surfaces—in contrast to atopic dermatitis, with poorly
demarcated plaques in flexural distribution. In body folds, scraping
and culture for Candida and examination of scalp and nails will
distinguish psoriasis from intertrigo and candidiasis. Dystrophic
changes in nails may simulate onychomycosis, but again, the general
examination combined with a potassium hydroxide (KOH)
preparation or fungal culture will be valuable in diagnosis. The
cutaneous features of reactive arthritis (Reiter syndrome) mimic
psoriasis.
 Treatment
There are many therapeutic options in psoriasis to be chosen
according to the extent (body surface area [BSA] affected) and the
presence of other findings (for example, arthritis). Certain drugs,
such as β-blockers, antimalarials, statins, and lithium, may flare or
worsen psoriasis. Even tiny doses of systemic corticosteroids given
to patients with psoriasis may lead to severe rebound flares of their
disease when they are tapered. Never use systemic corticosteroids
to treat flares of psoriasis. In general, patients with moderate to
severe psoriasis should be managed by or in conjunction with a
dermatologist.
 
Figure 6–9. Plaque psoriasis in the sacral region and intergluteal
fold. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission,
from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger
J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
A. Limited Disease
For patients with numerous small plaques, phototherapy is the best
therapy (see below). For patients with large plaques and < 10% of
the BSA involved, the easiest regimen is to use a high-potency to
ultra-high-potency topical corticosteroid cream or ointment. It is
best to restrict the ultra-high-potency corticosteroids to 2–3 weeks
of twice-daily use and then use them in a pulse fashion three or four
times on weekends or switch to a midpotency corticosteroid.
Topical corticosteroids rarely induce a lasting remission. They may
cause psoriasis to become unstable. Additional measures are
therefore commonly added to topical corticosteroid therapy.
Calcipotriene ointment 0.005% or calcitriol ointment 0.003%, both
vitamin D analogs, are used twice daily for plaque psoriasis. Initially,
patients are treated with twice-daily corticosteroids plus a vitamin D
analog twice daily. This rapidly clears the lesions. The vitamin D
analog is then used alone once daily and with the corticosteroid
once daily for several weeks. Eventually, the topical corticosteroids
are stopped, and once- or twice-daily application of the vitamin D
analog is continued long-term. Calcipotriene usually cannot be
applied to the groin or on the face because of irritation. Treatment
of extensive psoriasis with vitamin D analogs may result in
hypercalcemia, so that the maximum dose for calcipotriene is 100
g/week and for calcitriol is 200 g/week. Calcipotriene is
incompatible with many topical corticosteroids (but not
halobetasol), so if used concurrently it must be applied at a different
time. Tar preparations such as Fototar cream, LCD (liquor carbonis
detergens) 10% in Nutraderm lotion, alone or mixed directly with
triamcino-lone 0.1%, are useful adjuncts when applied twice daily.
Occlusion alone has been shown to clear isolated plaques in 30–
40% of patients. Thin, occlusive hydrocolloid dressings are placed
on the lesions and left undisturbed for as long as possible (a
minimum of 5 days, up to 7 days) and then replaced. Responses
may be seen within several weeks.
For the scalp, start with a tar shampoo, used daily if possible.
For thick scales, use 6% salicylic acid gel (eg, Keralyt), P & S
solution (phenol, mineral oil, and glycerin), or fluocinolone acetonide
0.01% in oil (Derma-Smoothe/FS) under a shower cap at night,
and shampoo in the morning. In order of increasing potency,
triamcinolone 0.1%, or fluocinolone, betamethasone dipropionate,
fluocinonide or amcinonide, and clobetasol are available in solution
form for use on the scalp twice daily. For psoriasis in the body
folds, treatment is difficult, since potent corticosteroids cannot be
used and other agents are poorly tolerated. Tacrolimus ointment
0.1% or 0.03% or pimecrolimus cream 1% may be effective in
penile, groin, and facial psoriasis.
B. Moderate Disease
Psoriasis affecting 10–30% of the patient's BSA is frequently
treated with UV phototherapy, either in a medical office or via a
home light unit. Systemic agents listed below may also be used.
C. Generalized Disease
If psoriasis involves >30% of the body surface, it is difficult to treat
with topical agents. The treatment of choice is outpatient
narrowband UVB (NB-UVB) three times weekly. Clearing occurs
in an average of 7 weeks, but maintenance may be required. Severe
psoriasis unresponsive to outpatient ultra-violet light may be treated
in a psoriasis day care center with the Goeckerman regimen, which
involves use of crude coal tar for many hours and exposure to UVB
light. Such treatment may offer the best chance for prolonged
remissions.
PUVA may be effective even in patients who have not
responded to standard NB-UVB treatment. Long-term use of
PUVA is associated with an increased risk of skin cancer
(especially squamous cell carcinoma and perhaps melanoma),
particularly in persons with fair complexions. Thus, periodic
examination of the skin is imperative. Atypical lentigines are a
common complication. There can be rapid aging of the skin in fair
individuals. Cataracts have not been reported with proper use of
protective glasses. PUVA may be used in combination with other
therapy, such as acitretin or methotrexate.
Methotrexate is very effective for severe psoriasis in doses up to
25 mg once weekly. It should be used according to published
protocols. Long-term methotrexate use may be associated with
cirrhosis. After receiving a 1.5–2 g cumulative dose, the patient
should be referred to a hepatologist for consideration of a liver
biopsy. Administration of folic acid, 1–2 mg daily, can eliminate
nausea caused by methotrexate without compromising efficacy.
Acitretin, a synthetic retinoid, is most effective for pustular
psoriasis in dosages of 0.5–0.75 mg/kg/d. Liver enzymes and serum
lipids must be checked periodically. Because acitretin is a teratogen
and persists for long periods in fat, women of childbearing age must
wait at least 3 years after completing acitretin treatment before
considering pregnancy. When used as single agents, retinoids will
flatten psoriatic plaques, but will rarely result in complete clearing.
Retinoids find their greatest use when combined with phototherapy
—either UVB or PUVA, with which they are synergistic.
Cyclosporine dramatically improves psoriasis and may be used
to control severe cases. Rapid relapse (rebound) is the rule after
cessation of therapy, so another agent must be added if
cyclosporine is stopped. The tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors
etanercept (Enbrel), 50 mg twice weekly; infliximab (Remicade);
and adalimumab (Humira) have shown antipsoriatic activity.
Infliximab provides the most rapid response and can be used for
severe pustular or erythrodermic flares. Etanercept is used more
frequently for long-term treatment at a dose of 50 mg twice weekly
for 3 months, then 50 mg once weekly. All three TNF inhibitors can
also induce psoriasis. Alefacept (Amevive) generally has moderate
efficacy, but in a small percentage of patients, it is dramatically
effective. IL-12/23 monoclonal antibodies (ustekinumab [Stelara])
can be dramatically effective in psoriasis, and may be considered
instead of using a TNF inhibitor.
 Prognosis
The course tends to be chronic and unpredictable, and the disease
may be refractory to treatment. Patients should be monitored for
metabolic syndrome, which occurs more commonly in psoriasis
patients.
Gottlieb A et al. Ustekinumab, a human interleukin 12/23
monoclonal antibody, for psoriatic arthritis: randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial. Lancet. 2009 Feb
21;373(9664):633–40. [PMID: 19217154]
 
Jensen P et al. Systemic combination treatment for psoriasis: a
review. Acta Derm Venereol. 2010 Jul;90(4):341–9. [PMID:
20574597]
 
Kircik LH et al. Scalp psoriasis. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010 Aug;9 (8
Suppl ODAC Conf Pt 2):s101–5. [PMID: 20715392]
 
Koek MB et al. Home versus outpatient ultraviolet B photo-
therapy for mild to severe psoriasis: pragmatic multicentre
randomised controlled non-inferiority trial (PLUTO study). BMJ.
2009 May 7;338:b1542. [PMID: 19423623]
 
Levine D et al. Evaluation and management of psoriasis: an inter-
nist's guide. Med Clin North Am. 2009 Nov;93(6):1291–303.
[PMID: 19932332]
 
Morar N et al. HIV-associated psoriasis: pathogenesis, clinical
features, and management. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010 Jul;10(7):
470–8. [PMID: 20610329]
 
Mortel MR et al. Prospective new biologic therapies for psoriasis
and psoriatic arthritis. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010 Aug;9(8): 947–58.
[PMID: 20684145]
 
Schmitt J et al. Efficacy and tolerability of biologic and nonbio-
logic systemic treatments for moderate-to-severe psoriasis: meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Dermatol. 2008
Sep;159(3):513–26. [PMID: 18627372]
 
Vizzardi E et al. Psoriasis and cardiovascular diseases. Acta
Cardiol. 2010 Jun;65(3):337–40. [PMID: 20666273]
 
PITYRIASIS ROSEA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Oval, fawn-colored, scaly eruption following cleavage lines of
trunk.
 Herald patch precedes eruption by 1–2 weeks.
 Occasional pruritus.
 
 General Considerations
This is a common mild, acute inflammatory disease that is 50%
more common in females. Young adults are principally affected,
mostly in the spring or fall. Concurrent household cases have been
reported.
 Clinical Findings
Itching is common but is usually mild. The diagnosis is made by
finding one or more classic lesions. The lesions consist of oval,
fawn-colored plaques up to 2 cm in diameter (Figure 6–10). The
centers of the lesions have a crinkled or “cigarette paper”
appearance and a collarette scale, ie, a thin bit of scale that is bound
at the periphery and free in the center. Only a few lesions in the
eruption may have this characteristic appearance, however. Lesions
follow cleavage lines on the trunk (so-called Christmas tree pattern,
Figure 6–11), and the proximal portions of the extremities are often
involved. A variant that affects the flexures (axillae and groin), so
called inverse pityriasis rosea, and a papular variant, especially in
black patients, also occur. An initial lesion (“herald patch”) that is
often larger than the later lesions often precedes the general eruption
by 1–2 weeks. The eruption usually lasts 6–8 weeks and heals
without scarring.
 Differential Diagnosis
A serologic test for syphilis should be performed if at least a few
perfectly typical lesions are not present and especially if there are
palmar and plantar or mucous membrane lesions or adenopathy,
features that are suggestive of secondary syphilis. For the
nonexpert, an RPR (rapid plasma reagin) test in all cases is not
unreasonable. Tinea corporis may present with red, slightly scaly
plaques, but rarely are there more than a few lesions of tinea
corporis compared to the many lesions of pityriasis rosea.
Seborrheic dermatitis on occasion presents on the body with poorly
demarcated patches over the sternum, in the pubic area, and in the
axillae. Tinea versicolor, viral exanthems, and drug eruptions may
simulate pityriasis rosea. Certain drugs (eg, angiotensin-converting
enzyme [ACE] inhibitors and metronidazole) may induce a skin
eruption mimicking pityriasis rosea.
 
Figure 6–10. Pityriasis rosea. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 
Figure 6–11. Pityriasis rosea with scaling lesions following skin
lines and resembling a Christmas tree. (Courtesy of EJ Mayeaux,
MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux
EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family
Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Treatment
Pityriasis rosea often requires no treatment. In Asians, Hispanics, or
blacks, in whom lesions may remain hyper-pigmented for some
time, more aggressive management may be indicated. Treatment is,
otherwise, only indicated if the patient is symptomatic. No treatment
has been demonstrated efficacious in pityriasis rosea in adequately
controlled and reproduced trials. Most dermatologists recommend
UVB treatments, or prednisone as used for contact dermatitis for
severe or severely symptomatic cases. For mild to moderate cases,
topical corticosteroids of medium strength (triamcinolone 0.1%) and
oral antihistamines may also be used if pruritus is bothersome.
 Prognosis
Pityriasis rosea is usually an acute self-limiting illness that disappears
in about 6 weeks.
Atzori L et al. Pityriasis rosea-like adverse reaction: review of the
literature and experience of an Italian drug-surveillance center.
Dermatol Online J. 2006 Jan 27;12(1):1. [PMID: 16638369]
 
SEBORRHEIC DERMATITIS & DANDRUFF
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Dry scales and underlying erythema.
 Scalp, central face, presternal, interscapular areas, umbilicus, and
body folds.
 
 General Considerations
Seborrheic dermatitis is an acute or chronic papulosquamous
dermatitis that often coexists with psoriasis.
 Clinical Findings
Pruritus is an inconstant finding. The scalp, face, chest, back,
umbilicus, eyelid margins, and body folds have dry scales or oily
yellowish scurf (Figure 6–12). Patients with Parkinson disease, HIV
infection, and patients who become acutely ill and are hospitalized
often have seborrheic dermatitis.
 Differential Diagnosis
There is a spectrum from seborrheic dermatitis to scalp psoriasis.
Extensive seborrheic dermatitis may simulate intertrigo in flexural
areas, but scalp, face, and sternal involvement suggests seborrheic
dermatitis.
 
Figure 6–12. Seborrheic dermatitis. (Used, with permission,
from Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Treatment
A. Seborrhea of the Scalp
Shampoos that contain zinc pyrithione or selenium are used daily if
possible. These may be alternated with ketoconazole shampoo (1%
or 2%) used twice weekly. A combination of shampoos is used in
refractory cases. Tar shampoos are also effective for milder cases
and for scalp psoriasis. Topical corticosteroid solutions or lotions
are then added if necessary and are used twice daily. (See
treatment for scalp psoriasis, above.)
B. Facial Seborrheic Dermatitis
The mainstay of therapy is a mild corticosteroid (hydrocortisone
1%, alclometasone, desonide) used intermittently and not near the
eyes. If the disorder cannot be controlled with intermittent use of a
mild topical corticosteroid alone, ketoconazole (Nizoral) 2% cream
is added twice daily. Topical tacrolimus (Protopic) and
pimecrolimus (Elidel) are steroid-sparing alternatives.
C. Seborrheic Dermatitis of Nonhairy Areas
Low-potency 
corticosteroid 
creams—ie, 
1% 
or 
2.5%
hydrocortisone, desonide, or alclometasone dipropionate—are
highly effective.
D. Seborrhea of Intertriginous Areas
Apply low-potency corticosteroid lotions or creams twice daily for
5–7 days and then once or twice weekly for maintenance as
necessary. Ketoconazole or clotrimazole cream may be a useful
adjunct. Tacrolimus or pimecrolimus topically may avoid
corticosteroid atrophy in chronic cases.
E. Involvement of Eyelid Margins
“Marginal blepharitis” usually responds to gentle cleaning of the lid
margins nightly as needed, with undiluted Johnson and Johnson
Baby Shampoo using a cotton swab.
 Prognosis
The tendency is for lifelong recurrences. Individual outbreaks may
last weeks, months, or years.
FUNGAL INFECTIONS OF THE SKIN
Mycotic infections are traditionally divided into two principal groups
—superficial and deep. In this chapter, we will discuss only the
superficial 
infections: 
tinea 
corporis 
and 
tinea 
cruris;
dermatophytosis of the feet and dermatophytid of the hands; tinea
unguium (onychomycosis); and tinea versicolor. See Chapter 36 for
discussion of deep mycoses.
The diagnosis of fungal infections of the skin is usually based on
the location and characteristics of the lesions and on the following
laboratory examinations: (1) Direct demonstration of fungi in 10%
KOH of scrapings from suspected lesions. “If it's scaly, scrape it” is
a time-honored maxim. (2) Cultures of organisms from skin
scrapings. (3) Histologic sections of biopsies stained with periodic
acid-Schiff (Hotchkiss-McManus) technique may be diagnostic if
scrapings and cultures are negative.
 Principles of Treatment
A diagnosis should always be confirmed by KOH preparation,
culture, or biopsy. Many other diseases cause scaling, and use of an
antifungal agent without a firm diagnosis makes subsequent
diagnosis more difficult. In general, fungal infections are treated
topically except for those involving the nails, those that are very
extensive, or those that involve the hair follicles.
Griseofulvin is safe and effective for treating dermatophyte
infections of the skin (except for the scalp and nails). Itraconazole,
an azole antifungal, and terbinafine, an allylamine oral antifungal,
have excellent activity against dermatophytes and can be used in
shorter courses than griseofulvin.
Fluconazole has excellent activity against yeasts and may be the
treatment of choice for many forms of mucocutaneous candidiasis.
Itraconazole, fluconazole, and terbinafine can all cause elevation of
liver function tests and—though rarely in the dosing regimens used
for the treatment of dermatophytosis—clinical hepatitis.
Ketoconazole is no longer recommended for the treatment of
dermatophytosis (except for tinea versicolor) because of the higher
rate of hepatitis when it is used for more than a month.
 General Measures & Prevention
Since moist skin favors the growth of fungi, dry the skin carefully
after bathing or after perspiring heavily. Talc or other drying
powders may be useful. The use of topical corticosteroids for other
diseases may be complicated by intercurrent tinea or candidal
infection, and topical anti-fungals are often used in intertriginous
areas with corticosteroids to prevent this.
1. Tinea Corporis or Tinea Circinata (Body Ringworm)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Ring-shaped lesions with an advancing scaly border and central
clearing or scaly patches with a distinct border.
 On exposed skin surfaces or the trunk.
 Microscopic examination of scrapings or culture confirms the
diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
The lesions are often on exposed areas of the body such as the face
and arms. A history of exposure to an infected cat may occasionally
be 
obtained, 
usually 
indicating Microsporum 
infection.
Trichophyton rubrum is the most common pathogen, usually
representing extension onto the trunk or extremities of tinea cruris,
pedis, or manuum.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Itching may be present. In classic lesions, rings of erythema have an
advancing scaly border and central clearing (Figures 6–13 and 6–
14).
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis may be confirmed by KOH preparation or culture.
 Differential Diagnosis
Positive fungal studies distinguish tinea corporis from other skin
lesions with annular configuration, such as the annular lesions of
psoriasis, lupus erythematosus, syphilis, granuloma annulare, and
pityriasis rosea. Psoriasis has typical lesions on elbows, knees,
scalp, and nails. Secondary syphilis is often manifested by
characteristic palmar, plantar, and mucous membrane lesions. Tinea
corporis rarely has the large number of lesions seen in pityriasis
rosea. Granuloma annulare lacks scales.
 Complications
Complications include extension of the disease down the hair
follicles (in which case it becomes much more difficult to cure) and
pyoderma.
 Prevention
Treat infected household pets (Microsporum infections).
 
Figure 6–13. Tinea pedis and corporis. (Used, with permission,
from Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Treatment
A. Local Measures
Tinea corporis responds to most topical antifungals, including
miconazole, clotrimazole, butenafine, and terbinafine, which are
available over the counter (see Table 6–2). Terbinafine and
butenafine require shorter courses and lead to the most rapid
response. Treatment should be continued for 1–2 weeks after
clinical clearing. Betamethasone dipropionate with clotrimazole
(Lotrisone) is not recommended. Long-term improper use may
result in side effects from the high-potency corticosteroid
component, especially in body folds. Cases of tinea that are
clinically resistant to this combination but respond to topical
antifungals without the topical corticosteroid can occur.
 
Figure 6–14. Tinea corporis. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
B. Systemic Measures
Griseofulvin (ultramicrosize), 250–500 mg twice daily, is used.
Typically, only 4–6 weeks of therapy are required. Itraconazole as
a single week-long pulse of 200 mg daily is also effective in tinea
corporis. Terbinafine, 250 mg daily for 1 month, is an alternative.
 Prognosis
Body ringworm usually responds promptly to conservative topical
therapy or to an oral agent within 4 weeks.
2. Tinea Cruris (Jock Itch)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Marked itching in intertriginous areas, usually sparing the
scrotum.
 Peripherally spreading, sharply demarcated, centrally clearing
erythematous lesions.
 May have associated tinea infection of feet or toenails.
 Laboratory examination with microscope or culture confirms
diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Tinea cruris lesions are confined to the groin and gluteal cleft.
Intractable pruritus ani may occasionally be caused by a tinea
infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Itching may be severe, or the rash may be asymptomatic. The
lesions have sharp margins, cleared centers, and active, spreading
scaly peripheries (Figure 6–15). Follicular pustules are sometimes
encountered. The area may be hyper-pigmented on resolution.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hyphae can be demonstrated microscopically in KOH
preparations. The organism may be cultured.
 Differential Diagnosis
Tinea cruris must be distinguished from other lesions involving the
intertriginous areas, such as candidiasis, seborrheic dermatitis,
intertrigo, psoriasis of body folds (“inverse psoriasis”), and
erythrasma. Candidiasis is generally bright red and marked by
satellite papules and pustules outside of the main border of the
lesion. Candida typically involves the scrotum. Seborrheic
dermatitis also often involves the face, sternum, and axillae.
Intertrigo tends to be more red, less scaly, and present in obese
individuals in moist body folds with less extension onto the thigh.
Inverse psoriasis is characterized by distinct plaques. Other areas of
typical psoriatic involvement should be checked, and the KOH
examination will be negative. Erythrasma is best diagnosed with
Wood (ultraviolet) light—a brilliant coral-red fluorescence is seen.
 
Figure 6–15. Tinea cruris. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine,
MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux
EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family
Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Drying powder (eg, miconazole nitrate [Zeasorb-AF]) can be
dusted into the involved area in patients with excessive perspiration
or occlusion of skin due to obesity.
B. Local Measures
Any of the topical antifungal preparations listed in Table 6–2 may
be used. Terbinafine cream is curative in over 80% of cases after
once-daily use for 7 days.
C. Systemic Measures
y
Griseofulvin ultramicrosize is reserved for severe cases. Give 250–
500 mg orally twice daily for 1–2 weeks. One week of either
itraconazole, 200 mg daily, or terbinafine, 250 mg daily, can be
effective.
 Prognosis
Tinea cruris usually responds promptly to topical or systemic
treatment but often recurs.
3. Tinea Manuum & Tinea Pedis (Dermatophytosis, Tinea of
Palms & Soles, “Athlete's Foot”)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most often presenting with asymptomatic scaling.
 May progress to fissuring or maceration in toe web spaces.
 Common cofactor in lower leg cellulitis.
 Itching, burning, and stinging of interdigital web; scaling palms,
and soles; vesicles of soles in inflammatory cases.
 The fungus is shown in skin scrapings examined microscopically
or by culture of scrapings.
 
 
Figure 6–16. Tinea pedis in the interdigital space between fourth
and fifth digits. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
 General Considerations
Tinea of the feet is an extremely common acute or chronic
dermatosis. Certain individuals appear to be more susceptible than
others. Most infections are caused by Trichophyton species.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The presenting symptom may be itching, burning, or stinging. Pain
may indicate secondary infection with complicating cellulitis.
Interdigital tinea pedis is the most common predisposing cause of
lower leg cellulitis in healthy individuals. Tinea pedis has several
presentations that vary with the location. On the sole and heel, tinea
may appear as chronic noninflammatory scaling, occasionally with
thickening and fissuring. This may extend over the sides of the feet
in a “moccasin” distribution. The KOH preparation is usually
positive. Tinea pedis often appears as a scaling or fissuring of the
toe webs, perhaps with sodden maceration (Figure 6–16). As the
web spaces become more macerated, the KOH preparation and
fungal culture are less often positive because bacterial species begin
to dominate. Finally, there may also be grouped vesicles distributed
any-where on the soles, generalized exfoliation of the skin of the
soles, or nail involvement in the form of discoloration and thickening
and crumbling of the nail plate.
B. Laboratory Findings
KOH and culture does not always demonstrate pathogenic fungi
from macerated areas.
 Differential Diagnosis
Differentiate from other skin conditions involving the same areas,
such as interdigital erythrasma (use Wood light). Psoriasis may be a
cause of chronic scaling on the palms or soles and may cause nail
changes. Repeated fungal cultures should be negative, and the
condition will not respond to antifungal therapy. Contact dermatitis
(from shoes) will often involve the dorsal surfaces and will respond
to topical or systemic corticosteroids. Vesicular lesions should be
differentiated from pompholyx (dyshidrosis) and scabies by proper
scraping of the roofs of individual vesicles. Rarely, gram-negative
organisms may cause toe web infections, manifested as an acute
erosive flare of interdigital disease. This entity is treated with
aluminum salts (see below) and imidazole antifungal agents or
ciclopirox.
 Prevention
The essential factor in prevention is personal hygiene. Wear open-
toed sandals if possible. Use of sandals in community showers and
bathing places is often recommended, though the effectiveness of
this practice has not been studied. Careful drying between the toes
after showering is essential. A hair dryer used on low setting may be
used. Socks should be changed frequently, and absorbent
nonsynthetic socks are preferred. Apply dusting and drying
powders as necessary. The use of powders containing antifungal
agents (eg, Zeasorb-AF) or chronic use of antifungal creams may
prevent recurrences of tinea pedis.
 Treatment
A. Local Measures
1. Macerated stage—Treat with aluminum subacetate solution
soaks for 20 minutes twice daily. Broad-spectrum antifungal creams
and solutions (containing imidazoles or ciclopirox instead of
tolnaftate and haloprogin) will help combat diphtheroids and other
gram-positive organisms present at this stage and alone may be
adequate therapy. If topical imidazoles fail, 1 week of once-daily
topical allylamine treatment (terbinafine or butenafine) will often
result in clearing.
2. Dry and scaly stage—Use any of the antifungal agents listed in
Table 6–2. The addition of urea 10–20% lotion or cream may
increase the efficacy of topical treatments in thick (“moccasin”) tinea
of the soles.
B. Systemic Measures
Griseofulvin may be used for severe cases or those recalcitrant to
topical therapy. If the infection is cleared by systemic therapy, the
patient should be encouraged to begin maintenance with topical
therapy, since recurrence is common. Itraconazole, 200 mg daily
for 2 weeks or 400 mg daily for 1 week, or terbinafine, 250 mg
daily for 2–4 weeks, may be used in refractory cases.
 Prognosis
For many individuals, tinea pedis is a chronic affliction, temporarily
cleared by therapy only to recur.
Crawford F et al. Topical treatments for fungal infections of the
skin and nails of the foot. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jul
18; (3):CD001434. [PMID: 17636672]
 
4. Tinea Versicolor (Pityriasis Versicolor)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Velvety, tan, or pink macules or white macules that do not tan.
 Fine scales that are not visible but are seen by scraping the lesion.
 Central upper trunk the most frequent site.
 Yeast and short hyphae observed on microscopic examination of
scales.
 
 General Considerations
Tinea versicolor is a mild, superficial Malassezia infection of the
skin (usually of the upper trunk). This yeast is a colonizer of all
humans, which accounts for the high recurrence rate after treatment.
The eruption is often called to patients’ attention by the fact that the
involved areas will not tan, and the resulting hypopigmentation may
be mistaken for vitiligo. A hyperpigmented form is not uncommon.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Lesions are asymptomatic, but a few patients note itching. The
lesions are velvety, tan, pink, or white macules that vary from 4–5
mm in diameter to large confluent areas. The lesions initially do not
look scaly, but scales may be readily obtained by scraping the area.
Lesions may appear on the trunk, upper arms, neck, and groin.
B. Laboratory Findings
Large, blunt hyphae and thick-walled budding spores (“spaghetti
and meatballs”) are seen on KOH. Fungal culture is not useful.
 Differential Diagnosis
Vitiligo usually presents with larger periorificial lesions. Vitiligo (and
not tinea versicolor) is characterized by total depigmentation, not
just a lessening of pigmentation. Vitiligo does not scale. Pink and
red-brown lesions on the chest are differentiated from seborrheic
dermatitis of the same areas by the KOH preparation.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Topical treatments include selenium sulfide lotion, which may be
applied from neck to waist daily and left on for 5–15 minutes for 7
days; this treatment is repeated weekly for a month and then
monthly for maintenance. Ketoconazole shampoo, 1% or 2%,
lathered on the chest and back and left on for 5 minutes may also
be used weekly for treatment and to prevent recurrence. Clinicians
must stress to the patient that the raised and scaly aspects of the
rash are being treated; the alterations in pigmentation may take
months to fade or fill in.
Ketoconazole, 200 mg daily orally for 1 week or 400 mg as a
single oral dose, with exercise to the point of sweating after
ingestion, results in short-term cure of 90% of cases. Patients
should be instructed not to shower for 8–12 hours after taking
ketoconazole, because it is delivered in sweat to the skin. The single
dose may not work in more hot and humid areas, and more
protracted therapy carries a small risk of drug-induced hepatitis.
Two doses of oral fluconazole, 300 mg, 14 days apart has similar
efficacy. Without maintenance therapy, recurrences will occur in
over 80% of “cured” cases over the subsequent 2 years. Imidazole
creams, solutions, and lotions are quite effective for localized areas
but are too expensive for use over large areas such as the chest and
back.
Bonifaz A et al. Tinea versicolor, tinea nigra, white piedra, and
black piedra. Clin Dermatol. 2010 Mar 4;28(2):140–5. [PMID:
20347655]
 
Yazdanpanah MJ et al. Comparison between fluconazole and
ketoconazole effectivity in the treatment of pityriasis versi-color.
Mycoses. 2007 Jul;50(4):311–3. [PMID: 17576325]
 
DISCOID & SUBACUTE LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
(Chronic Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Localized red plaques, usually on the face.
 Scaling, follicular plugging, atrophy, dyspigmentation, and
telangiectasia of involved areas.
 Histology distinctive.
 Photosensitive.
 
 General Considerations
The two most common forms of chronic cutaneous lupus
erythematosus (CCLE) are chronic scarring (discoid) lesions (DLE)
and erythematous non-scarring red plaques (subacute cutaneous
LE) (SCLE). Both occur most frequently in areas exposed to solar
irradiation. Permanent hair loss and loss of pigmentation are
common sequelae of discoid lesions. Systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) is discussed in Chapter 20. Patients with SLE may have DLE
or SCLE lesions.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are usually mild. The lesions consist of dusky red, well-
localized, single or multiple plaques, 5–20 mm in diameter, usually
on the head in DLE and the trunk in SCLE. In DLE, the scalp, face,
and external ears may be involved. In discoid lesions, there is
atrophy, telangiectasia, depigmentation, and follicular plugging. On
the scalp, significant permanent hair loss may occur in lesions of
DLE. In SCLE, the lesions are erythematous annular or
psoriasiform plaques up to several centimeters in diameter and favor
the upper chest and back.
B. Laboratory Findings
In patients with DLE, the diagnosis of SLE should be considered if
the following findings are present: positive anti-nuclear antibody
(ANA), other positive serologic studies (eg, anti-double stranded
DNA or anti-Smith antibody), presence of hypocomplementemia,
or widespread lesions (not localized to the head). Rare patients with
marked photosensitivity and a picture otherwise suggestive of lupus
have negative ANA tests but are positive for antibodies against
Ro/SSA or La/SSB (SCLE).
 Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on the clinical appearance confirmed by skin
biopsy in all cases. In DLE, the scales are dry and “thumbtack-like”
and can thus be distinguished from those of seborrheic dermatitis
and psoriasis. Older lesions that have left depigmented scarring
(classically in the concha of the ear) or areas of hair loss will also
differentiate lupus from these diseases. Ten percent of patients with
SLE have discoid skin lesions, and 5% of patients with discoid
lesions have SLE. Medications (most commonly, hydro-
chlorothiazide, calcium channel blockers, ACE inhibitors, TNF
inhibitors, and terbinafine) may induce SCLE with a positive
Ro/SSA.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Protect from sunlight. Use high-SPF (> 50) sunblock with UVB
and UVA coverage daily. Caution: Do not use any form of
radiation therapy. Avoid using drugs that are potentially
photosensitizing when possible.
B. Local Treatment
For limited lesions, the following should be tried before systemic
therapy: high-potency corticosteroid creams applied each night and
covered with airtight, thin, pliable plastic film (eg, Saran Wrap); or
Cordran tape; or ultra-high-potency corticosteroid cream or
ointment applied twice daily without occlusion.
C. Local Infiltration
Triamcinolone acetonide suspension, 2.5–10 mg/mL, may be
injected into the lesions of DLE once a month.
D. Systemic Treatment
1. Antimalarials—Caution: These drugs should be used only
when the diagnosis is secure because they have been associated
with flares of psoriasis, which may be in the differential diagnosis.
They may also cause ocular changes, and ophthalmologic evaluation
is required at the onset of therapy and at regular intervals during
treatment.
A. HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE SULFATE—0.2–0.4 g orally daily for
several months may be effective and is often used prior to
chloroquine. A minimum 3-month trial is recommended.
B. CHLOROQUINE SULFATE—250 mg daily may be effective in
some cases where hydroxychloroquine is not.
C. QUINACRINE (ATABRINE)—100 mg daily may be the safest of
the antimalarials, since eye damage has not been reported. It colors
the skin yellow and is therefore not acceptable to some patients. It
may be added to the other antimalarials for incomplete responses.
2. Isotretinoin—Isotretinoin, 1 mg/kg/d, is effective in
hypertrophic DLE lesions and lesions of CCLE or SCLE.
Recurrences are prompt and predictable on discontinuation of
therapy.
3. Thalidomide—Thalidomide is effective in refractory cases in
doses of up to 300 mg daily. Monitor for neuropathy.
Both isotretinoin and thalidomide are teratogens and should
be used with appropriate contraception and monitoring in
women of childbearing age.
 Prognosis
The disease is persistent but not life-endangering unless systemic
lupus is present. Treatment with antimalarials is effective in perhaps
60% of cases. Although the only morbidity may be cosmetic, this
can be of overwhelming significance in more darkly pigmented
patients with widespread disease. Scarring alopecia can be
prevented or lessened with close attention and aggressive therapy.
Over years, DLE tends to become inactive. Drug-induced SCLE
usually resolves over months when the inciting medication is
stopped.
Jessop S et al. Drugs for discoid lupus erythematosus. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Oct 7; (4):CD002954. [PMID:
19821298]
 
Marzano AV et al. Drug-induced lupus: an update on its
dermatologic aspects. Lupus 2009 Oct;18(11):935–40. [PMID:
19762393]
 
Vera-Recabarren MA et al. Comparative analysis of subacute
cutaneous lupus erythematosus and chronic cutaneous lupus
erythematosus: clinical and immunological study of 270 patients. Br
J Dermatol. 2010 Jan;162(1):91–101. [PMID: 19785596]
 
Wahie S et al. Measuring disease activity and damage in discoid
lupus erythematosus. Br J Dermatol. 2010 May;162(5):1030–7.
[PMID: 20199547]
 
CUTANEOUS T CELL LYMPHOMA (Mycosis Fungoides)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Localized or generalized erythematous scaling patches and
plaques.
 Pruritus.
 Lymphadenopathy.
 Distinctive histology.
 
 General Considerations
Mycosis fungoides is a cutaneous T cell lymphoma that begins on
the skin and may involve only the skin for years or decades. Certain
medications (including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) may
produce eruptions clinically and histologically identical to those of
mycosis fungoides.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Localized or generalized erythematous patches or plaques are
present usually on the trunk. Plaques are almost always over 5 cm
in diameter. Pruritus is a frequent complaint. The lesions often begin
as nondescript or nondiagnostic patches, and it is not unusual for the
patient to have skin lesions for more than a decade before the
diagnosis can be confirmed. In more advanced cases, tumors
appear. Lymphadenopathy may occur locally or widely. Lymph
node enlargement may be due to benign expansion of the node
(dermatopathic lymphadenopathy) or by specific involvement with
mycosis fungoides.
B. Laboratory Findings
The skin biopsy remains the basis of diagnosis, though at times
numerous biopsies are required before the diagnosis can be
confirmed. In more advanced disease, circulating malignant T cells
(Sézary cells) can be detected in the blood (T cell gene
rearrangement test). Eosinophilia may be present.
 Differential Diagnosis
Mycosis fungoides may be confused with psoriasis, a drug eruption,
an eczematous dermatitis, or tinea corporis. Histologic examination
can distinguish these conditions.
 Treatment
The treatment of mycosis fungoides is complex. Early and
aggressive treatment has not proved to cure or prevent progression
of the disease. Skin-directed therapies including topical
corticosteroids, topical mechlorethamine, bexarotene gel, and UV
phototherapy, are used initially. If the disease progresses, PUVA
plus retinoids, PUVA plus interferon, extracorporeal photophoresis,
bexarotene, α-interferon with or without retinoids, interleukin 12,
denileukin, and total skin electron beam are used.
 Prognosis
Mycosis fungoides is usually slowly progressive (over decades).
Prognosis is better in patients with patch or plaque stage disease
and worse in patients with erythroderma, tumors, and
lymphadenopathy. Survival is not reduced in patients with limited
patch disease. Elderly patients with limited patch and plaque stage
disease commonly die of other causes. Overly aggressive treatment
may lead to complications and premature demise.
Agar NS et al. Survival outcomes and prognostic factors in
mycosis fungoides/Sézary syndrome: validation of the revised
International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas/European
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer staging
proposal. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Nov 1;28(31):4730–9. [PMID:
20855822]
 
Galper SL et al. Diagnosis and management of mycosis fungoides.
Oncology (Williston Park). 2010 May;24(6):491–501. [PMID:
20568590]
 
Lansigan F et al. Current and emerging treatment strategies for
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Drugs. 2010 Feb 12;70(3):273–86.
[PMID: 20166766]
 
Meyer N et al. Pruritus in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas: frequent,
often severe and difficult to treat. Acta Derm Venereol.
2010;90(1):12–7. [PMID: 20107719]
 
Prince HM et al. How I treat mycosis fungoides and Sézary
syndrome. Blood. 2009 Nov 12;114(20):4337–53. [PMID:
19696197]
 
EXFOLIATIVE DERMATITIS (Exfoliative Erythroderma)
 ESSENTIAL OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Scaling and erythema over most of the body.
 Itching, malaise, fever, chills, weight loss.
 
 General Considerations
Erythroderma describes generalized redness and scaling of the skin
of > 30% BSA. A preexisting dermatosis is the cause of exfoliative
dermatitis in two-thirds of cases, including psoriasis, atopic
dermatitis, contact dermatitis, pityriasis rubra pilaris, and seborrheic
dermatitis. Reactions to topical or systemic drugs account for
perhaps 20–40% of cases and cancer (underlying lymphoma, solid
tumors and, most commonly, cutaneous T cell lymphoma) for 10–
20%. Causation of the remainder is indeterminable. At the time of
acute presentation, without a clear-cut prior history of skin disease
or drug exposure, it may be impossible to make a specific diagnosis
of the underlying condition, and diagnosis may require observation.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may include itching, weakness, malaise, fever, and
weight loss. Chills are prominent. Redness and scaling is
widespread. Loss of hair and nails can occur. Generalized
lymphadenopathy may be due to lymphoma or leukemia or may be
reactive. The mucosae are spared.
B. Laboratory Findings
A skin biopsy is required and may show changes of a specific
inflammatory dermatitis or cutaneous T cell lymphoma or leukemia.
Peripheral leukocytes may show clonal rearrangements of the T cell
receptor in Sézary syndrome.
 Differential Diagnosis
It may be impossible to identify the cause of exfoliative
erythroderma early in the course of the disease, so careful follow-up
is necessary.
 Complications
Debility (protein loss) and dehydration may develop in patients with
generalized inflammatory exfoliative erythroderma; or sepsis may
occur.
 Treatment
A. Topical Therapy
Home treatment is with cool to tepid baths and application of mid-
potency corticosteroids under wet dressings or with the use of an
occlusive plastic suit. If the exfoliative erythroderma becomes
chronic and is not manageable in an outpatient setting, hospitalize
the patient. Keep the room at a constant warm temperature and
provide the same topical treatment as for an outpatient.
B. Specific Measures
Stop all drugs, if possible. Systemic corticosteroids may provide
spectacular improvement in severe or fulminant exfoliative
dermatitis, but long-term therapy should be avoided (see Chapter
26). In addition, systemic corticosteroids must be used with caution
because some patients with erythroderma have psoriasis and could
develop pustular psoriasis. For cases of psoriatic erythroderma and
pityriasis rubra pilaris, either acitretin or methotrexate may be
indicated. Erythroderma secondary to lymphoma or leukemia
requires specific topical or systemic chemotherapy. Suitable
antibiotic drugs with coverage for Staphylococcus should be given
when there is evidence of bacterial infection.
 Prognosis
Most patients recover completely or improve greatly over time but
may require long-term therapy. Deaths are rare in the absence of
cutaneous T cell lymphoma. A minority of patients will suffer from
undiminished erythroderma for indefinite periods.
Chong VH et al. Erythroderma as the first manifestation of colon
cancer. South Med J. 2009 Mar;102(3):334–5. [PMID:
19204636]
 
Yuan XY et al. Erythroderma: a clinical-etiological study of 82
cases. Eur J Dermatol. 2010 May-Jun;20(3):373–7. [PMID:
20400388]
 
MISCELLANEOUS SCALING DERMATOSES
Isolated scaly patches may represent actinic (solar) keratoses,
nonpigmented seborrheic keratoses, or Bowen or Paget disease.
1. Actinic Keratoses
Actinic keratoses are small (0.2–0.6 cm) macules or papules—
flesh-colored, pink, or slightly hyperpigmented—that feel like
sandpaper and are tender when the finger is drawn over them. They
occur on sun-exposed parts of the body in persons of fair
complexion. Actinic keratoses are considered premalignant, but
only 1:1000 lesions per year progress to become squamous cell
carcinomas.
Application of liquid nitrogen is a rapid and effective method of
eradication. The lesions crust and disappear in 10–14 days. An
alternative treatment is the use of fluorouracil cream. This agent may
be rubbed into the lesions morning and night until they become first
red and sore and then crusted and eroded (usually 2–3 weeks).
Carac (0.5% fluorouracil) may be used once daily for a longer
period (4 weeks to several months). Keratoses may clear with less
irritation. Imiquimod 5% cream applied two to three times weekly
for 3–6 weeks is the more costly alternative to topical fluorouracil
(5FU). Photodynamic therapy can be effective in refractory cases
and reduces the duration of treatment. Any lesions that persist
should be evaluated for possible biopsy.
Berman B et al. Pharmacotherapy of actinic keratosis. Expert Opin
Pharmacother. 2009 Dec;10(18):3015–31. [PMID: 19925043]
 
McIntyre WJ et al. Treatment options for actinic keratoses. Am
Fam Physician. 2007 Sep 1;76(5):667–71. [PMID: 17894135]
 
2. Bowen Disease & Paget Disease
Bowen disease (intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma) occurs
either on both sun-exposed and non-sun-exposed skin. The lesion
is usually a small (0.5–3 cm), well-demarcated, slightly raised, pink
to red, scaly plaque and may resemble psoriasis or a large actinic
keratosis. These lesions may progress to invasive squamous cell
carcinoma. Excision or other definitive treatment is indicated.
 
Figure 6–17. Paget disease of the breast surrounding the nipple.
(Courtesy of the University of Texas Health Sciences Center,
Division of Dermatology; used, with permission, from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Extramammary Paget disease, a manifestation of intraepidermal
carcinoma or underlying genitourinary or gastrointestinal cancer,
resembles chronic eczema and usually involves apocrine areas such
as the genitalia. Mammary Paget disease of the nipple, a unilateral
or rarely bilateral red scaling plaque that may ooze, is associated
with an underlying intraductal mammary carcinoma (Figure 6–17).
Cox NH et al; Therapy Guidelines and Audit Subcommittee,
British Association of Dermatologists. Guidelines for management
of Bowen's disease: 2006 update. Br J Dermatol. 2007
Jan;156(1):11–21. [PMID: 17199561]
 
Kanitakis J. Mammary and extramammary Paget's disease. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2007 May;21(5):581–90. [PMID:
17447970]
 
Neidecker MV et al. Pharmacoeconomic considerations in treating
actinic keratosis. Pharmacoeconomics. 2009;27(6):451–64.
[PMID: 19640009]
 
Zhang N et al. Extramammary Paget's disease of scrotum–report
of 25 cases and literature review. Urol Oncol. 2010 Jan–Feb;28
(1):28–33. [PMID: 18805708]
 
INTERTRIGO
Intertrigo is caused by the macerating effect of heat, moisture, and
friction. It is especially likely to occur in obese persons and in humid
climates. The symptoms are itching, stinging, and burning. The body
folds develop fissures, erythema, and sodden epidermis, with
superficial denudation. Candidiasis may complicate intertrigo.
“Inverse psoriasis,” seborrheic dermatitis, tinea cruris, erythrasma,
and candidiasis must be ruled out.
Maintain hygiene in the area, and keep it dry. Compresses may
be useful acutely. Hydrocortisone 1% cream plus an imidazole or
nystatin cream is effective. Recurrences are common.
VESICULAR DERMATOSES
HERPES SIMPLEX (Cold Or Fever Sore; Genital Herpes)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Recurrent small grouped vesicles on an erythematous base,
especially in the orolabial and genital areas.
 May follow minor infections, trauma, stress, or sun exposure;
regional lymph nodes may be swollen and tender.
 Viral cultures and direct fluorescent antibody tests are positive.
 
 General Considerations
Over 85% of adults have serologic evidence of herpes simplex type
1 (HSV-1) infections, most often acquired asymptomatically in
childhood. Occasionally, primary infections may be manifested as
severe gingivostomatitis. Thereafter, the patient may have recurrent
self-limited attacks, provoked by sun exposure, orofacial surgery,
fever, or a viral infection.
About 25% of the United States population has serologic
evidence of infection with herpes simplex type 2 (HSV-2). HSV-2
causes lesions whose morphology and natural history are similar to
those caused by HSV-1 on the genitalia of both sexes. The infection
is acquired by sexual contact. In monogamous heterosexual couples
where one partner has HSV-2 infection, seroconversion of the
noninfected partner occurs in 10% over a 1-year period. Up to
70% of such infections appeared to be transmitted during periods of
asymptomatic shedding. Genital herpes may also be due to HSV-1.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The principal symptoms are burning and stinging. Neuralgia may
precede or accompany attacks. The lesions consist of small,
grouped vesicles that can occur anywhere but which most often
occur on the vermilion border of the lips (Figures 6–18 and 6–19),
the penile shaft, the labia, the perianal skin, and the buttocks. Any
erosion in the genital region can be due to HSV-2 (or HSV-1).
Regional lymph nodes may be swollen and tender. The lesions
usually crust and heal in 1 week. Herpes simplex is the most
common cause of painful genital ulcerations in patients with HIV
infection.
B. Laboratory Findings
Lesions of herpes simplex must be distinguished from chancroid,
syphilis, pyoderma, or trauma. Direct fluorescent antibody slide
tests offer rapid, sensitive diagnosis. Viral culture may also be
helpful. Herpes serology is not used in the diagnosis of an acute
genital ulcer. However, specific HSV-2 serology by Western blot
assay or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can
determine who is HSV-infected and potentially infectious. Such
testing is very useful in couples in which only one partner reports a
history of genital herpes.
 
Figure 6–18. Herpes simplex. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Complications
Complications include pyoderma, eczema herpeticum, herpetic
whitlow, herpes gladiatorum (epidemic herpes in wrestlers
transmitted by contact), proctitis, esophagitis, neonatal infection,
keratitis, and encephalitis.
 
Figure 6–19. Herpes simplex type 1 vesicles at the vermillion
border of the lip. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
 Prevention
Sunscreens are useful adjuncts in preventing sun-induced
recurrences. Prophylactic use of oral acyclovir may prevent
recurrences. Acyclovir should be started at a dosage of 200 mg
four times daily beginning 24 hours prior to ultra-violet light
exposure, dental surgery, or orolabial cosmetic surgery.
Comparable doses are 500 mg twice daily for valacyclovir and 250
mg twice daily for famciclovir.
 Treatment
A. Systemic Therapy
Three systemic agents are available for the treatment of herpes
infections: acyclovir, its valine analog valacyclovir, and famciclovir.
All three agents are very effective and, when used properly, virtually
nontoxic. Only acyclovir is available for intravenous administration.
In the immuno-competent, with the exception of severe orolabial
herpes, only genital disease is treated. For first clinical episodes of
herpes simplex, the dosage of acyclovir is 400 mg orally five times
daily (or 800 mg three times daily); of valacyclovir, 1000 mg twice
daily; and of famciclovir, 250 mg three times daily. The duration of
treatment is from 7 to 10 days depending on the severity of the
outbreak. Most cases of recurrent herpes are mild and do not
require therapy. In addition, pharmacotherapy of recurrent HSV is
of limited benefit, with studies finding a reduction in the average
outbreak by only 12–24 hours. To be effective, the treatment must
be initiated by the patient at the first sign of recurrence. If treatment
is desired, recurrent genital herpes outbreaks may be treated with 3
days of valacyclovir, 500 mg twice daily; or with 5 days of
acyclovir, 200 mg five times a day, or famciclovir, 125 mg twice
daily. Valacyclovir, 2 g twice daily for 1 day, or famciclovir, 1 g
once or twice in 1 day, are equally effective short-course
alternatives, and can abort impending recurrences of both orolabial
and genital herpes. The addition of a potent topical corticosteroid
three times daily reduces the duration, size, and pain of orolabial
herpes treated with an oral antiviral agent.
In patients with frequent or severe recurrences, suppressive
therapy is most effective in controlling disease. Suppressive
treatment will reduce outbreaks by 85% and reduces viral shedding
by > 90%. This results in about a 50% reduced risk of transmission.
The recommended suppressive doses, taken continuously, are
acyclovir, 400 mg twice daily; valacyclovir, 500 mg once daily; or
famciclovir, 125–250 mg twice daily. Long-term suppression
appears very safe, and after 5–7 years a substantial proportion of
patients can discontinue treatment. The use of condoms and patient
education have proved effective in reducing genital herpes
transmission in some studies and in others have not been beneficial.
No single or combination intervention absolutely prevents
transmission.
B. Local Measures
In general, topical therapy is not effective. It is strongly urged that
5% acyclovir ointment, if used at all, be limited to the restricted
indications for which it has been approved, ie, initial herpes genitalis
and 
mucocutaneous 
herpes 
simplex 
infections 
in
immunocompromised patients. Penciclovir cream, to be applied at
the first symptom every 2 hours while awake for 4 days for
recurrent orolabial herpes, reduces the average attack duration from
5 days to 4.5 days.
 Prognosis
Aside from the complications described above, recurrent attacks
last several days, and patients recover without sequelae.
Cernik C et al. The treatment of herpes simplex infections: an
evidence-based review. Arch Intern Med. 2008 Jun 9;168(11):
1137–44. [PMID: 18541820]
 
Harmenberg J et al. Prevention of ulcerative lesions by episodic
treatment of recurrent herpes labialis: A literature review. Acta
Derm Venereol. 2010 Mar;90(2):122–30. [PMID: 20169294]
 
Martens MG et al. Once daily valacyclovir for reducing viral
shedding in subjects newly diagnosed with genital herpes. Infect
Dis Obstet Gynecol. 2009;2009:1053-76. [PMID: 19680456]
 
Paz-Bailey G et al. Improvement in healing and reduction in HIV
shedding with episodic acyclovir therapy as part of syndromic
management among men: a randomized, controlled trial. J Infect
Dis. 2009 Oct 1;200(7):1039–49. [PMID: 19715417]
 
HERPES ZOSTER (SHINGLES)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain along the course of a nerve followed by grouped vesicular
lesions.
 Involvement is unilateral; some lesions (<20) may occur outside
the affected dermatome.
 Lesions are usually on face or trunk.
 Direct fluorescent antibody positive, especially in vesicular
lesions.
 
 General Considerations
Herpes zoster is an acute vesicular eruption due to the varicella-
zoster virus. It usually occurs in adults. With rare exceptions,
patients suffer only one attack. Dermatomal herpes zoster does not
imply the presence of a visceral malignancy. Generalized disease,
however, raises the suspicion of an associated immunosuppressive
disorder such as Hodgkin disease or HIV infection. HIV-infected
patients are 20 times more likely to develop zoster, often before
other clinical findings of HIV disease are present. A history of HIV
risk factors and HIV testing when appropriate should be
considered, especially in patients with zoster who are younger than
55 years.
 
Figure 6–20. Herpes zoster. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Clinical Findings
Pain usually precedes the eruption by 48 hours or more and may
persist and actually increase in intensity after the lesions have
disappeared. The lesions consist of grouped, tense, deep-seated
vesicles distributed unilaterally along a dermatome (Figure 6–20).
The most common distributions are on the trunk or face. Up to 20
lesions may be found outside the affected dermatomes, even in
immuno-competent persons. Regional lymph glands may be tender
and swollen.
 Differential Diagnosis
Since poison oak and poison ivy dermatitis can occur unilaterally,
they must be differentiated at times from herpes zoster. Allergic
contact dermatitis is pruritic; zoster is painful. One must differentiate
herpes zoster from lesions of herpes simplex, which occasionally
occurs in a dermatomal distribution. Doses of antivirals appropriate
for zoster should be used in the absence of a clear diagnosis. Facial
zoster may simulate erysipelas initially, but zoster is unilateral and
shows vesicles after 24–48 hours. The pain of preeruptive herpes
zoster may lead the clinician to diagnose migraine, myocardial
infarction, acute abdomen, herniated disc, etc, depending on the
dermatome involved.
 Complications
Sacral zoster may be associated with bladder and bowel
dysfunction. Persistent neuralgia, anesthesia or scarring of the
affected area, facial or other nerve paralysis, and encephalitis may
occur. Postherpetic neuralgia is most common after involvement of
the trigeminal region, and in patients over the age of 55. Early
(within 72 hours after onset) and aggressive antiviral treatment of
herpes zoster reduces the severity and duration of postherpetic
neuralgia. Zoster ophthalmicus (V1) can result in visual impairment.
 Prevention
An effective live herpes zoster vaccine (Zostavax) is available to
prevent both herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia. It is
recommended in persons aged 60 and older.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
1. Immunocompetent host—Since early antiviral treatment of
zoster reduces postherpetic neuralgia, those with a risk of
developing this complication should be treated, ie, those over age
50 and those with nontruncal eruption. In addition, younger patients
with acute moderate to severe pain or rash may benefit from
effective antiviral therapy. Treatment can be given with oral
acyclovir, 800 mg five times daily; famciclovir, 500 mg three times
daily; or valacyclovir, 1 g three times daily—all for 7 days (see
Chapter 32). For reasons of increased bioavailability and ease of
dosing schedule, the preferred agents are those given three times
daily. Patients should maintain good hydration. The dose of antiviral
should be adjusted for kidney function as recommended. Nerve
blocks may be used in the management of initial severe pain.
Ophthalmologic consultation is vital for involvement of the first
branch of the trigeminal nerve, even if the patient has no ocular
symptoms. Systemic corticosteroids are effective in reducing acute
pain, improving quality of life, and returning patients to normal
activities much more quickly. They do not increase the risk of
dissemination in immunocompetent hosts. If not contraindicated, a
tapering 3-week course of prednisone, starting at 60 mg/d, should
be considered for its adjunctive benefit in immunocompetent
patients. Oral corticosteroids do not reduce the prevalence,
severity, or duration of postherpetic neuralgia beyond that achieved
by effective antiviral therapy. Adequate analgesia should be given
from the onset of zoster-associated pain, which might include
opioids and gabapentin in patients with severe pain.
2. Immunocompromised host—Given the safety and efficacy of
currently available antivirals, most immuno-compromised patients
with herpes zoster are candidates for antiviral therapy. The dosage
schedule is as listed above, but treatment should be continued until
the lesions have completely crusted and are healed or almost healed
(up to 2 weeks). Because corticosteroids increase the risk of
dissemination in immunosuppressed patients, they should not be
used in these patients. Progression of disease may necessitate
intravenous therapy with acyclovir, 10 mg/kg intravenously, three
times daily. After 3–4 days, oral therapy may be substituted if there
has been a good response to intravenous therapy. Adverse effects
include decreased kidney function from crystallization, nausea and
vomiting, and abdominal pain.
Foscarnet, administered in a dosage of 40 mg/kg two or three
times daily intravenously, is indicated for treatment of acyclovir-
resistant varicella-zoster virus infections.
B. Local Measures
Calamine or starch shake lotions may be of some help.
C. Postherpetic Neuralgia Therapy
The most effective treatment is prevention with vaccination of those
at risk for developing zoster and early and aggressive antiviral
therapy once zoster has occurred. Once established, postherpetic
neuralgia may be treated with capsaicin ointment, 0.025–0.075%,
or lidocaine (Lidoderm) topical patches. Chronic postherpetic
neuralgia may be relieved by regional blocks (stellate ganglion,
epidural, local infiltration, or peripheral nerve), with or without
corticosteroids added to the injections. Amitriptyline, 25–75 mg
orally as a single nightly dose, is the first-line therapy beyond simple
analgesics. Gabapentin, up to 3600 mg orally daily (starting at 300
mg orally three times daily), or duloxetine, up to 60–120 mg orally
daily (starting at 30–60 mg orally daily) may be added for additional
pain relief. Referral to a pain management clinic should be
considered in moderate to severe cases and in those failing the
above treatments.
 Prognosis
The eruption persists 2–3 weeks and usually does not recur. Motor
involvement in 2–3% of patients may lead to temporary palsy.
Dworkin RH et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
oxycodone and of gabapentin for acute pain in herpes zoster. Pain.
2009 Apr;142(3):209-17. [PMID: 19195785]
 
Ji G et al. The effectiveness of repetitive paravertebral injections
with local anesthetics and steroids for the prevention of
postherpetic neuralgia in patients with acute herpes zoster. Anesth
Analg. 2009 Nov;109(5):1651–5. [PMID: 19713253]
 
Oxman MN. Zoster vaccine: current status and future prospects.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jul 15;51(2):197–213. [PMID: 20550454]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Shingles. JAMA. 2009 Jul
1;302(1):108. [PMID: 19567448]
 
Weinberg A et al; US Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
Cooperative Studies Program Shingles Prevention Study
Investigators. Varicella-zoster virus-specific immune responses to
herpes zoster in elderly participants in a trial of a clinically effective
zoster vaccine. J Infect Dis. 2009 Oct 1;200(7):1068–77. [PMID:
19712037]
 
Whitley RJ et al. Management of herpes zoster and post-herpetic
neuralgia now and in the future. J Clin Virol. 2010 May; 48(Suppl
1):S20–8. [PMID: 20510264]
 
POMPHOLYX; VESICULOBULLOUS HAND ECZEMA
(Formerly Known as Dyshidrosis, Dyshidrotic Eczema)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 “Tapioca” vesicles of 1–2 mm on the palms, soles, and sides of
fingers, associated with pruritus.
 Vesicles may coalesce to form multiloculated blisters.
 Scaling and fissuring may follow drying of the blisters.
 Appearance in the third decade, with lifelong recurrences.
 
 General Considerations
This is an extremely common form of hand dermatitis, preferably
called pompholyx (Gr “bubble”) or vesiculobullous dermatitis of the
palms and soles. Patients often have an atopic background and
report flares with stress. Patients with widespread dermatitis due to
any cause may develop pompholyx-like eruptions as a part of an
autoeczematization response.
 Clinical Findings
Small clear vesicles stud the skin at the sides of the fingers and on
the palms (Figure 6–21) or soles. They look like the grains in
tapioca. They may be associated with intense itching. Later, the
vesicles dry and the area becomes scaly and fissured.
 Differential Diagnosis
Unroofing the vesicles and examining the blister roof with a KOH
preparation will reveal hyphae in cases of bullous tinea. Patients
with inflammatory tinea pedis may have a vesicular dermatophytid
of the palms. Always examine the feet of a patient with a hand
eruption. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may
produce an eruption very similar to that of dyshidrosis on the hands.
 Prevention
There is no known way to prevent attacks.
 Treatment
Topical and systemic corticosteroids help some patients
dramatically. Since this is a chronic problem, systemic
corticosteroids are generally not appropriate therapy. A high-
potency topical corticosteroid used early in the attack may help
abort the flare and ameliorate pruritus. Topical corticosteroids are
also important in treating the scaling and fissuring that are seen after
the vesicular phase. It is essential that patients avoid anything that
irritates the skin; they should wear cotton gloves inside vinyl gloves
when doing dishes or other wet chores, use long-handled brushes
instead of sponges, and use a hand cream after washing the hands.
Patients respond to PUVA therapy and injection of botulinum toxin
into the palms as for hyperhidrosis.
 
Figure 6–21. Pompholyx (acute vesiculobullous hand eczema).
(Used, with permission, from Berger TG, Dept Dermatology,
UCSF.)
 
 Prognosis
For most patients, the disease is an inconvenience. For some,
vesiculobullous hand eczema can be incapacitating.
Veien NK. Acute and recurrent vesicular hand dermatitis.
Dermatol Clin. 2009 Jul;27(3):337–53. [PMID: 19580928]
 
PORPHYRIA CUTANEA TARDA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Noninflammatory blisters on sun-exposed sites, especially the
dorsal surfaces of the hands.
 Hypertrichosis, skin fragility.
 Associated liver disease.
 Elevated urine porphyrins.
 
 
Figure 6–22. Porphyria cutanea tarda. (Courtesy of Lewis
Rose, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA,
Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 General Considerations
Porphyria cutanea tarda is the most common type of porphyria.
Cases are sporadic or hereditary. The disease is associated with
ingestion of certain medications (eg, estrogens), and liver disease
from alcoholism or hepatitis C. In patients with liver disease,
hemosiderosis is often present.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients complain of painless blistering and fragility of the skin of the
dorsal surfaces of the hands (Figure 6–22). Facial hypertrichosis
and hyperpigmentation are common.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinary uroporphyrins are elevated twofold to fivefold above
coproporphyrins. Patients may also have abnormal liver function
tests, evidence of hepatitis C infection, increased liver iron stores,
and hemochromatosis gene mutations. Multiple triggering factors are
often discovered.
 Differential Diagnosis
Skin lesions identical to those of porphyria cutanea tarda may be
seen in patients who receive maintenance dialysis and in those who
take certain medications (tetracyclines and NSAIDs, especially
naproxen, and voriconazole). In this so-called pseudoporphyria, the
biopsy results are identical to those associated with porphyria
cutanea tarda, but urine porphyrins are normal.
 Prevention
Although the lesions are triggered by sun exposure, the wavelength
of light triggering the lesions is beyond that absorbed by sunscreens,
which for that reason are ineffective. Barrier sun protection with
clothing is required.
 Treatment
Stopping all triggering medications and substantially reducing or
stopping alcohol consumption may alone lead to improvement.
Phlebotomy without oral iron supplementation at a rate of 1 unit
every 2–4 weeks will gradually lead to improvement. Very low
dose antimalarials (as low as 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine twice
weekly), alone or in combination with phlebotomy, will increase the
excretion of porphyrins, improving the skin disease. Treatment is
continued until the patient is asymptomatic. Urine porphyrins may
be monitored.
 Prognosis
Most patients improve with treatment. Sclerodermoid skin lesions
may develop on the trunk, scalp, and face.
DERMATITIS HERPETIFORMIS
Dermatitis herpetiformis is an uncommon disease manifested by
pruritic papules, vesicles, and papulovesicles mainly on the elbows,
knees, buttocks, posterior neck, and scalp. It appears to have its
highest prevalence in Scandinavia and is associated with HLA
antigens -B8, -DR3, and -DQ2. The diagnosis is made by light
microscopy, which demonstrates neutrophils at the dermal papillary
tips. Direct immunofluorescence studies show granular deposits of
IgA in the dermal papillae. Circulating antibodies to tissue
transglutaminase are present in 90% of cases. NSAIDs may cause
flares. Patients have gluten-sensitive enteropathy, but for the great
majority it is sub-clinical. However, ingestion of gluten is the cause
of the disease, and strict long-term avoidance of dietary gluten has
been shown to decrease the dose of dapsone (usually 100–200 mg
daily) required to control the disease and may even eliminate the
need for treatment. Patients with dermatitis herpetiformis are at
increased risk for development of gastrointestinal lymphoma, and
this risk is reduced by a gluten-free diet.
Caproni M et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
dermatitis herpetiformis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2009
Jun;23(6):633–8. [PMID: 19470076]
 
Jalil S et al. Associations among behavior-related susceptibility
factors in porphyria cutanea tarda. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2010 Mar;8(3):297–302. [PMID: 19948245]
 
Muñoz-Santos C et al. Familial and sporadic porphyria cutanea
tarda: clinical and biochemical features and risk factors in 152
patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010 Mar;89(2):69–74. [PMID:
20517178]
 
WEEPING OR CRUSTED LESIONS
IMPETIGO
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Superficial blisters filled with purulent material that rupture easily.
 Crusted superficial erosions.
 Positive Gram stain and bacterial culture.
 
 General Considerations
Impetigo is a contagious and autoinoculable infection of the skin
caused by staphylococci or streptococci.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The lesions consist of macules, vesicles, bullae, pustules, and
honey-colored gummy crusts that when removed leave denuded red
areas (Figure 6–23). The face and other exposed parts are most
often involved. Ecthyma is a deeper form of impetigo caused by
staphylococci or streptococci, with ulceration and scarring. It
occurs frequently on the extremities.
B. Laboratory Findings
Gram stain and culture confirm the diagnosis. In temperate climates,
most cases are associated with S aureus infection. Streptococcus
species are more common in tropical infections. Community-
associated methicillin-resistant S aureus (CA-MRSA) can be
isolated from lesions of impetigo and ecthyma.
 Differential Diagnosis
The main differential diagnoses are acute allergic contact dermatitis
and herpes simplex. Contact dermatitis may be suggested by the
history or by linear distribution of the lesions, and culture should be
negative for staphylococci and streptococci. Herpes simplex
infection usually presents with grouped vesicles or discrete erosions
and may be associated with a history of recurrences. Viral cultures
are positive.
 
Figure 6–23. Bullous impetigo. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Treatment
Soaks and scrubbing can be beneficial, especially in unroofing lakes
of pus under thick crusts. Topical agents such as bacitracin,
mupirocin, or retapamulin can be attempted for infections limited to
small areas. Mupirocin and retapamulin are more expensive than
systemic treatments. In most cases, systemic antibiotics are
indicated. Cephalexin, 250 mg four times daily, is usually effective.
Doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily, is a reasonable alternative. CA-
MRSA may cause impetigo, and initial coverage for MRSA could
include doxycycline, clindamycin, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-SMZ). About 50% of CA-MRSA cases are quinolone
resistant. Recurrent impetigo is associated with nasal carriage of S
aureus, treated with rifampin, 600 mg daily. Intranasal mupirocin
ointment twice daily for 5 days clears the carriage of 40% of
MRSA strains. Bleach baths (½ to 1 cup per 20 liters of bathwater
for 15 minutes 3–5 times weekly) for all family members, and the
use of dilute household bleach to clean showers and other bath
surfaces may help reduce the spread. Individuals should not share
towels if there is a case of impetigo in the household.
Geria AN et al. Impetigo update: new challenges in the era of
methicillin resistance. Cutis. 2010 Feb;85(2):65–70. [PMID:
20349679]
 
ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Erythema and edema, with pruritus, often followed by vesicles
and bullae in an area of contact with a suspected agent.
 Later, weeping, crusting, or secondary infection.
 A history of previous reaction to suspected contactant.
 Patch test with agent positive.
 
 General Considerations
Contact dermatitis is an acute or chronic dermatitis that results from
direct skin contact with chemicals or allergens. Eighty percent of
cases are due to excessive exposure to or additive effects of
primary or universal irritants (eg, soaps, detergents, organic
solvents) and are called irritant contact dermatitis. This appears red
and scaly but not vesicular. The most common causes of allergic
contact dermatitis are poison ivy or poison oak; topically applied
antimicrobials (especially bacitracin and neomycin), anesthetics
(benzocaine); hair-care products; preservatives; jewelry (nickel);
rubber; vitamin E; essential oils; propolis (from bees); and adhesive
tape. Occupational exposure is an important cause of allergic
contact dermatitis. Weeping and crusting are typically due to allergic
and not irritant dermatitis.
 
Figure 6–24. Contact dermatitis with linear pattern due to
poison ivy. (Used, with permission, from Berger TG, Dept
Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In allergic contact dermatitis, the acute phase is characterized by
tiny vesicles and weepy and crusted lesions, whereas resolving or
chronic contact dermatitis presents with scaling, erythema, and
possibly thickened skin (Figure 6–24). Itching, burning, and stinging
may be severe. The lesions, distributed on exposed parts or in
bizarre asymmetric patterns, consist of erythematous macules,
papules, and vesicles. The affected area is often hot and swollen,
with exudation and crusting, simulating—and at times complicated
by—infection. The pattern of the eruption may be diagnostic (eg,
typical linear streaked vesicles on the extremities in poison oak or
ivy dermatitis). The location will often suggest the cause: Scalp
involvement suggests hair dyes or shampoos; face involvement,
creams, cosmetics, soaps, shaving materials, nail polish; and neck
involvement, jewelry, hair dyes.
B. Laboratory Findings
Gram stain and culture will rule out impetigo or secondary infection
(impetiginization). If itching is generalized, then scabies should be
considered. After the episode has cleared, patch testing may be
useful if the triggering allergen is not known.
 Differential Diagnosis
Asymmetric distribution, blotchy erythema around the face, linear
lesions, and a history of exposure help distinguish acute contact
dermatitis from other skin lesions. The most commonly mistaken
diagnosis is impetigo. Chronic allergic contact dermatitis must be
differentiated from scabies, atopic dermatitis, pompholyx, and other
eczemas.
 Prevention
Prompt and thorough removal of the causative oil by washing with
liquid dishwashing soap (eg, Dial Ultra) may be effective if done
within 30 minutes after exposure to poison oak or ivy. The three
most effective over-the-counter barrier creams which are applied
prior to exposure and prevent/reduce the severity of the dermatitis
are Stokogard, Hollister Moisture Barrier, and Hydropel.
The mainstay of prevention is identification of the agent causing
the dermatitis and avoidance of exposure or use of protective
clothing and gloves. In industry-related cases, prevention may be
accomplished by moving or retraining the worker.
 Treatment
A. Overview
While local measures are important, severe or widespread
involvement is difficult to manage without systemic corticosteroids
because even the highest-potency topical corticosteroids seem not
to work well on vesicular and weepy lesions. Localized involvement
(except on the face) can often be managed solely with topical
agents. Irritant contact dermatitis is treated by protection from the
irritant and use of topical corticosteroids as for atopic dermatitis
(described above). The treatment of allergic contact dermatitis is
detailed below.
B. Local Measures
1. Acute weeping dermatitis—Compresses are most often used.
It is unwise to scrub lesions with soap and water. Calamine lotion
may be used between wet dressings, especially for involvement of
intertriginous areas or when oozing is not marked. Lesions on the
extremities may be bandaged with wet dressings for 30–60 minutes
several times a day. High potency topical corticosteroids in gel or
cream form (eg, fluocinonide, clobetasol, or halobetasol) may help
suppress acute contact dermatitis and relieve itching. This treatment
should be followed by tapering of the number of applications per
day or use of a mid-potency corticosteroid such as triamcinolone
0.1% cream to prevent rebound of the dermatitis. A soothing
formulation is 2 oz of 0.1% triamcinolone acetonide cream in 7.5 oz
Sarna lotion (0.5% camphor, 0.5% menthol, 0.5% phenol) mixed
by the patient.
2. Subacute dermatitis (subsiding)—Mid-potency (triamcinolone
0.1%) to high-potency corticosteroids (clobetasol, amcinonide,
fluocinonide, desoximetasone) are the mainstays of therapy.
3. Chronic dermatitis (dry and lichenified)—High-potency to
superpotency corticosteroids are used in ointment form.
C. Systemic Therapy
For acute severe cases, prednisone may be given orally for 12–21
days. Prednisone, 60 mg for 4–7 days, 40 mg for 4–7 days, and 20
mg for 4–7 days without a further taper is one useful regimen.
Another is to dispense seventy-eight 5-mg pills to be taken 12 the
first day, 11 the second day, and so on. The key is to use enough
corticosteroid (and as early as possible) to achieve a clinical effect
and to taper slowly enough to avoid rebound. A Medrol Dosepak
(methylprednisolone) with 5 days of medication is inappropriate on
both counts. (See Chapter 26.)
 Prognosis
Allergic contact dermatitis is self-limited if reexposure is prevented
but often takes 2–3 weeks for full resolution.
Craig K et al. What is the best duration of steroid therapy for
contact dermatitis (rhus)? J Fam Pract. 2006 Feb;55(2):166–7.
[PMID: 16451787]
 
Usatine RP et al. Diagnosis and management of contact dermatitis.
Am Fam Physician. 2010 Aug 1;82(3):249–55. [PMID:
20672788]
 
PUSTULAR DISORDERS
ACNE VULGARIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Occurs at puberty, though onset may be delayed into the third or
fourth decade.
 Open and closed comedones are the hallmark of acne vulgaris.
 The most common of all skin conditions.
 Severity varies from purely comedonal to papular or pustular
inflammatory acne to cysts or nodules.
 Face and upper trunk may be affected.
 Scarring may be a sequela of the disease or picking and
manipulating by the patient.
 
 General Considerations
Acne vulgaris is polymorphic. Open and closed come-dones,
papules, pustules, and cysts are found. The disease is activated by
androgens in those who are genetically predisposed.
Acne vulgaris is more common and more severe in males. It does
not always clear spontaneously when maturity is reached. Twelve
percent of women and 3% of men over age 25 have acne vulgaris.
This rate does not decrease until after age 44. The skin lesions
parallel sebaceous activity. Pathogenic events include plugging of
the infundibulum of the follicles, retention of sebum, overgrowth of
the acne bacillus (Propionibacterium acnes) with resultant release
of and irritation by accumulated fatty acids, and foreign body
reaction to extrafollicular sebum. The mechanism of antibiotics in
controlling acne is not clearly understood, but they may work
because of their antibacterial or anti-inflammatory properties.
When a resistant case of acne is encountered in a woman,
hyperandrogenism may be suspected. This may or may not be
accompanied by hirsutism, irregular menses, or other signs of
virilism. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common
identifiable cause.
 Clinical Findings
There may be mild soreness, pain, or itching. The lesions occur
mainly over the face, neck, upper chest, back, and shoulders.
Comedones are the hallmark of acne vulgaris. Closed comedones
are tiny, flesh-colored, noninflamed bumps that give the skin a rough
texture or appearance. Open comedones typically are a bit larger
and have black material in them. Inflammatory papules, pustules,
ectatic pores, acne cysts, and scarring are also seen (Figure 6–25).
Acne may have different presentations at different ages. Preteens
often present with comedones as their first lesions. Inflammatory
lesions in young teenagers are often found in the middle of the face,
extending outward as the patient becomes older. Women in their
third and fourth decades (often with no prior history of acne)
commonly present with papular lesions on the chin and around the
mouth.
 Differential Diagnosis
In adults, acne rosacea presents with papules and pustules in the
middle third of the face, but telangiectasia, flushing, and the absence
of comedones distinguish this disease from acne vulgaris. A pustular
eruption on the face in patients receiving antibiotics or with otitis
externa should be investigated with culture to rule out an uncommon
gram-negative folliculitis. Acne may develop in patients who use
systemic corticosteroids or topical fluorinated corticosteroids on the
face. Acne may be exacerbated or caused by irritating creams or
oils. Pustules on the face can also be caused by tinea infections.
Lesions on the back are more problematic. When they occur alone,
staphylococcal folliculitis, miliaria (“heat rash”) or, uncommonly,
Malassezia folliculitis should be suspected. Bacterial culture, trial of
an antistaphylococcal antibiotic, and observing the response to
therapy will help in the differential diagnosis. In patients with HIV
infection, folliculitis is common and may be either staphylococcal
folliculitis or eosinophilic folliculitis.
 
Figure 6–25. Acne vulgaris, severe nodular cystic form with
scarring. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
 Complications
Cyst formation, pigmentary changes in pigmented patients, severe
scarring, and psychological problems may result.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
1. Education of the patient—When scarring seems out of
proportion to the severity of the lesions, clinicians must suspect that
the patient is manipulating the lesions. It is essential that the patient
be educated in a supportive way about this complication. Anxiety
and depression are often the underlying cause of young women
excoriating minor acne. It is wise to let the patient know that at least
4–6 weeks will be required to see improvement and that old lesions
may take months to fade. Therefore, improvement will be judged
according to the number of new lesions forming after 6–8 weeks of
therapy. Additional time will be required to see improvement on the
back and chest, as these areas are slowest to respond. If hair
pomades are used, they should contain glycerin and not oil. Avoid
topical exposure to oils, cocoa butter (theobroma oil), and greases.
2. Diet—A low glycemic diet that results in weight loss has been
reported to improve acne in males aged 18–25. This improvement
was associated with a reduction in insulin resistance.
Hyperinsulinemia has also been associated with acne in
eumenorrheic women. The metabolic syndrome with insulin
resistance can also be a feature of PCOS in women. This finding
suggests a possible common pathogenic mechanism for acne in both
adult women and men.
B. Comedonal Acne
Treatment of acne is based on the type and severity of lesions.
Comedones require treatment different from that of pustules and
cystic lesions. In assessing severity, take the sequelae of the lesions
into account. An individual who gets only a few new lesions per
month that scar or leave postinflammatory hyperpigmentation must
be treated much more aggressively than a comparable patient
whose lesions clear without sequelae. Soaps play little role in acne
treatment, and unless the patient's skin is exceptionally oily, a mild
soap should be used to avoid irritation that will limit the usefulness
of other topicals, all of which are themselves somewhat irritating.
The agents effective in come-donal acne are listed in the order in
which they should be tried.
1. Topical retinoids—Tretinoin is very effective for come-donal
acne or for treatment of the comedonal component of more severe
acne, but its usefulness is limited by irritation. Start with 0.025%
cream (not gel) and have the patient use it at first twice weekly at
night, then build up to as often as nightly. A few patients cannot use
even this low-strength preparation more than three times weekly but
even that may cause improvement. A lentil-sized amount is sufficient
to cover the entire face. To avoid irritation, have the patient wait 20
minutes after washing to apply. Adapalene gel 0.1% and
reformulated tretinoin (Renova, Retin A Micro, Avita) are other
options for patients irritated by standard tretinoin preparations.
Some patients—especially teenagers—do best on 0.01% gel.
Although the absorption of tretinoin is minimal, its use during
pregnancy is contraindicated. Some patients report photosensitivity
with tretinoin. Patients should be warned that they may flare in the
first 4 weeks of treatment. Tazarotene gel (0.05% or 0.1%)
(Tazorac) is another topical retinoid approved for treatment of
psoriasis and acne, and may be used in patients intolerant of the
other retinoids.
2. Benzoyl peroxide—Benzoyl peroxide products are available in
concentrations of 2.5%, 4%, 5%, 8%, and 10%, but it appears that
2.5% is as effective as 10% and less irritating. In general, water-
based and not alcohol-based gels should be used to decrease
irritation.
3. Antibiotics—Use of topical antibiotics (see below) has been
demonstrated to decrease pustular and comedonal lesions.
C. Papular or Cystic Inflammatory Acne
Antibiotics are the mainstay for treatment of inflammatory acne.
They may be used topically or orally. The oral antibiotics of choice
are tetracycline and doxycycline. Minocycline is often effective in
acne unresponsive or resistant to treatment with these antibiotics but
it is more expensive. Rarely, other antibiotics such as TMP-SMZ
(one double-strength tablet twice daily), clindamycin (150 mg twice
daily), or a cephalosporin (cefadroxil or cephalexin) may be used.
Topical clindamycin phosphate and erythromycin are also used (see
below). Topicals are probably the equivalent of about 500 mg/d of
tetracycline given orally, which is half the usual starting dose.
Topical antibiotics are used in three situations: for mild papular acne
that can be controlled by topicals alone, for patients who refuse or
cannot tolerate oral antibiotics, or to wean patients under good
control from oral to topical preparations. To decrease resistance,
benzoyl peroxide should be used in combination with the topical
antibiotic.
1. Mild acne—The first choice of topical antibiotics in terms of
efficacy and relative lack of induction of resistant P acnes is the
combination of erythromycin or clindamycin with benzoyl peroxide
topical gel. Clindamycin (Cleocin T) lotion (least irritating), gel, or
solution, or one of the many brands of topical erythromycin gel or
solution, may be used twice daily and the benzoyl peroxide in the
morning. (A combination of erythromycin or clindamycin with
benzoyl peroxide is available as a prescription item.) The addition of
tretinoin 0.025% cream or 0.01% gel at night may increase
improvement, since it works via a different mechanism.
2. Moderate acne—Tetracycline, 500 mg twice daily,
doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily, and minocycline, 50–100 mg
twice daily, are all effective though minocycline is more expensive.
When initiating minocycline therapy, start at 100 mg in the evening
for 4–7 days, then 100 mg twice daily, to decrease the incidence of
vertigo. Plan a return visit in 6 weeks and at 3–4 months after that.
If the patient's skin is quite clear, instructions should be given for
tapering the dose by 250 mg for tetracycline, by 100 mg for
doxycycline, or by 50 mg for minocycline every 6–8 weeks—while
treating with topicals—to arrive at the lowest systemic dose needed
to maintain clearing. In general, lowering the dose to zero without
other therapy results in prompt recurrence of acne. Tetracycline,
minocycline, and doxycycline are contraindicated in pregnancy, but
oral erythromycin may be used.
It is important to discuss the issue of contraceptive failure when
prescribing antibiotics for women taking oral contraceptives.
Women may need to consider using barrier methods as well, and
should report breakthrough bleeding. Oral contraceptives or
spironolactone (50–200 mg daily) may be added as an
antiandrogen in women with antibiotic-resistant acne or in women in
whom relapse occurs after isotretinoin therapy.
3. Severe acne
A. ISOTRETINOIN—A vitamin A analog, isotretinoin is used for the
treatment of severe cystic acne that has not responded to
conventional therapy. A dosage of 0.5–1 mg/kg/d for 20 weeks for
a cumulative dose of at least 120 mg/kg is usually adequate for
severe cystic acne. Patients should be offered isotretinoin therapy
before they experience significant scarring if they are not promptly
and adequately controlled by antibiotics. The drug is absolutely
contraindicated during pregnancy because of its teratogenicity;
two serum pregnancy tests should be obtained before starting the
drug in a female and every month thereafter. Sufficient medication
for only 1 month should be dispensed. Two forms of effective
contraception must be used. Informed consent must be obtained
before its use and patients must be enrolled in a monitoring program
(iPledge). Side effects occur in most patients, usually related to dry
skin and mucous membranes (dry lips, nosebleed, and dry eyes). If
headache occurs, pseudotumor cerebri must be considered.
Depression has been reported. Hypertriglyceridemia will develop in
about 25% of patients, hypercholesterolemia in 15%, and a
lowering of high-density lipoproteins in 5%. Minor elevations in liver
function tests may develop in some patients. Fasting blood sugar
may be elevated. Miscellaneous adverse reactions include
decreased night vision, musculoskeletal symptoms, dry skin, thinning
of hair, exuberant granulation tissue in lesions, and bony
hyperostoses (seen only with very high doses or with long duration
of therapy). Moderate to severe myalgias rarely necessitate
decreasing the dosage or stopping the drug. Inflammatory bowel
disease has first appeared after acne treatment with both
tetracyclines and isotretinoin at a rate of 1:1000 cases treated or
less. Causality of this association has not been established. Young
adults with severe acne who are potential candidates for isotretinoin
should be asked about any bowel symptoms prior to starting
isotretinoin. Laboratory tests to be performed in all patients before
treatment and after 4 weeks on therapy include complete blood cell
count (CBC), cholesterol, triglycerides, and liver function studies.
Elevations of liver enzymes and triglycerides return to normal
upon conclusion of therapy. The drug may induce long-term
remissions in 40–60%, or acne may recur that is more easily
controlled with conventional therapy. Occasionally, acne does not
respond or promptly recurs after therapy, but it may clear after a
second course.
B. INTRALESIONAL INJECTION—In otherwise moderate acne,
intralesional injection of dilute suspensions of triamcinolone
acetonide (2.5 mg/mL, 0.05 mL per lesion) will often hasten the
resolution of deeper papules and occasional cysts.
C. LASER, DERMABRASION—Cosmetic improvement may be
achieved by excision and punch-grafting of deep scars and by
abrasion of inactive acne lesions, particularly flat, superficial scars.
The technique is not without untoward effects, since
hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation, grooving, and scarring have
been known to occur. Dark-skinned individuals do poorly.
Corrective surgery within 12 months after isotretinoin therapy may
not be advisable. Active acne of all types can be treated with
certain laser and photodynamic therapies. This can be considered
when standard treatments are contraindicated or fail.
 Prognosis
Acne vulgaris eventually remits spontaneously, but when this will
occur cannot be predicted. The condition may persist throughout
adulthood and may lead to severe scarring if left untreated. Patients
treated with antibiotics continue to improve for the first 3–6 months
of therapy. Relapse during treatment may suggest the emergence of
resistant P acnes. The disease is chronic and tends to flare
intermittently in spite of treatment. Remissions following systemic
treatment with isotretinoin may be lasting in up to 60% of cases.
Relapses after isotretinoin usually occur within 3 years and require a
second course in up to 20% of patients.
Bowe WP et al. Diet and acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010 Jul;
63(1):124–41. [PMID: 20338665]
 
Hamilton FL et al. Laser and other light therapies for the treatment
of acne vulgaris: systematic review. Br J Dermatol. 2009
Jun;160(6):1273–85. [PMID: 19239470]
 
Kaymak Y et al. Comparison of depression, anxiety and life
quality in acne vulgaris patients who were treated with either
isotretinoin or topical agents. Int J Dermatol. 2009 Jan;48(1): 41–
6. [PMID: 19126049]
 
Smith RN et al. The effect of a high-protein, low glycemic-load
diet versus a conventional, high glycemic-load diet on biochemical
parameters associated with acne vulgaris: a randomized,
investigator-masked, controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007
Aug;57(2):247–56. [PMID: 17448569]
 
ROSACEA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A chronic facial disorder.
 A neurovascular component (erythema and telangiectasis and a
tendency to flush easily).
 An acneiform component (papules and pustules) may also be
present.
 A glandular component accompanied by hyperplasia of the soft
tissue of the nose (rhinophyma).
 
 General Considerations
The pathogenesis of this disorder is not known. Topical
corticosteroids applied to the lower face can induce rosacea-like
conditions.
 Clinical Findings
Patients frequently report flushing or exacerbation of their rosacea
by heat or cold, hot drinks, spicy food, sunlight, exercise, alcohol,
emotions, and menopausal flushing. The cheeks, nose, and chin—at
times the entire face—may have a rosy hue. No comedones are
seen. In its mildest form, erythema and dilated vessels are seen on
the cheeks. Inflammatory papules may be superimposed on this
background and may evolve to pustules (Figure 6–26). Associated
seborrhea may be found. The patient often complains of burning or
stinging with episodes of flushing. Patients may have associated
ophthalmic disease, including blepharitis and keratitis, that often
requires systemic antibiotic therapy.
 
Figure 6–26. Rosacea. (Used, with permission, from Berger
TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Differential Diagnosis
Rosacea is distinguished from acne by the presence of the
neurovascular component and the absence of comedones. The rosy
hue of rosacea and telangiectasis will pinpoint the diagnosis. Lupus
is often misdiagnosed, but the presence of pustules excludes that
diagnosis.
 Treatment
Educating patients to avoid the factors they know to produce
exacerbations is important. Patients should wear a broad-spectrum
sunscreen with UVA coverage; however, exquisite sensitivity to
topical preparations may limit patient options. Zinc- or titanium-
based sunscreens are better tolerated, and barrier protective
silicones in the sunblock may enhance tolerance. Medical
management is effective only for the inflammatory papules and
pustules and the erythema that surrounds them. Rosacea is usually a
lifelong condition, so maintenance therapy is required.
A. Local Therapy
Avoidance of triggers (especially alcohol) and sucking on an ice
cube may be effective in reducing facial erythema and flushing.
Metronidazole (available as creams, gels, or lotions), 0.75%
applied twice daily or 1% applied once daily, is the topical
treatment of choice. If metronidazole is not tolerated, topical
clindamycin (solution, gel, or lotion) 1% applied twice daily is
effective. Response is noted in 4–8 weeks. Sulfur-sodium
sulfacetamide-containing topicals are helpful in patients only partially
responsive to topical antibiotics. Benzoyl peroxide, as in acne
vulgaris, may be helpful in reducing the pustular component. Topical
retinoids can be carefully added for maintenance.
B. Systemic Therapy
Tetracycline, 250 or 500 mg orally twice daily on an empty
stomach, should be used when topical therapy is inadequate.
Minocycline or doxycycline, 50–100 mg orally daily to twice daily,
is also effective. Metronidazole or amoxicillin, 250–500 mg orally
twice daily, or rifaximin, 550 mg orally twice daily, may be used in
refractory cases. Side effects are few, although metronidazole may
produce a disulfiram-like effect when the patient ingests alcohol and
it may cause neuropathy with long-term use. Isotretinoin may
succeed where other measures fail. A dosage of 0.5 mg/kg/d orally
for 12–28 weeks is recommended. See precautions above.
Telangiectasias are benefitted by laser therapy, and phymatous
overgrowth of the nose can be treated by surgical reduction.
 Prognosis
Rosacea tends to be a persistent process. With the regimens
described above, it can usually be controlled adequately.
Mostafa FF et al. Comparative study of some treatment modalities
of rosacea. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2009 Jan;23(1): 22–
8. [PMID: 18705632]
 
Parodi A et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in rosacea:
clinical effectiveness of its eradication. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2008 Jul (7):759–64. [PMID: 18456568]
 
Scharschmidt TC et al. Neurogenic rosacea: a distinct clinical
subtype requiring a modified approach to treatment. Arch
Dermatol. 2011 Jan;147(1):123–6. [PMID: 21242409]
 
Scheinfeld N et al. A review of the diagnosis and treatment of
rosacea. Postgrad Med. 2010 Jan;122(1):139–43. [PMID:
20107297]
 
Webster GF. Rosacea. Med Clin North Am. 2009 Nov;93(6):
1183–94. [PMID: 19932325]
 
FOLLICULITIS (Including Sycosis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Itching and burning in hairy areas.
 Pustules in the hair follicles.
 
 General Considerations
Folliculitis has multiple causes. It is frequently caused by
staphylococcal infection and may be more common in the diabetic
patient. When the lesion is deep-seated, chronic, and recalcitrant on
the head and neck, it is called sycosis.
Gram-negative folliculitis, which may develop during antibiotic
treatment of acne, may present as a flare of acne pustules or
nodules. Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Escherichia coli, and Proteus
have been isolated from these lesions.
“Hot tub folliculitis,” caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, is
characterized by pruritic or tender follicular, pustular lesions
occurring within 1–4 days after bathing in a contaminated hot tub,
whirlpool, or public swimming pool. Rarely, systemic infections may
result. Neutropenic patients should avoid these exposures.
Nonbacterial folliculitis may also be caused by friction and oils.
Occlusion, perspiration, and rubbing, such as that resulting from
tight jeans and other heavy fabrics on the upper legs can worsen this
type of folliculitis.
Steroid acne may be seen during topical or systemic
corticosteroid therapy.
A form of sterile folliculitis called eosinophilic folliculitis consisting
of urticarial papules with prominent eosinophilic infiltration is
common in patients with AIDS. It may appear first with institution of
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and be mistaken for a
drug eruption.
Pseudofolliculitis is caused by ingrowing hairs in the beard area.
It occurs in men and women with tightly curled beard hair. In this
entity, the papules and pustules are located at the side of and not in
follicles. It may be treated by growing a beard, by using chemical
depilatories, or by shaving with a foil-guard razor. Laser hair
removal is dramatically beneficial in patients with pseudofolliculitis,
requires limited maintenance, and can be done on patients of any
skin color. Pseudofolliculitis is a true medical indication for such a
procedure and should not be considered cosmetic.
 Clinical Findings
The symptoms range from slight burning and tenderness to intense
itching. The lesions consist of pustules of hair follicles (Figure 6–27).
 Differential Diagnosis
It is important to differentiate bacterial from nonbacterial folliculitis.
The history is important for pinpointing the causes of nonbacterial
folliculitis, and a Gram stain and culture are indispensable. One must
differentiate folliculitis from acne vulgaris or pustular miliaria (heat
rash) and from infections of the skin such as impetigo or fungal
infections. Pseudomonas folliculitis is often suggested by the history
of hot tub use. Eosinophilic folliculitis in AIDS often requires biopsy
for diagnosis.
 Complications
Abscess formation is the major complication of bacterial folliculitis.
 
Figure 6–27. Bacterial folliculitis. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Prevention
Correct any predisposing local causes such as oils or friction. Be
sure that the water in hot tubs and spas is treated properly. If
staphylococcal folliculitis is persistent, treatment of nasal or perineal
carriage with rifampin, 600 mg daily for 5 days, or with topical
mupirocin ointment 2% twice daily for 5 days, may help. Prolonged
oral clindamycin, 150–300 mg/d for 4–6 weeks, or oral TMP-
SMZ given 1 week per month for 6 months can be effective in
preventing recurrent staphylococcal folliculitis and furunculosis.
Bleach baths (½ to 1 cup per 20 liters of bathwater for 15 minutes
3–5 times weekly) may reduce cutaneous staphylococcal carriage
and not contribute to antibiotic resistance. Control of blood glucose
in diabetes may reduce the number of these infections.
 Treatment
A. Local Measures
Anhydrous ethyl alcohol containing 6.25% aluminum chloride
(Xerac AC), applied to lesions and environs, may be helpful,
especially for chronic frictional folliculitis of the buttocks. Topical
antibiotics are generally ineffective if bacteria have invaded the hair
follicle.
B. Specific Measures
Pseudomonas folliculitis will clear spontaneously in nonneutropenic
patients if the lesions are superficial. It may be treated with
ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily for 5 days.
Systemic antibiotics are recommended for bacterial folliculitis due
to other organisms. Extended periods of treatment (4–8 weeks or
more) with antistaphylococcal antibiotics are required if infection
has involved the scalp or densely hairy areas such as the axilla,
beard, or groin.
Gram-negative folliculitis in acne patients may be treated with
isotretinoin in compliance with all precautions discussed above (see
Acne Vulgaris).
Eosinophilic folliculitis may be treated initially by the combination
of potent topical corticosteroids and oral antihistamines. In more
severe cases, treatment is with one of the following: topical
permethrin (application for 12 hours every other night for 6 weeks);
itraconazole, 200–400 mg daily; UVB or PUVA phototherapy; or
isotretinoin, 0.5 mg/kg/d for up to 5 months. A remission may be
induced by some of these therapies, but long-term treatment may be
required.
 Prognosis
Bacterial folliculitis is occasionally stubborn and persistent, requiring
prolonged or intermittent courses of antibiotics.
Fukamachi S et al. Therapeutic effectiveness of various treatments
for eosinophilic pustular folliculitis. Acta Derm Venereol.
2009;89(2):155–9. [PMID: 19326000]
 
Hernandez C et al. Acute onset of facial pruritic papules in a
patient with AIDS: AIDS-associated eosinophilic folliculitis. Am
Fam Physician. 2009 Mar 15;79(6):511–2. [PMID: 19323365]
 
Nara T et al. Eosinophilic folliculitis with a Demodex folliculorum
infestation successfully treated with ivermectin in a man infected
with human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2009
Dec;34(8):e981–3. [PMID: 20055877]
 
MILIARIA (Heat Rash)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Burning, itching, superficial aggregated small vesicles, papules, or
pustules on covered areas of the skin, usually the trunk.
 More common in hot, moist climates.
 Rare forms associated with fever and even heat prostration.
 
 General Considerations
Miliaria occurs most commonly on the trunk and inter-triginous
areas. A hot, moist environment is the most frequent cause.
Bedridden febrile patients are susceptible. Plugging of the ostia of
sweat ducts occurs, with ultimate rupture of the sweat duct,
producing an irritating, stinging reaction. Increase in numbers of
resident aerobes, notably cocci, plays a role. Drugs that enhance
sweat gland function (eg, clonidine, β-blockers, opiates), may
contribute.
 Clinical Findings
The usual symptoms are burning and itching. The lesions consist of
small, superficial, red, thin-walled, discrete vesicles (miliaria
crystallina), papules (miliaria rubra), or vesicopustules or pustules
(miliaria pustulosa). The reaction virtually always affects the back in
a hospitalized patient.
 Differential Diagnosis
Miliaria is to be distinguished from drug eruption and folliculitis.
 Prevention
Use of an antibacterial preparation such as chlorhexidine prior to
exposure to heat and humidity may help prevent the condition.
Frequent turning or sitting of the hospitalized patient may reduce
miliaria on the back.
 Treatment
The patient should keep cool and wear light clothing. Triamcinolone
acetonide, 0.1% in Sarna lotion, or a midpotency corticosteroid in a
lotion or cream should be applied two to four times daily.
Secondary infections (superficial pyoderma) are treated with
appropriate anti-staphylococcal antibiotics. Anticholinergic drugs
given by mouth may be helpful in severe cases, eg, glycopyrrolate, 1
mg twice daily.
 Prognosis
Miliaria is usually a mild disorder, but severe forms (tropical
anhidrosis and asthenia) result from interference with the heat-
regulating mechanism.
Howe AS et al. Heat-related illness in athletes. Am J Sports Med.
2007 Aug;35(8):1384–95. [PMID: 17609528]
 
MUCOCUTANEOUS CANDIDIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe pruritus of vulva, anus, or body folds.
 Superficial denuded, beefy-red areas with or without satellite
vesicopustules.
 Whitish curd-like concretions on the oral and vaginal mucous
membranes.
 Yeast and pseudohyphae on microscopic examination of scales
or curd.
 
 General Considerations
Mucocutaneous candidiasis is a superficial fungal infection that may
involve almost any cutaneous or mucous surface of the body. It is
particularly likely to occur in diabetics, during pregnancy, and in
obese persons. Systemic antibiotics, oral corticosteroids, and oral
contraceptive agents may be contributory. Oral candidiasis may be
the first sign of HIV infection (see Chapter 31).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Itching may be intense. Burning is reported, particularly around the
vulva and anus. The lesions consist of superficially denuded, beefy-
red areas in the depths of the body folds such as in the groin and the
intergluteal cleft, beneath the breasts, at the angles of the mouth, and
in the umbilicus. The peripheries of these denuded lesions are
superficially undermined, and there may be satellite vesicopustules.
Whitish, curd-like concretions may be present on mucosal lesions
(Figure 6–28). Paronychia may occur (Figure 6–29).
B. Laboratory Findings
Clusters of budding yeast and pseudohyphae can be seen under
high power (400×) when skin scales or curd-like lesions have been
cleared in 10% KOH. Culture can confirm the diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Intertrigo, seborrheic dermatitis, tinea cruris, “inverse psoriasis,”
and erythrasma involving the same areas may mimic mucocutaneous
candidiasis.
 Complications
Systemic invasive candidiasis with candidemia may be seen with
immunosuppression and in patients receiving broad-spectrum
antibiotic and hypertonic glucose solutions, as in hyperalimentation.
There may or may not be clinically evident mucocutaneous
candidiasis.
 
Figure 6–28. Oral mucosal candidiasis. (Courtesy of Sol
Silverman, Jr., DDS, Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
 
Figure 6–29. Acute paronychia. (Courtesy of EJ Mayeaux, MD;
used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ
Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Affected parts should be kept dry and exposed to air as much as
possible. If possible, discontinue systemic antibiotics. For treatment
of systemic invasive candidiasis, see Chapter 36.
B. Local Measures
1. Nails and paronychia—Apply clotrimazole solution 1% twice
daily. Thymol 4% in ethanol applied once daily is an alternative.
2. Skin—Apply nystatin ointment or clotrimazole cream 1%, either
with hydrocortisone cream 1%, twice daily. Gentian violet 0.5%
solution is economical and highly effective in treating cutaneous
candidiasis (and also mucosal disease), but the purple discoloration
represents a cosmetic issue in some patients.
3. Vulvar and anal mucous membranes—For vaginal
candidiasis, single-dose fluconazole (150 mg) is effective.
Intravaginal clotrimazole, miconazole, terconazole, or nystatin may
also be used. Long-term suppressive therapy may be required for
recurrent or “intractable” cases. Non-albicans candidal species
may be identified by culture in some refractory cases and may
respond to oral itraconazole, 200 mg twice daily for 2–4 weeks.
4. Balanitis—This is most frequent in uncircumcised men, and
Candida usually plays a role. Topical nystatin ointment is the initial
treatment if the lesions are mildly erythematous or superficially
erosive. Soaking with dilute aluminum acetate for 15 minutes twice
daily may quickly relieve burning or itching. Chronicity and relapses,
especially after sexual contact, suggest reinfection from a sexual
partner who should be treated. Severe purulent balanitis is usually
due to bacteria. If it is so severe that phimosis occurs, oral
antibiotics—some with activity against anaerobes—are required; if
rapid improvement does not occur, urologic consultation is
indicated.
5. Mastitis—Lancinating breast pain and nipple dermatitis in
breastfeeding women may be a manifestation of Candida
colonization/infection of the breast ducts. Treatment with oral
fluconazole, 200 mg daily can be dramatically effective. Topical
gentian violet 0.5% is also useful in these cases.
 Prognosis
Cases of cutaneous candidiasis range from the easily cured to the
intractable and prolonged.
Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee. ABM
clinical protocol #4: mastitis. Revision, May 2008. Breastfeed
Med. 2008 Sep;3(3):177–80. [PMID: 18778213]
 
Sobel JD. Vulvovaginal candidosis. Lancet. 2007 Jun 9;369
(9577): 1961–71. [PMID: 17560449]
 
Worthington HV et al. Interventions for treating oral candidiasis for
patients with cancer receiving treatment. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2010 Jul 7;7:CD001972. [PMID: 20614427]
 
ERYTHEMAS
REACTIVE ERYTHEMAS
1. Urticaria & Angioedema
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Eruptions of evanescent wheals or hives.
 Itching is usually intense but may on rare occasions be absent.
 Special forms of urticaria have special features
(dermatographism, cholinergic urticaria, solar urticaria, or cold
urticaria).
 Most incidents are acute and self-limited over a period of 1–2
weeks.
 Chronic urticaria (episodes lasting > 6 weeks) may have an
autoimmune basis.
 
 General Considerations
Urticaria can result from many different stimuli on an immunologic or
nonimmunologic basis. The most common immunologic mechanism
is mediated by IgE, as seen in the majority of patients with acute
urticaria; another involves activation of the complement cascade.
Some patients with chronic urticaria demonstrate autoantibodies
directed against mast cell IgE receptors. Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor and angiotensin II receptor antagonist therapy may
be complicated by urticaria or angioedema. In general, extensive
costly workups are not indicated in patients who have urticaria. A
careful history and physical examination are more helpful.
 
Figure 6–30. Urticaria. (Used, with permission, from Berger
TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Lesions are itchy red swellings of a few millimeters to many
centimeters (Figure 6–30). The morphology of the lesions may vary
over a period of minutes to hours, resulting in geographic or bizarre
patterns. Individual lesions in true urticaria last <24 hours, and often
only 2–4 hours. Angioedema is involvement of deeper
subcutaneous tissue with swelling of the lips, eyelids, palms, soles,
and genitalia. Angioedema is no more likely than urticaria to be
associated with systemic complications such as laryngeal edema or
hypotension. In cholinergic urticaria, triggered by a rise in core body
temperature (hot showers, exercise), wheals are 2–3 mm in
diameter with a large surrounding red flare. Cold urticaria is
acquired or inherited and triggered by exposure to cold and wind
(see Chapter 37).
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory studies are not likely to be helpful in the evaluation of
acute or chronic urticaria. The most common causes of acute
urticaria are foods, infections, and medications. The cause of
chronic urticaria is often not found. In patients with individual slightly
purpuric lesions that persist past 24 hours, skin biopsy may confirm
neutrophilic urticaria or urticarial vasculitis. A functional ELISA test
can detect patients with an autoimmune basis for their chronic
urticaria.
 Differential Diagnosis
Papular urticaria resulting from insect bites persists for days. A
central punctum can usually be seen. Streaked urticarial lesions may
be seen in the 24–48 hours before blisters appear in acute allergic
plant dermatitis, eg, poison ivy, oak, or sumac. Urticarial response
to heat, sun, water, and pressure are quite rare. Urticarial vasculitis
may be seen as part of serum sickness, associated with fever and
arthralgia. In this setting, a low serum complement level may be
associated with severe systemic disease.
In hereditary angioedema, there is generally a positive family
history and gastrointestinal or respiratory symptoms. Urticaria is not
part of the syndrome, and lesions are not pruritic.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
A detailed search by history for a cause of acute urticaria should be
undertaken, and treatment may then be tailored to include the
provocative condition. The chief causes are drugs—eg, aspirin,
NSAIDs, morphine, and codeine; arthropod bites—eg, insect bites
and bee stings (though the latter may cause anaphylaxis as well as
angioedema); physical factors such as heat, cold, sunlight, and
pressure; and, presumably, neurogenic factors, as in cholinergic
urticaria induced by exercise, excitement, hot showers, etc. Other
causes may include penicillins and other medications; inhalants such
as feathers and animal danders; ingestion of shellfish, tomatoes, or
strawberries; vaccines; external contactants, including various
chemicals and cosmetics; and infections such as viral hepatitis
(causing urticarial vasculitis).
B. Systemic Treatment
The mainstay of treatment initially includes H1-antihistamines (see
above). Initial therapy is hydroxyzine, 10 mg twice daily to 25 mg
three times daily, or as a single nightly dose of 50–75 mg at night to
reduce sedation. Cyproheptadine, 4 mg four times daily, may be
especially useful for cold urticaria. “Nonsedating” or less sedating
antihistamines are added if the generic sedating antihistamines are
not effective. Options include fexofenadine, 60 mg twice daily (or
180 mg once daily); or loratadine, 10 mg daily. Higher doses of
these second-generation antihistamines may be required to suppress
urticaria (up to four times the standard recommended dose) than
are required for allergic rhinitis. These high doses are safe and can
be used in refractory cases. Cetirizine, a metabolite of hydroxyzine,
is less sedating (13% of patients) and is given in a dosage of 10 mg
daily.
Doxepin (a tricyclic antidepressant), 10–75 mg at bedtime, can
be very effective in chronic urticaria. It has anti-cholinergic side
effects.
H2-antihistamines in combination with H1-blockers may be
helpful in patients with symptomatic dermatographism and to a
lesser degree in chronic urticaria. UVB phototherapy can suppress
some cases of chronic urticaria. If neutrophils are a significant
component of the inflammatory infiltrate in chronic urticaria,
dapsone may be useful.
A few patients with chronic urticaria may respond to elimination
of salicylates and tartrazine (coloring agent). Asymptomatic foci of
infection—sinusitis, vaginal candidiasis, cholecystitis, and intestinal
parasites—may rarely cause chronic urticaria. Systemic
corticosteroids in a dose of about 40 mg daily will usually suppress
acute and chronic urticaria. However, the use of corticosteroids is
rarely indicated, since properly selected combinations of
antihistamines with less toxicity are usually effective. Once
corticosteroids are withdrawn, the urticaria virtually always returns if
it had been chronic. Instead of instituting systemic corticosteroids,
consultation should be sought from a dermatologist or allergist with
experience in managing severe urticaria. Cyclosporine (3–5
mg/kg/d) may be effective in severe cases of autoimmune chronic
urticaria.
C. Local Treatment
Local treatment is rarely rewarding.
 Prognosis
Acute urticaria usually lasts only a few days to weeks. Half of
patients whose urticaria persists for > 6 weeks will have it for years.
Fonacier L et al. Clinical evaluation and treatment of chronic
urticaria. Postgrad Med. 2010 Mar;122(2):148–56. [PMID:
20203466]
 
Wakefield YS et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and
delayed onset, recurrent angioedema of the head and neck. Br
Dent J. 2008 Nov 22;205(10):553–6. [PMID: 19023310]
 
Weis M. Clinical review of hereditary angioedema: diagnosis and
management. Postgrad Med. 2009 Nov;121(6):113–20. [PMID:
19940422]
 
Zuberbier T et al. Urticaria: current opinions about etiology,
diagnosis and therapy. Acta Derm Venereol. 2007;87(3): 196–
205. [PMID: 17533484]
 
2. Erythema Multiforme
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of symmetric erythematous skin lesions with history
of recurrence.
 May be macular, papular, urticarial, bullous, or purpuric.
 “Target” lesions with clear centers and concentric erythematous
rings or “iris” lesions may be noted in erythema multiforme minor.
These are rare in drug-associated erythema multiforme major
(Stevens-Johnson syndrome).
 Erythema multiforme minor on extensor surfaces, palms, soles, or
mucous membranes. Erythema multiforme major favors the trunk.
 Herpes simplex is the most common cause of erythema
multiforme minor.
 Drugs are the most common cause of erythema multiforme major
in adults.
 
 General Considerations
Erythema multiforme is an acute inflammatory skin disease.
Erythema multiforme is divided clinically into minor and major types
based on the clinical findings. Approximately 90% of cases of
erythema multiforme minor follow outbreaks of herpes simplex, and
so is now preferably termed “herpes-associated erythema
multiforme” (HAEM). The term “erythema multiforme major” has
been replaced by three terms: Stevens-Johnson syndrome, with <
10% BSA skin loss; toxic epidermal necrolysis when there is >
30% BSA skin loss; and Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic
epidermal necrolysis overlap for cases with between 10% and 30%
BSA denudation. All these clinical scenarios are characterized by
toxicity and involvement of two or more mucosal surfaces (often
oral and conjunctival). They are most often caused by drugs,
especially sulfonamides, NSAIDs, allopurinol, and anticonvulsants.
In certain races, polymorphisms of antigen presenting major
histocompatibility (MHC) loci increase the risk for the development
of 
Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome/toxic 
epidermal 
necrolysis.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae may trigger a skin eruption closely
resembling Stevens-Johnson syndrome and may be the cause of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome in up to 50% of children in some series.
Erythema multiforme may also present as chronic or recurring
ulceration localized to the oral mucosa, with skin lesions present in
only half of the cases. The exposure to drugs associated with
erythema multiforme may be systemic or topical (eg, eyedrops).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A classic target lesion, found most commonly in herpes-associated
erythema multiforme, consists of three concentric zones of color
change, most often found acrally on the hands and feet (Figure 6–
31). Not all lesions will have this appearance. Drug-associated
bullous eruptions in the Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal
necrolysis spectrum present with raised purpuric target-like lesions,
with only two zones of color change and a central blister, or
nondescript reddish or purpuric macules. Pain on eating,
swallowing, and urination can occur if the appropriate mucosae are
involved.
 
Figure 6–31. Erythema multiforme. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Blood tests are not useful for diagnosis. Skin biopsy is diagnostic.
Direct immunofluorescence studies are negative.
 Differential Diagnosis
Urticaria and drug eruptions are the chief entities that must be
differentiated from erythema multiforme minor. Individual lesions of
true urticaria should come and go within 24 hours and are usually
responsive to antihistamines. In erythema multiforme major, the
differential diagnosis includes autoimmune bullous diseases
(including pemphigus and pemphigoid) and acute generalized
exanthematous pustulosis. The presence of a blistering eruption
requires biopsy and consultation for appropriate diagnosis and
treatment.
 Complications
The tracheobronchial mucosa and conjunctiva may be involved in
severe cases with resultant scarring. Ophthalmologic consultation is
required if ocular involvement is present because vision loss is the
major consequence of erythema multiforme major.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is best treated in a burn unit, or hospital
setting with similar support. Otherwise, patients need not be
admitted unless mucosal involvement interferes with hydration and
nutrition. Patients who begin to blister should be seen daily. Open
lesions should be managed like second-degree burns. Immediate
discontinuation of the inciting medication (before blistering occurs) is
a significant predictor of outcome. Delay in establishing the
diagnosis and inadvertently continuing the offending medication
results in higher morbidity and mortality.
B. Specific Measures
The most important aspect of treatment is to stop the offending
medication and to move patients with > 25–30% BSA involvement
to an appropriate acute care environment. Nutritional and fluid
support and high vigilance for infection are the most important
aspects of care. Recent reviews of systemic treatments for Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis have been
conflicting, but the largest series have failed to show statistically
significant benefit with treatment. Some data support the use of
high-dose corticosteroids. If corticosteroids are to be tried in more
severe cases, they should be used early, before blistering occurs,
and in moderate to high doses (prednisone, 100–250 mg) and
stopped within days if there is no dramatic response. Intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) (1 g/kg/d for 4 days) has become standard
of care at some centers for toxic epidermal necrolysis cases and can
be considered in cases with > 30% BSA involvement. It has not
been proven to reduce mortality. Oral and topical corticosteroids
are useful in the oral variant of erythema multiforme. Oral acyclovir
prophylaxis of herpes simplex infections may be effective in
preventing recurrent herpes-associated erythema multiforme minor.
C. Local Measures
Topical therapy is not very effective in this disease. For oral lesions,
1% diphenhydramine elixir mixed with Kaopectate or with 1%
dyclonine may be used as a mouth rinse several times daily.
 Prognosis
Erythema multiforme minor usually lasts 2–6 weeks and may recur.
Erythema multiforme major may be serious with a mortality of about
30% in cases with > 30% BSA involvement.
Harr T et al. Severe cutaneous adverse reactions: acute
generalized exanthematous pustulosis, toxic epidermal necrolysis
and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Jul;94(4):727–42. [PMID: 20609860]
 
Hazin R et al. Stevens-Johnson syndrome: pathogenesis, diagnosis,
and management. Ann Med. 2008;40(2):129–38. [PMID:
18293143]
 
Schneck J et al. Effects of treatments on the mortality of Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: a retrospective
study on patients included in the prospective EuroSCAR Study. J
Am Acad Dermatol. 2008 Jan;58(1):33–40. [PMID: 17919775]
 
Teo L et al. Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis: efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin and a review of
treatment options. Singapore Med J. 2009 Jan;50(1): 29–33.
[PMID: 19224081]
 
3. Erythema Migrans (See also Chapter 34)
Erythema migrans is a unique cutaneous eruption that characterizes
the localized or generalized early stage of Lyme disease
(borreliosis). Three to 32 days (median: 7 days) after a tick bite,
there is gradual expansion of redness around the papule
representing the bite site (Figure 6–32). The advancing border is
usually slightly raised, warm, red to bluish-red, and free of any
scale. Centrally, the site of the bite may clear, leaving only a rim of
peripheral erythema, or it may become indurated, vesicular, or
necrotic. The annular erythema usually grows to a median diameter
of 15 cm (range: 3–68 cm, but virtually always > 5 cm). It is
accompanied by a burning sensation in half of patients; rarely, it is
pruritic or painful. Multiple secondary annular lesions similar in
appearance to the primary lesion but without indurated centers and
generally of smaller size will develop in 20% of patients. In the
southeastern United States, similar lesions are seen in patients who
are not as ill and who tend to have classic central clearing of their
lesions. These patients have negative Lyme serology tests. This
condition has been called Southern tick-associated rash illness
(STARI). This illness is transmitted by the lonestar tick; some cases
are caused by Borrelia lonestari, for which the white tail deer is
the animal reservoir. Systemic symptoms are uncommon in STARI
and the skin lesions respond to the same antibiotic agents used for
Lyme disease, suggesting that a spirochete (probably as yet
unidentified Borrelia species) is causative in all these cases.
 
Figure 6–32. Erythema migrans due to Borrelia burgdorferi
(lyme disease). (Courtesy of James Gathany, Public Health Image
Library, CDC.)
 
Without treatment, erythema migrans and the secondary lesions
fade in a median of 28 days, though some may persist for months.
Ten percent of untreated patients experience recurrences over the
ensuing months. Treatment with systemic antibiotics (see Table 34–
4) is necessary to prevent systemic involvement. However, only
60–70% of those with systemic involvement have experienced
erythema migrans.
Bratton RL et al. Diagnosis and treatment of Lyme disease. Mayo
Clin Proc. 2008 May;83(5):566–71. [PMID: 18452688]
 
Dandache P et al. Erythema migrans. Infect Dis Clin North Am.
2008 Jun;22(2):235–60. [PMID: 18452799]
 
Masters EJ et al. STARI, or Masters disease: Lone Star tick-
vectored Lyme-like illness. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2008
Jun;22(2): 361–76. [PMID: 18452807]
 
Murray TS et al. Lyme disease. Clin Lab Med. 2010 Mar;30(1):
311–28. [PMID: 20513553]
 
INFECTIOUS ERYTHEMAS
1. Erysipelas
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Edematous, spreading, circumscribed, hot, erythematous area,
with or without vesicles or bullae.
 Central face frequently involved.
 Pain, chills, fever, and systemic toxicity may be striking.
 
 General Considerations
Erysipelas is a superficial form of cellulitis that occurs classically on
the cheek, caused by β-hemolytic streptococci.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms are pain, malaise, chills, and moderate fever. A
bright red spot appears first, very often near a fissure at the angle of
the nose. This spreads to form a tense, sharply demarcated,
glistening, smooth, hot plaque (Figure 6–33). The margin
characteristically makes noticeable advances in days or even hours.
The lesion is somewhat edematous and may pit slightly with the
finger. Vesicles or bullae occasionally develop on the surface. The
lesion does not usually become pustular or gangrenous and heals
without scar formation. The disease may complicate any break in
the skin that provides a portal of entry for the organism.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukocytosis is almost invariably present; blood cultures may be
positive.
 Differential Diagnosis
Erysipeloid is a benign bacillary infection producing cellulitis of the
skin of the fingers or the backs of the hands in fishermen and meat
handlers.
 Complications
Unless erysipelas is promptly treated, death may result from
extension of the process and systemic toxicity, particularly in the
elderly.
 Treatment
Place the patient at bed rest with the head of the bed elevated.
Intravenous antibiotics effective against group A β-hemolytic
streptococci and staphylococci are indicated for the first 48 hours in
all but the mildest cases. A 7-day course is completed with penicillin
VK, 250 mg, dicloxacillin, 250 mg, or a first-generation
cephalosporin, 250 mg, orally four times a day. Alternatives in
penicillin-allergic patients are clindamycin (250 mg twice daily orally
for 7–14 days) or erythromycin (250 mg four times daily orally for
7–14 days), the latter only if the infection is known to be due to
streptococci.
 
Figure 6–33. Erysipelas (cellulitis). (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Prognosis
Erysipelas was at one time a life-threatening infection. It can now
usually be quickly controlled with systemic penicillin or erythromycin
therapy.
Bartholomeeusen S et al. Epidemiology and comorbidity of
erysipelas in primary care. Dermatology. 2007;215(2):118–22.
[PMID: 17684373]
 
Pertel PE et al. The efficacy and safety of daptomycin vs.
vancomycin for the treatment of cellulitis and erysipelas. Int J Clin
Pract. 2009 Mar;63(3):368–75. [PMID: 19222623]
 
2. Cellulitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Edematous, expanding, erythematous, warm plaque with or
without vesicles or bullae.
 Lower leg is frequently involved.
 Pain, chills, and fever are commonly present.
 Septicemia may develop.
 
 General Considerations
Cellulitis, a diffuse spreading infection of the dermis and sub-
cutaneous tissue, is usually on the lower leg and most commonly
due to gram-positive cocci, especially group A β-hemolytic
streptococci and S aureus. Rarely, gram-negative rods or even
fungi can produce a similar picture. In otherwise healthy persons,
the most common portal of entry for lower leg cellulitis is toe web
intertrigo with fissuring. Venous insufficiency can also predispose to
lower leg cellulitis. Injection drug use and open ulcerations may also
be complicated by cellulitis. Cellulitis in the diabetic foot may be a
major problem and is often associated with neuropathy and
hyperkeratotic nodules from ill-fitting shoes and abnormal weight
bearing.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Cellulitis begins as a small patch, which from its onset is tender.
Swelling, erythema, and pain are often present. The lesion expands
over hours, so that from onset to presentation is usually 6 to 36
hours. As the lesion grows, the patient becomes more ill with
progressive chills, fever, and malaise. If septicemia develops,
hypotension may develop, followed by shock.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukocytosis or at least a neutrophilia (left shift) is present from
early in the course. Blood cultures may be positive. If a central
ulceration, pustule, or abscess is present, culture may be of value.
Aspiration of the advancing edge has a low yield (20%) and is
usually not performed. Instead, if an unusual organism is suspected
and there is no loculated site to culture, a full thickness skin biopsy
taken before antibiotics are given can be useful. Part is cultured and
part processed for histologic evaluation with Gram stain. This
technique is particularly useful in the immunocompromised patient. If
a primary source for the infection is identified (wound, leg ulcer, toe
web intertrigo), cultures from these sites isolate the causative
pathogen in half of cases and can be used to guide antibiotic
therapy.
 Differential Diagnosis
Two potentially life threatening entities that can mimic cellulitis (ie,
present with a painful, red, swollen lower extremity) include deep
venous thrombosis and necrotizing fasciitis. The diagnosis of
necrotizing fasciitis should be suspected in a patient who has a very
toxic appearance, bullae, crepitus or anesthesia of the involved skin,
overlying skin necrosis, and laboratory evidence of rhabdomyolysis
(elevated creatine kinase [CK]) or disseminated intravascular
coagulation. While these findings may be present with severe
cellulitis and bacteremia, it is essential to rule out necrotizing fasciitis
because rapid surgical debridement is essential. Other skin lesions
that may resemble cellulitis include sclerosing panniculitis, an acute,
exquisitely tender red plaque on the medial lower legs above the
malleolus in patients with venous stasis or varicosities, and acute
severe contact dermatitis on a limb, which produces erythema,
vesiculation, and edema as seen in cellulitis, but with itching instead
of pain.
 Treatment
Intravenous or parenteral antibiotics may be required for the first 2–
5 days, with adequate coverage for Streptococcus and
Staphylococcus. Hospitalization is required in cases with severe
local symptoms and signs, hypotension, elevated serum creatinine,
low serum bicarbonate, elevated creatine kinase, elevated white
blood cell count with marked left shift, or elevated C-reactive
protein. If CA-MRSA is suspected, therapy is vancomycin,
clindamycin, or TMP-SMZ plus a β-lactam. In mild cases or
following the initial parenteral therapy, dicloxacillin or cephalexin,
250–500 mg four times daily for 5–10 days, is usually adequate. If
MRSA is suspected, use of TMP-SMZ, clindamycin, or the
combination of doxycycline plus rifampin should be considered. In
patients in whom intravenous treatment is not instituted, the first
dose of oral antibiotic can be doubled to achieve rapid high blood
levels.
Chira S et al. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common
identified cause of cellulitis: a systematic review. Epidemiol Infect.
2010 Mar;138(3):313–7. [PMID: 19646308]
 
Kilburn SA et al. Interventions for cellulitis and erysipelas.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jun 16;6:CD004299. [PMID:
20556757]
 
Morgan MS. Diagnosis and management of necrotising fasciitis: a
multiparametric approach. J Hosp Infect. 2010 Aug;75(4): 249–
57. [PMID: 20542593]
 
BLISTERING DISEASES
PEMPHIGUS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Relapsing crops of bullae.
 Often preceded by mucous membrane bullae, erosions, and
ulcerations.
 Superficial detachment of the skin after pressure or trauma
variably present (Nikolsky sign).
 Acantholysis on biopsy.
 Immuno-fluorescence studies are confirmatory.
 
 General Considerations
Pemphigus is an uncommon intraepidermal blistering disease
occurring on skin and mucous membranes. It is caused by
autoantibodies to adhesion molecules expressed in the skin and
mucous membranes. The cause is unknown, and in the preantibiotic,
presteroid era, the condition was usually fatal within 5 years. The
bullae appear spontaneously and are tender and painful when they
rupture. Drug-induced pemphigus from penicillamine, captopril, and
others has been reported. There are several forms of pemphigus:
pemphigus vulgaris and its variant, pemphigus vegetans; and
the more superficially blistering pemphigus foliaceus and its
variant, pemphigus erythematosus. All forms may occur at any
age but most commonly in middle age. The vulgaris form begins in
the mouth in over 50% of cases. The foliaceus form is especially apt
to be associated with other autoimmune diseases, or it may be
drug-induced. Paraneoplastic pemphigus, a unique form of the
disorder, is associated with numerous types of benign and malignant
neoplasms but most frequently non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pemphigus is characterized by an insidious onset of flaccid bullae,
crusts, and erosions in crops or waves (Figure 6–34). In pemphigus
vulgaris, lesions often appear first on the oral mucous membranes.
These rapidly become erosive. The scalp is another site of early
involvement. Rubbing a cotton swab or finger laterally on the
surface of uninvolved skin may cause easy separation of the
epidermis (Nikolsky sign).
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis is made by light microscopy and by direct and
indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) microscopy. Autoantibodies to
intercellular adhesion molecules can be detected with ELISA assays
and have replaced the use of IIF in some centers.
 
Figure 6–34. Pemphigus. (Used, with permission, from Berger
TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Differential Diagnosis
Blistering diseases include erythema multiforme, drug eruptions,
bullous impetigo, contact dermatitis, dermatitis herpetiformis, and
bullous pemphigoid, but flaccid blisters are not typical of these
diseases, and acantholysis is not seen on biopsy. All of these
diseases 
have 
clinical 
characteristics 
and 
different
immunofluorescence test results that distinguish them from
pemphigus.
Paraneoplastic pemphigus is clinically, histologically, and
immunologically distinct from other forms of the disease. Oral
erosions and erythematous plaques resembling erythema multiforme
are seen. Survival rates are low because of the underlying
malignancy.
 Complications
Secondary infection commonly occurs; this is a major cause of
morbidity and mortality. Disturbances of fluid, electrolyte, and
nutritional intake can occur as a result of painful oral ulcers.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
When the disease is severe, hospitalize the patient at bed rest and
provide antibiotics and intravenous feedings as indicated. Anesthetic
troches used before eating ease painful oral lesions.
B. Systemic Measures
Pemphigus requires systemic therapy as early in its course as
possible. However, the main morbidity in this disease is due to the
side effects of such therapy. Initial therapy is with systemic
corticosteroids: prednisone, 60–80 mg daily. In all but the most mild
cases, a steroid-sparing agent is added from the beginning, since the
course of the disease is long and the steroid-sparing agents take
several weeks to exert their activity. Azathioprine (100–200 mg
daily) or mycophenolate mofetil (1–1.5 g twice daily) is used most
frequently, the latter seeming to be the most reliable and
recommended for most cases. Rituximab may be given in refractory
cases to diminish the amount of autoantibody production. If this
fails, monthly IVIG at 2 g/kg intravenously over 3 days with
rituximab is dramatically beneficial and has replaced high-dose
corticosteroids plus cyclophosphamide and pulse intravenous
corticosteroids 
as 
rescue 
therapy. 
Increased 
risk 
of
thromboembolism is associated with IVIG therapy in these doses.
C. Local Measures
In patients with limited disease, skin and mucous membrane lesions
should be treated with topical corticosteroids. Complicating
infection requires appropriate systemic and local antibiotic therapy.
 Prognosis
The course tends to be chronic in most patients, though about one-
third appear to experience remission. Infection is the most frequent
cause of death, usually from S aureus septicemia.
Amagai M et al; Pemphigus Study Group. A randomized double-
blind trial of intravenous immunoglobulin for pemphigus. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 2009 Apr;60(4):595–603. [PMID: 19293008]
 
Aoyama Y. What's new in i.v. immunoglobulin therapy and
pemphigus: high-dose i.v. immunoglobulin therapy and its mode of
action for treatment of pemphigus. J Dermatol. 2010 Mar;
37(3):239–45. [PMID: 20507387]
 
Meyer N et al. Geoepidemiologic considerations of auto-immune
pemphigus. Autoimmun Rev. 2010 Mar;9(5): A379–82. [PMID:
19895907]
 
BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
Many other autoimmune skin disorders are characterized by
formation of bullae, or blisters. These include bullous pemphigoid,
cicatricial pemphigoid, dermatitis herpetiformis, and pemphigoid
gestationis.
Bullous pemphigoid is a relatively benign pruritic disease
characterized by tense blisters in flexural areas, usually remitting in 5
or 6 years, with a course characterized by exacerbations and
remissions. Most affected persons are over the age of 60 (often in
their 70s or 80s), and men are affected twice as frequently as
women. The appearance of blisters may be preceded by urticarial
or edematous lesions for months. Oral lesions are present in about
one-third of affected persons. The disease may occur in various
forms, including localized, vesicular, vegetating, erythematous,
erythrodermic, and nodular.
The diagnosis is made by biopsy and direct immunofluorescence
examination. Light microscopy shows a subepidermal blister. With
direct immunofluorescence, IgG and C3 are found at the dermal-
epidermal junction. If the patient has mild disease, ultrapotent
corticosteroids may be adequate. Prednisone at a dosage of 0.75
mg/kg daily is often used to achieve rapid control of more
widespread disease. Although slower in onset of action, tetracycline
or erythromycin, 500 mg three times daily, alone or combined with
nicotinamide—not nicotinic acid or niacin!—(up to 1.5 g/d), if
tolerated, may control the disease in patients who cannot use
corticosteroids or may allow decreasing or eliminating
corticosteroids after control is achieved. Dapsone is particularly
effective in mucous membrane pemphigoid. If these drugs are not
effective, methotrexate, 5–25 mg weekly, or azathioprine, 50 mg
one to three times daily, may be used as steroid-sparing agents.
Mycophenolate mofetil (1 g twice daily) may be used in refractory
cases.
Joly P et al. A comparison of two regimens of topical
corticosteroids in the treatment of patients with bullous
pemphigoid: a multicenter randomized study. J Invest Dermatol.
2009 Jul; 129(7):1681–7. [PMID: 19177141]
 
Kasperkiewicz M et al. Current treatment of autoimmune blistering
diseases. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2009 Dec;6(4): 270–80.
[PMID: 20025595]
 
Ujiie H et al. What's new in bullous pemphigoid. J Dermatol. 2010
Mar;37(3):194–204. [PMID: 20507382]
 
PAPULES
WARTS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Verrucous papules anywhere on the skin or mucous membranes,
usually no larger than 1 cm in diameter.
 Prolonged incubation period (average 2–18 months).
Spontaneous “cures” are frequent (50% at 2 years for common
warts).
 “Recurrences” (new lesions) are frequent.
 
 General Considerations
Warts are caused by human papillomaviruses (HPVs). Typing of
HPV lesions is NOT a part of standard medical evaluation except in
the case of genital dysplasia. Genital HPV types are divided into
low-risk and high-risk depending on the likelihood of their
association with cervical and anal cancer.
 Clinical Findings
There are usually no symptoms. Tenderness on pressure occurs
with plantar warts; itching occurs with anogenital warts (Figure 6–
35). Flat warts are most evident under oblique illumination.
Periungual warts may be dry, fissured, and hyperkeratotic and may
resemble hangnails or other nonspecific changes. Plantar warts
resemble plantar corns or calluses.
 
Figure 6–35. Condylomata acuminata, or genital warts, of the
anal region due to human papillomavirus. (Public Health Image
Library, CDC.)
 
 Differential Diagnosis
Some warty-looking lesions are actually hypertrophic actinic
keratoses or squamous cell carcinomas. Some genital warty lesions
may be due to secondary syphilis (condylomata lata). The lesions of
molluscum contagiosum are pearly with a central dell. In AIDS,
wart-like lesions may be caused by varicella zoster virus.
 Prevention
Administration of a vaccine against certain genital HPV types can
prevent infection with these wart types and reduce cervical
dysplasia. It is recommended for teenagers and young adults (see
Chapters 1 and 18).
 Treatment
Treatment is aimed at inducing “wart-free” intervals for as long as
possible without scarring, since no treatment can guarantee a
remission or prevent recurrences. In immuno-compromised
patients, the goal is even more modest, ie, to control the size and
number of lesions present.
A. Removal
For common warts of the hands, patients are usually offered liquid
nitrogen or keratolytic agents. The former may work in fewer
treatments but requires office visits and is painful.
1. Liquid nitrogen—Liquid nitrogen is applied to achieve a thaw
time of 30–45 seconds. Two freeze-thaw cycles are given every 2–
4 weeks for several visits. Scarring will occur if it is used
incorrectly. Liquid nitrogen may cause permanent depigmentation in
pigmented individuals. Cryotherapy is first-line physician applied
surgical treatment for condyloma acuminata.
2. Keratolytic agents and occlusion—Salicylic acid products
may be used against common warts or plantar warts. They are
applied then occluded. Plantar warts may be treated by applying a
40% salicylic acid plaster (Mediplast) after paring. The plaster may
be left on for 5–6 days, then removed, the lesion pared down, and
another plaster applied. Although it may take weeks or months to
eradicate the wart, the method is safe and effective with almost no
side effects. Chronic occlusion alone with water-impermeable tape
(duct tape, adhesive tape) for months may be effective.
3. Podophyllum resin—For genital warts, the purified active
component of the podophyllum resin, podofilox, is applied by the
patient twice daily 3 consecutive days a week for cycles of 4–6
weeks. It is less irritating and more effective than “physician-
applied” podophyllum resin. After a single 4-week cycle, 45% of
patients were wart-free; but of these, 60% relapsed at 6 weeks.
Thus, multiple cycles of treatment are often necessary. Patients
unable to obtain the take home podofilox may be treated in the
clinician's office by painting each wart carefully (protecting normal
skin) every 2–3 weeks with 25% podophyllum resin (podophyllin)
in compound tincture of benzoin. Pregnant patients should not be so
treated. Podophyllin is ineffective for common warts and plantar
warts.
4. Imiquimod—A 5% cream of this local interferon inducer has
moderate activity in clearing external genital warts (EGWs).
Treatment is once daily on 3 alternate days per week. Response
may be slow, with patients who eventually cleared having responses
at 8 weeks (44%) or 12 weeks (69%). There is a marked gender
difference with respect to response, with 77% of women and 40%
of men having complete clearing of their lesions. Once cleared,
about 13% have recurrences in the short term.
In accidental exposure during pregnancy, there is less risk with
imiquimod than with podophyllum resin (category B versus category
X). 
Imiquimod 
is 
considerably 
more 
expensive 
than
podophyllotoxin, but given the high rate of response in women and
its safety, it appears to be the “patient-administered” treatment of
choice for EGWs in women. In men, the more rapid response,
lower cost, and similar efficacy make podophyllotoxin the initial
treatment of choice, with imiquimod used for recurrences or
refractory cases. Imiquimod has no demonstrated efficacy for—and
should not be used to treat—plantar or common warts.
5. Operative removal—Plantar warts may be removed by blunt
dissection. For hemostasis, trichloroacetic acid or Monsel solution
on a tightly wound cotton-tipped applicator may be painted on the
wound, or light electrocautery may be used. For genital warts, snip
biopsy (scissors) removal followed by light electrocautery is more
effective than cryotherapy, especially for patients with pedunculated
or large lesions.
6. Laser therapy—The CO2 laser can be effective for treating
recurrent warts, periungual warts, plantar warts, and condylomata
acuminata. It leaves open wounds that must fill in with granulation
tissue over 4–6 weeks and is best reserved for warts resistant to all
other modalities. Lasers with emissions of 585, 595, or 532 nm
may also be used every 3–4 weeks to gradually ablate common or
plantar warts. This is no more effective than cryotherapy in
controlled trials. For genital warts, it has not been shown that laser
therapy is more effective than electrosurgical removal.
Photodynamic therapy can be considered in refractory widespread
flat and genital warts.
7. Other agents—Bleomycin diluted to 1 unit/mL may be injected
into common and plantar warts. It has been shown to have a high
cure rate. It should be used with caution on digital warts because of
the potential complications of Raynaud phenomenon, nail loss, and
terminal digital necrosis.
B. Immunotherapy
Squaric acid dibutylester may be effective. It is applied in a
concentration of 0.2–2% directly to the warts from once weekly to
five times weekly to induce a mild contact dermatitis. Between 60%
and 80% of warts clear over 10–20 weeks. Injection of Candida
antigen starting at 1:50 dilution and repeated every 3–4 weeks may
be similarly effective in stimulating immunologic regression of
common and plantar warts.
C. Physical Modalities
Soaking warts in hot (42.2°C) water for 10–30 minutes daily for 6
weeks has resulted in involution in some cases.
 Prognosis
There is a striking tendency to the development of new lesions.
Warts may disappear spontaneously or may be unresponsive to
treatment.
Batista CS et al. 5-FU for genital warts in non-
immunocompromised individuals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2010 Apr 14;4: CD006562. [PMID: 20393949]
 
Mayeaux EJ Jr et al. Modern management of external genital
warts. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2008 Jul;12(3):185–92. [PMID:
18596459]
 
Oon SF et al. Perianal condylomas, anal squamous intraepithelial
neoplasms and screening: a review of the literature. J Med Screen.
2010;17(1):44–9. [PMID: 20356945]
 
Scheinfeld N et al. An evidence-based review of medical and
surgical treatments of genital warts. Dermatol Online J. 2006 Mar
30;12(3):5. [PMID: 16638419]
 
Zimet GD et al. Appropriate use of cervical cancer vaccine. Annu
Rev Med. 2008 Feb 18;59:223–36. [PMID: 18186704]
 
CALLOSITIES & CORNS OF FEET OR TOES
Callosities and corns are caused by pressure and friction due to
faulty weight-bearing, orthopedic deformities, improperly fitting
shoes, or neuropathies.
Tenderness on pressure and “after-pain” are the only symptoms.
The hyperkeratotic well-localized overgrowths always occur at
pressure points. Dermatoglyphics (finger-print lines) are preserved
over the surface (not so in warts). When the surface is shaved with
a 15 blade, a glassy core is found (which differentiates them from
plantar warts, which have multiple capillary bleeding points or black
dots when pared).
Treatment consists of correcting mechanical abnormalities that
cause friction and pressure. Callosities may be removed by careful
paring of the callus after a warm water soak or with keratolytic
agents as found in various brands of corn pads.
Plantar hyperkeratosis of the heels can be treated successfully by
using 20% urea (Ureacin 20) or 12% lactic acid (Lac-Hydrin) or
combinations nightly and a pumice stone after soaking in water.
Callosities on diabetic feet, especially in the setting of
hyposensate neuropathy, can be a major problem and the value of
early podiatric management to prevent complications is very high.
Rathur HM et al. The diabetic foot. Clin Dermatol. 2007 Jan-Feb;
25(1):109–20. [PMID: 17276208]
 
 
Figure 6–36. Molluscum contagiosum lesion on the back.
(Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM
Molluscum contagiosum, caused by a poxvirus, presents as single
or multiple dome-shaped, waxy papules 2–5 mm in diameter that
are umbilicated (Figure 6–36). Lesions at first are firm, solid, and
flesh-colored but upon reaching maturity become soft, whitish, or
pearly gray and may suppurate. The principal sites of involvement
are the face, lower abdomen, and genitals.
The lesions are autoinoculable and spread by wet skin-to-skin
contact. In sexually active individuals, they may be confined to the
penis, pubis, and inner thighs and are considered a sexually
transmitted infection.
Molluscum contagiosum is common in patients with AIDS,
usually with a helper T cell count < 100/mcL. Extensive lesions tend
to develop over the face and neck as well as in the genital area.
The diagnosis is easily established in most instances because of
the distinctive central umbilication of the dome-shaped lesion. The
best treatment is by curettage or applications of liquid nitrogen as
for warts—but more briefly. When lesions are frozen, the central
umbilication often becomes more apparent. Light electrosurgery
with a fine needle is also effective. It has been estimated that
individual lesions persist for about 2 months. They are difficult to
eradicate in patients with AIDS unless immunity improves.
However, in AIDS, with highly effective anti-retroviral treatment,
molluscum do not need to be treated because they usually
spontaneously clear.
Sadick N et al. A comparative split-face study of cryosurgery and
trichloroacetic acid 100% peels in the treatment of HIV-associated
disseminated facial molluscum contagiosum. Cutis. 2009
Jun;83(6):299–302. [PMID: 19681340]
 
Villa L et al. Molluscum contagiosum: a 20-year study in a sexually
transmitted infections unit. Sex Transm Dis. 2010 Jul; 37(7):423–
4. [PMID: 20414149]
 
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pearly papule, erythematous patch > 6 mm, or nonhealing ulcer,
in sun exposed areas (face, trunk, lower legs).
 History of bleeding.
 Fair-skinned person with a history of sun exposure (often intense,
intermittent).
 
 General Considerations
Basal cell carcinomas are the most common form of cancer. They
occur on sun-exposed skin in otherwise normal fair-skinned
individuals; ultraviolet light is the cause. The most common
presentation is a papule or nodule that may have a central scab or
erosion (Figure 6–37). Occasionally the nodules have stippled
pigment (pigmented basal cell carcinoma). Intradermal nevi without
pigment on the face of older white individuals may resemble basal
cell carcinomas. Basal cell carcinomas grow slowly, attaining a size
of 1–2 cm or more in diameter, usually only after years of growth.
There is a waxy, “pearly” appearance, with telangiectatic vessels
easily visible (Figure 6–38). It is the pearly or translucent quality of
these lesions that is most diagnostic, a feature best appreciated if the
skin is stretched. On the back and chest, basal cell carcinomas
appear as reddish, somewhat shiny, scaly patches.
Clinicians should examine the whole skin routinely, looking for
bumps, patches, and scabbed lesions. When examining the face,
look at the eyelid margins and medial canthi, the nose and alar folds,
the lips, and then around and behind the ears.
 
Figure 6–37. nodular basal cell carcinoma of the nose.
(Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 
Figure 6–38. Basal cell carcinoma on the forehead with irregular
distribution of the telangiectasias and lack of typical doughnut
shape. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
 Treatment
Lesions suspected to be basal cell carcinomas should be biopsied,
by shave or punch biopsy. Therapy is then aimed at eradication with
minimal cosmetic deformity, often by excision and suturing with
recurrence rates of 5% or less. The technique of three cycles of
curettage and electrodesiccation depends on the skill of the
operator and is not recommended for head and neck lesions. After
4–6 weeks of healing, it leaves a broad, hypopigmented, at times
hyper-trophic scar. Radiotherapy is effective and sometimes
appropriate for older individuals (over age 65), but recurrent tumors
after radiation therapy are more difficult to treat and may be more
aggressive. Radiation therapy is the most expensive method to treat
basal cell carcinoma and should only be used if other treatment
options are not appropriate. Mohs surgery—removal of the tumor
followed by immediate frozen section histopathologic examination of
margins with subsequent reexcision of tumor-positive areas and final
closure of the defect—gives the highest cure rates (98%) and
results in least tissue loss. It is appropriate therapy for tumors of the
eyelids, nasolabial folds, canthi, external ear, and temple; for
recurrent lesions; or where tissue sparing is needed for cosmesis.
Since up to half of patients with a basal cell carcinoma will develop
a second lesion, patients with basal cell carcinomas must be
monitored to detect new or recurrent lesions.
Bath-Hextall FJ et al. Interventions for basal cell carcinoma of the
skin. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24; (1): CD003412.
[PMID: 17253489]
 
Dessinioti C et al. Basal cell carcinoma: what's new under the sun.
Photochem Photobiol. 2010 May–Jun;86(3):481–91. [PMID:
20550646]
 
Muller FM et al. Randomized comparison of Mohs micrographic
surgery and surgical excision for small nodular basal cell
carcinoma: tissue-sparing outcome. Dermatol Surg. 2009
Sep;35(9):1349–54. [PMID: 19500127]
 
SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Nonhealing ulcer or warty nodule.
 Skin damage due to long-term sun exposure.
 Common in fair-skinned organ transplant recipients.
 
Squamous cell carcinoma usually occurs subsequent to
prolonged sun exposure on exposed parts in fair-skinned individuals
who sunburn easily and tan poorly. It may arise from an actinic
keratosis. The lesions appear as small red, conical, hard nodules
that occasionally ulcerate (Figure 6–39). The frequency of
metastasis is not precisely known, though metastatic spread is said
to be less likely with squamous cell carcinoma arising out of actinic
keratoses than with those that arise de novo. In actinically induced
squamous cell cancers, rates of metastasis are estimated from
retrospective studies to be 3–7%. Squamous cell carcinomas of the
lip, oral cavity, tongue, and genitalia have much higher rates of
metastasis and require special management.
 
Figure 6–39. Squamous cell carcinoma. (Used, with permission,
from Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
Examination of the skin and therapy are essentially the same as
for basal cell carcinoma. The preferred treatment of squamous cell
carcinoma is excision. Electrodesiccation and curettage and x-ray
radiation may be used for some lesions, and fresh tissue
microscopically controlled excision (Mohs) is recommended for
high-risk lesions (lips, temples, ears, nose) and for recurrent tumors.
Follow-up for squamous cell carcinoma must be more frequent and
thorough than for basal cell carcinoma, starting at every 3 months,
with careful examination of lymph nodes. In addition, palpation of
the lips is essential to detect hard or indurated areas that represent
early squamous cell carcinoma. All such cases must be biopsied.
Multiple squamous cell carcinomas are very common on the sun-
exposed skin of organ transplant patients. The intensity of
immunosuppression, 
not 
the 
use 
of 
any 
particular
immunosuppressive agent, is the primary risk factor in determining
the development of skin cancer after transplant. The tumors begin to
appear after 5 years of immunosuppression. Regular dermatologic
evaluation in at-risk organ transplant recipients is recommended.
Biologic behavior of skin cancer in organ transplant recipients may
be aggressive, and careful management is required. Other forms of
immunosuppression such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
HIV/AIDS, and chronic iatrogenic immunosuppression may also
increase skin cancer risk and be associated with more aggressive
skin cancer behavior. Voriconazole may contribute to skin cancer
risk in selected immunosuppressed patients.
Lansbury L et al. Interventions for non-metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma of the skin. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Apr
14;4:CD007869. [PMID: 20393962]
 
Love WE et al. Topical imiquimod or fluorouracil therapy for basal
and squamous cell carcinoma: a systematic review. Arch Dermatol.
2009 Dec;145(12):1431–8. [PMID: 20026854]
 
Zafar SY et al. Malignancy after solid organ transplantation: an
overview. Oncologist. 2008 Jul;13(7):769–78. [PMID:
18614590]
 
VIOLACEOUS TO PURPLE PAPULES &
NODULES
LICHEN PLANUS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pruritic, violaceous, flat-topped papules with fine white streaks
and symmetric distribution.
 Lacy or erosive lesions of the buccal and vaginal mucosa; nail
dystrophy.
 Commonly seen along linear scratch marks (Koebner
phenomenon) on anterior wrists, penis, legs.
 Histopathologic examination is diagnostic.
 
 General Considerations
Lichen planus is an inflammatory pruritic disease of the skin and
mucous membranes characterized by distinctive papules with a
predilection for the flexor surfaces and trunk. The three cardinal
findings are typical skin lesions, mucosal lesions, and histopathologic
features of band-like infiltration of lymphocytes in the upper dermis.
The most common drugs causing lichen planus-like reactions include
sulfonamides, tetracycline, quinidine, NSAIDs, and hydro-
chlorothiazide. Hepatitis C infection is found with greater frequency
in lichen planus patients than in controls. Allergy to mercury
amalgams can trigger oral lesions identical to lichen planus.
 Clinical Findings
Itching is mild to severe. The lesions are violaceous, flat-topped,
angulated papules, up to 1 cm in diameter, discrete or in clusters,
with very fine white streaks (Wickham striae) on the flexor surfaces
of the wrists and on the penis, lips, tongue as well as buccal,
vaginal, esophageal, and anorectal mucous membranes. The
papules may become bullous or eroded. The disease may be
generalized (Figure 6-40). Mucous membrane lesions have a lacy
white network overlying them that may be confused with
leukoplakia. The presence of oral and vaginal lichen planus in the
same patient is common. Patients with both these mucous
membranes involved are at much higher risk for esophageal lichen
planus. The Koebner phenomenon (appearance of lesions in areas
of trauma) may be seen.
 
Figure 6–40. Lichen planus. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
A special form of lichen planus is the erosive or ulcerative variety,
a major problem in the mouth or genitalia. Squamous cell carcinoma
develops in 5% of patients with erosive oral or genital lichen planus
and may occur in esophageal lichen planus.
 Differential Diagnosis
Lichen planus must be distinguished from similar lesions produced
by medications (see above) and other papular lesions such as
psoriasis, lichen simplex chronicus, graft-versus-host disease, and
syphilis. Lichen planus on the mucous membranes must be
differentiated from leukoplakia. Erosive oral lesions require biopsy
and often direct immunofluorescence for diagnosis since lichen
planus may simulate other erosive diseases.
 Treatment
A. Topical Therapy
Superpotent topical corticosteroids applied twice daily are most
helpful for localized disease in nonflexural areas. Alternatively, high-
potency corticosteroid cream or ointment may be used nightly under
thin pliable plastic film.
Topical tacrolimus appears effective in oral and vaginal erosive
lichen planus, but long-term therapy is required to prevent relapse.
If tacrolimus is used, lesions must be observed carefully for
development of cancer. Since absorption can occur through mucous
membranes, serum tacrolimus levels should be checked at least
once if widespread mucosal application (> 5–10 cm2) is used. If the
erosive oral lichen planus lesions are adjacent to a mercury
containing amalgam, removal of the amalgam may result in clearing
of the erosions.
B. Systemic Therapy
Corticosteroids (see Chapter 26) may be required in severe cases
or in circumstances where the most rapid response to treatment is
desired. Unfortunately, relapse almost always occurs as the
corticosteroids are tapered, making systemic corticosteroid therapy
an impractical option for the management of chronic lichen planus.
NB-UVB, bath PUVA, oral PUVA, and the combination of an oral
retinoid plus PUVA (re-PUVA) are all forms of phototherapy that
can improve lichen planus. Hydroxychloroquine, 200 mg orally
twice daily, can also be effective in mucosal lichen planus.
 Prognosis
Lichen planus is a benign disease, but it may persist for months or
years and may be recurrent. Hypertrophic lichen planus and oral
lesions tend to be especially persistent, and neoplastic degeneration
has been described in chronically eroded lesions.
Carrozzo M et al. Lichen planus and hepatitis C virus infection: an
updated critical review. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2008
Mar;54(1):65–74. [PMID: 18299669]
 
Farhi D et al. Pathophysiology, etiologic factors, and clinical
management of oral lichen planus, part I: facts and controversies.
Clin Dermatol. 2010 Jan–Feb;28(1):100–8. [PMID: 20082959]
 
Quispel R el al. High prevalence of esophageal involvement in
lichen planus: a study using magnification chromoendoscopy.
Endoscopy. 2009 Mar;41(3):187–93. [PMID: 19280529]
 
Torti DC et al. Oral lichen planus: a case series with emphasis on
therapy. Arch Dermatol. 2007 Apr;143(4):511–5. [PMID:
17438185]
 
Wedgeworth EK et al. Management of symptomatic esophageal
involvement with lichen planus. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2009 Nov–
Dec;43(10):915–9. [PMID: 19525865]
 
KAPOSI SARCOMA
 General Considerations
Before 1980 in the United States, this rare malignant skin lesion was
seen mostly in elderly men, had a chronic clinical course, and was
rarely fatal. Kaposi sarcoma occurs endemically in an often
aggressive form in young black men of equatorial Africa, but it is
rare in American blacks. Kaposi sarcoma continues to occur largely
in homosexual men with HIV infection as an AIDS-defining illness.
Kaposi sarcoma may complicate immunosuppressive therapy, and
stopping the immunosuppression may result in improvement. Human
herpes virus 8 (HHV-8), or Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes
virus (KSHV), is universally present in all forms of Kaposi sarcoma.
Red or purple plaques or nodules on cutaneous (Figure 6–41) or
mucosal surfaces are characteristic. Marked edema may occur with
few or no skin lesions. Kaposi sarcoma commonly involves the
gastrointestinal tract and can be screened for by fecal occult blood
testing. In asymptomatic patients, these lesions are not sought or
treated. Pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma can present with shortness of
breath, cough, hemoptysis, or chest pain; it may be asymptomatic,
appearing only on chest radiograph. Bronchoscopy may be
indicated. The incidence of AIDS-associated Kaposi sarcoma is
diminishing; however, chronic Kaposi sarcoma can develop in
patients with HIV infection, high CD4 counts, and low viral loads.
In this setting, the Kaposi sarcoma usually resembles the endemic
form, being indolent and localized. At times, however, it can be
clinically aggressive.
 
Figure 6–41. Cutaneous nodule of Kaposi sarcoma in AIDS.
(Courtesy of Dr. Steve Kraus, Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
 Treatment
For Kaposi sarcoma in the elderly, palliative local therapy with
intralesional chemotherapy or radiation is usually all that is required.
In the setting of iatrogenic immunosuppression, the treatment of
Kaposi 
sarcoma 
is 
primarily 
reduction 
of 
doses 
of
immunosuppressive medications. In AIDS-associated Kaposi
sarcoma, the patient should first be given effective anti-HIV
antiretrovirals because in most cases this treatment alone is
associated with improvement. Other therapeutic options include
cryotherapy or intralesional vinblastine (0.1–0.5 mg/mL) for
cosmetically objectionable lesions; radiation therapy for accessible
and space-occupying lesions; and laser surgery for certain intraoral
and pharyngeal lesions. Systemic therapy is indicated in patients
with rapidly progressive skin disease (more than ten new lesions per
month), with edema or pain, and with symptomatic visceral disease
or pulmonary disease. Liposomal doxorubicin is highly effective in
controlling these cases and has considerably less toxicity—and
greater efficacy—than anthracycline monotherapy or combination
chemotherapeutic regimens. α-Interferon may also be used.
Paclitaxel and other taxanes can be effective even in patients who
do not respond to anthracycline treatment.
Di Lorenzo G. Update on classic Kaposi sarcoma therapy: new
look at an old disease. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2008
Dec;68(3):242–9. [PMID: 18657433]
 
Riva G et al. Immunological and inflammatory features of Kaposi's
sarcoma and other Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8-associated neoplasias. AIDS
Rev. 2010 Jan–Mar;12(1):40–51. [PMID: 20216909]
 
PRURITUS (ITCHING)
Pruritus is a disagreeable sensation that provokes a desire to
scratch. It is modulated by central factors, including anxiety,
depression, and amphetamine and cocaine use. Many cases of
pruritus are not mediated by histamine.
Dry skin is the first cause of itch that should be sought, since it is
common and easily treated. Other causes include scabies, atopic
dermatitis, insect bites, pediculosis, contact dermatitis, drug
reactions, urticaria, psoriasis, lichen planus, lichen simplex
chronicus, and fiberglass dermatitis.
Persistent pruritus not explained by cutaneous disease or
association with a primary skin eruption should prompt a staged
workup for systemic causes. Perhaps the most common cause of
pruritus associated with systemic disease is uremia in conjunction
with hemodialysis. This condition and to a lesser degree the pruritus
of liver disease may be helped by phototherapy with ultraviolet B or
PUVA. Naltrexone and nalmefene have been shown to relieve the
pruritus of liver disease. Naltrexone is not effective in pruritus
associated with advanced chronic kidney disease, but gabapentin
may be effective. Endocrine disorders such as hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism, psychiatric disturbances, lymphoma, leukemia, and
other internal malignant disorders, iron deficiency anemia, and
certain neurologic disorders may also cause pruritus. The treatment
of chronic pruritus can be frustrating. Combinations of anti-
histamines, gabapentin, mirtazapine, and opioid antagonists can be
attempted in refractory cases.
 Prognosis
Elimination of external factors and irritating agents may give
complete relief. Pruritus accompanying a specific skin disease will
subside when the skin disease is controlled. Pruritus accompanying
serious internal disease may not respond to any type of therapy.
Feramisco JD et al. Innovative management of pruritus. Dermatol
Clin. 2010 Jul;28(3):467-78. [PMID: 20510757]
 
Patel T et al. Therapy of pruritus. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2010 Jul;11(10):1673–82. [PMID: 20426711]
 
Reich A et al. Opioid-induced pruritus: an update. Clin Exp
Dermatol. 2010 Jan;35(1):2–6. [PMID: 19663845]
 
ANOGENITAL PRURITUS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Itching, chiefly nocturnal, of the anogenital area.
 Examination is highly variable, ranging from no skin findings to
excoriations and inflammation of any degree, including
lichenification.
 
 General Considerations
Anogenital pruritus may be due to intertrigo, psoriasis, lichen
simplex chronicus, or seborrheic or contact dermatitis (from soaps,
colognes, douches, contraceptives, and perhaps scented toilet
tissue), or it may be due to irritating secretions, as in diarrhea,
leukorrhea, or trichomoniasis, or to local disease (candidiasis,
dermatophytosis, erythrasma), and at times oxyuriasis (pinworms).
Lichen sclerosus may at times be the cause. Erythrasma is easily
diagnosed by demonstration of coral-red fluorescence with Wood
light; it is easily cured with erythromycin orally or topically.
In pruritus ani, hemorrhoids are often found, and leakage of
mucus and bacteria from the distal rectum onto the perianal skin
may be important in cases in which no other skin abnormality is
found.
Many women experience pruritus vulvae. Pruritus vulvae does
not usually involve the anal area, though anal itching may spread to
the vulva. In men, pruritus of the scrotum is most commonly seen in
the absence of pruritus ani. Up to one-third of causes of anogenital
pruritus may be due to nerve impingements of the lumbosacral
spine, so referral for evaluation of lumbosacral spine disease is
appropriate if no skin disorder is identified, and topical therapy is
ineffective.
 
Figure 6–42. Erythrasma of the axilla. (Courtesy of Richard P.
Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA,
Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Squamous cell carcinoma of the anus and extramam-mary Paget
disease are rare causes of genital pruritus.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The only symptom is itching. Physical findings are usually not
present, but there may be erythema, fissuring, maceration,
lichenification, excoriations, or changes suggestive of candidiasis or
tinea (Figure 6–42).
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis and blood glucose testing may lead to a diagnosis of
diabetes mellitus. Microscopic examination or culture of tissue
scrapings may reveal yeasts or fungi. Stool examination may show
pinworms. Radiologic studies may demonstrate spinal cord disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
The etiologic differential diagnosis consists of Candida infection,
parasitosis, local irritation from contactants or irritants, nerve
impingement and other primary skin disorders of the genital area
such as psoriasis, seborrhea, inter-trigo, or lichen sclerosus et
atrophicus.
 Prevention
Instruct the patient in proper anogenital hygiene after treating
systemic or local conditions. If appropriate, physical therapy and
exercises to support the lower spine are recommended.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Treating constipation, preferably with high-fiber management
(psyllium), may help. Instruct the patient to use very soft or
moistened tissue or cotton after bowel movements and to clean the
perianal area thoroughly with cool water if possible. Women should
use similar precautions after urinating.
B. Local Measures
Pramoxine cream or lotion or hydrocortisone-pramoxine
(Pramosone), 1% or 2.5% cream, lotion, or ointment, is helpful in
managing pruritus in the anogenital area. The ointment or cream
should be applied after a bowel movement. Topical doxepin cream
5% is similarly effective, but it may be sedating. The use of strong
corticosteroids on the scrotum may lead to persistent severe burning
upon withdrawal of the drug. Underclothing should be changed
daily. Balneol Perianal Cleansing Lotion or Tucks premoistened
pads, ointment, or cream may be very useful for pruritus ani. About
one-third of patients with scrotal or anal pruritus will respond to
capsaicin 0.006%. Treatment for underlying spinal neurologic
disease may be required.
 Prognosis
Although benign, anogenital pruritus is often persistent and
recurrent.
Markell KW et al. Pruritus ani: etiology and management. Surg
Clin North Am. 2010 Feb;90(1):125–35. [PMID: 20109637]
 
Siddiqi S et al. Pruritus ani. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2008
Sep;90(6):457–63. [PMID: 18765023]
 
SCABIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Generalized very severe itching.
 Pruritic burrows, vesicles and pustules, especially on finger webs
and in wrist creases.
 Mites, ova, and brown dots of feces visible microscopically.
 Red papules or nodules on the scrotum and on the penile glans
and shaft are pathognomonic.
 
 General Considerations
Scabies is caused by infestation with Sarcoptes scabiei. The
infestation usually spares the head and neck (though even these
areas may be involved in infants, in the elderly, and in patients with
AIDS). Scabies is usually acquired by sleeping with or in the
bedding of an infested individual or by other close contact. The
entire household may be affected. Hospital-associated scabies is
increasingly common, primarily in long-term care facilities. Index
patients are usually elderly and immunosuppressed. When these
patients are hospitalized, hospital-based epidemics can occur.
These epidemics are difficult to eradicate since many health care
workers become infected and spread the infestation to other
patients.
 
Figure 6–43. Scabies. (Used, with permission, from Berger TG,
Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Itching is almost always present and can be quite severe. The
lesions consist of more or less generalized excoriations with small
pruritic vesicles, pustules, and “burrows” in the web spaces and on
the heels of the palms, wrists (Figure 6–43), elbows, around the
axillae, and on the breasts of women. The feet are a good place to
identify burrows, since they may have been scratched off in other
locations. The burrow appears as a short irregular mark, 2–3 mm
long and the width of a hair. Characteristic nodular lesions may
occur on the scrotum or penis and along the posterior axillary line.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis should be confirmed by microscopic demonstration
of the organism, ova, or feces in a mounted specimen, examined
with tap water. Best results are obtained when multiple lesions are
scraped, choosing the best unexcoriated lesions from interdigital
webs, wrists, elbows, or feet. A No. 15 blade is used to scrape
each lesion until it is flat. Pinpoint bleeding may result from the
scraping. Patients with crusted/hyperkeratotic scabies must be
evaluated for immunosuppression (especially HIV and HTLV-1
infections) if no iatrogenic cause of immunosuppression is present.
 Differential Diagnosis
Scabies must be distinguished from the various forms of pediculosis,
from bedbug and flea bites, and from other causes of pruritus.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Treatment is aimed at killing scabies mites and controlling the
dermatitis, which can persist for months after effective eradication of
the mites. Bedding and clothing should be laundered or cleaned or
set aside for 14 days in plastic bags. High heat (60°C) is required to
kill the mites and ova. Unless treatment is aimed at all infected
persons in a family or institutionalized group, reinfestations will
probably occur.
Permethrin 5% cream is highly effective and safe in the
management of scabies. Treatment consists of a single application
for 8–12 hours, repeated in 1 week.
Pregnant patients should be treated only if they have documented
scabies themselves. Permethrin 5% cream once for 12 hours—or
5% or 6% sulfur in petrolatum applied nightly for 3 nights from the
collarbones down—may be used.
Patients will continue to itch for several weeks after treatment.
Use of triamcinolone 0.1% cream will help resolve the dermatitis.
Scabies in nursing home patients, institutionalized or mentally
impaired (especially Down syndrome) patients, and AIDS patients
may be much more difficult to treat.
Most failures in normal persons are related to incorrect use or
incomplete treatment of the housing unit. In these cases, repeat
treatment with permethrin once weekly for 2 weeks, with
reeducation regarding the method and extent of application, is
suggested. In immunocompetent individuals, ivermectin in a dose of
200 mcg/kg is effective in about 75% of cases with a single dose
and 95% of cases with two doses 2 weeks apart. In
immunosuppressed hosts and those with crusted (hyperkeratotic)
scabies, multiple doses of ivermectin (every 2 weeks for two or
three doses) plus topical therapy with permethrin once weekly may
be effective when topical treatment and oral therapy alone fail. Oral
ivermectin can be very beneficial in mass treatment to eradicate
infections in institutions or villages.
If secondary pyoderma is present, it is treated with systemic
antibiotics. In areas where nephritogenic streptococcal strains are
prevalent, infestation with scabies or exposure to scabies-infested
dogs 
may 
be 
followed 
by 
acute 
post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis.
Persistent pruritic postscabietic papules may be treated with mid-
to high-potency corticosteroids or with intralesional triamcinolone
acetonide (2.5–5 mg/mL).
Bouvresse S et al. Scabies in healthcare settings. Curr Opin Infect
Dis. 2010 Apr;23(2):111–8. [PMID: 20075729]
 
Hay RJ. Scabies and pyodermas–diagnosis and treatment.
Dermatol Ther. 2009 Nov–Dec;22(6):466–74. [PMID:
19889132]
 
PEDICULOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pruritus with excoriation.
 Nits on hair shafts; lice on skin or clothes.
 Occasionally, sky-blue macules (maculae ceruleae) on the inner
thighs or lower abdomen in pubic louse infestation.
 
 General Considerations
Pediculosis is a parasitic infestation of the skin of the scalp, trunk, or
pubic areas. Body lice usually occur among people who live in
overcrowded dwellings with inadequate hygiene facilities. Pubic lice
may be sexually transmitted. Head lice may be transmitted by
shared use of hats or combs. Adults contacting children with head
lice frequently acquire the infestation.
There are three different varieties: (1) pediculosis pubis, caused
by Phthirus pubis (pubic louse, “crabs”); (2) pediculosis corporis,
caused by Pediculus humanus var corporis (body louse); and (3)
pediculosis capitis, caused by Pediculus humanus var capitis
(head louse).
Head and body lice are similar in appearance and are 3–4 mm
long. The body louse can seldom be found on the body, because
the insect comes onto the skin only to feed and must be looked for
in the seams of the clothing. Trench fever, relapsing fever, and
typhus are transmitted by the body louse in countries where those
diseases are endemic.
 Clinical Findings
Itching may be very intense in body louse infestations, and
scratching may result in deep excoriations, especially over the upper
shoulders, posterior flanks, and neck. In some cases, only itching is
present, with few excoriations seen. Pyoderma may be the
presenting sign. Head lice can be found on the scalp or may be
manifested as small nits resembling pussy willow buds on the scalp
hairs close to the skin. They are easiest to see above the ears and at
the nape of the neck. Pubic louse infestations are occasionally
generalized, particularly in hairy individuals; the lice may even be
found on the eyelashes and in the scalp.
 Differential Diagnosis
Head louse infestation must be distinguished from seborrheic
dermatitis, body louse infestation from scabies and bedbug bites,
and pubic louse infestation from anogenital pruritus and eczema.
 Treatment
Body lice are treated by disposing of the infested clothing and
addressing the patient's social situation. For pubic lice, permethrin
rinse 1% for 10 minutes and permethrin cream 5% applied for 8
hours are effective. Sexual contacts should be treated. Clothes and
bedclothes should be washed and dried at high temperature if
possible.
Permethrin 1% cream rinse (Nix) is a topical over-the-counter
pediculicide and ovicide and is the treatment of choice for head lice.
It is applied to the scalp and hair and left on for 8 hours before
being rinsed off. Permethrin resistance of head lice is common.
Malathion lotion 1% (Ovide) is very effective, but it is highly volatile
and flammable, so application must be done in a well-ventilated
room or out of doors. For involvement of eyelashes, petrolatum is
applied thickly twice daily for 8 days, and remaining nits are then
plucked off.
Leone PA. Scabies and pediculosis pubis: an update of treatment
regimens and general review. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Apr 1;
44(Suppl 3):S153–9. [PMID: 17342668]
 
SKIN LESIONS DUE TO OTHER ARTHROPODS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Localized rash with pruritus.
 Furuncle-like lesions containing live arthropods.
 Tender erythematous patches that migrate (“larva migrans”).
 Generalized urticaria or erythema multiforme in some patients.
 
 General Considerations
Some arthropods (eg, mosquitoes and biting flies) are readily
detected as they bite. Many others are not, eg, because they are
too small, because there is no immediate reaction, or because they
bite during sleep. Reactions are allergic and may be delayed for
hours to days. Patients are most apt to consult a clinician when the
lesions are multiple and pruritus is intense.
Many persons will react severely only to their earliest contacts
with an arthropod, thus presenting pruritic lesions when traveling,
moving into new quarters, etc. Body lice, fleas, bedbugs, and
mosquitoes should be considered. Bedbug exposure typically
occurs in hotels and in housing with inadequate hygiene but also
may occur in stable domiciles. Spiders are often incorrectly believed
to be the source of bites; they rarely attack humans, though the
brown spider (Loxosceles laeta, L reclusa) may cause severe
necrotic reactions and death due to intravascular hemolysis, and the
black widow spider (Latrodectus mactans) may cause severe
systemic symptoms and death. (See also Chapter 38.) The majority
of patient-diagnosed, physician-diagnosed, and even published
cases of brown recluse spider bites (or loxoscelism) are incorrect,
especially if made in areas where these spiders are not endemic.
Many of these lesions are actually due to CA-MRSA.
In addition to arthropod bites, the most common lesions are
venomous stings (wasps, hornets, bees, ants, scorpions) or bites
(centipedes), furuncle-like lesions due to fly maggots or sand fleas in
the skin, and a linear creeping eruption due to a migrating larva.
 Clinical Findings
The diagnosis may be difficult when the patient has not noticed the
initial attack but suffers a delayed reaction. Individual bites are often
in clusters and tend to occur either on exposed parts (eg, midges
and gnats) or under clothing, especially around the waist or at
flexures (eg, small mites or insects in bedding or clothing). The
reaction is often delayed for 1–24 hours or more. Pruritus is almost
always present and may be all but intolerable once the patient starts
to scratch. Secondary infection may follow scratching. Urticarial
wheals are common. Papules may become vesicular. The diagnosis
is aided by searching for exposure to arthropods and by considering
the patient's occupation and recent activities.
The principal arthropods are as follows:
 
1. Fleas: Fleas are bloodsucking ectoparasites that feed
on dogs, cats, humans, and other species. Flea saliva
produces papular urticaria in sensitized individuals. To
break the life cycle of the flea, one must treat the home and
pets, using quick-kill insecticides, residual insecticides,
and a growth regulator.
2. Bedbugs: In crevices of beds or furniture; bites tend to
occur in lines or clusters. Papular urticaria is a
characteristic lesion of bedbug (Cimex lectularius) bites.
Bedbugs are not restricted to any socioeconomic group
and are a major health problem in some major metropolitan
areas, especially in commercial and residential hotels.
3 . Ticks: Usually picked up by brushing against low
vegetation.
4. Chiggers or red bugs: These are larvae of trombiculid
mites. A few species confined to particular regions and
locally recognized habitats (eg, berry patches, woodland
edges, lawns, brush turkey mounds in Australia, poultry
farms) attack humans, often around the waist, on the
ankles, or in flexures, raising intensely itching erythematous
papules after a delay of many hours. The red chiggers may
sometimes be seen in the center of papules that have not
yet been scratched.
5 . Bird and rodent mites: Larger than chiggers, bird
mites infest birds and their nests. Bites are multiple
anywhere on the body. Room air conditioning units may
suck in bird mites and infest the inhabitants of the room.
Rodent mites from mice or rats may cause similar effects. If
the domicile has evidence of rodent activity, then rodent
mite dermatitis should be suspected, as the mites are
rarely found. Pet rodents or birds may be infested with
mites, maintaining the infestation.
6. Mites in stored products: These are white and almost
invisible and infest products such as copra, vanilla pods,
sugar, straw, cottonseeds, and cereals. Persons who
handle these products may be attacked, especially on the
hands and forearms and sometimes on the feet.
7. Caterpillars of moths with urticating hairs: The hairs
are blown from cocoons or carried by emergent moths,
causing severe and often seasonally recurrent outbreaks
after mass emergence. The gypsy moth is a cause in the
eastern United States.
8. Tungiasis: Tungiasis is due to the burrowing flea known
a s Tunga penetrans and is found in Africa, the West
Indies, and South and Central America. The female
burrows under the skin, sucks blood, swells to 0.5 cm, and
then ejects her eggs onto the ground. Ulceration,
lymphangitis, gangrene, and septicemia may result, in
some cases with lethal effect. Simple surgical removal is
usually performed.
 Differential Diagnosis
Arthropods should be considered in the differential diagnosis of skin
lesions showing any of the above symptoms.
 Prevention
Arthropod infestations are best prevented by avoidance of
contaminated areas, personal cleanliness, and disinfection of
clothing, bedclothes, and furniture as indicated. Chiggers and mites
can be repelled by permethrin applied to the head and clothing. (It
is not necessary to remove clothing.) Bedbugs are no longer
repelled by permethrin. Aggressive hygiene and removal of the
infested occupant from the domicile may be required to eradicate
bedbug infestation in a residence.
 Treatment
Living arthropods should be removed carefully with tweezers after
application of alcohol and preserved in alcohol for identification. In
endemic Rocky Mountain spotted fever areas, ticks should not be
removed with the bare fingers.
Corticosteroid lotions or creams are helpful. Topical antibiotics
may be applied if secondary infection is suspected. Localized
persistent lesions may be treated with intralesional corticosteroids.
Stings produced by many arthropods may be alleviated by
applying papain powder (Adolph's Meat Tenderizer) mixed with
water, or aluminum chloride hexahydrate (Xerac AC).
Extracts from venom sacs of bees, wasps, yellow jackets, and
hornets are available for immunotherapy of patients at risk for
anaphylaxis.
Doggett SL et al. Bed bugs–What the GP needs to know. Aust
Fam Physician. 2009 Nov;38(11):880–4. [PMID: 19893834]
 
Goddard J et al. Bed bugs (Cimex lectularius) and clinical
consequences of their bites. JAMA. 2009 Apr 1;301(13):1358–
66. [PMID: 19336711]
 
Vetter RS et al. Of spiders and zebras: publication of inadequately
documented loxoscelism case reports. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007
Jun;56(6):1063–4. [PMID: 17504721]
 
INFLAMMATORY NODULES
ERYTHEMA NODOSUM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painful red nodules without ulceration on anterior aspects of legs.
 Slow regression over several weeks to resemble contusions.
 Women are predominantly affected by a ratio of 10:1 over men.
 Some cases associated with infection, inflammatory bowel
disease, or drug exposure.
 
 General Considerations
Erythema nodosum is a symptom complex characterized by tender,
erythematous nodules that appear most commonly on the extensor
surfaces of the lower legs. It usually lasts about 6 weeks and may
recur. The disease may be associated with various infections—
streptococcosis, primary coccidioidomycosis, other deep fungal
infections, 
tuberculosis, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis 
and Y
enterocolitica infection, diverticulitis, or syphilis. It may accompany
sarcoidosis, Behçet disease, and inflammatory bowel disease.
Erythema nodosum may be associated with pregnancy or with use
of oral contraceptives.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The subcutaneous swellings are exquisitely tender and may be
preceded by fever, malaise, and arthralgia. They are most often
located on the anterior surfaces of the legs below the knees but may
occur on the arms, trunk, and face. The lesions, 1–10 cm in
diameter, are at first pink to red; with regression, all the various
hues seen in a contusion can be observed (Figure 6–44).
B. Laboratory Findings
Evaluation of patients presenting with acute erythema nodosum
should include a careful history (including drug exposures) and
physical examination for prior upper respiratory infection or
diarrheal illness, symptoms of any deep fungal infection endemic to
the area, a chest radiograph, a PPD, and two consecutive
ASO/DNAse B titers at 2- to 4-week intervals. If no underlying
cause is found, only a small percentage of patients will go on to
develop a significant underlying illness (usually sarcoidosis) over the
next year.
 Differential Diagnosis
Erythema induratum from tuberculosis is seen on the posterior
surfaces of the legs and may ulcerate. Lupus panniculitis presents as
tender nodules on the buttocks and posterior arms that heal with
depressed scars. In polyarteritis nodosa, the subcutaneous nodules
are often associated with a fixed livedo. In the late stages, erythema
nodosum must be distinguished from simple bruises and contusions.
 Treatment
First, the underlying cause should be identified and treated. Primary
therapy is with NSAIDs in usual doses. Saturated solution of
potassium iodide, 5–15 drops three times daily, results in prompt
involution in many cases. Complete bed rest may be advisable if the
lesions are painful. Systemic therapy directed against the lesions
themselves may include corticosteroid therapy (see Chapter 26)
unless contraindicated by associated infection.
 Prognosis
The lesions usually disappear after about 6 weeks, but they may
recur.
 
Figure 6–44. Erythema nodosum. (Used, with permission, from
Berger TG, Dept Dermatology, UCSF.)
 
Gheith O et al. Erythema nodosum in renal transplant recipients:
multiple cases and review of literature. Transpl Infect Dis. 2010
Apr;12(2):164–8. [PMID: 20002354]
 
Larsen S et al. Extraintestinal manifestations of inflammatory bowel
disease: epidemiology, diagnosis, and management. Ann Med.
2010 Mar;42(2):97–114. [PMID: 20166813]
 
Schwartz RA et al. Erythema nodosum: a sign of systemic disease.
Am Fam Physician. 2007 Mar 1;75(5):695–700. [PMID:
17375516]
 
FURUNCULOSIS (Boils) & CARBUNCLES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Extremely painful inflammatory swelling based on a hair follicle
that forms an abscess.
 Predisposing condition (diabetes mellitus, HIV disease, injection
drug use) sometimes present.
 Coagulase-positive S aureus is the causative organism.
 
 General Considerations
A furuncle (boil) is a deep-seated infection (abscess) caused by S
aureus and involving the entire hair follicle and adjacent
subcutaneous tissue. The most common sites of occurrence are the
hairy parts exposed to irritation and friction, pressure, or moisture.
Because the lesions are autoinoculable, they are often multiple.
Diabetes mellitus (especially if using insulin injections), injection drug
use, allergy injections, and HIV disease all increase the risk of
staphylococcal infections by increasing the rate of carriage. Certain
other exposures including hospitalization, athletic teams, prisons,
military service, and homelessness may also increase the risk of
infection.
A carbuncle consists of several furuncles developing in adjoining
hair follicles and coalescing to form a conglomerate, deeply situated
mass with multiple drainage points.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pain and tenderness may be prominent. The abscess is either
rounded or conical. It gradually enlarges, becomes fluctuant, and
then softens and opens spontaneously after a few days to 1–2
weeks to discharge a core of necrotic tissue and pus. The
inflammation occasionally subsides before necrosis occurs. Infection
of the soft tissue around the nails (paronychia) may be due to
staphylococci when it is acute or Candida when chronic.
B. Laboratory Findings
There may be slight leukocytosis, but a white blood cell count is
rarely required. Pus should be cultured to rule out MRSA or other
bacteria. Culture of the anterior nares may identify chronic
staphylococcal carriage in cases of recurrent cutaneous infection.
 Differential Diagnosis
The most common entity in the differential is an inflamed epidermal
inclusion cyst that suddenly becomes red, tender, and expands
greatly in size over one to a few days. The history of a prior cyst in
the same location, the presence of a clearly visible cyst orifice, and
the extrusion of malodorous cheesy rather than purulent material
helps in the diagnosis. Tinea profunda (deep dermatophyte infection
of the hair follicle) may simulate recurrent furunculosis. Furuncle is
also to be distinguished from deep mycotic infections, such as
sporotrichosis; from other bacterial infections, such as anthrax and
tularemia (rare); from atypical mycobacterial infections; and from
acne cysts. Hidradenitis suppurativa (acne inversa) presents with
recurrent tender sterile abscesses in the axillae and groin, on the
buttocks, or below the breasts. The presence of old scars or sinus
tracts plus negative cultures suggests this diagnosis.
 Complications
Serious and sometimes fatal complications of staphylococcal
infection such as septicemia can occur.
 Prevention
Identifying and eliminating the source of infection is critical to
prevent recurrences after treatment. The source individual may have
chronic dermatitis or be an asymptomatic carrier. Local measures
such as meticulous hand-washing; no sharing of towels and clothing;
aggressive scrubbing of showers, bathrooms and surfaces with
bleach; bleach baths (1/2 to 1 cup per 20 liters of bathwater for 15
minutes 3–5 times weekly) and isolation of infected patients who
reside in institutions to prevent spread are all effective measures.
 Treatment
A. Specific Measures
Incision and drainage is recommended for all loculated suppurations
and is the mainstay of therapy. Systemic antibiotics are usually
given, although they offer little beyond adequate incision and
drainage. Sodium dicloxacillin or cephalexin, 1 g daily in divided
doses by mouth for 10 days, is usually effective. Doxycycline 100
mg twice daily, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole DS one tablet twice
daily, and clindamycin 150–300 mg twice daily are effective in
treating MRSA. Recurrent furunculosis may be effectively treated
with a combination of cephalexin, 250–500 mg four times daily for
2–4 weeks, and rifampin, 300 mg twice daily for 5 days during this
period. Chronic clindamycin, 150–300 mg daily for 1–2 months,
may also cure recurrent furunculosis. Family members and intimate
contacts may need evaluation for staphylococcal carrier state and
perhaps concomitant treatment. Applications of topical 2%
mupirocin to the nares, axillae, and anogenital areas twice daily for
5 days may eliminate the staphylococcal carrier state, although
resistance is increasing.
B. Local Measures
Immobilize the part and avoid overmanipulation of inflamed areas.
Use moist heat to help larger lesions “localize.” Use surgical incision
and drainage after the lesions are “mature.” To incise and drain an
acute staphylococcal paronychia, insert a flat metal spatula or
sharpened hard-wood stick into the nail fold where it adjoins the
nail. This will release pus from a mature lesion.
 Prognosis
Recurrent crops may harass the patient for months or years.
Elston DM. Community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Jan;56(1):
1–16. [PMID: 17190619]
 
EPIDERMAL INCLUSION CYST
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Firm dermal papule or nodule.
 Overlying black comedone or “punctum.”
 Expressible foul-smelling cheesy material.
 May become red and drain, mimicking an abscess.
 
 General Considerations
Epidermal inclusion cysts (EICs) are common, benign growths of
the upper portion of the hair follicle. They are common in Gardner
syndrome and may be the first stigmata of the condition.
Epidermal inclusion cysts favor the face and trunk and may
complicate nodulocystic acne vulgaris. Individual lesions range in
size from 0.3 cm to several centimeters. An overlying pore or
punctum is characteristic. Lateral pressure may lead to extrusion of
a foul-smelling, cheesy material.
 Differential Diagnosis
EICs are distinguished from lipomas by being more superficial (in
the dermis not the subcutaneous fat) and by their overlying punctum.
Many other benign and malignant tumors may superficially resemble
EICs, but all lack the punctum.
 Complications
EICs may rupture, creating an acute inflammatory nodule very
similar to an abscess. Cultures of the expressed material will be
sterile.
 Treatment
Treatment is not required if asymptomatic. Inflamed lesions may be
treated with incision and drainage or intralesional triamcinolone
acetomide 5–10 mg/mL. For large or symptomatic cysts, surgical
excision is curative.
Lee HE et al. Comparison of the surgical outcomes of punch
incision and elliptical excision in treating epidermal inclusion cysts: a
prospective, randomized study. Dermatol Surg. 2006
Apr;32(4):520–5. [PMID: 16681659]
 
Lin SH et al. Facial epidermal inclusion cysts are associated with
smoking in men: a hospital-based case-control study. Dermatol
Surg. 2010 Jun;36(6):894–8. [PMID: 20482735]
 
PHOTODERMATITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painful or pruritic erythema, edema, or vesiculation on sun-
exposed surfaces: the face, neck, hands, and “V” of the chest.
 Inner upper eyelids spared, as is the area under the chin.
 
 General Considerations
In most cases, photosensitivity is an acute or chronic skin reaction
due to hypersensitivity to ultraviolet radiation. It is caused by certain
drugs, by lupus erythematosus, and some inherited disorders
including the porphyrias. Contact photosensitivity may occur with
plants, perfumes, and sunscreens. Three percent of persons with
atopic 
dermatitis, 
especially 
middle-aged 
women, 
are
photosensitive.
Photodermatitis is manifested as phototoxicity—a tendency for
the individual to sunburn more easily than expected—or, as
photoallergy, a true immunologic reaction that often presents with
dermatitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The acute inflammatory skin reaction, if severe enough, is
accompanied by pain, fever, gastrointestinal symptoms, malaise,
and even prostration, but this is very rare. Signs include erythema,
edema, and possibly vesiculation and oozing on exposed surfaces.
Peeling of the epidermis and pigmentary changes often result. The
key to diagnosis is localization of the rash to photoexposed areas,
though these eruptions may become generalized with time to involve
even photoprotected areas. The lower lip may be affected.
B. Laboratory Findings
Blood and urine tests are generally not helpful unless porphyria
cutanea tarda is suggested by the presence of blistering, scarring,
milia (white cysts 1–2 mm in diameter) and skin fragility of the
dorsal hands, and facial hypertrichosis. Eosinophilia may be present
in chronic photoallergic responses.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis is long. If a clear history of the use of a
topical or systemic photosensitizer is not available and if the
eruption is persistent, then a workup including biopsy and light
testing may be required. Photodermatitis must be differentiated from
contact dermatitis that may develop from one of the many
substances in suntan lotions and oils, as these may often have a
similar distribution. Sensitivity to actinic rays may also be part of a
more serious condition such as porphyria cutanea tarda or lupus
erythematosus. These disorders are diagnosed by appropriate
blood or urine tests. Phenothiazines, quinine or quinidine,
griseofulvin, 
sulfonylureas 
(especially 
hydrochlorothiazide),
NSAIDs, and antibiotics (eg, some tetracyclines, quinolone,
TMPSMZ) may photosensitize the skin. Polymorphous light
eruption (PMLE) is a very common idiopathic photodermatitis and
often has its onset in the third to fourth decades except in Native
Americans and Latinos, in whom it may present in childhood.
PMLE is chronic in nature. Transitory periods of spontaneous
remission do occur. The action spectrum of PMLE may also extend
into the long ultraviolet wavelengths (UVA; 320–400 nm). Drug-
induced photosensitivity is triggered by UVA.
 Complications
Some individuals continue to be chronic light reactors even when
they apparently are no longer exposed to photosensitizing drugs.
 Prevention
While sunscreens are useful agents in general and should be used by
persons with photosensitivity, patients may react to such low
amounts of energy that sunscreens alone may not be sufficient.
Sunscreens with an SPF of 30–60 and broad UVA coverage,
containing dicamphor sulfonic acid (Mexoryl SX), avobenzone
(Parasol 1789), titanium dioxide, and micronized zinc oxide, are
especially useful in patients with photoallergic dermatitis.
Photosensitivity due to porphyria is not prevented by sunscreens
and requires barrier protection (clothing) to prevent outbreaks.
 Treatment
A. Specific Measures
Drugs should be suspected in cases of photosensitivity even if the
particular medication (such as hydrochlorothiazide) has been used
for months.
B. Local Measures
When the eruption is vesicular or weepy, treatment is similar to that
of any acute dermatitis, using cooling and soothing wet dressing.
Sunscreens should be used as described above. Midpotency to
high-potency topical corticosteroids are of limited benefit in sunburn
reactions but may help in PMLE and photoallergic reactions. Since
the face is often involved, close monitoring for corticosteroid side
effects is recommended.
C. Systemic Measures
Aspirin may have some value for fever and pain of acute sunburn.
Systemic corticosteroids in doses as described for acute contact
dermatitis may be required for severe photosensitivity reactions.
Otherwise, different photodermatoses are treated in specific ways.
Patients 
with 
severe 
photoallergy 
may 
require
immunosuppressives, such as azathioprine, in the range of 50–300
mg/d, or cyclosporine, 3–5 mg/kg/d.
 Prognosis
The most common phototoxic sunburn reactions are usually benign
and self-limited. PMLE and some cases of photoallergy can persist
for years.
Chew AL et al. Contact and photocontact sensitization in chronic
actinic dermatitis: a changing picture. Contact Dermatitis. 2010
Jan;62(1):42–6. [PMID: 20136878]
 
Gambichler T et al. Immunologically mediated photodermatoses:
diagnosis and treatment. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2009; 10(3):169–
80. [PMID: 19354331]
 
Victor FC et al. A 20-year analysis of previous and emerging
allergens that elicit photoallergic contact dermatitis. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2010 Apr;62(4):605–10. [PMID: 20163891]
 
ULCERS
LEG ULCERS SECONDARY TO VENOUS
INSUFFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Past history of varicosities, thrombophlebitis, or postphlebitic
syndrome.
 Irregular ulceration, often on the medial aspect of the lower legs
above the malleolus.
 Edema of the legs, varicosities, hyperpigmentation, and red and
scaly areas (stasis dermatitis) and scars from old ulcers support
the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Patients at risk may have a history of venous insufficiency, either
with obvious varicosities or with a past history of thrombophlebitis,
or with immobility of the calf muscle group (paraplegics, etc). Red,
pruritic patches of stasis dermatitis often precede ulceration.
Because venous insufficiency plays a role in between 75% and 90%
of lower leg ulcerations, testing of venous competence is a required
part of a leg ulcer evaluation even when no changes of venous
insufficiency are present.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Classically, chronic edema is followed by a dermatitis, which is
often pruritic. These changes are followed by hyperpigmentation,
skin breakdown, and eventually sclerosis of the skin of the lower leg
(Figure 6–45). The ulcer base may be clean, but it often has a
yellow fibrin eschar that may require surgical removal. Ulcers that
appear on the feet, toes, or above the knees should be approached
with other diagnoses in mind.
B. Laboratory Findings
Thorough evaluation of the patient's vascular system (including
measurement of the ankle/brachial index [ABI]) is essential. If the
ABI is < 0.7, the patient should be referred to a vascular surgeon
for surgical evaluation. Doppler and light rheography examinations
as office procedures are usually sufficient (except in the diabetic) to
elucidate the cause of most vascular cases of lower leg ulceration.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential includes vasculitis, pyoderma gangrenosum, arterial
ulcerations, infection, trauma, skin cancer, arachnid bites, and sickle
cell anemia. When the diagnosis is in doubt, a punch biopsy from
the border (not base) of the lesion may be helpful.
 
Figure 6–45. Venous stasis ulcer near the medial malleolus.
(Courtesy of Maureen Sheehan, MD; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Prevention
Compression stockings to reduce edema are the most important
means of prevention. Compression should achieve a pressure of 30
mm Hg below the knee and 40 mm Hg at the ankle. The stockings
should not be used in patients with arterial insufficiency with an ABI
< 0.7. Pneumatic sequential compression devices may be of great
benefit when edema is refractory to standard compression
dressings.
 Treatment
A. Local Measures
Clean the base of the ulcer with saline or cleansers such as Saf-
Clens. A curette or small scissors can be used to remove the yellow
fibrin eschar; local anesthesia may be used if the areas are very
tender.
The ulcer is treated with metronidazole gel to reduce bacterial
growth and odor. Any red dermatitic skin is treated with a medium-
to high-potency corticosteroid ointment. The ulcer is then covered
with an occlusive hydroactive dressing (DuoDerm, Hydrasorb or
Cutinova) or a polyurethane foam (Allevyn) followed by an Unna
zinc paste boot. This is changed weekly. The ulcer should begin to
heal within weeks, and healing should be complete within 4–6
months. If the patient is diabetic, becaplermin (Regranex) may be
applied to those ulcers that are not becoming smaller or developing
a granulating base. Some ulcerations require grafting. Full- or split-
thickness grafts often do not take, and pinch grafts (small shaves of
skin laid onto the bed) may be effective. Cultured epidermal cell
grafts may accelerate wound healing, but they are very expensive.
They should be considered in refractory ulcers, especially those that
have not healed after a year or more of conservative therapy.
Manuka honey has been purported to accelerate wound healing.
No topical intervention has evidence to suggest that it will
improve healing of arterial leg ulcers.
B. Systemic Therapy
Pentoxifylline, 400 mg three times daily administered with
compression dressings, is beneficial in accelerating healing of venous
insufficiency leg ulcers. Zinc supplementation is occasionally
beneficial in patients with low serum zinc levels. The diagnosis of
cellulitis in the setting of a venous insufficiency ulcer can be very
difficult. Surface cultures are of limited value. The diagnosis of
cellulitis should be considered in the following settings: 1) expanding
warmth and erythema surrounding the ulceration with or without 2)
increasing pain of the ulceration. The patient may also report
increased exudate from the ulceration, but this without the other
cardinal findings of cellulitis does not confirm the diagnosis of
cellulitis. If cellulitis accompanies the ulcer, systemic antibiotics are
recommended: dicloxacillin, 250 mg orally four times a day, or
levofloxacin, 500 mg once daily for 1–2 weeks is usually adequate.
Routine use of antibiotics and treating bacteria isolated from a
chronic ulcer without clinical evidence of infection is discouraged. If
the ulcer fails to heal or there is a persistent draining tract in the
ulcer, an underlying osteomyelitis should be sought.
 Prognosis
The combination of limited debridement, compression dressings or
stockings, and newer moist dressings will heal the majority of
venous stasis ulcers within months (average 18 months). These need
to be applied at least 80% of the time to optimize ulcer healing.
Topical growth factors, antibiotics, debriding agents, Manuka
honey, and xeno-grafts and autografts can be considered in
recalcitrant cases, but they are usually not required in most patients.
The failure of venous insufficiency ulcerations to heal is most often
related to not using the basic treatment methods consistently, rather
than failure to use these specific modalities. Ongoing control of
edema is essential to prevent recurrent ulceration. The use of
compression stockings following ulcer healing is critical to prevent
recurrence, with recurrence rates 2-20 times higher if patients do
not comply with compression stocking use. If the ABI is < 0.5, the
prognosis for healing is poor.
Amsler F et al. In search of optimal compression therapy for
venous leg ulcers: a meta-analysis of studies comparing divers
bandages with specifically designed stockings. J Vasc Surg. 2009
Sep;50(3):668–74. [PMID: 19595551]
 
Armstrong DG. Manuka honey improved wound healing in
patients with sloughy venous leg ulcers. Evid Based Med. 2009
Oct;14(5):148. [PMID: 19794023]
 
Milic DJ et al. Risk factors related to the failure of venous leg
ulcers to heal with compression treatment. J Vasc Surg. 2009
May;49(5):1242–7. [PMID: 19233601]
 
Moffatt C et al. Venous leg ulcers: patient concordance with
compression therapy and its impact on healing and prevention of
recurrence. Int Wound J. 2009 Oct;6(5):386–93. [PMID:
19912396]
 
Olson JM et al. Guideline concordant venous ulcer care predicts
healing in a tertiary care Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Wound
Repair Regen. 2009 Sep–Oct;17(5):666–70. [PMID: 19769720]
 
O'Meara S et al. Antibiotics and antiseptics for venous leg ulcers.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 20; (1):CD003557.
[PMID: 20091548]
 
O'Meara S et al. Compression for venous leg ulcers. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):CD000265. [PMID:
19160178]
 
MISCELLANEOUS
DERMATOLOGIC DISORDERS*
 
PIGMENTARY DISORDERS
Although the color of skin may be altered by many diseases and
agents, the vast majority of patients have either an increase or
decrease in pigment secondary to some inflammatory disease such
as acne or atopic dermatitis.
Other pigmentary disorders include those resulting from exposure
to exogenous pigments such as carotenemia, argyria, and tattooing.
Other endogenous pigmentary disorders are attributable to
metabolic substances—including hemosiderin (iron)—in purpuric
processes; or to homogentisic acid in ochronosis; and bile pigments.
 Classification
First, determine whether the disorder is hyperpigmentation or
hypopigmentation, ie, an increase or decrease in normal skin colors.
Each may be considered to be primary or to be secondary to other
disorders.
A. Primary Pigmentary Disorders
1. Hyperpigmentation—The disorders in this category are nevoid,
congenital or acquired, and include pigmented nevi, ephelides
(juvenile 
freckles), 
and 
lentigines 
(senile 
freckles).
Hyperpigmentation occurs also in arsenical melanosis or in
association with Addison disease. Melasma (chloasma) occurs as
patterned hyperpigmentation of the face, usually as a direct effect of
estrogens. It occurs not only during pregnancy but also in 30–50%
of women taking oral contraceptives, and rarely in men. One report
suggests that such men have low testosterone and elevated
luteinizing hormone levels.
2. Hypopigmentation and depigmentation—The disorders in
this category are vitiligo, albinism, and piebaldism. In vitiligo,
pigment cells (melanocytes) are destroyed (Figure 6–46). Vitiligo,
present in approximately 1% of the population, may be associated
with other autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune thyroid
disease, pernicious anemia, diabetes mellitus, and Addison disease.
B. Secondary Pigmentary Disorders
Any damage to the skin (irritation, allergy, infection, excoriation,
burns, or dermatologic therapy such as chemical peels and freezing
with liquid nitrogen) may result in hyperpigmentation or
hypopigmentation. Several disorders of clinical importance are
described below.
______________________
* Hirsutism is discussed in Chapter 26.
 
 
Figure 6–46. Vitiligo of the hands. (Courtesy of Richard P.
Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA,
Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
1. Hyperpigmentation—The most common type of secondary
hyperpigmentation occurs after another dermatologic condition,
such as acne, and is most commonly seen in moderately
complexioned persons (Asians, Hispanics, and light-skinned African
Americans). It is called postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.
Pigmentation may be produced by certain drugs, eg, chloroquine,
chlorpromazine, minocycline, and amiodarone. Fixed drug eruptions
to phenolphthalein in laxatives, to TMP-SMZ, to NSAIDs, and to
tetracyclines, for example, are further causes.
2. Hypopigmentation—Leukoderma may complicate atopic
dermatitis, lichen planus, psoriasis, DLE, and lichen simplex
chronicus. Practitioners must exercise special care in using liquid
nitrogen on any patient with olive or darker complexions, since
doing so may result in hypopigmentation or depigmentation, at times
permanent. Intralesional or intra-articular injections of high
concentrations of corticosteroids may also cause localized
temporary hypopigmentation.
 Differential Diagnosis
The evaluation of pigmentary disorders is helped by Wood's light,
which accentuates epidermal pigmentation and highlights
hypopigmentation. Depigmentation, as seen in vitiligo, enhances with
Wood's 
light 
examination, 
whereas 
postinflammatory
hypopigmentation does not.
 Complications
Actinic keratoses and skin cancers are more likely to develop in
persons with vitiligo. Severe emotional trauma may occur in
extensive vitiligo and other types of hypopigmentation and
hyperpigmentation, particularly in naturally dark-skinned persons.
 Treatment & Prognosis
A. Hyperpigmentation
Therapeutic bleaching preparations generally contain hydroquinone.
Hydroquinone 
has 
occasionally 
caused 
unexpected
hypopigmentation, 
hyperpigmentation, 
or 
even 
secondary
ochronosis and pigmented milia, particularly with prolonged use.
The role of exposure to ultraviolet light cannot be over-stressed
p
g
as a factor promoting or contributing to most disorders of
hyperpigmentation, and such exposure should be minimized.
Melasma, ephelides, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation may
be treated with varying success with 3–4% hydroquinone cream,
gel, or solution and a sunscreen containing UVA photoprotectants
(Avobenzone, Mexoryl, zinc oxide, titanium dioxide). Tretinoin
cream, 0.025–0.05%, may be added. Superficial melasma
responds well, but if there is predominantly dermal deposition of
pigment (does not enhance with Wood's light), the prognosis is
poor. Response to therapy takes months and requires avoidance of
sunlight. Hyperpigmentation often recurs after treatment if the skin is
exposed to ultraviolet light. Solar lentigines respond to liquid
nitrogen application. Tretinoin, 0.1% cream and tazarotene 0.1%
used over 10 months, will fade solar lentigines (liver spots),
hyperpigmented facial macules in Asians, and postinflammatory
hyperpigmentation in blacks. New laser systems for the removal of
epidermal and dermal pigments are available, and referral should be
considered for patients whose responses to medical treatment are
inadequate.
B. Hypopigmentation
In secondary hypopigmentation, repigmentation may occur
spontaneously. Cosmetics such as Covermark and Dermablend are
highly effective for concealing disfiguring patches. Therapy of vitiligo
is long and tedious, and the patient must be strongly motivated. If <
20% of the skin is involved (most cases), topical tacrolimus 0.1%
twice daily is the first-line therapy. A superpotent corticosteroid
may also be used, but local skin atrophy from prolonged use may
ensue. With 20–25% involvement, narrowband UVB or oral
PUVA is best. Severe phototoxic response (sun-burn) may occur
with PUVA. The face and upper chest respond best, and the
fingertips and the genital areas do not respond as well to treatment.
Years of treatment may be required. Newer techniques of using
epidermal autografts and cultured epidermis combined with PUVA
therapy give hope for surgical correction of vitiligo.
Taïeb A et al. Clinical practice. Vitiligo. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jan
8;360(2):160–9. [PMID: 19129529]
 
BALDNESS (Alopecia)
 Baldness Due to Scarring (Cicatricial
Alopecia)
Cicatricial baldness may occur following chemical or physical
trauma, lichen planopilaris, bacterial or fungal infections, severe
herpes zoster, chronic DLE, scleroderma, and excessive ionizing
radiation. The specific cause is often suggested by the history, the
distribution of hair loss, and the appearance of the skin, as in lupus
erythematosus. Biopsy is useful in the diagnosis of scarring alopecia,
but specimens must be taken from the active border and not from
the scarred central zone.
Scarring alopecias are irreversible and permanent. It is important
to diagnose and treat the scarring process as early in its course as
possible.
 
Baldness 
Not 
Associated 
with
Scarring
Nonscarring alopecia may occur in association with various
systemic diseases such as SLE, secondary syphilis, hyperthyroidism
or hypothyroidism, iron deficiency anemia, and pituitary
insufficiency. The only treatment necessary is prompt and adequate
control of the underlying disorder and usually leads to regrowth of
the hair.
Androgenetic (pattern) baldness, the most common form of
alopecia, is of genetic predetermination. The earliest changes occur
at the anterior portions of the calvarium on either side of the
“widow's peak” and on the crown (vertex). The extent of hair loss
is variable and unpredictable. Minoxidil 5% is available over the
counter and can be specifically recommended for persons with
recent onset (< 5 years) and smaller areas of alopecia.
Approximately 40% of patients treated twice daily for a year will
have moderate to dense growth. Finasteride (Propecia), 1 mg orally
daily, has similar efficacy and may be additive to minoxidil. As
opposed to minoxidil, finasteride is used only in males.
Hair loss or thinning of the hair in women results from the same
cause as common baldness in men (androgenetic alopecia) and may
be treated with topical minoxidil. A workup consisting of
determination of serum testosterone, DHEAS, iron, total iron
binding capacity, thyroid function tests, and a complete blood count
will identify most other causes of hair thinning in premenopausal
women. Women who complain of thin hair but show little evidence
of alopecia need follow-up, because > 50% of the scalp hair can be
lost before the clinician can perceive it.
Telogen effluvium is transitory increase in the number of hairs
in the telogen (resting) phase of the hair growth cycle. This may
occur spontaneously, may appear at the termination of pregnancy,
may be precipitated by “crash dieting,” high fever, stress from
surgery or shock, malnutrition, or may be provoked by hormonal
contraceptives. Whatever the cause, telogen effluvium usually has a
latent period of 2–4 months. The prognosis is generally good. The
condition is diagnosed by the presence of large numbers of hairs
with white bulbs coming out upon gentle tugging of the hair. Counts
of hairs lost by the patient on combing or shampooing often exceed
150 per day, compared to an average of 70–100. In one study, a
major cause of telogen effluvium was found to be iron deficiency,
and the hair counts bore a clear relationship to serum iron levels.
Alopecia areata is of unknown cause but is believed to be an
immunologic process. Typically, there are patches that are perfectly
smooth and without scarring. Tiny hairs 2–3 mm in length, called
“exclamation hairs,” may be seen. Telogen hairs are easily dislodged
from the periphery of active lesions. The beard, brows, and lashes
may be involved. Involvement may extend to all of the scalp hair
(alopecia totalis) or to all scalp and body hair (alopecia universalis).
Severe forms may be treated by systemic corticosteroid therapy,
although recurrences follow discontinuation of therapy. Alopecia
areata is occasionally associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis,
pernicious anemia, Addison disease, and vitiligo.
Intralesional corticosteroids are frequently effective for alopecia
areata. Triamcinolone acetonide in a concentration of 2.5–10
mg/mL is injected in aliquots of 0.1 mL at approximately 1- to 2-cm
intervals, not exceeding a total dose of 30 mg per month for adults.
Alternatively, anthralin 0.5% ointment, used daily, may help some
patients. Alopecia areata is usually self-limiting, with complete
regrowth of hair in 80% of patients with focal disease. Some mild
cases are resistant to treatment, as are the extensive totalis and
universalis types. Both topical diphency-prone and squaric acid
dibutylester, have been used to treat persistent alopecia areata. The
principle is to sensitize the skin, then intermittently apply weaker
concentrations to produce and maintain a slight dermatitis. Hair
regrowth in 3–6 months in some patients has been reported to be
remarkable. Long-term safety and efficacy have not been
established. Support groups for patients with extensive alopecia
areata are very beneficial.
I n trichotillomania (the pulling out of one's own hair), the
patches of hair loss are irregular and short growing hairs are always
present, since they cannot be pulled out until they are long enough.
The patches are often unilateral, occurring on the same side as the
patient's dominant hand. The patient may be unaware of the habit.
Alkhalifah A et al. Alopecia areata update: part II. Treatment. J
Am Acad Dermatol. 2010 Feb;62(2):191–202. [PMID:
20115946]
 
Rogers NE et al. Medical treatments for male and female pattern
hair loss. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008 Oct;59(4):547–66. [PMID:
18793935]
 
NAIL DISORDERS
1. Morphologic Abnormalities of the Nails
 Classification
Acquired nail disorders may be classified as local or those
associated with systemic or generalized skin diseases.
A. Local Nail Disorders
Onycholysis (distal separation of the nail plate from the nail bed,
usually of the fingers) is caused by excessive exposure to water,
soaps, detergents, alkalies, and industrial cleaning agents. Candidal
infection of the nail folds and subungual area, nail hardeners, and
drug-induced photosensitivity may cause onycholysis, as may
hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, and psoriasis.
1. Distortion of the nail occurs as a result of chronic
inflammation of the nail matrix underlying the eponychial
fold. Such changes may also be caused by warts, tumors,
or cysts, impinging on the nail matrix.
2. Discoloration and crumbly thickened nails are noted in
dermatophyte infection and psoriasis.
3. Allergic reactions (to resins in undercoats and polishes
or to nail glues) are characterized by onycholysis or by
grossly distorted, hypertrophic, and misshapen nails.
 
Figure 6–47. Clubbing of the fingers in congenital heart disease.
(Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
B. Nail Changes Associated with Systemic or Generalized Skin Diseases
Beau lines (transverse furrows) may follow any serious systemic
illness.
1. Atrophy of the nails may be related to trauma or to
vascular or neurologic disease.
2. Clubbed fingers may be due to the prolonged hypoxemia
associated with cardiopulmonary disorders (Figure 6–47).
(See Chapter 9.)
3. Spoon nails may be seen in anemic patients.
4. Stippling or pitting of the nails is seen in psoriasis,
alopecia areata, and hand eczema.
5. Nail hyperpigmentation may be caused by many
chemotherapeutic agents, but especially the taxanes.
 Differential Diagnosis
Onychomycosis may cause nail changes identical to those seen in
psoriasis. Careful examination for more characteristic lesions
elsewhere on the body is essential to the diagnosis of the nail
disorders. Cancer should be suspected (eg, Bowen disease or
squamous cell carcinoma) as the cause of any persistent solitary
subungual or periungual lesion.
 Complications
Toenail changes may lead to an ingrown nail—in turn often
complicated by bacterial infection and occasionally by exuberant
granulation tissue. Poor manicuring and poorly fitting shoes may
contribute to this complication. Cellulitis may result.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Treatment consists usually of careful debridement and manicuring
and, above all, reduction of exposure to irritants (soaps, detergents,
alkali, bleaches, solvents, etc). Longitudinal grooving due to
temporary lesions of the matrix, such as warts, synovial cysts, and
other impingements, may be cured by removal of the offending
lesion.
2. Tinea Unguium (Onychomycosis)
Tinea unguium is a trichophyton infection of one or more (but rarely
all) fingernails or toenails. The species most commonly found is T
rubrum. “Saprophytic” fungi may rarely (< 5%) cause
onychomycosis.
The nails are lusterless, brittle, and hypertrophic, and the
substance of the nail is friable. Laboratory diagnosis is mandatory
since only 50% of dystrophic nails are due to dermatophytosis.
Portions of the nail should be cleared with 10% KOH and
examined under the microscope for hyphae. Fungi may also be
cultured. Periodic acid-Schiff stain of a histologic section of the nail
plate will also demonstrate the fungus readily. Each technique is
positive in only 50% of cases so several different tests may need to
be performed.
Onychomycosis is difficult to treat because of the long duration of
therapy required and the frequency of recurrences. Fingernails
respond more readily than toenails. For toenails, treatment is limited
to patients with discomfort, inability to exercise, and immune
compromise.
In general, systemic therapy is required to effectively treat nail
onychomycosis. Topical therapy has limited value and the
adjunctive value of surgical procedures is unproven. Fingernails can
virtually always be cured and toenails are cured 35–50% of the time
and are clinically improved about 75% of the time. In all cases,
before treatment, the diagnosis should be confirmed. The costs of
the various treatment options should be known and the most cost-
effective treatment chosen. Drug interactions must be avoided.
Ketoconazole, due to its higher risk for hepatotoxicity, is not
recommended to treat any form of onychomycosis. For fingernails,
ultramicronized griseofulvin 250 mg orally three times daily for 6
months can be effective. Alternative treatments are (in order of
preference) oral terbinafine 250 mg daily for 6 weeks, oral
itraconazole 400 mg daily for 7 days each month for 2 months, and
oral itraconazole 200 mg daily for 2 months. Off-label use of
fluconazole, 400 mg once weekly for 6 months, can also be
effective, but there is limited evidence for this option. Once clear,
fingernails usually remain free of disease for some years.
Onychomycosis of the toenails does not respond to griseofulvin
therapy or topical treatments. The best treatment, which is also
FDA approved, is oral terbinafine 250 mg daily for 12 weeks. Liver
function tests and a complete blood count with platelets are
performed monthly during treatment. Pulse oral itraconazole 200 mg
twice daily for 1 week per month for 3 months is inferior to
standard terbinafine treatments, but it is an acceptable alternative for
those unable to take terbinafine. The courses of terbinafine or
itraconazole may need to be repeated 6 months after the first
treatment cycle if fungal cultures of the nail are still positive.
Crawford F et al. Topical treatments for fungal infections of the
skin and nails of the foot. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jul
18; (3):CD001434. [PMID: 17636672]
 
de Berker D. Clinical practice. Fungal nail disease. N Engl J Med.
2009 May 14;360(20):2108–16. [PMID: 19439745]
 
Scher RK et al. Onychomycosis: diagnosis and definition of cure. J
Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Jun;56(6):939–44. [PMID: 17307276]
 
Welsh O et al. Onychomycosis. Clin Dermatol. 2010 Mar 4;28(2):
151–9. [PMID: 20347657]
 
DERMATITIS MEDICAMENTOSA (Drug Eruption)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually, abrupt onset of widespread, symmetric erythematous
eruption.
 May mimic any inflammatory skin condition.
 Constitutional symptoms (malaise, arthralgia, headache, and
fever) may be present.
 
 General Considerations
As is well recognized, only a minority of cutaneous drug reactions
result from allergy. True allergic drug reactions involve prior
exposure, an “incubation” period, reactions to doses far below the
therapeutic range, manifestations different from the usual
pharmacologic effects of the drug, involvement of only a small
portion of the population at risk, restriction to a limited number of
syndromes (anaphylactic and anaphylactoid, urticarial, vasculitic,
etc), and reproducibility.
Rashes are among the most common adverse reactions to drugs
and occur in 2–3% of hospitalized patients. Amoxicillin, TMP-
SMZ, and ampicillin or penicillin are the most common causes of
urticarial and maculopapular reactions. Toxic epidermal necrolysis
and Stevens-Johnson syndrome are most commonly produced by
sulfonamides and anticonvulsants. Phenolphthalein, pyrazolone
derivatives, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, TMP-SMZ, and barbiturates
are the major causes of fixed drug eruptions.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Drug eruptions are generally classified as “simple” or “complex.”
Simple drug eruptions involve an exanthem, usually appear in the
second week of drug therapy, and have no associated constitutional
or laboratory findings. Antibiotics, including the penicillins and
quinolones are the most common causes. Complex drug eruptions
(also called drug-induced hypersensitivity syndromes) occur during
the third week of treatment on average and have constitutional and
laboratory findings. These may include fevers, chills, hematologic
abnormalities (especially eosinophilia), and abnormal liver or kidney
function. A mnemonic for complex eruptions is “DRESS” (DRug
Eruption with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms). The most
common causes are the long-acting sulfonamides, allopurinol, and
anticonvulsants. The use of anticonvulsants to treat bipolar disorder
and chronic pain has led to an apparent increase in these reactions.
In patients of certain races, polymorphisms of antigen presenting
major histocompatibility (MHC) loci increases risk for the
development of severe drug eruptions. Coexistent reactivation of
Epstein-Barr virus, HHV-6, or cytomegalovirus is often present and
may be important in the pathogenesis of these complex drug
eruptions. Table 6–3 summarizes the types of skin reactions, their
appearance and distribution, and the common offenders in each
case.
 
Table 6–3. Skin reactions due to systemic drugs.
 
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.
B. Laboratory Findings
Routinely ordered blood work is of no value in the diagnosis of
simple drug eruptions. In complex drug eruptions, the CBC, liver
biochemical tests, and renal function tests should be monitored.
Skin biopsies may be helpful in making the diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Observation after discontinuation, which may be a slow process,
helps establish the diagnosis. Rechallenge, though of theoretical
value, may pose a danger to the patient and is best avoided.
 Complications
Some cutaneous drug reactions may be associated with visceral
involvement. The organ systems involved depend on the individual
medication or drug class. Most common is an infectious
mononucleosis-like 
illness 
and 
hepatitis 
associated 
with
administration of anticonvulsants. Myocarditis may be a serious
complication of drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome. Months
after recovering from DRESS, patients may suffer hypothyroidism.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Systemic manifestations are treated as they arise (eg, anemia,
icterus, purpura). Antihistamines may be of value in urticarial and
angioneurotic reactions. Epinephrine 1:1000, 0.5–1 mL
intravenously or subcutaneously, should be used as an emergency
measure. In complex eruptions, systemic corticosteroids may be
required, starting at about 1 mg/kg/d and tapering very slowly.
B. Local Measures
Extensive blistering eruptions resulting in erosions and superficial
ulcerations demand hospitalization and nursing care as for burn
patients.
 Prognosis
Drug rash usually disappears upon withdrawal of the drug and
proper treatment. Drug hypersensitivity syndromes may be
associated with autoimmune phenomena, including abnormal thyroid
function. This can occur months after the hypersensitivity syndrome
has resolved.
Bahna SL et al. New concepts in the management of adverse drug
reactions. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2007 Sep–Oct;28(5): 517–24.
[PMID: 18034968]
 
Bircher AJ et al. Delayed cutaneous manifestations of drug
hypersensitivity. Med Clin North Am. 2010 Jul;94(4):711–25.
[PMID: 20609859]
 
Brown RJ et al. Minocycline-induced drug hypersensitivity
syndrome followed by multiple autoimmune sequelae. Arch
Dermatol. 2009 Jan;145(1):63–6. [PMID: 19153345]
 
Chung WH et al. Genetic predisposition of life-threatening
antiepileptic-induced skin reactions. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2010
Jan;9(1):15–21. [PMID: 20001755]
 
Cornejo-Garcia JA et al. Hypersensitivity reactions to non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Curr Drug Metab. 2009
Nov;10(9):971–80. [PMID: 20214589]
 
Ferrell et al. Carbamazepine, HLA-B* 1502 and risk of Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: US FDA
recommendations. Pharmacogenomics. 2008 Oct;9(10): 1543–6.
[PMID: 18855540]
 
Harr T et al. Severe cutaneous adverse reactions: acute
generalized exanthematous pustulosis, toxic epidermal necrolysis
and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Jul;94(4):727–42. [PMID: 20609860]
 
Limsuwan T et al. Acute symptoms of drug hypersensitivity
(urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis, anaphylactic shock). Med Clin
North Am. 2010 Jul;94(4):691–710. [PMID: 20609858]
 
Lonjou C et al. A European study of HLA-B in Stevens-Johnson
syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis related to five high-risk
drugs. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2008 Feb;18(2): 99–107.
[PMID: 18192896]
 
Tassaneeyakul W et al. Strong association between HLAB*5801
and allopurinol-induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis in a Thai population. Pharmacogenet
Genomics. 2009 Sep;19(9):704–9. [PMID: 19696695]
 
Vitezica ZG et al. HLA-DRB1*01 associated with cutaneous
hypersensitivity induced by nevirapine and efavirenz. AIDS. 2008
Feb 19;22(4):540–1. [PMID: 18301070]
 
Ward KE et al. Severe adverse skin reactions to nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs: a review of the literature. Am J Health Syst
Pharm. 2010 Feb 1;67(3):206–13. [PMID: 20101062]
 
 
 
Disorders of the
Eyes & Lids
Paul Riordan-Eva, FRCS, FRCOphth
REFRACTIVE ERRORS
Refractive errors are the most common cause of reduced clarity of
vision (visual acuity) and may be a readily treatable component of
poor vision in patients with other diagnoses. In the normal state
(emmetropia), objects at infinity are seen clearly. Focusing on
objects nearer than infinity requires an increase in the refractive
power of the crystalline lens by the process of accommodation. In
farsightedness (hyperopia), objects at infinity are not seen clearly
unless accommodation is used, and near objects may not be seen
because accommodative capacity is finite. Farsightedness is
corrected with plus (convex) lenses. In nearsightedness (myopia),
the unaccommodated eye focuses on objects closer than infinity.
The markedly nearsighted eye is able to focus on very near objects
without glasses. Objects beyond this distance cannot be seen
without the aid of corrective (minus, concave) lenses.
Astigmatism, in which the refractive errors in the horizontal and
vertical axes differ, is corrected with cylindrical lenses. Presbyopia
is the natural loss of accommodative capacity with age. Persons
with emmetropia usually notice inability to focus on objects at a
normal reading distance at about age 45. Farsighted individuals
experience symptoms at an earlier age. Presbyopia is corrected
with plus lenses for near work.
Use of a pinhole will overcome most refractive errors and thus
allows their identification as a cause of reduced visual acuity.
1. Contact Lenses
Contact lenses are used mostly for correction of refractive errors,
for which they provide better optical correction than glasses, as well
as for management of diseases of the cornea, conjunctiva, or lids.
The major types of lenses are rigid (gas-permeable) and soft. Rigid
lenses, which need to be removed each day, are more durable and
easier to care for than soft lenses but are more difficult to tolerate.
Usually removed each day, soft lenses are available for extended
wear. Disposable soft lenses to be renewed daily, or less frequently
(up to monthly), are available.
Contact lens care includes cleaning and sterilization whenever the
lenses are to be reused and removal of protein deposits as required.
Sterilization is usually by chemical methods. For individuals
developing reactions to preservatives in contact lens solutions,
preservative-free systems are available.
The major risk from contact lens wear is bacterial, amebic, or
fungal corneal infection, potentially a blinding condition. Such
infections occur more commonly with soft lenses, particularly
extended wear, for which there is at least a fivefold increase in risk
of corneal ulceration compared with daily wear, and with certain
contact lens solutions. Contact lens wearers should be made aware
of the risks they face and ways to minimize them, such as avoiding
overnight wear and maintaining meticulous lens hygiene, including
not using tap water or saliva for lens cleaning. Whenever there is
ocular discomfort or redness, contact lenses should be removed.
Ophthalmologic care should be sought if symptoms persist.
 When to Refer
Any contact lens wearer with an acute painful red eye must be
referred emergently to an ophthalmologist.
Cavanagh HD et al. Castroviejo Lecture 2009: 40 years in search
of the perfect contact lens. Cornea. 2010 Oct;29(10):1075–85.
[PMID: 20622672]
 
Jeng BH et al. Epidemiology of ulcerative keratitis in Northern
California. Arch Ophthalmol. 2010 Aug:128(8):1022–8. [PMID:
20697003]
 
2. Surgical Correction
Various surgical techniques are available for the correction of
refractive errors, particularly nearsightedness. Laser corneal
refractive surgery reshapes the mid-portion (stroma) of the cornea
with an excimer laser. Laser assisted in situ keratomileusis
(LASIK), 
including 
femtosecond 
laser 
assisted 
LASIK
(IntraLASIK), and the surface ablation techniques epithelial LASIK
(Epi-LASIK), laser epithelial keratomileusis (LASEK), and
photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) differ according to how access
to the stroma is achieved. LASIK is most commonly performed
because postoperative visual recovery is rapid and there is little
postoperative discomfort, but it is contraindicated if the cornea is
relatively thin. Approximately 16 million procedures have been
performed worldwide with > 90% patient satisfaction after primary
surgery. However, outcomes for individual cases are not completely
predictable. It has been reported that repeated treatment is required
in up to 15% of patients and serious complications occur in up to
5%. Other refractive surgery techniques are extraction of the clear
crystalline lens with insertion of a single vision, multifocal or
accommodative intraocular lens, insertion of an intraocular lens
without removal of the crystalline lens (phakic intraocular lens),
intrastromal corneal ring segments (INTACS), and conductive
keratoplasty (CK). Topical atropine and pirenzepine, a selective
muscarinic antagonist, and rigid contact lens wear during sleep
(orthokeratology) are also being investigated for nearsightedness.
Messmer JJ. LASIK: a primer for family physicians. Am Fam
Physician. 2010 Jan;81(1):42–7. [PMID: 20052962]
 
O'Keefe M et al. Laser epithelial keratomileusis in 2010–a review.
Clin Experiment Ophthalmol. 2010 Mar;38(2):183–91. [PMID:
20398107]
 
Reynolds A et al. Excimer laser surface ablation–a review. Clin
Experiment Ophthalmol. 2010 Mar;38(2):168–82. [PMID:
20398106]
 
Sutton GL et al. Laser in situ keratomileusis in 2010–a review. Clin
Experiment Ophthalmol. 2010 Mar;38(2):192–210. [PMID:
20398108]
 
DISORDERS OF THE LIDS & LACRIMAL APPARATUS
1. Hordeolum
Hordeolum is a common staphylococcal abscess that is
characterized by a localized red, swollen, acutely tender area on the
upper or lower lid (Figure 7–1). Internal hordeolum is a meibomian
gland abscess that usually points onto the conjunctival surface of the
lid; external hordeolum or sty is smaller and on the margin.
Figure 7–1. External hordeolum (black arrow) and chalazion
(white arrow), which developed from an internal hordeolum.
(Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Warm compresses are helpful. Incision may be indicated if
resolution does not begin within 48 hours. An antibiotic ointment
(bacitracin or erythromycin) applied to the eyelid every 3 hours may
be beneficial during the acute stage. Internal hordeolum may lead to
generalized cellulitis of the lid.
2. Chalazion
Chalazion is a common granulomatous inflammation of a meibomian
gland that may follow an internal hordeolum (Figure 7–1). It is
characterized by a hard, nontender swelling on the upper or lower
lid with redness and swelling of the adjacent conjunctiva. If the
chalazion is large enough to impress the cornea, vision will be
distorted. Treatment is usually by incision and curettage but
corticosteroid injection may also be effective.
Gilchrist H et al. Management of chalazia in general practice. Aust
Fam Physician. 2009 May;38(5):311–4. [PMID: 19458801]
 
3. Blepharitis
Blepharitis is a common chronic bilateral inflammatory condition of
the lid margins. Anterior blepharitis involves the eyelid skin,
eyelashes, and associated glands. It may be ulcerative, because of
infection by staphylococci, or seborrheic in association with
seborrhea of the scalp, brows, and ears. Posterior blepharitis
results from inflammation of the meibomian glands. There may be
bacterial infection, particularly with staphylococci, or primary
glandular dysfunction, in which there is a strong association with
acne rosacea.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms are irritation, burning, and itching. In anterior
blepharitis, the eyes are “red-rimmed,” and scales or granulations
can be seen clinging to the lashes. In posterior blepharitis, the lid
margins are hyperemic with telangiectasias; the meibomian glands
and their orifices are inflamed, with dilation of the glands, plugging
of the orifices, and abnormal secretions. The lid margin is frequently
rolled inward to produce a mild entropion, and the tears may be
frothy or abnormally greasy.
Blepharitis is a common cause of recurrent conjunctivitis. Both
anterior and, more particularly, posterior blepharitis may be
complicated by hordeola or chalazions; abnormal lid or lash
positions, producing trichiasis; epithelial keratitis of the lower third
of the cornea; marginal corneal infiltrates; and inferior corneal
vascularization and thinning.
 Treatment
Anterior blepharitis is usually controlled by cleanliness of the lid
margins, eyebrows, and scalp. Scales should be removed from the
lids daily with a hot wash cloth or a damp cotton applicator and
baby shampoo. In acute exacerbations, an antistaphylococcal
antibiotic eye ointment such as bacitracin or erythromycin is applied
daily to the lid margins. Antibiotic sensitivity studies may be helpful
in severe cases.
I n mild posterior blepharitis, regular meibomian gland
expression may be sufficient to control symptoms. Inflammation of
the conjunctiva and cornea indicates a need for more active
treatment, including long-term low-dose oral antibiotic therapy,
usually with tetracycline (250 mg twice daily), doxycycline (100 mg
daily), minocycline (50–100 mg daily) or erythromycin (250 mg
three times daily), and possibly short-term topical corticosteroids,
eg, prednisolone, 0.125% twice daily. Topical therapy with
antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin 0.3% ophthalmic solution twice
daily may be helpful but should be restricted to short courses.
4. Entropion & Ectropion
Entropion (inward turning of usually the lower lid) occurs
occasionally in older people as a result of degeneration of the lid
fascia, or may follow extensive scarring of the conjunctiva and
tarsus. Surgery is indicated if the lashes rub on the cornea.
Botulinum toxin injections may also be used for temporary
correction of the involutional lower eyelid entropion of older people.
Ectropion (outward turning of the lower lid) is common with
advanced age. Surgery is indicated if there is excessive tearing,
exposure keratitis, or a cosmetic problem.
5. Tumors
Eyelid tumors are usually benign. Basal cell carcinoma is the most
common malignant tumor. Squamous cell carcinoma, meibomian
gland carcinoma, and malignant melanoma also occur. Surgery for
any lesion involving the lid margin should be performed by an
ophthalmologist or suitably trained plastic surgeon to avoid
deformity of the lid. Otherwise, small lesions can often be excised
by the nonophthalmologist. Histopathologic examination of eyelid
tumors should be routine, since 2% of lesions thought to be benign
clinically are found to be malignant. The Mohs technique of
intraoperative examination of excised tissue is particularly valuable
in ensuring complete excision so that the risk of recurrence is
reduced.
Bernardini FP. Management of malignant and benign eyelid lesions.
Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2006 Oct;17(5):480–4. [PMID:
16932064]
 
6. Dacryocystitis
Dacryocystitis is infection of the lacrimal sac due to obstruction of
the nasolacrimal system. It may be acute or chronic and occurs
most often in infants and in persons over 40 years. It is usually
unilateral.
The usual infectious organisms are Staphylococcus aureus and
β-hemolytic streptococci in acute dacryocystitis and S epidermidis,
anaerobic 
streptococci, 
or Candida albicans in chronic
dacryocystitis.
Acute dacryocystitis is characterized by pain, swelling,
tenderness, and redness in the tear sac area; purulent material may
be expressed. In chronic dacryocystitis, tearing and discharge are
the principal signs, and mucus or pus may also be expressed.
Acute dacryocystitis responds well to systemic antibiotic therapy.
Surgical relief of the underlying obstruction is usually done electively
but may be performed urgently in acute cases. The chronic form
may be kept latent with antibiotics, but relief of the obstruction is the
only cure. In adults, the standard procedure for obstruction of the
lacrimal drainage system is dacryocystorhinostomy, which involves
surgical exploration of the lacrimal sac and formation of a fistula into
the nasal cavity; if necessary, the procedure can be supplemented
by 
nasolacrimal 
intubation. 
Laser-assisted 
endoscopic
dacryocystorhinostomy and balloon dilation or probing of the
nasolacrimal system are alternatives. Congenital nasolacrimal duct
obstruction is common and often resolves spontaneously. It can be
treated by probing of the nasolacrimal system and supplemented by
nasolacrimal intubation or balloon catheter dilation, if necessary.
Dacryocystorhinostomy is rarely required.
Eichhorn K et al. External vs. endonasal dacryocystorhinosotomy:
six of one, a half dozen of the other? Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2010
Sep;21(5):396–403. [PMID: 20651593]
 
Lee DW et al. Primary external dacryocystorhinostomy versus
primary endonasal dacryocystorhinostomy: a review. Clin
Experiment Ophthalmol. 2010 May;38(4):418–26. [PMID:
20665987]
 
CONJUNCTIVITIS
Conjunctivitis is the most common eye disease. It may be acute or
chronic. Most cases are due to viral or bacterial (including
gonococcal and chlamydial) infection. Other causes include
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, allergy, chemical irritants, and deliberate
self-harm. The mode of transmission of infectious conjunctivitis is
usually direct contact via fingers, towels, handkerchiefs, etc, to the
fellow eye or to other persons. It may be through contaminated eye
drops.
Conjunctivitis must be differentiated from acute uveitis, acute
glaucoma, and corneal disorders (Table 7–1).
1. Viral Conjunctivitis
Adenovirus is the most common cause of viral conjunctivitis. There
is usually bilateral disease with copious watery discharge, often with
marked foreign body sensation, and a follicular conjunctivitis.
Infection spreads easily. Eye clinics and contaminated swimming
pools are sometimes the source of infection. Epidemic
keratoconjunctivitis, which may result in visual loss due to corneal
subepithelial infiltrates, is usually caused by adenovirus types 8, 19,
and 37. The disease lasts at least 2 weeks. Infection with
adenovirus types 3, 4, 7, and 11 is typically associated with
pharyngitis, fever, malaise, and preauricular adenopathy
(pharyngoconjunctival fever). The disease usually lasts 10 days.
Viral conjunctivitis may also be due to herpes simplex virus (HSV),
when it is usually unilateral and may be associated with lid vesicles,
and enterovirus 70 or coxsackievirus A24 that characteristically
cause acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (see Chapter 32).
 
Table 7–1. The inflamed eye: Differential diagnosis of common
causes.
 
Except for HSV infection for which topical or systemic antivirals
may be prescribed, there is no specific treatment. Cold compresses
reduce discomfort and topical sulfonamides (or other antibiotics)
can be prescribed to prevent secondary bacterial infection. The
value of weak topical corticosteroids or topical cyclosporine for
corneal infiltrates due to adenoviral infection is uncertain.
2. Bacterial Conjunctivitis
The organisms isolated most commonly in bacterial conjunctivitis
are staphylococci, streptococci (particularly S pneumoniae),
Haemophilus species, Pseudomonas, and Moraxella. All may
produce a copious purulent discharge. There is no blurring of vision
and only mild discomfort. In severe cases, examination of stained
conjunctival scrapings and cultures is recommended.
The disease is usually self-limited, lasting about 10–14 days if
untreated. Topical sulfonamide (eg, sulfacetamide, 10% ophthalmic
solution or ointment three times a day) will usually clear the infection
in 2–3 days but the need for antibacterial therapy is disputed. The
use of topical fluoroquinolones is rarely justified for treatment of a
generally self-limiting, benign infection.
Tarabishy AB et al. Bacterial conjunctivitis: a review for internists.
Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Jul;75(7):507–12. [PMID: 18646586]
 
A. Gonococcal Conjunctivitis
Gonococcal conjunctivitis, usually acquired through contact with
infected genital secretions, typically causes copious purulent
discharge. It is an ophthalmologic emergency because corneal
involvement may rapidly lead to perforation. The diagnosis should
be confirmed by stained smear and culture of the discharge. A
single 1-g dose of intramuscular ceftriaxone is usually adequate.
(Fluoroquinolone resistance is common.) Topical antibiotics such as
erythromycin and bacitracin may be added. Other sexually
transmitted diseases, including chlamydiosis, syphilis, and HIV
infection, should be considered.
B. Chlamydial Keratoconjunctivitis
1. Trachoma—Trachoma is the most common infectious cause of
blindness worldwide, with approximately 40 million people affected
and 1.3 million with profound vision loss. Recurrent episodes of
infection in childhood manifest as bilateral follicular conjunctivitis,
epithelial keratitis, and corneal vascularization (pannus).
Cicatrization of the tarsal conjunctiva leads to entropion and
trichiasis in adulthood, with secondary central corneal scarring.
Immunologic tests or polymerase chain reaction on conjunctival
samples will confirm the diagnosis but treatment should be started
on the basis of clinical findings. Single-dose therapy with oral
azithromycin, 20 mg/kg, is the preferred drug treatment but
improvements in hygiene and living conditions probably have
contributed more to the marked reduction in the prevalence of
trachoma during the past 25 years. Local treatment is not
necessary. Surgical treatment includes correction of eyelid
deformities and corneal transplantation.
2. Inclusion conjunctivitis—The agent of inclusion conjunctivitis is
a common cause of genital tract disease in adults. The eye is usually
involved following contact with genital secretions. The disease starts
with acute redness, discharge, and irritation. The eye findings
consist of follicular conjunctivitis with mild keratitis. A nontender
preauricular lymph node can often be palpated. Healing usually
leaves no sequelae. Diagnosis can be rapidly confirmed by
immunologic tests or polymerase chain reaction on conjunctival
samples. Treatment is with a single-dose of azithromycin, 1 g orally.
Before treatment, all cases should be assessed for genital tract
infection so that management can be adjusted accordingly, and
other venereal diseases sought.
3. Dry Eyes (Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca)
This is a common disorder, particularly in older women.
Hypofunction of the lacrimal glands, causing loss of the aqueous
component of tears, may be due to aging, hereditary disorders,
systemic disease (eg, Sjögren syndrome), or systemic drugs.
Excessive evaporation of tears may be due to environmental factors
(eg, a hot, dry, or windy climate) or abnormalities of the lipid
component of the tear film, as in blepharitis. Mucin deficiency may
be due to vitamin A deficiency, or conjunctival scarring from
trachoma, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and related conditions,
mucous membrane pemphigoid, burns, or topical drugs or their
preservatives.
 Clinical Findings
The patient complains of dryness, redness, or foreign body
sensation. In severe cases, there is persistent marked discomfort,
with photophobia, difficulty in moving the eyelids, and often
excessive mucus secretion. In many cases, inspection reveals no
abnormality, but on slit-lamp examination there are subtle
abnormalities of tear film stability and reduced volume of the tear
film meniscus along the lower lid. In more severe cases, damaged
corneal and conjunctival cells stain with 1% rose bengal. In the most
severe cases, there is marked conjunctival injection, loss of the
normal conjunctival and corneal luster, epithelial keratitis that may
progress to frank ulceration, and mucous strands. Schirmer test,
which measures the rate of production of the aqueous component of
tears, may be helpful.
 Treatment
Aqueous deficiency can be treated with various types of artificial
tears. The simplest preparations are physiologic (0.9%) or hypo-
osmotic (0.45%) solutions of sodium chloride, which can be used
as frequently as every half-hour, but in most cases are needed only
three or four times a day. More prolonged duration of action can be
achieved with drop preparations containing methylcellulose,
polyvinyl alcohol, or polyacrylic acid (carbomers) or by using
petrolatum ointment or a hydroxypropyl cellulose (Lacrisert) insert.
Such mucomimetics are particularly indicated when there is mucin
deficiency. If there is tenacious mucus, mucolytic agents (eg,
acetylcysteine, 20% one drop six times daily) may be helpful.
Autologous serum eye drops are used for severe dry eyes.
Presumably due to its effects on ocular surface and lacrimal gland
inflammation, cyclosporine (0.05% ophthalmic emulsion [Restasis]
twice a day) has been shown to be beneficial in moderate and
severe dry eyes with few adverse effects even in individuals treated
for up to 4 years.
Lacrimal punctal occlusion by canalicular plugs or surgery is
useful in severe cases. Blepharitis is treated as described above.
Associated blepharospasm may benefit from botulinum toxin
injections.
Artificial tear preparations are generally very safe and without
side effects. Preservatives included in some preparations to maintain
sterility are potentially toxic and allergenic and may cause keratitis
and cicatrizing conjunctivitis in frequent users. The development of
such reactions may be misinterpreted by both the patient and the
clinician as a worsening of the dry eye state requiring more frequent
use of the artificial tears and leading in turn to further deterioration,
rather than being recognized as a need to change to a preservative-
free preparation.
Donnenfeld E et al. Topical ophthalmic cyclosporine:
pharmacology and clinical uses. Surv Ophthalmol. 2009 May–Jun;
54(3):321–38. [PMID: 19422961]
 
Tavares Fde P et al. Dry eye disease. Semin Ophthalmol. 2010
May;25(3):84–93. [PMID: 20590418]
 
4. Allergic Eye Disease
Allergic eye disease is common and takes a number of different
forms but all are expressions of atopy, which may also manifest as
atopic asthma, atopic dermatitis, or allergic rhinitis.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms include itching, tearing, redness, stringy discharge and,
occasionally, photophobia and visual loss.
Allergic conjunctivitis is a benign disease, occurring usually in
late childhood and early adulthood. It may be seasonal (hay fever),
developing usually during the spring or summer, or perennial.
Clinical signs are limited to conjunctival hyper-emia and edema
(chemosis), the latter at times being marked and sudden in onset.
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis also tends to occur in late childhood
and early adulthood. It is usually seasonal, with a predilection for
the spring. Large “cobble-stone” papillae are noted on the upper
tarsal conjunctiva. There may be lymphoid follicles at the limbus.
Atopic keratoconjunctivitis is a more chronic disorder of
adulthood. Both the upper and the lower tarsal conjunctivas exhibit
a fine papillary conjunctivitis with fibrosis, resulting in forniceal
shortening and entropion with trichiasis. Staphylococcal blepharitis
is a complicating factor. Corneal involvement, including refractory
ulceration, is frequent during exacerbations of both vernal and
atopic keratoconjunctivitis. The latter may be complicated by
herpes simplex keratitis.
 Treatment
A. Mild and Moderately Severe Allergic Eye Disease
Treatments include topical histamine H1-receptor antagonist (Table
7–2), such as levocabastine hydrochloride 0.05% or emedastine
difumarate 0.05%, or ketorolac tromethamine 0.5%, a nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agent, four times daily. Ketotifen 0.025% two to
four times daily and bepotastine 1.5% twice daily, have histamine
H1-receptor antagonist, mast cell stabilizer, and eosinophil inhibitor
activity. Olopatadine, 0.2% once daily or 0.1% twice daily;
azelastine, 0.05% twice daily; and epinastine, 0.05% twice daily
reduce symptoms by similar mechanisms. Topical mast cell
stabilizers, such as cromolyn sodium 4% or lodoxamide
tromethamine 0.1%, applied four times daily, or nedocromil sodium
2%, applied twice daily, produce longer-term prophylaxis but the
therapeutic response may be delayed. Topical vasoconstrictors and
antihistamines are of limited efficacy in allergic eye disease and may
produce rebound hyperemia and follicular conjunctivitis. Systemic
antihistamines (eg, loratadine 10 mg orally daily) may be useful in
prolonged atopic keratoconjunctivitis. In allergic conjunctivitis,
p
g
p
j
g
j
,
specific allergens may be avoidable. In vernal keratoconjunctivitis, a
cooler climate often provides significant benefit.
 
Table 7–2. Topical ophthalmic agents.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book, 2010, Thomas Reuters (Healthcare) Inc.
AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide
contractual variations exist among institutions.
2Many combination products containing antibacterials or antibacterials
and corticosteroids are available.
3Little efficacy against gram-negative organisms (except Neisseria).
4Aplastic anemia has been reported with prolonged ophthalmic use.
5Also indicated for prophylaxis of neonatal conjunctivitis due to Neisseria
gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis.
6No gram-positive coverage.
7May produce rebound hyperemia and local reactions.
8Cross-sensitivity to aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.
9Long-term use increases intraocular pressure, causes cataracts and
predisposes to bacterial, herpes simplex virus, and fungal keratitis.
10Less likely to elevate intraocular pressure.
11Macular edema occurs in 30% of patients.
12Cardioselective (β1) β-blocker.
13Teoptic is not available in the United States.
14Nonselective (β1 and β2) β-blocker. Monitor all patients for systemic
side effects, particularly exacerbation of asthma.
15Decreased night vision, headaches possible.
B. Acute Exacerbations and Severe Allergic Eye Disease
Topical corticosteroids (Table 7-2) are essential to the control of
acute exacerbations of both vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis.
Corticosteroid-induced side effects, including cataracts, glaucoma,
and exacerbation of herpes simplex keratitis, are major problems
but may be attenuated by the ester corticosteroid, loteprednol
0.5%. Topical cyclosporine or tacrolimus is also effective. Systemic
corticosteroid or other immunosuppressant therapy and even
plasmapheresis 
may 
be 
required 
in 
severe 
atopic
keratoconjunctivitis.
Bielory B et al. Atopic dermatitis and keratoconjunctivitis.
Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2010 Aug;30(3):323–36.
[PMID: 20670816]
 
Guglielmetti S et al. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis and atopic
dermatitis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Oct;10(5):
478–85. [PMID: 20720488]
 
Kumar S et al. Modern approach to managing vernal
keratoconjunctivitis. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2010
May;10(3):155–62. [PMID: 20425012]
 
PINGUECULA & PTERYGIUM
Pinguecula is a yellow elevated conjunctival nodule, more
commonly on the nasal side, in the area of the palpebral fissure. It is
common in persons over age 35 years. Pterygium is a fleshy,
triangular encroachment of the conjunctiva onto the nasal side of the
cornea and is usually associated with constant exposure to wind,
sun, sand, and dust (Figure 7–2). Pinguecula and pterygium are
often bilateral.
Pingueculae rarely grow but may become inflamed (pingueculitis).
Pterygia become inflamed and may grow. No treatment is usually
required for inflammation of pinguecula or pterygium, but artificial
tears are often beneficial, and short courses of topical nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents or weak corticosteroids (prednisolone,
0.125% three times a day) may be necessary.
Figure 7–2. A medial pterygium extending to the cornea.
(Courtesy of Paul D. Corneau; used, with permission, from Usatine
RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
The indications for excision of pterygium are growth that
threatens vision by encroaching on the visual axis, marked induced
astigmatism, or severe ocular irritation. Recurrence is common and
often more aggressive than the primary lesion.
CORNEAL ULCER
Corneal ulcers are most commonly due to infection by bacteria,
viruses, fungi, or amebas. Noninfectious causes—all of which may
be complicated by infection—include neurotrophic keratitis
(resulting from loss of corneal sensation), exposure keratitis (due to
inadequate eyelid closure), severe dry eyes, severe allergic eye
disease, and various inflammatory disorders that may be purely
ocular or part of a systemic vasculitis. Delayed or ineffective
treatment of corneal infection may lead to devastating consequences
with corneal scarring or intraocular infection. Prompt referral is
essential.
Patients complain of pain, photophobia, tearing, and reduced
vision. The eye is red, with predominantly circumcorneal injection,
and there may be purulent or watery discharge. The corneal
appearance varies according to the organisms involved.
 When to Refer
Any patient with an acute painful red eye and corneal abnormality
should be referred emergently to an ophthalmologist.
1. Bacterial Keratitis
Bacterial keratitis usually pursues an aggressive course. Precipitating
factors include contact lens wear—especially overnight wear—and
corneal trauma, including refractive surgery. The pathogens most
commonly 
isolated 
are Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa,
Pneumococcus, Moraxella 
species, and staphylococci. The
cornea is hazy, with a central ulcer and adjacent stromal abscess.
Hypopyon is often present. The ulcer is scraped to recover material
for Gram stain and culture prior to starting treatment with high-
concentration topical antibiotic drops applied hourly day and night
for at least the first 48 hours. Fluoroquinolones such as levofloxacin
0.5%, ofloxacin 0.3%, norfloxacin 0.3%, or ciprofloxacin 0.3% are
commonly used as first-line agents as long as local prevalence of
resistant organisms is low (Table 7–2). The fourth-generation
fluoroquinolones (moxifloxacin 0.5% and gatifloxacin 0.3% [not
available in the United States]), are also active against mycobacteria
but otherwise may not be preferable. Gram-positive cocci can also
be treated with a cephalosporin such as fortified cefazolin 10%; and
gram-negative bacilli can be treated with an aminoglycoside such as
fortified tobramycin 1.5%. If no organisms are seen on Gram stain,
these two agents can be used together in areas where resistance to
fluoroquinolones is common. Adjunctive topical corticosteroid
therapy should only be prescribed by an ophthalmologist.
 When to Refer
Any patient with suspected bacterial keratitis must be referred
emergently to an ophthalmologist.
Jeng BH et al. Epidemiology of ulcerative keratitis in Northern
California. Arch Ophthalmol. 2010 Aug;128(8):1022–8. [PMID:
20697003]
 
2. Herpes Simplex Keratitis
Herpes simplex keratitis is an important cause of ocular morbidity.
The ability of the virus to colonize the trigeminal ganglion leads to
recurrences that may be precipitated by fever, excessive exposure
to sunlight, or immunodeficiency.
The dendritic (branching) ulcer is the most characteristic
manifestation. More extensive (“geographic”) ulcers also occur,
particularly if topical corticosteroids have been used. These ulcers
are most easily seen after instillation of fluorescein and examination
with a blue light. Such epithelial disease in itself does not lead to
corneal scarring. It responds well to simple debridement and
patching. More rapid healing can be achieved by the addition of
topical antivirals, such as trifluridine drops, ganciclovir gel, or
acyclovir ointment (Table 7–2), or oral antivirals, such as acyclovir,
400 mg five times daily. Long-term oral acyclovir, 400 mg twice
daily, or valacyclovir, 500 mg once daily, reduces the rate of
recurrent epithelial disease, particularly in atopic individuals.
Stromal herpes simplex keratitis produces increasingly severe
corneal opacity with each recurrence. Topical antivirals alone are
insufficient to control stromal disease. Thus, topical corticosteroids
are used in combination, but steroid dependence is a common
consequence. Corticosteroids may also enhance viral replication,
exacerbating epithelial disease. Oral acyclovir, 200–400 mg five
times a day, is often helpful in the treatment of severe herpetic
keratitis. The role of topical cyclosporine is being determined.
Severe stromal scarring may require corneal grafting, but the overall
outcome is relatively poor. Caution: For patients with known or
possible herpetic disease, topical corticosteroids should be
prescribed only with ophthalmologic supervision.
 When to Refer
Any patient with a history of herpes simplex keratitis and an acute
red eye should be referred urgently to an ophthalmologist.
Wilhelmus KR. Antiviral treatment and other therapeutic
interventions for herpes simplex virus epithelial keratitis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2010 Dec 8;12:CD002898. [PMID:
21154352]
 
Young RC et al. Incidence, recurrence, and outcomes of herpes
simplex virus eye disease in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1976–
2007: the effect of oral antiviral prophylaxis. Arch Ophthalmol.
2010 Sep;128(9):1178–83. [PMID: 20837803]
 
3. Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus
Herpes zoster frequently involves the ophthalmic division of the
trigeminal nerve. It presents with malaise, fever, headache, and
periorbital burning and itching. These symptoms may precede the
eruption by a day or more. The rash is initially vesicular, quickly
becoming pustular and then crusting. Involvement of the tip of the
nose or the lid margins predicts involvement of the eye. Ocular signs
include conjunctivitis, keratitis, episcleritis, and anterior uveitis, often
with elevated intraocular pressure. Recurrent anterior segment
inflammation, neurotrophic keratitis, and posterior subcapsular
cataract are long-term complications. Optic neuropathy, cranial
nerve palsies, acute retinal necrosis, and cerebral angiitis occur
infrequently. HIV infection is an important risk factor for herpes
zoster ophthalmicus and increases the likelihood of complications.
High-dose oral acyclovir (800 mg five times a day), valacyclovir
(1 g three times a day), or famciclovir (250–500 mg three times a
day) started within 72 hours after the appearance of the rash
reduces the incidence of ocular complications but not of
postherpetic neuralgia. Anterior uveitis requires treatment with
topical corticosteroids and cycloplegics. Neurotrophic keratitis is an
important cause of long-term morbidity.
 When to Refer
Any patient with herpes zoster ophthalmicus and ocular symptoms
or signs should be referred urgently to an ophthalmologist.
Adam RS et al. Triaging herpes zoster ophthalmicus patients in the
emergency department: do all patients require referral? Acad
Emerg Med. 2010 Nov;17(11):1183–8. [PMID: 21175516]
 
Chen N et al. Corticosteroids for preventing postherpetic
neuralgia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Dec
8;12:CD005582. [PMID: 21154361]
 
Lam FC et al. Herpes zoster ophthalmicus. BMJ. 2009 Aug
13;339:457–8. [PMID: 19679612]
 
4. Fungal Keratitis
Fungal keratitis tends to occur after corneal injury involving plant
material or in an agricultural setting, in eyes with chronic ocular
surface disease, and increasingly in contact lens wearers. It is
usually an indolent process, with the cornea characteristically having
multiple stromal abscesses and relatively little epithelial loss.
Intraocular infection is common. Corneal scrapings are cultured on
media suitable for fungi whenever the history or corneal appearance
is suggestive of fungal disease. Diagnosis is often delayed and
treatment is difficult. Natamycin 5%, amphotericin 0.1-0.5%, and
voriconazole 1% are the most commonly used topical agents.
Systemic imidazoles may be helpful. Corneal grafting is often
required.
Vaddavalli PK et al. Role of confocal microscopy in the diagnosis
of fungal and Acanthamoeba keratitis. Ophthalmology. 2011
Jan;118(1):29–35. [PMID: 20801515]
 
Yildiz EH et al. Update on fungal keratitis from 1999 to 2008.
Cornea. 2010 Dec;29(12):1406–11. [PMID: 20847685]
 
5. Acanthamoeba Keratitis
Acanthamoeba infection is an important cause of keratitis in contact
lens wearers. Although severe pain with perineural and ring
infiltrates in the corneal stroma is characteristic, earlier forms with
changes confined to the corneal epithelium are identifiable.
Diagnosis is facilitated by confocal microscopy. Culture requires
specialized media. Treatment is hampered by the organism's ability
to encyst within the corneal stroma. Topical biguanides are
probably the only effective primary treatment. Topical
corticosteroids may be beneficial. Corneal grafting may be required
after resolution of infection to restore vision. Systemic anti-
inflammatory therapy is helpful if there is scleral involvement.
Dart JK et al. Acanthamoeba keratitis: diagnosis and treatment
update 2009. Am J Ophthalmol. 2009 Oct;148(4):487–99.
[PMID: 19660733]
 
Qian Y et al. Clinical experience with Acanthamoeba keratitis at
the Cole Eye Institute, 1999–2008. Cornea. 2010 Sep;29(9):
1016–21. [PMID: 20539213]
 
ACUTE ANGLE-CLOSURE GLAUCOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Older age group, particularly farsighted individuals.
 Rapid onset of severe pain and profound visual loss with “halos
around lights.”
 Red eye, steamy cornea, dilated pupil.
 Hard eye to palpation.
 
 General Considerations
Primary acute angle-closure glaucoma occurs only with closure of a
preexisting narrow anterior chamber angle, for which the
predisposing factors are age, owing to enlargement of the crystalline
lens; farsightedness; and inheritance, being particularly prevalent
among Asians and Inuits. It may be precipitated by pupillary dilation
and thus can occur from sitting in a darkened theater, during times
of stress, following nonocular administration of anticholinergic or
sympathomimetic agents (eg, nebulized bronchodilators, atropine
for preoperative medication, antidepressants, bowel or bladder
antispasmodics, nasal decongestants, or tocolytics) or, rarely, from
pharmacologic mydriasis (see Precautions in Management of Ocular
Disorders, below). Secondary acute angle-closure glaucoma may
occur in anterior uveitis, dislocation of the lens, or topiramate
therapy. Symptoms are the same as in primary acute angle-closure
glaucoma, but differentiation is important because of differences in
management. Chronic angle-closure glaucoma is particularly
common in eastern Asia. It presents in the same way as open-angle
glaucoma (see below).
 Clinical Findings
Patients with acute glaucoma usually seek treatment immediately
because of extreme pain and blurred vision, though there are
subacute cases. The blurred vision is associated with halos around
lights. Nausea and abdominal pain may occur. The eye is red, the
cornea steamy, and the pupil moderately dilated and nonreactive to
light. Intraocular pressure is usually over 50 mm Hg, producing a
hard eye on palpation.
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute glaucoma must be differentiated from conjunctivitis, acute
uveitis, and corneal disorders (Table 7–1).
 Treatment
A. Primary
Initial treatment in primary angle-closure glaucoma is reduction of
intraocular pressure. A single 500-mg intravenous dose of
acetazolamide, followed by 250 mg orally four times a day, is
usually sufficient. Osmotic diuretics such as oral glycerin and
intravenous urea or mannitol—the dosage of all three being 1–2
g/kg—may be necessary if there is no response to acetazolamide.
Laser therapy to the peripheral iris (iridoplasty) or anterior chamber
paracentesis is also effective. Once the intraocular pressure has
started to fall, topical 4% pilocarpine, 1 drop every 15 minutes for
1 hour and then four times a day, is used to reverse the underlying
angle closure. The definitive treatment is laser peripheral iridotomy
or surgical peripheral iridectomy. Cataract extraction is a possible
alternative. If it is not possible to control the intraocular pressure
medically, glaucoma drainage surgery as for uncontrolled open-
angle glaucoma (see below) may be required.
All patients with primary acute angle-closure should undergo
prophylactic laser peripheral iridotomy to the unaffected eye, unless
that eye has already undergone cataract or glaucoma surgery.
Whether prophylactic laser peripheral iridotomy should be
undertaken in asymptomatic patients with narrow anterior chamber
angles is uncertain and mainly influenced by the risk of the more
common chronic angle-closure (see below).
B. Secondary
In secondary acute angle-closure glaucoma, systemic acetazolamide
is also used, with or without osmotic agents. Further treatment is
determined by the cause.
 Prognosis
Untreated acute angle-closure glaucoma results in severe and
permanent visual loss within 2–5 days after onset of symptoms.
Affected patients need to be observed for development of chronic
glaucoma.
 When to Refer
Any patient with suspected acute angle-closure glaucoma must be
referred emergently to an ophthalmologist.
Razeghinejad MR et al. Iatrogenic glaucoma secondary to
medications. Am J Med. 2011 Jan;124(1):20–5. [PMID:
21092926]
 
Subak-Sharpe I et al. Pharmacological and environmental factors
in primary angle-closure glaucoma. Br Med Bull. 2010;93:125–
43. [PMID: 19933218]
 
Tan GS et al. Is routine pupil dilation safe among Asian patients
with diabetes? Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Sep;50(9): 4110–
3. [PMID: 19443719]
 
CHRONIC GLAUCOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 No symptoms in early stages.
 Insidious progressive bilateral loss of peripheral vision, resulting in
tunnel vision but preserved visual acuities.
 Pathologic cupping of the optic disks.
 Intraocular pressure is usually elevated.
 
 General Considerations
Chronic glaucoma is characterized by gradually progressive
excavation (“cupping”) and pallor of the optic disk with loss of
vision progressing from slight constriction of the peripheral fields to
complete blindness. In chronic open-angle glaucoma, primary or
secondary, the intraocular pressure is elevated due to reduced
drainage of aqueous fluid through the trabecular meshwork. In
chronic angle-closure glaucoma, flow of aqueous fluid into the
anterior chamber angle is obstructed. In normal-tension glaucoma,
intraocular pressure is not elevated but the same pattern of optic
nerve damage occurs, probably due to vascular insufficiency.
Primary open-angle glaucoma is bilateral. There is an increased
prevalence in first-degree relatives of affected individuals and in
diabetic patients. In blacks, it is more frequent, occurs at an earlier
age, and results in more severe optic nerve damage. Secondary
open-angle glaucoma may result from uveitis; ocular trauma; or
corticosteroid therapy, whether it is topical, systemic, inhaled, or
administered by nasal spray.
In the United States, it is estimated that 2% of people over 40
years of age have glaucoma, affecting more than 2 million individuals
and being three times more prevalent in blacks. At least 25% of
cases are undetected. Over 90% of cases are of the open-angle
type. Worldwide, about 4.5 million people are bilaterally blind from
chronic open-angle glaucoma and 4 million, of which approximately
50% live in China, are bilaterally blind from chronic angle-closure
glaucoma.
 Clinical Findings
Because initially there are no symptoms, chronic glaucoma is often
suspected at a routine eye test. Diagnosis requires consistent and
reproducible abnormalities in at least two of three parameters—
optic disk, visual field, and intraocular pressure. Optic disk cupping
is identified as an absolute increase or an asymmetry between the
two eyes of the ratio of the diameter of the optic cup to the
diameter of the whole optic disk (cup-disk ratio, Figures 7–3 and
7–4). (Cup-disk ratio greater than 0.5 or 0.2 or more asymmetry
between eyes is suggestive.) Visual field abnormalities initially
develop in the paracentral region, followed by constriction of the
peripheral visual field. Central vision remains good until late in the
disease. The normal range of intraocular pressure is 10–21 mm Hg.
Figure 7–3. normal eye with a normal optic cup-to-disk ratio of
0.4. (Courtesy of Paul D. Corneau; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Figure 7–4. glaucoma with an increased optic cupto-disk ratio
of 0.8. (Courtesy of Paul D. Corneau; used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
In many individuals, elevated intraocular pressure is not
associated with optic disk or visual field abnormalities. These
persons with ocular hypertension are at increased risk for
glaucoma. Treatment to reduce intraocular pressure is justified if
there is a moderate to high risk, determined by several factors,
including age, optic disk appearance, level of intraocular pressure,
and corneal thickness. A significant proportion of eyes with primary
open-angle glaucoma have normal intraocular pressure when it is
first measured, and only repeated measurements identify the
abnormally high pressure. In normal-tension glaucoma, intraocular
pressure is always within the normal range despite repeated
measurement.
There are many causes of optic disk abnormalities or visual field
changes that mimic glaucoma, and visual field testing may prove
unreliable in some patients, particularly in the older age group.
The diagnosis of glaucoma is not always straightforward,
hampering the effectiveness of screening programs.
 Prevention
All persons over age 50 years should have intraocular pressure
measurement and optic disk examination every 3–5 years. In
persons with diabetes and in individuals with a family history of
glaucoma, annual examination is indicated. Regular ophthalmic
screening should be considered in patients taking long-term oral or
combined intranasal and inhaled corticosteroid therapy.
 Treatment
A. Medications
The prostaglandin analogs (latanoprost 0.005%, bimatoprost
0.03%, travoprost 0.004%, and tafluprost 0.0015% once daily at
night, and unoprostone 0.15% twice daily) are commonly used as
first-line therapy because of their efficacy, their lack of systemic side
effects, as well as the convenience of once-daily dosing (except
unoprostone) (Table 7–2). All may produce conjunctival
hyperemia, permanent darkening of the iris and eyebrow color, and
increased eyelash growth. Latanoprost has been associated with
reactivation of uveitis and macular edema. Tafluprost is not available
in the United States.
Topical β-adrenergic blocking agents such as timolol 0.25% or
0.5%, carteolol 1%, levobunolol 0.5%, and metipranolol 0.3%
solutions twice daily or timolol 0.25% or 0.5% gel once daily may
be used alone or in combination with a prostaglandin analog. They
are contraindicated in patients with reactive airway disease or heart
failure. Betaxolol, 0.25% or 0.5%, a β-receptor selective blocking
agent, is theoretically safer in reactive airway disease but less
effective at reducing intraocular pressure. Brimonidine 0.2%, a
selective α2-agonist, and dorzolamide 2% or brinzolamide 1%,
topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, also can be used in addition
to a prostaglandin analog or a β-blocker (twice daily) or as initial
therapy when prostaglandin analogs and β-blockers are
contraindicated (brimonidine twice daily, dorzolamide and
brinzolamide three times daily). All three are associated with allergic
reactions. Combination drops Xalacom (latanoprost 0.005% and
timolol 0.5%), Ganfort (bimatoprost 0.03% and timolol 0.5%), and
DuoTrav (travoprost 0.004% and timolol 0.5%), each used once
daily, and Cosopt (dorzolamide 2% and timolol 0.5%), Azarga
(brinzolamide 1% and timolol 0.5%), and Combigan (brimonidine
0.2% and timolol 0.5%), each used twice daily improve compliance
when multiple medications are required.
Apraclonidine, 0.5–1%, another α2-agonist, can be used three
times a day to postpone the need for surgery in patients receiving
maximal medical therapy, but long-term use is limited by drug
reactions. It is more commonly used to control acute rises in
intraocular pressure such as after laser therapy. Pilocarpine 1–4%,
epinephrine, 0.5–1%, and the prodrug dipivefrin, 0.1%, are rarely
used because of adverse effects. Oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
(eg, acetazolamide) may still be used on a long-term basis if topical
therapy is inadequate and surgical or laser therapy is inappropriate.
B. Laser Therapy and Surgery
Laser trabeculoplasty is used as an adjunct to topical therapy to
defer surgery and is also advocated as primary treatment. Surgery is
generally undertaken when intraocular pressure is inadequately
controlled by medical and laser therapy, but it may also be used as
primary treatment. Trabeculectomy remains the standard
procedure. Adjunctive treatment with subconjunctival mitomycin or
fluorouracil is used perioperatively or postoperatively in difficult
cases. Viscocanalostomy and deep sclerectomy with collagen
implant—two alternative procedures that avoid a full-thickness
incision into the eye—may be as effective as trabeculectomy but are
more difficult to perform.
In chronic angle-closure glaucoma, laser peripheral iridotomy or
surgical peripheral iridectomy may be helpful. In patients with
asymptomatic narrow anterior chamber angles, which includes
about 10% of Chinese adults, prophylactic laser peripheral
iridotomy can be performed to reduce the risk of acute and chronic
angle-closure glaucoma. However, there are concerns about the
efficacy of such treatment and the risk of cataract progression and
corneal decompensation. In the United States, about 1% of people
over age 35 years have narrow anterior chamber angles, but acute
and chronic angle-closure are sufficiently uncommon that
prophylactic therapy is not generally advised.
 Prognosis
Untreated chronic glaucoma that begins at age 40–45 years will
probably cause complete blindness by age 60–65. Early diagnosis
and treatment can preserve useful vision throughout life. In primary
open-angle glaucoma—and if treatment is required in ocular
hypertension—the aim is to reduce intraocular pressure to a level
that will adequately reduce progression of visual field loss. In eyes
with marked visual field or optic disk changes, intraocular pressure
must be reduced to less than 16 mm Hg. In normal-tension
glaucoma with progressive visual field loss, it is necessary to achieve
even lower intraocular pressure such that surgery is often required.
 When to Refer
All patients with suspected chronic glaucoma should be referred to
an ophthalmologist.
Francis BA et al. Population and high risk group screening for
glaucoma: The Los Angeles Latino Eye Study. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci. 2011 Jan 18. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21245400]
 
Guedes G et al. Glaucoma and aging. Curr Aging Sci. 2011 Jan
14. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21235491]
 
Kwon YH et al. Primary open-angle glaucoma. N Engl J Med.
2009 Mar 12;360(11):1113–24. [PMID: 19279343]
 
Sihota R. Lasers in primary open angle glaucoma. Indian J
Ophthalmol. 2011 Jan;59(Suppl):S114–7. [PMID: 21150022]
 
Trikudanathan S et al. Optimum management of glucocorticoid-
treated patients. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008 May;
4(5):262–71. [PMID: 18349823]
 
UVEITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually immunologic but possibly infective or neoplastic.
 Acute nongranulomatous anterior uveitis: pain, redness,
photophobia, and visual loss.
 Granulomatous anterior uveitis: blurred vision in a mildly inflamed
eye.
 Posterior uveitis: gradual loss of vision in a quiet eye.
 
 General Considerations
Intraocular inflammation (uveitis) is classified into acute or chronic,
and nongranulomatous or granulomatous according to the clinical
signs, or by its distribution—anterior or posterior uveitis,
predominantly affecting the anterior or posterior segments of the
eye, or panuveitis, in which both segments are affected equally. The
common types are acute nongranulomatous anterior uveitis,
granulomatous anterior uveitis, and posterior uveitis.
In most cases, the pathogenesis of uveitis is primarily
immunologic, but infection may be the cause, particularly in
immunodeficiency states. The systemic disorders associated with
acute nongranulomatous anterior uveitis are the HLA-B27-related
conditions ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriasis,
ulcerative colitis, and Crohn disease. Behçet syndrome produces
both anterior uveitis, with recurrent hypopyon but little discomfort,
and posterior uveitis, characteristically with branch retinal vein
occlusions. Both herpes simplex and herpes zoster infections may
cause nongranulomatous anterior uveitis as well as retinitis (acute
retinal necrosis), which has a very poor prognosis.
Diseases producing granulomatous anterior uveitis also tend to be
causes of posterior uveitis. These include sarcoidosis,
toxoplasmosis, tuberculosis, syphilis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada
syndrome (bilateral uveitis associated with alopecia, poliosis
[depigmented eyelashes, eyebrows, or hair], vitiligo, and hearing
loss), and sympathetic ophthalmia following penetrating ocular
trauma. In toxoplasmosis, there may be evidence of previous
episodes of retinochoroiditis. Syphilis characteristically produces a
“salt and pepper” fundus but may present with a wide variety of
clinical manifestations. The other principal pathogens responsible for
ocular inflammation in HIV infection (see below) are cytomegalo-
virus (CMV), herpes simplex and herpes zoster viruses,
mycobacteria, Cryptococcus, Toxoplasma, and Candida.
Autoimmune retinal vasculitis and pars planitis (inter-mediate
uveitis) are idiopathic conditions that produce posterior uveitis.
 Clinical Findings
Anterior uveitis is characterized by inflammatory cells and flare
within the aqueous. In severe cases, there may be hypopyon
(layered collection of white cells) and fibrin within the anterior
chamber. Cells may also be seen on the corneal endothelium as
keratic precipitates (KPs). In granulomatous uveitis, these are large
“mutton-fat” KPs, and iris nodules may be seen. In
nongranulomatous uveitis, the KPs are smaller and iris nodules are
not seen. The pupil is usually small, and with the development of
posterior synechiae (adhesions between the iris and anterior lens
capsule), it also becomes irregular.
Nongranulomatous anterior uveitis tends to present acutely with
unilateral pain, redness, photophobia, and visual loss.
Granulomatous anterior uveitis is more indolent, causing blurred
vision in a mildly inflamed eye.
In posterior uveitis, there are cells in the vitreous. Inflammatory
lesions may be present in the retina or choroid. Fresh lesions are
yellow, with indistinct margins, and there may be retinal
hemorrhages, whereas older lesions have more definite margins and
are commonly pigmented. Retinal vessel sheathing may occur
adjacent to such lesions or more diffusely. In severe cases, vitreous
opacity precludes visualization of retinal details.
Posterior uveitis tends to present with gradual visual loss in a
relatively quiet eye. Bilateral involvement is common. Visual loss
may be due to vitreous haze and opacities, inflammatory lesions
involving the macula, macular edema, retinal vein occlusion or,
rarely, associated optic neuropathy.
 Differential Diagnosis
Retinal detachment, intraocular tumors, and central nervous system
lymphoma may all masquerade as uveitis.
 Treatment
Anterior uveitis usually responds to topical corticosteroids.
Occasionally, periocular corticosteroid injections or even systemic
corticosteroids may be required. Dilation of the pupil is important to
relieve discomfort and prevent posterior synechiae. Posterior
uveitis more commonly requires systemic or intravitreal
corticosteroid 
therapy 
and 
occasionally 
systemic
immunosuppression with agents such as azathioprine, tacrolimus,
cyclosporine, or mycophenolate. The value of biologic therapies is
being evaluated. Pupillary dilation is not usually necessary.
If an infectious cause is identified, specific antimicrobial therapy
may be indicated. In general, the prognosis for anterior uveitis,
particularly the nongranulomatous type, is better than that for
posterior uveitis.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any patient with suspected acute uveitis should be
referred urgently to an ophthalmologist or emergently if
visual loss or pain is severe.
•    Any patient with suspected chronic uveitis should be
referred to an ophthalmologist, urgently if there is more than
mild visual loss.
 When to Admit
Patients with severe uveitis, particularly those requiring intravenous
therapy, may require hospital admission.
Cunningham ET Jr et al. Practical approach to the use of
corticosteroids in patients with uveitis. Can J Ophthalmol. 2010
Aug;45(4):352–8. [PMID: 20648092]
 
Guly CM et al. Investigation and management of uveitis. BMJ.
2010 Oct 13;341:c4976. [PMID: 20943722]
 
CATARACT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Gradually progressive blurred vision.
 No pain or redness.
 Lens opacities (may be grossly visible).
 
 General Considerations
Cataract is opacity of the crystalline lens. It is the leading cause of
blindness worldwide, but access to treatment and quality of
outcome are still limited in many areas. Cataracts are usually
bilateral. They may be congenital (owing to intrauterine infections
such as rubella and CMV, or inborn errors of metabolism such as
galactosemia); traumatic; or secondary to systemic disease
(diabetes, myotonic dystrophy, atopic dermatitis), systemic or
inhaled corticosteroid treatment, or uveitis; but senile cataract is by
far the most common type. Most persons over age 60 have some
degree of lens opacity. Cigarette smoking increases the risk of
cataract formation.
 Clinical Findings
The predominant symptom is progressive blurring of vision. Glare,
especially in bright light or when driving at night; change of focusing,
particularly development of nearsightedness; and monocular double
vision may also occur.
Even in its early stages, a cataract can be seen through a dilated
pupil with an ophthalmoscope or slit lamp. As the cataract matures,
the retina will become increasingly more difficult to visualize, until
finally the fundus reflection is absent and the pupil is white.
 Treatment
In adults, functional visual impairment is the prime criterion for
surgery. The cataract is usually removed by one of the techniques in
which the posterior lens capsule remains (extracapsular), thus
providing support for a prosthetic intraocular lens that dispenses
with the need for heavy cataract glasses or contact lenses. Laser
treatment may be required subsequently if the posterior capsule
opacifies. Ultrasonic fragmentation (phacoemulsification) of the lens
nucleus and foldable intraocular lenses allow cataract surgery to be
performed through a small incision without the need for sutures, thus
reducing the postoperative complication rate and accelerating visual
rehabilitation. Multifocal and accommodative intraocular lenses
reduce the need for both distance and reading glasses.
Management of congenital cataract is complicated by additional
technical difficulties during surgery, changes in the optics of the eye
with growth influencing choice of intraocular lens power, and
treatment of associated amblyopia.
 Prognosis
In the developed world, cataract surgery in adults improves visual
acuity in 95% of cases, whereas in less developed areas the
outcome is less good, in part due to uncorrected refractive error. In
the other 5%, there is preexisting retinal damage or operative or
postoperative complications. Treatment with α1-antagonists,
particularly with tamsulosin for benign prostatic hyperplasia, or with
risperi-done for psychiatric disease increases the risk of
intraoperative 
(floppy 
iris 
syndrome) 
and 
postoperative
complications.
 When to Refer
Patients with cataracts should be referred to an ophthalmologist
when their visual impairment adversely affects their everyday
activities.
Chatziralli IP et al. Risk factors for intraoperative floppy iris
syndrome: A Meta-Analysis. Ophthalmology. 2011 Apr; 118(4):
730-50. [PMID: 21168223]
 
Hildreth CJ et al. JAMA patient page. Cataracts. JAMA. 2009
May 20;301(19):2060. [PMID: 19454646]
 
Rao GN et al. The global burden of cataract. Curr Opin
Ophthalmol. 2010 Nov 23. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
21107260]
 
RETINAL DETACHMENT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Curtain spreading across field of vision or sudden onset of visual
loss in one eye.
 No pain or redness.
 Detachment seen by ophthalmoscopy.
 
 General Considerations
Most cases of retinal detachment are due to development of a
retinal tear (rhegmatogenous retinal detachment). This is usually
spontaneous, is related to changes in the vitreous, and generally
occurs in persons over 50 years of age. Nearsightedness and
cataract extraction are the two most common predisposing causes.
Retinal tear may also be caused by penetrating or blunt ocular
trauma. Once there is a tear in the retina, fluid vitreous is able to
pass through the tear and lodge behind the sensory retina. This,
combined with vitreous traction and the pull of gravity, results in
progressive detachment.
Tractional retinal detachment occurs when there is pre-retinal
fibrosis, such as in association with proliferative retinopathy
secondary to diabetic retinopathy or retinal vein occlusion. Serous
retinal detachment results from accumulation of subretinal fluid, such
as in neovascular age-related macular degeneration or secondary to
choroidal tumors.
 Clinical Findings
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment usually starts in the superior
temporal area and spreads rapidly, causing visual field loss that
starts inferiorly and expands upwards. Central vision remains intact
until the macula becomes detached. On ophthalmoscopic
examination, the retina is seen hanging in the vitreous like a gray
cloud. One or more retinal tears will usually be found on further
examination.
In traction retinal detachment, there is irregular retinal elevation
with fibrosis. With serous retinal detachment, the retina is dome-
shaped and the subretinal fluid may shift position with changes in
posture.
 Treatment
Treatment of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments is directed at
closing the retinal tears. A permanent adhesion between the
neurosensory retina, the retinal pigment epithelium, and the choroid
is produced in the region of the tears by laser photocoagulation to
the retina or cryotherapy to the sclera. Indentation of the sclera with
a silicone sponge or buckle; subretinal fluid drainage via an incision
in the sclera; or injection of an expansile gas into the vitreous cavity,
possibly following intraocular surgery to remove the vitreous (pars
plana vitrectomy) may be required to achieve apposition of the
neurosensory retina to the retinal pigment epithelium while the
adhesion is developing. Certain types of uncomplicated retinal
detachment may be treated by pneumatic retinopexy, in which an
expansile gas is injected into the vitreous cavity followed by
positioning of the patient's head to facilitate reattachment of the
retina. Once the retina is repositioned, the tear is sealed by laser
photocoagulation or cryotherapy; these two methods are also used
to seal retinal tears without associated detachment.
In complicated retinal detachments—particularly those in which
fibroproliferative tissue has developed on the surface of the retina or
within the vitreous cavity, ie, traction retinal detachments—retinal
reattachment can be accomplished only by pars plana vitrectomy,
direct manipulation of the retina, and internal tamponade of the
retina with air, expansile gases, or even silicone oil. (The presence
of an expansile gas within the eye is a contraindication to air travel,
mountaineering at high altitude, and nitrous oxide anesthesia. Such
gases persist in the globe for weeks after surgery.) Treatment of
serous retinal detachments is determined by the underlying cause.
 Prognosis
About 80% of uncomplicated rhegmatogenous retinal detachments
can be cured with one operation; an additional 15% will need
repeated operations; and the remainder never reattach. The visual
prognosis is worse if the macula is detached or if the detachment is
of long duration. Without treatment, retinal detachment often
becomes total within 6 months. Spontaneous detachments are
ultimately bilateral in up to 25% of cases.
 When to Refer
All cases of retinal detachment must be referred urgently to an
ophthalmologist, emergently if central vision is good because this
indicates that the macula has not detached. During transportation,
the patient's head is positioned so that the detached portion of the
retina will fall back with the aid of gravity.
Hatten B et al. Retinal detachment. Emerg Med J. 2011 Jan;
28(1):83. [PMID: 20378746]
 
Kang HK et al. Management of retinal detachment: a guide for
non-ophthalmologists. BMJ. 2008 May 31;336(7655):1235–40.
[PMID: 18511798]
 
VITREOUS HEMORRHAGE
Patients with vitreous hemorrhage complain of sudden visual loss,
abrupt onset of floaters that may progressively increase in severity
or, occasionally, “bleeding within the eye.” Visual acuity ranges
from 20/20 to light perception only. The eye is not inflamed, and the
clue to diagnosis is the inability to see fundal details clearly despite
the presence of a clear lens. Causes of vitreous hemorrhage include
diabetic retinopathy, retinal tears (with or without detachment),
retinal vein occlusions, neovascular age-related macular
degeneration, blood dyscrasias, trauma, and subarachnoid
hemorrhage. In all cases, examination by an ophthalmologist is
essential. Retinal tears and detachments necessitate urgent treatment
(see above).
 When to Refer
All patients with suspected vitreous hemorrhage must be referred
urgently to an ophthalmologist.
AGE-RELATED MACULAR DEGENERATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Older age group.
 Acute or chronic deterioration of central vision in one or both
eyes.
 Distortion or abnormal size of images.
 No pain or redness.
 Macular abnormalities seen by ophthalmoscopy.
 
 General Considerations
In developed countries, age-related macular degeneration is the
leading cause of permanent visual loss in the older population. The
exact cause is unknown, but the prevalence increases with each
decade over age 50 years (to almost 30% by age 75), and there is
an association with genetically determined variations in the
complement pathway. Other associated factors are race (usually
white), sex (slight female predominance), family history, and
cigarette smoking.
Age-related macular degeneration is classified into atrophic
(“dry,” “geographic”) and neovascular (“wet,” “exudative”).
Although both are progressive and usually bilateral, they differ in
manifestations, prognosis, and management.
 Clinical Findings
The precursor to age-related macular degeneration is age-related
maculopathy, characterized by retinal drusen. Hard drusen appear
ophthalmoscopically as discrete yellow deposits. Soft drusen are
larger, paler, and less distinct. Large, confluent soft drusen are
particularly associated with neovascular age-related macular
degeneration.
Atrophic degeneration is characterized by gradually
progressive bilateral visual loss of moderate severity due to atrophy
and degeneration of the outer retina and retinal pigment epithelium.
I n neovascular degeneration, choroidal new vessels grow
between the retinal pigment epithelium and Bruch membrane,
leading to accumulation of serous fluid, hemorrhage, and fibrosis.
The onset of visual loss is more rapid and more severe in
neovascular degeneration than in atrophic degeneration. The two
eyes are frequently affected sequentially over a period of a few
years. Neovascular disease accounts for about 90% of all cases of
legal blindness due to age-related macular degeneration. Macular
degeneration results in loss of central vision only. Peripheral fields
and hence navigational vision are maintained, though these may
become impaired by cataract formation for which surgery may be
helpful.
 Treatment
In the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS), oral treatment
with antioxidants (vitamin A [beta-carotene], vita-min C and vitamin
E), and zinc and copper reduced the risk of disease progression in
patients with moderate age-related maculopathy or severe disease
in one eye, but there are concerns about long-term adverse effects
and adherence to treatment is poor. Lack of disease progression
has also been found to be associated with high dietary consumption
of other carotenoids, lutein and zeaxanthin, and omega-3 long-chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and with dietary supplementation with a
combination of folic acid, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 in women.
Laser retinal photo-coagulation results in regression of drusen but
does not reduce the risk of disease progression.
Inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF),
including ranibizumab, pegaptanib, and bevacizumab, reverse the
choroidal neovascularization, resulting in stabilization and less
frequently improvement in vision in neovascular degeneration. They
have to be administered by intravitreal injection. Initial trials involved
monthly injections for 2 years. Current studies are determining
whether it is feasible to initially treat monthly for 3 months and then
only when there is evidence of reactivation of disease. Treatment is
well tolerated with minimal adverse effects, although there is a small
risk of intraocular infection and inflammation, retinal detachment, or
traumatic cataract.
There is no specific treatment for atrophic degeneration, but—as
with the neovascular form—patients may benefit from low vision
aids.
 When to Refer
Older patients developing sudden visual loss due to macular disease
—particularly paracentral distortion or scotoma with preservation of
central acuity—should be referred urgently to an ophthalmologist.
Bird AC. Therapeutic targets in age-related macular disease. J Clin
Invest. 2010 Sep 1;120(9):3033–41. [PMID: 20811159]
 
Folk JC et al. Ranibizumab therapy for neovascular age-related
macular degeneration. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 21;363(17):
1648–55. [PMID: 20961248]
 
CENTRAL & BRANCH RETINAL VEIN OCCLUSIONS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden monocular loss of vision.
 No pain or redness.
 Widespread or sectoral retinal pallid swelling.
 
 General Considerations
All patients with retinal vein occlusion should be screened for
diabetes, systemic hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and glaucoma. In
younger 
patients, 
antiphospholipid 
antibodies, 
inherited
thrombophilia, and hyperhomocysteinemia should be considered.
Rarely, hyperviscosity syndromes, including myeloproliferative
disorders, are associated with retinal vein occlusions and
particularly should be considered in bilateral disease.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The visual impairment in central retinal vein occlusion is commonly
first noticed upon waking. Ophthalmoscopic signs include
widespread retinal hemorrhages, retinal venous dilation and
tortuosity, retinal cotton-wool spots, and optic disk swelling.
Branch retinal vein occlusions may present in a variety of ways.
Sudden loss of vision may occur at the time of occlusion if the fovea
is involved or some time afterward from vitreous hemorrhage due to
retinal new vessels. More gradual visual loss may occur with
development of macular edema. In acute branch retinal vein
occlusion, the retinal abnormalities (hemorrhages, venous dilation
and tortuosity, and cotton-wool spots) are confined to the area
drained by the obstructed vein.
Check blood pressure in all patients.
B. Laboratory Findings
Obtain screening studies for diabetes and hyperlipidemia. In
younger patients, consider obtaining antiphospholipid antibodies,
lupus anticoagulant, tests for inherited thrombophilia, and plasma
homocysteine levels. Very high paraproteins, found on serum
protein electrophoresis (particularly IgM), can cause hyperviscosity.
 Complications
If central retinal vein occlusion is associated with widespread retinal
ischemia, manifesting as poor visual acuity (20/200 or worse), florid
retinal abnormalities, and extensive areas of capillary closure on
fluorescein angiography, there is a high risk of development of
neovascular (rubeotic) glaucoma, typically within first 3 months.
Branch retinal vein occlusion may be complicated by peripheral
retinal neovascularization or chronic macular edema.
 Treatment
Eyes at risk of neovascular glaucoma following ischemic central
retinal vein occlusion can be treated by panretinal laser
photocoagulation either prophylactically or as soon as there is
evidence of neovascularization, the latter approach necessitating
frequent monitoring. Regression of iris neovascularization has been
achieved with intravitreal injections of bevacizumab, an inhibitor of
VEGF. In branch retinal vein occlusion complicated by retinal
neovascularization, the ischemic retina should be laser
photocoagulated.
Retinal laser photocoagulation may be indicated in chronic
macular edema due to branch but not central retinal vein occlusion.
Intravitreal injection of a VEGF inhibitor, ranibizumab,
bevacizumab, or pegaptanib, is beneficial in chronic macular edema
due to either branch or nonischemic central retinal vein occlusion.
Intravitreal triamcino-lone improves vision in chronic macular edema
due to nonischemic central retinal vein occlusion, whereas an
intravitreal implant containing dexamethasone is beneficial in both
central and branch retinal vein occlusion.
Improvement in vision has been reported after vitrectomy with
direct injection of tissue plasminogen activator into the retinal
venous system or incision of the sclera at the edge of the optic disk
(radial optic neurotomy). Improvement has also been reported after
isovolemic hemodilution in central retinal vein occlusion and after
vitrectomy alone or combined with surgical incision of the retinal
vascular adventitia (arteriovenous sheathotomy) and injection of
tissue plasminogen activator in branch retinal vein occlusion.
However, the overall value of each technique remains uncertain.
 Prognosis
In central retinal vein occlusion, severity of visual loss initially is a
good guide to visual outcome. Initial visual acuity of 20/60 or better
indicates a good prognosis. Visual prognosis is poor for eyes with
neovascular glaucoma.
Visual outcome in branch retinal vein occlusion is determined by
the severity of macular damage from hemorrhage, ischemia, or
edema.
 When to Refer
All patients with retinal vein occlusion should be referred urgently to
an ophthalmologist.
Jonas J et al. Retinal vein occlusions. Dev Ophthalmol. 2010;47:
111–35. [PMID: 20703046]
 
Wong TY et al. Clinical practice. Retinal-vein occlusion. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Nov 25;363(22):2135–44. [PMID: 21105795]
 
Yau JW et al. Retinal vein occlusion: an approach to diagnosis,
systemic risk factors and management. Intern Med J. 2008
Dec;38(12):904–10. [PMID: 19120547]
 
CENTRAL & BRANCH RETINAL ARTERY
OCCLUSIONS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden monocular loss of vision.
 No pain or redness.
 Widespread or sectoral retinal hemorrhages.
 
 General Considerations
In patients 55 years of age or older with central retinal artery
occlusion, giant cell arteritis must be considered (see Ischemic
Optic Neuropathy page 187 and Chapter 20). Carotid and cardiac
sources of emboli must be sought in central and in branch retinal
artery occlusion in particular, even if no retinal emboli are identified
on ophthalmoscopy, so that appropriate treatment can be given to
reduce the risk of stroke (see Chapters 12 and 14). Migraine, oral
contraceptives, systemic vasculitis, congenital or acquired
thrombophilia, and hyperhomocysteinemia should be considered in
young patients. Internal carotid artery dissection should be
considered when there is neck pain or a recent history of neck
trauma. Diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and systemic hypertension should
be considered in all patients.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Central retinal artery occlusion presents as sudden profound
monocular visual loss. Visual acuity is usually reduced to counting
fingers or worse, and visual field is restricted to an island of vision in
the temporal field. Ophthalmoscopy reveals pallid swelling of the
retina, most obvious in the posterior segment, with a cherry-red
spot at the fovea. The retinal arteries are attenuated, and “box-car”
segmentation of blood in the veins may be seen. Occasionally,
emboli are seen in the central retinal artery or its branches. The
retinal swelling subsides over a period of 4–6 weeks, leaving a pale
optic disk and attenuated arterioles with otherwise a relatively
normal retinal appearance but thinning of the inner retina is
detectable by optical coherence tomography.
Branch retinal artery occlusion may also present with sudden loss
of vision if the fovea is involved, but more commonly sudden loss of
visual field is the presenting complaint. Fundal signs of retinal
swelling and adjacent cotton-wool spots are limited to the area of
retina supplied by the occluded artery.
Evaluate all patients for arrhythmia, particularly atrial fibrillation,
as well as cardiac murmurs. In addition, measure the patient's blood
pressure and identify risk factors for cardiac source of emboli.
Clinical features of giant cell arteritis, which generally occurs in
patients 55 years or older, include jaw claudication (which is very
specific), headache, scalp tenderness, general malaise, weight loss,
symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica, and tenderness, thickening, or
absence of pulse of the superficial temporal arteries. Table 20–14
lists the clinical manifestations of vasculitis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Screen for diabetes and hyperlipidemia in all patients. Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are usually markedly
elevated in giant cell arteritis but one or both may be normal.
Consider screening for other types of vasculitis (see Table 20–13).
In younger patients, consider obtaining antiphospholipid antibodies,
lupus anticoagulant, tests for inherited thrombophilia and a plasma
homo-cysteine level.
C. Imaging
Obtain duplex ultrasonography of the carotid arteries, ECG, and
echocardiography, with transesophageal studies (if necessary), to
identify carotid and cardiac sources of emboli as well as internal
carotid artery dissection.
 Treatment
If the patient is seen within a few hours after onset, emergency
treatment—including laying the patient flat, ocular massage, high
concentrations of inhaled oxygen, intravenous acetazolamide, and
anterior chamber paracentesis—may influence the visual outcome.
Studies of early thrombolysis, particularly by local intra-arterial
injection but also intravenously, have shown good results in central
retinal artery occlusion not due to giant cell arteritis but the former
method has a high incidence of adverse effects.
In giant cell arteritis, there is risk—highest in the first few days—
of involvement of the other eye. When the diagnosis is suspected,
high-dose corticosteroids (oral prednisolone 1–1.5 mg/kg/d, if
necessary preceded by intravenous hydrocortisone 250–500 mg
stat, or methylprednisolone 0.5–1 g/d for 1–3 days followed by oral
prednisolone, especially in patients with bilateral visual loss) must be
instituted immediately, possibly together with low-dose aspirin. The
patient must be monitored closely to ensure that treatment is
adequate. A temporal artery biopsy should be performed promptly,
and if necessary, assistance should be sought from a rheumatologist.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with central retinal artery occlusion should be
referred emergently to an ophthalmologist.
•    Patients with branch retinal artery occlusion should be
referred urgently.
 When to Admit
Patients with visual loss due to giant cell arteritis may require
emergency admission for high-dose corticosteroid therapy and
close monitoring to ensure that treatment is adequate.
Harder N. Temporal arteritis: an approach to suspected
vasculitides. Prim Care. 2010 Dec;37(4):757-66. [PMID:
21050956]
 
Kale N et al. Diagnosis and management of giant cell arteritis: a
review. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2010 Nov;21(6):417-22. [PMID:
20811283]
 
Schumacher M et al. Central retinal artery occlusion: local intra-
arterial fibrinolysis versus conservative treatment, a multi-center
randomized trial. Ophthalmology. 2010 Jul;117(7): 1367–75.e1.
[PMID: 20609991]
 
Weizbilt N et al. Ophthaproblem. Central retinal artery occlusion.
Can Fam Physician. 2009 Feb;55(2):167–8. [PMID: 19221078]
 
TRANSIENT MONOCULAR BLINDNESS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Monocular loss of vision usually lasting a few minutes with
complete recovery.
 
Transient monocular blindness may be caused by retinal emboli
from ipsilateral carotid disease or the heart. The visual loss is
characteristically described as a curtain passing vertically across the
visual field with complete monocular visual loss lasting a few minutes
and a similar curtain effect as the episode passes (amaurosis fugax;
also called “fleeting blindness”). Emboli are rarely seen on
ophthalmoscopy. Other causes of temporary ocular ischemia are
giant cell arteritis, antiphospholipid syndrome, and severe occlusive
carotid disease; in the last case, the visual loss characteristically
occurs on exposure to bright light. More transient episodes of visual
loss, lasting only a few seconds to 1 minute and affecting one or
both eyes, occur in patients with raised intracranial pressure. In
young patients, there is a benign form of transient visual loss that has
been ascribed to choroidal or retinal vascular spasm.
 Diagnostic Studies
Clinical assessment and investigations are the same as for retinal
artery occlusion (see above).
 Treatment
To reduce the risk of stroke, all patients with transient monocular
blindness due to retinal emboli from ipsilateral carotid disease
should be treated with oral aspirin, 81 mg daily, or another
antiplatelet drug, and their vascular risk factors should be
controlled. Patients with high-grade stenosis (70–99%), and
possibly those with medium-grade (30–69%) stenosis, should be
considered for early carotid endarterectomy or possibly angioplasty
with stenting, but surgery is less likely to be necessary than in
patients with cerebral hemispheric events (see Chapter 12).
In younger patients with the benign variant of transient monocular
blindness, calcium channel blockers, such as slow-release
nifedipine, 60 mg/d, may be effective.
 When to Refer
In all cases of episodic visual loss, early ophthalmologic consultation
is advisable.
Cohen R et al. Carotid artery occlusive disease and ocular
manifestations: importance of identifying patients at risk.
Optometry. 2010 Jul;81(7):359–63. [PMID: 20630374]
 
Kulkarni SR et al. The importance of early carotid endarterectomy
in symptomatic patients. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2009
Apr;91(3):210–3. [PMID: 19220938]
 
RETINAL DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH SYSTEMIC
DISEASES
1. Diabetic Retinopathy
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Present in about 40% of diagnosed diabetic patients.
 Present in up to 20% of type 2 diabetic patients at diagnosis.
 Background retinopathy: mild retinal abnormalities without visual
loss.
 Maculopathy: macular edema, exudates, or ischemia.
 Proliferative retinopathy: new retinal vessels.
 
 General Considerations
In the United States, diabetic retinopathy is present in about 40% of
diagnosed diabetic patients. It is the leading cause of new blindness
among adults aged 20–65 years; the number of affected individuals
aged 65 years or older is particularly increasing. Retinopathy
increases in prevalence and severity with increasing duration and
poorer control of diabetes. In type 1 diabetes, retinopathy is not
detectable for at least 3 years after diagnosis. In type 2 diabetes,
retinopathy is present in up to 20% of patients at diagnosis and may
be the presenting feature. It is broadly classified as
nonproliferative, 
comprising background retinopathy and
maculopathy, or proliferative. Maculopathy and proliferative
retinopathy may coexist, particularly in severe disease.
 Clinical Findings
Nonproliferative retinopathy manifests as dilation of veins,
microaneurysms, retinal hemorrhages, retinal edema, and hard
exudates. In background retinopathy, the abnormalities are mild
and do not cause any impairment of visual acuity. Pre-proliferative
retinopathy is characterized by marked vascular abnormalities and
retinal hemorrhages.
Maculopathy manifests as edema, exudates, or ischemia
involving the macula (Figure 7–5). Assessment requires
stereoscopic examination of the retina, retinal imaging with optical
coherence tomography, and sometimes fluorescein angiography.
Visual acuity is a poor guide to the presence of treatable
maculopathy—hence the need for regular ophthalmologic follow-
up. Maculopathy is the most common cause of legal blindness in
type 2 diabetes.
Figure 7–5. Diabetic exudative maculopathy. (Used with
permission from Victor Chong; Reproduced from Riordan-Eva P,
Whitcher JP. Vaughan & Asbury's General Ophthalmology, 17th
edition, McGraw-Hill, 2008.)
 
Proliferative 
retinopathy 
is 
characterized 
by
neovascularization, arising from either the optic disk or the major
vascular arcades. Vitreous hemorrhage is a common sequela.
Proliferation into the vitreous of blood vessels, with their associated
fibrous component, may lead to tractional retinal detachment.
Without treatment, the visual prognosis with proliferative retinopathy
is generally much worse than that with nonproliferative retinopathy.
 Screening
Adult and adolescent patients with diabetes should undergo at least
yearly screening by fundal photography, preferably after pupil
dilation (mydriasis), or by slit-lamp examination after pupil dilation.
(Failure to identify diabetic retinopathy by direct ophthalmoscopy is
common, particularly if the pupils are not dilated. Non-mydriatic
fundal photography, possibly with centralized screening by
telemedicine, may increase rates of participation.) More frequent
monitoring is required in women during pregnancy and in those
planning pregnancy. Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus should be
screened shortly after diagnosis.
 Treatment
Treatment includes optimizing blood glucose, blood pressure, renal
function, and serum lipids, although such measures are probably
more important in preventing the development of retinopathy than in
influencing its subsequent course.
Macular edema and exudates, but not ischemia, may respond to
laser photocoagulation, intravitreal corticosteroid or VEGF
inhibitor, or vitrectomy.
Proliferative retinopathy is usually treated by panretinal laser
photocoagulation, preferably before vitreous hemorrhage or
tractional 
detachment 
has 
occurred. 
Regression 
of
neovascularization can also be achieved by intravitreal injection of a
VEGF 
inhibitor. 
Determining 
whether 
panretinal 
laser
photocoagulation should be undertaken for pre-proliferative
retinopathy may be helped by assessing the degree of retinal
ischemia on fluorescein angiography. Vitrectomy is necessary for
removal of persistent vitreous hemorrhage, to improve vision and
allow panretinal laser photocoagulation for the underlying retinal
neovascularization, for treatment of tractional retinal detachment
involving the macula, and for management of rapidly progressive
proliferative disease.
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy, especially after successful laser
treatment, is not a contraindication to treatment with thrombolytic
agents, aspirin, or warfarin unless there has been recent vitreous or
pre-retinal hemorrhage.
 When to Refer
 
•    All diabetic patients with sudden loss of vision or retinal
detachment should be referred emergently to an
ophthalmologist.
•    Proliferative retinopathy or maculopathy requires urgent
referral to an ophthalmologist.
•    Pre-proliferative retinopathy or unexplained reduction of
visual acuity requires early referral to an ophthalmologist.
Bhatnagar A et al. Diabetic retinopathy in pregnancy. Curr
Diabetes Rev. 2009 Aug;5(3):151–6. [PMID: 19689249]
 
Cheung N et al. Diabetic retinopathy. Lancet. 2010 Jul 10;
376(9735):124–36. [PMID: 20580421]
 
Ockrim Z et al. Managing diabetic retinopathy. BMJ. 2010 Oct
25;341:c5400. [PMID: 20974661]
 
2. Hypertensive Retinochoroidopathy
Systemic hypertension affects both the retinal and choroidal
circulations. The clinical manifestations vary according to the degree
and rapidity of rise in blood pressure and the underlying state of the
ocular circulation. The most florid disease occurs in young patients
with abrupt elevations of blood pressure, such as may occur in
pheochromocytoma, malignant hypertension, or preeclampsia-
eclampsia.
Chronic hypertension accelerates the development of
atherosclerosis. The retinal arterioles become more tortuous and
narrow and develop abnormal light reflexes (“silver-wiring” and
“copper-wiring”). There is increased venous compression at the
retinal arteriovenous crossings (“arteriovenous nicking”), an
important factor predisposing to branch retinal vein occlusions.
Flame-shaped hemorrhages occur in the nerve fiber layer of the
retina.
Acute elevations of blood pressure result in loss of autoregulation
in the retinal circulation, leading to the breakdown of endothelial
integrity and occlusion of pre-capillary arterioles and capillaries.
These pathologic changes are manifested as cotton-wool spots,
retinal hemorrhages, retinal edema, and retinal exudates, often in a
stellate appearance at the macula (Figure 7–6). In the choroid,
vasoconstriction and ischemia result in serous retinal detachments
and retinal pigment epithelial infarcts. These infarcts later develop
into pigmented lesions that may be focal, linear, or wedge-shaped.
The abnormalities in the choroidal circulation may also affect the
optic nerve head, producing ischemic optic neuropathy with optic
disk swelling. Malignant hypertensive retinopathy was the term
previously used to describe the constellation of clinical signs
resulting from the combination of abnormalities in the retinal,
choroidal, and optic disk circulation. When there is such severe
disease, there is likely to be permanent retinal, choroidal, or optic
nerve damage. Precipitous reduction of blood pressure may
exacerbate such damage.
Figure 7–6. Accelerated hypertension in a young woman
manifesting as marked optic disk edema, macular star of hard
exudates, serous retinal detachment, and retinal hemorrhages and
cotton-wool spots.
 
Meetz RE et al. The optometrist's role in the management of
hypertensive crises. Optometry. 2011 Feb;82(2):108–16. [PMID:
21168370]
 
Wong TY et al. The eye in hypertension. Lancet. 2007 Feb 3;
369(9559):425–35. [PMID: 17276782]
 
 3. Blood Dyscrasias
In conditions characterized by severe thrombocytopenia or anemia,
various types of hemorrhages occur in both the retina and choroid
and may lead to visual loss. If the macula is uninvolved, normal
vision is usually regained after resolution of the hemorrhages.
Sickle cell retinopathy is particularly common in hemoglobin SC
disease but may also occur with other hemoglobin S variants.
Manifestations 
include 
“salmon-patch” 
preretinal/intraretinal
hemorrhages, “black sunbursts” resulting from intraretinal
hemorrhage, and new vessels. Severe visual loss is rare. Retinal
laser photocoagulation reduces the frequency of vitreous
hemorrhage from new vessels. Surgery is occasionally needed for
persistent vitreous hemorrhage or tractional retinal detachment.
Elagouz M et al. Sickle cell disease and the eye: old and new
concepts. Surv Ophthalmol. 2010 Jul 8;55(4):359–77. [PMID:
20452638]
 
4. AIDS
Cotton-wool spots, retinal hemorrhages, and microaneurysms are
the most common ophthalmic abnormalities in AIDS patients.
CMV retinitis occurs when CD4 counts are below 50/mcL (or
0.05 × 106/L). It is characterized by progressively enlarging
yellowish-white patches of retinal opacification, which are
accompanied by retinal hemorrhages; they usually begin adjacent to
the major retinal vascular arcades (Figure 7–7). Patients are often
asymptomatic until there is involvement of the fovea or optic nerve
or until retinal detachment develops.
Choices for initial therapy are (1) valganciclovir 900 mg orally
twice daily for 3 weeks; (2) ganciclovir 5 mg/kg intravenously twice
a day, foscarnet 60 mg/kg intravenously three times a day, or
cidofovir 5 mg/kg intravenously once weekly, for 2–3 weeks; or (3)
local administration, using either intravitreal injection of ganciclovir
or foscarnet, or the sustained-release ganciclovir intravitreal implant.
Intravitreal cidofovir is effective, but there is a high incidence of
uveitis, low intraocular pressure, and ciliary body necrosis. Other
major side effects are neutropenia and thrombocytopenia with
systemic ganciclovir and nephrotoxicity with foscarnet and
cidofovir. Doses of both ganciclovir and foscarnet are adjusted in
patients with renal failure. Oral probenecid and intravenous
hydration are used to minimize nephrotoxicity from cidofovir. All
available agents are virostatic. Maintenance therapy can be
conducted with lower-dose therapy (oral valganciclovir 900 mg
once daily, intravenous ganciclovir 5 mg/kg/d, intravenous foscarnet
90 mg/kg/d, or intravenous cidofovir 5 mg/kg once every 2 weeks)
or with intravitreal therapy. Local therapy tends to be more effective
than systemic therapy and avoids systemic side effects, but there is
a risk of intraocular complications, and the incidence of retinitis in
the fellow eye and of extraocular CMV infection is higher.
Unresponsive disease or reactivation during maintenance therapy
can be managed by changing to a different agent or by use of
combination therapy. Retinal detachment, either due to retinitis or as
a complication of intravitreal therapy, requires vitrectomy and
intravitreal silicone oil. Pharmacologic prophylaxis against CMV
retinitis in patients with low CD4 counts or high CMV burdens has
not been found to be worthwhile.
Figure 7–7. Retinal changes in HIV infection: cytomegalovirus
retinitis. (Used with permission from Elizabeth Graham;
Reproduced from Riordan-Eva P, Whitcher, JP. Vaughan &
Asbury's General Ophthalmology, 17th edition, McGraw-Hill,
2008.)
 
In all patients with CMV retinitis, highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) needs to be instituted or adjusted. This may lead
to the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), of
which the immune recovery uveitis may lead to visual loss,
predominantly due to cystoid macular edema. If the CD4 count is
maintained above 100/mcL (0.1 × 106/L), it may be possible to
discontinue maintenance anti-CMV therapy.
Other ophthalmic manifestations of opportunistic infections
occurring in AIDS patients include herpes simplex retinitis,
toxoplasmic 
and 
candidal 
chorioretinitis, 
herpes 
zoster
ophthalmicus, and various entities due to syphilis or tuberculosis.
Kaposi sarcoma of the conjunctiva (see Chapter 31) and orbital
lymphoma may also be seen on rare occasions.
Jabs DA. Cytomegalovirus retinitis and the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome—bench to bedside: LXVII Edward
Jackson Memorial Lecture. Am J Ophthalmol. 2011 Feb;151(2):
198–216.e1. [PMID: 21168815]
 
Jabs DA et al. Course of cytomegalovirus retinitis in the era of
highly active antiretroviral therapy: five-year outcomes.
Ophthalmology. 2010 Nov;117(11):2152–61.e1–2. [PMID:
20673591]
 
Stewart MW. Optimal management of cytomegalovirus retinitis in
patients with AIDS. Clin Ophthalmol. 2010 Apr;26;4: 285–99.
[PMID: 20463796]
 
ISCHEMIC OPTIC NEUROPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Subacute unilateral visual loss with signs of optic nerve
dysfunction.
 Optic disc swelling in anterior ischemic optic neuropathy.
 
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy—due to inadequate
perfusion of the posteriorciliary arteries that supply the anterior
portion of the optic nerve—produces sudden visual loss, usually
with an altitudinal field defect, and optic disk swelling. In older
patients, it is often caused by giant cell arteritis, which necessitates
emergency high-dose systemic corticosteroid treatment to prevent
visual loss in the other eye. (See Central & Branch Retinal Artery
Occlusions, above and Polymyalgia Rheumatica & Giant Cell
Arteritis, Chapter 20.) The predominant factor predisposing to
nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy is congenitally
crowded optic disks. Other causative factors include systemic
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, systemic vasculitis,
inherited or acquired thrombophilia, and possibly ingestion of
sildenafil, interferon-α therapy, and sleep apnea. Rarely, an optic
neuropathy that can be difficult to differentiate from nonarteritic
anterior optic neuropathy can develop in patients taking
amiodarone.
Ischemic optic neuropathy, usually involving the retrobulbar optic
nerve and thus not causing any optic disk swelling (posterior
ischemic optic neuropathy), may occur after severe blood loss or
nonocular surgery, particularly prolonged lumbar spine surgery in
the prone position.
 When to Refer
Patients with ischemic optic neuropathy should be referred urgently
to an ophthalmologist.
 When to Admit
Patients with ischemic optic neuropathy due to giant cell arteritis
may require emergency admission for high-dose corticosteroid
therapy and close monitoring to ensure that treatment is adequate.
Atkins EJ. Nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy. Curr
Treat Options Neurol. 2011 Feb;13(1):92–100. [PMID:
21063919]
 
Berg KT et al. Perioperative visual loss in ocular and nonocular
surgery. Clin Ophthalmol. 2010 Jun 24;4:531–46. [PMID:
20596508]
 
Kale N et al. Diagnosis and management of giant cell arteritis: a
review. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2010 Nov;21(6):417–22. [PMID:
20811283]
 
OPTIC NEURITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden painless visual loss with signs of optic nerve dysfunction.
 Pain exacerbated by eye movements.
 Optic disc usually normal in acute stage but subsequently
developing pallor.
 
 General Considerations
Inflammatory optic neuropathy (optic neuritis) is strongly associated
with demyelinating disease, particularly multiple sclerosis but also
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. It also occurs in sarcoidosis;
as a component of neuromyelitis optica (Devic syndrome); with viral
infections (including measles, mumps, influenza and those caused by
the varicella zoster virus); with various autoimmune disorders,
particularly systemic lupus erythematosus; and by spread of
inflammation from the meninges, orbital tissues, or paranasal
sinuses.
 Clinical Findings
Optic neuritis in demyelinating disease is characterized by unilateral
loss of vision, which usually develops over a few days. Vision
ranges from 20/30 to no perception of light. Commonly there is pain
in the region of the eye, particularly on eye movements. Field loss is
usually a central scotoma, but a wide range of monocular field
defects is possible. There is marked loss of color vision and a
relative afferent pupillary defect. In about two-thirds of cases, the
optic nerve is normal during the acute stage (retrobulbar optic
neuritis). In the remainder, the optic disk is swollen (papillitis) with
occasional flame-shaped peripapillary hemorrhages. Visual acuity
usually improves within 2–3 weeks and returns to 20/40 or better in
95% of previously unaffected eyes. Optic atrophy subsequently
develops if there has been destruction of sufficient optic nerve
fibers. Any patient with presumed demyelinating optic neuritis in
which visual recovery does not occur or there are other atypical
features should undergo further investigation, including CT or MRI
of the head and orbits to exclude a lesion compressing the optic
nerve.
 Treatment
In 
acute 
demyelinating 
optic 
neuritis, 
intravenous
methylprednisolone (1 g daily for 3 days followed by a tapering
course of oral prednisolone) has been shown to accelerate visual
recovery, although in clinical practice the oral taper is rarely
prescribed. Use in an individual patient is determined by the degree
of visual loss, the state of the fellow eye, and the patient's visual
requirements.
Optic neuritis due to sarcoidosis, neuromyelitis optica, herpes
zoster, or systemic lupus erythematosus generally has a poorer
prognosis and requires more prolonged corticosteroid therapy.
 Prognosis
Among patients with a first episode of clinically isolated optic
neuritis, multiple sclerosis will develop in 50% within 15 years but
the visual and neurologic prognosis is good. The major risk factors
are female gender and multiple white matter lesions on brain MRI
scan. In patients with multiple cerebral white matter lesions, long-
term interferon therapy reduces the risk of subsequent development
of multiple sclerosis by 25% at 5 years, although the effect on long-
term disability remains uncertain and some patients do not respond.
Other disease-modifying drugs are being investigated.
 When to Refer
All patients with optic neuritis should be referred urgently for
ophthalmologic or neurologic assessment.
Clark D et al. Optic neuritis. Neurol Clin. 2010 Aug;28(3):573–
80. [PMID: 20637989]
 
Jenkins TM et al. Diagnosing and managing multiple sclerosis.
Practitioner. 2009 Sep;253(1721):25–30, 2–3. [PMID:
19873856]
 
Rejdak K et al. Multiple sclerosis: a practical overview for
clinicians. Br Med Bull. 2010;95:79–104. [PMID: 20603280]
 
Shams PN et al. Optic neuritis: a review. Int MS J. 2009 Sep;
16(3):82–9. [PMID: 19878630]
 
OPTIC DISK SWELLING
Optic disk swelling may result from intraocular disease, orbital and
optic nerve lesions, severe hypertensive retinochoroidopathy, or
raised intracranial pressure, the last necessitating urgent imaging to
exclude an intracranial mass or cerebral venous sinus occlusion.
Intraocular causes include central retinal vein occlusion, posterior
uveitis, and posterior scleritis. Optic nerve lesions causing disk
swelling include optic neuritis; anterior ischemic optic neuropathy;
optic disk drusen; optic nerve sheath meningioma; and nerve
infiltration by sarcoidosis, leukemia, or lymphoma. Any orbital
lesion causing nerve compression may produce disk swelling.
Papilledema (optic disk swelling due to raised intracranial
pressure) is usually bilateral and most commonly produces
enlargement of the blind spot without loss of acuity (Figure 7–8).
Chronic papilledema, as in idiopathic intracranial hypertension and
dural venous sinus occlusion, or severe acute papilledema may be
associated with visual field loss and occasionally with profound loss
of acuity. All patients with chronic papilledema must be monitored
carefully—especially their visual fields—and cerebrospinal fluid
shunt or optic nerve sheath fenestration should be considered in
those with progressive visual failure not controlled by medical
therapy (weight loss where appropriate and acetazolamide).
 
Figure 7–8. Severe acute papilledema. (Used with permission
from Riordan-Eva P.)
 
Optic disk drusen and congenitally crowded optic disks, which
are associated with farsightedness, cause optic disk elevation that
may be mistaken for swelling (pseudopapilledema). Exposed optic
disk drusen may be obvious clinically or can be demonstrated by
their autofluorescence. Buried drusen are best detected by orbital
ultra-sound or CT scanning. Other family members may be similarly
affected.
Fraser C et al. The syndrome of pseudotumour cerebri and
idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011
Feb;24(1):12–7. [PMID: 21150597]
 
Wall M. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Neurol Clin. 2010
Aug;28(3):593–617. [PMID: 20637991]
 
OCULAR MOTOR PALSIES
In complete third nerve paralysis, there is ptosis with a divergent
and slightly depressed eye. Extraocular movements are restricted in
all directions except laterally (pre-served lateral rectus function).
Intact fourth nerve (superior oblique) function is detected by the
presence of inward rotation on attempted depression of the eye.
Pupillary involvement (dilated pupil that does not constrict to light
shone in either eye) is an important sign differentiating “surgical,”
including traumatic, from “medical” causes of isolated third nerve
palsy. Compressive lesions of the third nerve—eg, aneurysm of the
posterior communicating artery and uncal herniation due to a
supratentorial mass lesion—characteristically have pupillary
involvement. Patients with painful acute isolated third nerve palsy
and pupillary involvement should be assumed to have a posterior
communicating artery aneurysm until this has been excluded.
Pituitary apoplexy is a rarer cause. Medical causes of isolated third
nerve palsy include diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and giant cell
arteritis.
Fourth nerve paralysis causes upward deviation of the eye
with failure of depression on adduction. There is vertical and
torsional diplopia that becomes most apparent on attempted reading
and descending stairs. Many cases with similar clinical features are
due to congenital orbital musculo-facial anomaly, although labeled
as congenital fourth nerve palsy. Trauma is a major cause of
acquired—particularly bilateral—fourth nerve palsy, but posterior
fossa tumor and medical causes such as in third nerve palsies should
also be considered.
Sixth nerve paralysis causes convergent squint in the primary
position with failure of abduction of the affected eye, producing
horizontal diplopia that increases on gaze to the affected side and on
looking into the distance. It is an important sign of raised intracranial
pressure. Sixth nerve palsy may also be due to trauma, neoplasms,
brainstem lesions, or medical causes such as in third nerve palsy.
An intracranial or intraorbital mass lesion should be considered in
any patient with an isolated ocular motor palsy. In patients with
isolated ocular motor nerve palsies presumed to be due to medical
causes, brain MRI is generally only necessary if recovery has not
begun within 3 months, although some authors suggest that it should
be undertaken in all cases.
Ocular motor nerve palsies occurring in association with other
neurologic signs may be due to lesions in the brainstem, the
cavernous sinus, or in the orbit. Lesions around the cavernous sinus
involve the upper divisions of the trigeminal nerve, the ocular motor
nerves, and occasionally the optic chiasm. Orbital apex lesions
involve the optic nerve and the ocular motor nerves.
Myasthenia gravis and dysthyroid eye disease should also be
considered in the differential diagnosis of disordered extraocular
movements.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any patient with recent onset isolated third nerve palsy,
particularly if there is pupillary involvement or pain, must be
referred emergently for neurologic assessment and
possible CT, MR, or catheter angiography for intracranial
aneurysm.
•    All patients with recent onset double vision should be
referred urgently to an ophthalmologist or neurologist,
particularly if there is multiple cranial nerve dysfunction or
other neurologic abnormalities.
 When to Admit
Patients with double vision due to giant cell arteritis may require
emergency admission for high-dose corticosteroid therapy and
close monitoring to ensure that treatment is adequate.
Woodruff MM et al. Evaluation of third nerve palsy in the
emergency department. J Emerg Med. 2008 Oct;35(3):239–46.
[PMID: 17976817]
 
DYSTHYROID EYE DISEASE
Dysthyroid eye disease is a syndrome of clinical and orbital imaging
abnormalities caused by deposition of mucopolysaccharides and
infiltration with chronic inflammatory cells of the orbital tissues,
particularly the extraocular muscles. It usually occurs in association
with autoimmune hyperthyroidism, when it is known as Graves
disease. However clinical or laboratory evidence of thyroid
dysfunction and thyroid autoantibodies may not be detectable at
presentation or even on long-term follow-up. Radioiodine therapy
and cigarette smoking increase its severity.
 Clinical Findings
The primary clinical features are proptosis, lid retraction and lid lag,
conjunctival chemosis and episcleral inflammation, and extraocular
muscle dysfunction. Resulting symptoms are cosmetic abnormalities,
surface irritation, which usually responds to artificial tears, and
diplopia, which should be treated conservatively (eg, with prisms) in
the active stages of the disease and only by surgery when the
disease has been static for at least 6 months. The important
complications are corneal exposure and optic nerve compression,
both of which may lead to marked visual loss. The primary imaging
features are enlargement of the extraocular muscles, usually affecting
both orbits.
 Treatment
Treatment options for optic nerve compression or severe corneal
exposure are intravenous pulse methylpredniso-lone therapy (eg, 1
g daily for 3 days, repeated weekly for 3 weeks), oral prednisolone
80–100 mg/d, radiotherapy, or surgery (usually consisting of
extensive removal of bone from the medial, inferior, and lateral walls
of the orbit), either singly or in combination.
The optimal management of moderately severe dysthyroid eye
disease without visual loss is controversial. Systemic corticosteroids
and radiotherapy have not been shown to provide definite long-term
benefit. Peribulbar corticosteroid injections have been advocated.
Surgical decompression may be justified in patients with marked
proptosis. Lateral tarsorrhaphy may be used for moderately severe
corneal exposure. Other procedures are particularly useful for
correcting lid retraction but should not be undertaken until the
orbital disease is quiescent and orbital decompression or
extraocular muscle surgery has been undertaken. Establishing and
maintaining euthyroidism are important in all cases.
 When to Refer
All patients with dysthyroid eye disease should be referred to an
ophthalmologist, urgently if there is reduced vision.
Bahn RS. Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl J Med. 2010 Feb 25;
362(8):726–38. [PMID: 20181974]
 
ORBITAL CELLULITIS
Orbital cellulitis is characterized by fever, proptosis, restriction of
extraocular movements, and swelling with redness of the lids.
Immediate treatment with intravenous antibiotics is necessary to
prevent optic nerve damage and spread of infection to the
cavernous sinuses, meninges, and brain. Infection of the paranasal
sinuses is the usual underlying cause; examples of infecting
organisms include S pneumoniae, other streptococci, H influenzae
and, less commonly, S aureus. Penicillinase-resistant penicillin, such
as nafcillin, is recommended, possibly together with metronidazole
or clindamycin to treat anaerobic infections (Table 30–9). If trauma
is the underlying cause, a cephalosporin, such as cefazolin or
ceftriaxone, should be added (Table 30–6) to ensure coverage for
S aureus and group A β-hemolytic streptococci. Vancomycin or
clindamycin may be required if there is concern about methicillin-
resistant S aureus (MRSA). For patients with penicillin
hypersensitivity, vancomycin, levofloxacin (Table 30–8), and
metronidazole are recommended. The response to antibiotics is
usually excellent, but abscess formation may necessitate surgical
drainage. In immunocompromised patients, zygomycosis must be
considered.
 When to Refer
All patients with suspected orbital cellulitis must be referred
emergently to an ophthalmologist.
Hauser A et al. Periorbital and orbital cellulitis. Pediatr Rev. 2010
Jun;31(6):242-9. [PMID: 20516236]
 
Hennemann S et al. Clinical inquiries. What is the best initial
treatment for orbital cellulitis in children? J Fam Pract. 2007
Aug;56(8):662–4. [PMID: 17669292]
 
OCULAR TRAUMA
1. Conjunctival & Corneal foreign Bodies
If a patient complains of “something in my eye” and gives a
consistent history, a foreign body is usually present on the cornea or
under the upper lid even though it may not be visible. Visual acuity
should be tested before treatment is instituted, as a basis for
comparison in the event of complications.
After a local anesthetic (eg, proparacaine, 0.5%) is instilled, the
eye is examined with a hand flashlight, using oblique illumination,
and loupe. Corneal foreign bodies may be made more apparent by
the instillation of sterile fluorescein. They are then removed with a
sterile wet cotton-tipped applicator or hypodermic needle.
Polymyxinbacitracin ophthalmic ointment should be instilled. It is not
necessary to patch the eye.
Steel foreign bodies usually leave a diffuse rust ring. This requires
excision of the affected tissue and is best done under local
anesthesia using a slit lamp. Caution: Anesthetic drops should not
be given to the patient for self-administration.
If there is no infection, a layer of corneal epithelial cells will line
the crater within 24 hours. The intact corneal epithelium forms an
effective barrier to infection, but once it is disturbed the cornea
becomes extremely susceptible to infection. Early infection is
manifested by a white necrotic area around the crater and a small
amount of gray exudate.
In the case of a foreign body under the upper lid, a local
anesthetic is instilled and the lid is everted by grasping the lashes
gently and exerting pressure on the mid portion of the outer surface
of the upper lid with an applicator. If a foreign body is present, it
can easily be removed by passing a wet sterile cotton-tipped
applicator across the conjunctival surface.
 When to Refer
Urgent referral to an ophthalmologist should be arranged if a
corneal foreign body cannot be removed or if there is suspicion of
corneal infection.
2. Intraocular Foreign Body
Intraocular foreign body requires emergency treatment by an
ophthalmologist. Patients giving a history of “some-thing hitting the
eye”—particularly while hammering on metal or using grinding
equipment—must be assessed for this possibility, especially when
no corneal foreign body is seen, a corneal or scleral wound is
apparent, or there is marked visual loss or media opacity. Such
patients must be treated as for corneal laceration (see below) and
referred without delay. Intraocular foreign bodies significantly
increase the risk of intraocular infection.
 When to Refer
Patients with suspected intraocular foreign body must be referred
emergently to an ophthalmologist.
3. Corneal Abrasions
A patient with a corneal abrasion complains of severe pain and
photophobia. There is often a history of trauma to the eye,
commonly involving a fingernail, piece of paper, or contact lens.
Visual acuity is recorded, and the cornea and conjunctiva are
examined with a light and loupe to rule out a foreign body. If an
abrasion is suspected but cannot be seen, sterile fluorescein is
instilled into the conjunctival sac: the area of corneal abrasion will
stain a deeper green than the surrounding cornea.
Treatment includes polymyxin-bacitracin ophthalmic ointment,
mydriatic (cyclopentolate 1%), and analgesics either topical or oral
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. Padding the eye is probably
not helpful for small abrasions. Recurrent corneal erosion may
follow corneal abrasions.
4. Contusions
Contusion injuries of the eye and surrounding structures may cause
ecchymosis (“black eye”), subconjunctival hemorrhage, edema or
rupture of the cornea, hemorrhage into the anterior chamber
(hyphema), rupture of the root of the iris (iridodialysis), paralysis of
the pupillary sphincter, paralysis of the muscles of accommodation,
cataract, dislocation of the lens, vitreous hemorrhage, retinal
hemorrhage and edema (most common in the macular area),
detachment of the retina, rupture of the choroid, fracture of the
orbital floor (“blowout fracture”), or optic nerve injury. Many of
these injuries are immediately obvious; others may not become
apparent for days or weeks. The possibility of globe injury must
always be considered in patients with facial injury, particularly if
there is an orbital fracture. Patients with moderate to severe
contusions should be seen by an ophthalmologist.
Any injury causing hyphema involves the danger of secondary
hemorrhage, which may cause intractable glaucoma with permanent
visual loss (Figure 7–9). The patient should be advised to rest until
complete resolution has occurred. Daily ophthalmologic assessment
is essential. Aspirin and any drugs inhibiting coagulation increase the
risk of secondary hemorrhage and are to be avoided. Sickle cell
anemia or trait adversely affects outcome.
 When to Refer
Patients with moderate or severe ocular contusion should be
referred to an ophthalmologist, emergently if there is hyphema.
 
Figure 7–9. Severe ocular injury with total hyphema. (Used with
permission of James Augsberger; (Reproduced with permission
from Riordan-Eva P, Whitcher, JP. Vaughn & Asbury's General
Ophthalmology, 17th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2008.)
 
Ashaye AO. Traumatic hyphaema: a report of 472 consecutive
cases. BMC Ophthalmol. 2008 Nov 26;8(1):24. [PMID:
19036128]
 
Gharaibeh A et al. Medical interventions for traumatic hyphema.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Jan 19;1:CD005431. [PMID:
21249670]
 
5. Lacerations
A. Lids
If the lid margin is lacerated, the patient should be referred for
specialized care, since permanent notching may result. Lacerations
of the lower eyelid near the inner canthus often sever the lower
canaliculus, for which canalicular intubation is likely to be required.
Lid lacerations not involving the margin may be sutured like any skin
laceration.
B. Conjunctiva
In lacerations of the conjunctiva, sutures are not necessary. To
prevent infection, sulfonamides or other antibiotics are instilled into
the eye until the laceration is healed.
C. Cornea or Sclera
Patients with suspected corneal or scleral lacerations must be seen
promptly by an ophthalmologist (Figure 7–10). Manipulation is kept
to a minimum, since pressure may result in extrusion of the
intraocular contents. The eye is bandaged lightly and covered with a
metal shield that rests on the orbital bones above and below. The
patient should be instructed not to squeeze the eye shut and to
remain still. The eye is routinely imaged by radiography, and CT
scanning if necessary, to identify and localize any metallic intraocular
foreign body. MRI is contraindicated because of the risk of
movement of the foreign body in the magnetic field. Endophthalmitis
occurs in over 5% of open globe injuries.
 
Figure 7–10. Corneal laceration with extrusion of iris. (Used
with permission from James Augsburger; Reproduced from
Riordan-Eva P, Whitcher JP. Vaughan & Asbury's General
Ophthalmology, 17th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2008.)
 
 When to Refer
Patients with suspected globe laceration must be referred
emergently to an ophthalmologist.
Kanoff JM et al. Characteristics and outcomes of work-related
open globe injuries. Am J Ophthalmol. 2010 Aug;150(2): 265–
269.e2. [PMID: 20522411]
 
ULTRAVIOLET KERATITIS (Actinic Keratitis)
Ultraviolet burns of the cornea are usually caused by use of a
sunlamp without eye protection, exposure to a welding arc, or
exposure to the sun when skiing (“snow blindness”). There are no
immediate symptoms, but about 6–12 hours later the patient
complains of agonizing pain and severe photophobia. Slit-lamp
examination after instillation of sterile fluorescein shows diffuse
punctate staining of both corneas.
Treatment consists of binocular patching and instillation of 1–2
drops of 1% cyclopentolate (to relieve the discomfort of ciliary
spasm). All patients recover within 24–48 hours without
complications. Local anesthetics should not be prescribed because
they delay corneal epithelial healing.
CHEMICAL CONJUNCTIVITIS & KERATITIS
Chemical burns are treated by copious irrigation of the eyes with
saline solution, plain water, or buffering solution if available as soon
as possible after exposure. Neutralization of an acid with an alkali
or vice versa generates heat and may cause further damage. Alkali
injuries are more serious and require prolonged irrigation, since
alkalies are not precipitated by the proteins of the eye as are acids.
It is important to remove any retained particulate matter such as is
typically present in injuries involving cement and building plaster.
This may require double eversion of the upper lid. The pupil should
be dilated with 1% cyclopentolate, 1 drop twice a day, to relieve
discomfort and prophylactic topical antibiotics should be started. In
moderate to severe injuries, intensive topical corticosteroids and
topical and systemic vitamin C are also necessary. Complications
include mucus deficiency, scarring of the cornea and conjunctiva,
symblepharon (adhesions between the tarsal and bulbar
conjunctiva), tear duct obstruction, and secondary infection. It can
be difficult to assess severity of chemical burns without slit-lamp
examination.
Rodrigues Z. Irrigation of the eye after alkaline and acidic burns.
Emerg Nurse. 2009 Dec;17(8):26–9. [PMID: 20043429]
 
TREATMENT OF OCULAR DISORDERS
Table 7–2 lists commonly used ophthalmic drugs and their
indications and costs.
PRECAUTIONS IN MANAGEMENT OF OCULAR
DISORDERS
1. Use of Local Anesthetics
Unsupervised self-administration of local anesthetics is dangerous
because the patient may further injure an anesthetized eye without
knowing it. The drug may also interfere with the normal healing
process.
2. Pupillary Dilation
Dilating the pupil can very occasionally precipitate acute glaucoma if
the patient has a narrow anterior chamber angle and should be
undertaken with caution if the anterior chamber is obviously shallow
(readily determined by oblique illumination of the anterior segment
of the eye). A short-acting mydriatic such as tropicamide should be
used and the patient warned to report immediately if ocular
discomfort or redness develops. Angle closure is more likely to
occur if pilocarpine is used to overcome pupillary dilation than if the
pupil is allowed to constrict naturally.
3. Corticosteroid Therapy
Repeated use of local corticosteroids presents several hazards:
herpes simplex (dendritic) keratitis, fungal infection, open-angle
glaucoma, and cataract formation. Furthermore, perforation of the
cornea may occur when the corticosteroids are used for herpes
simplex keratitis. Topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are
being used increasingly. The potential for causing or exacerbating
systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, gastritis, osteoporosis, or
glaucoma must always be borne in mind when systemic
corticosteroids are prescribed, such as for uveitis or giant cell
arteritis.
4. Contaminated Eye Medications
Ophthalmic solutions are prepared with the same degree of care as
fluids intended for intravenous administration, but once bottles are
opened there is always a risk of contamination, particularly with
solutions of tetracaine, proparacaine, fluorescein, and any
preservative-free preparations. The most dangerous is fluorescein,
as this solution is frequently contaminated with P aeruginosa, which
can rapidly destroy the eye. Sterile fluorescein filter paper strips are
recommended for use in place of fluorescein solutions.
Whether in plastic or glass containers, eye solutions should not
remain in use for long periods after the bottle is opened. Four
weeks after opening is an absolute maximal time to use a solution
containing preservatives before discarding. Preservative-free
preparations should be kept refrigerated and discarded within 1
week after opening.
If the eye has been injured accidentally or by surgical trauma, it is
of the greatest importance to use freshly opened bottles of sterile
medications or single-use eyedropper units.
5. Toxic & Hypersensitivity Reactions to Topical Therapy
In patients receiving long-term topical therapy, local toxic or
hypersensitivity reactions to the active agent or preservatives may
develop, especially if there is inadequate tear secretion.
Preservatives in contact lens cleaning solutions may produce similar
problems. Burning and soreness are exacerbated by drop instillation
or contact lens insertion; occasionally, fibrosis and scarring of the
conjunctiva and cornea may occur.
An antibiotic instilled into the eye can sensitize the patient to that
drug and cause an allergic reaction upon subsequent systemic
administration.
6. Systemic Effects of Ocular Drugs
The systemic absorption of certain topical drugs (through the
conjunctival vessels and lacrimal drainage system) must be
considered when there is a systemic medical contraindication to the
use of the drug. Ophthalmic solutions of the nonselective β-
blockers, eg, timolol, may worsen bradycardia, congestive heart
failure, or asthma. Phenylephrine eye drops may precipitate
hypertensive crises and angina. Also to be considered are adverse
interactions between systemically administered and ocular drugs.
Using only 1 or 2 drops at a time and a few minutes of nasolacrimal
occlusion or eyelid closure ensure maximum efficacy and decrease
systemic side effects of topical agents.
ADVERSE OCULAR EFFECTS OF SYSTEMIC DRUGS
Systemically administered drugs produce a wide variety of adverse
effects on the visual system. Table 7–3 lists the major examples.
Blomquist PH. Ocular complications of systemic medications. Am
J Med Sci. 2010 Dec 6. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
21139494]
 
Fraunfelder FW. Ocular & systemic side effects of drugs. In:
Vaughan & Asbury's General Ophthalmology, 17th ed.
Riordan-Eva P et al (editors). McGraw-Hill, 2008.
 
 
Table 7–3. Adverse ophthalmic effects of systemic drugs.
 
 
 
Drug
Possible Side Effects
Respiratory drugs
Anticholinergic
bronchodilators
Angle-closure glaucoma due to
mydriasis, blurring of vision due to
cycloplegia, dry eyes.
Oxygen
Retinopathy of prematurity.
Sympathomimetic
bronchodilators and
decongestants
Angle-closure glaucoma due to
mydriasis.
Cardiovascular system drugs
α2-Antagonists
(terazosin,
doxazosin)
Complications during (floppy-iris
syndrome) and after cataract
surgery.
Amiodarone
Corneal deposits (vortex
keratopathy), optic neuropathy,
thyroid ophthalmopathy.
Carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors
(acetazolamide)
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, near-
sightedness.
Digitalis
Disturbance of color vision,
photopsia.
Phosphodiesterase
type 5 inhibitors (eg,
sildenafil)
Disturbance of color vision,
ischemic optic neuropathy.
Statins
Myasthenic syndrome.
Thiazides
Xanthopsia (yellow vision), near-
sightedness.
Gastrointestinal drugs
Anticholinergic
agents
Angle-closure glaucoma due to
mydriasis, blurring of vision due to
cycloplegia, dry eyes.
Urinary tract drugs
α2-Antagonists
(tamsulosin,
alfuzosin, terazosin,
doxazosin)
Complications during (floppy-iris
syndrome) and after cataract
surgery.
Central nervous system drugs
Amphetamines
Widening of palpebral fissure,
blurring of vision due to mydriasis.
Anticholinergic
agents including
preoperative
medications
Angle-closure glaucoma due to
mydriasis, blurring of vision due to
cycloplegia, dry eyes.
Diazepam
Nystagmus.
Haloperidol
Capsular cataract.
Lithium carbonate
Proptosis, oculogyric crisis,
nystagmus.
Monoamine oxidase
Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors
Nystagmus.
Morphine
Miosis.
Neostigmine
Nystagmus, miosis.
Paroxetine
Angle-closure glaucoma.
Phenothiazines
Deposits of pigment in conjunctiva,
cornea, lens, and retina, oculogyric
crises.
Phenytoin
Nystagmus.
Risperidone
Complications during (floppy-iris
syndrome) and after cataract
surgery.
Topiramate
Angle-closure glaucoma, near-
sightedness.
Tricyclic agents
Angle-closure glaucoma due to
mydriasis, blurring of vision due to
cycloplegia.
Vigabatrin
Visual field constriction.
Obstetric drugs
Sympathomimetic
tocolytics
Angle-closure glaucoma due to
mydriasis.
Hormonal agents
Female sex
hormones
Retinal artery occlusion, retinal vein
occlusion, papilledema, extraocular
muscle palsies, ischemic optic
neuropathy.
Tamoxifen
Crystalline retinal and corneal
deposits, optic neuropathy.
Immunomodulators
Corticosteroids
Cataract (posterior subcapsular);
susceptibility to viral (herpes
simplex), bacterial, and fungal
infections; steroid-induced
glaucoma.
Cyclosporine
Posterior reversible
leukoencephalopathy.
Interferon-α
Retinopathy, keratoconjunctivitis,
dry eyes, optic neuropathy.
Tacrolimus
Optic neuropathy, posterior
reversible leukoencephalopathy.
Antibacterials
Chloramphenicol
Optic neuropathy.
Ethambutol
Optic neuropathy.
Fluoroquinolones
Diplopia.
Isoniazid
Optic neuropathy.
Linezolid
Optic neuropathy.
Streptomycin
Optic neuropathy, Stevens-Johnson
syndrome.
Sulfonamides
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, near-
sightedness.
Tetracycline,
doxycycline,
minocycline
Papilledema.
Antimalarial agents
Chloroquine,
hydroxychloroquine
Retinal degeneration principally
involving the macula, keratopathy.
Amebicides
Iodochlorhydroxyquin Optic neuropathy.
Chemotherapeutic agents
Chlorambucil
Optic neuropathy.
Cisplatin
Optic neuropathy
Fluorouracil
Lacrimal obstruction.
Vincristine
Optic neuropathy.
Heavy metals
Gold salts
Deposits in the cornea, conjunctiva,
and lens.
Lead compounds
Optic neuropathy, papilledema,
ocular palsies.
Chelating agents
Deferoxamine
Retinopathy, optic neuropathy, lens
opacity.
Penicillamine
Ocular pemphigoid, optic
neuropathy, myasthenic syndrome.
Oral hypoglycemic agents
Chlorpropamide
Refractive error, Stevens-Johnson
syndrome, optic neuropathy.
Vitamins
Vitamin A
Papilledema.
Vitamin D
Band-shaped keratopathy.
Antirheumatic agents
Indomethacin
Corneal deposits.
Phenylbutazone
Retinal hemorrhages.
Salicylates
Subconjunctival or retinal
hemorrhages, nystagmus.
Dermatologic agents
Retinoids
(isotretinoin,
tretinoin, acitretin,
and etretinate)
Papilledema, blepharoconjunctivitis,
corneal opacities, decreased
contact lens tolerance, decreased
dark adaptation, teratogenic ocular
abnormalities.
Bisphosphonates
Alendronate
Scleritis, episcleritis, uveitis.
Pamidronate
Scleritis, episcleritis, uveitis.
 
 
Ear, Nose, & Throat
Disorders
Lawrence R. Lustig, MD, & Joshua S.
Schindler, MD
DISEASES OF THE EAR
 
HEARING LOSS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Three main types of hearing loss: conductive, sensory, and neural.
 Most commonly due to cerumen impaction, transient eustachian
tube dysfunction associated with upper respiratory tract infection,
or age-related hearing loss.
 
 Classification & Epidemiology
Table 8–1 categorizes hearing loss as normal, mild, moderate,
severe, and profound and outlines the vocal equivalent as well as
the decibel range.
A. Conductive Hearing Loss
Conductive hearing loss results from dysfunction of the external or
middle ear. There are four mechanisms, each resulting in impairment
of the passage of sound vibrations to the inner ear: (1) obstruction
(eg, cerumen impaction), (2) mass loading (eg, middle ear effusion),
(3) stiffness effect (eg, otosclerosis), and (4) discontinuity (eg,
ossicular disruption). Conductive losses in adults are most
commonly due to cerumen impaction or transient eustachian tube
dysfunction associated with upper respiratory tract infection.
Persistent conductive losses usually result from chronic ear infection,
trauma, or otosclerosis. Conductive hearing loss is often correctable
with medical or surgical therapy—or in some cases both.
B. Sensory Hearing Loss
Sensory and neural causes of hearing loss are difficult to
differentiate due to testing methodology, thus often referred to as
‘sensorineural.’ Sensory hearing loss results from deterioration of
the cochlea, usually due to loss of hair cells from the organ of Corti.
Sensorineural losses in adults are common. The most common form
is a gradually progressive, predominantly high-frequency loss with
advancing age (presbyacusis). Additional common causes include
excessive noise exposure, head trauma, and systemic diseases. An
individual's genetic make-up influences all of these causes of hearing
loss. Sensory hearing loss is usually not correctable with medical or
surgical therapy but often may be prevented or stabilized. An
exception is a sudden sensory hearing loss, which may respond to
corticosteroids if delivered within several weeks of onset.
Huang Q et al. Age-related hearing loss or presbycusis. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Aug;267(8):1179–91. [PMID: 2046441]
 
Marchese MR et al. Role of stapes surgery in improving hearing
loss caused by otosclerosis. J Laryngol Otol. 2007
May;121(5):438–43. [PMID: 17112393]
 
Rauch SD. Clinical practice. Idiopathic sudden sensorineural
hearing loss. N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 21;359(8):833–40.
[PMID: 18716300]
 
C. Neural Hearing Loss
Neural hearing loss occurs with lesions involving the eighth nerve,
auditory nuclei, ascending tracts, or auditory cortex. It is the least
common clinically recognized cause of hearing loss. Causes include
acoustic neuroma, multiple sclerosis, and auditory neuropathy.
Manchaiah VK et al. The genetic basis of auditory neuropathy
spectrum disorder (ANSD). Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2011
Feb;75(2):151–8. [PMID: 21176974]
 
 Evaluation of Hearing (Audiology)
In a quiet room, the hearing level may be estimated by having the
patient repeat aloud words presented in a soft whisper, a normal
spoken voice, or a shout. A 512-Hz tuning fork is useful in
differentiating conductive from sensorineural losses. In the Weber
test, the tuning fork is placed on the forehead or front teeth. In
conductive losses, the sound appears louder in the poorer-hearing
ear, whereas in sensorineural losses it radiates to the better side. In
the Rinne test, the tuning fork is placed alternately on the mastoid
bone and in front of the ear canal. In conductive losses > 25dB,
bone conduction exceeds air conduction; in sensorineural losses, the
opposite is true.
 
Table 8–1. Hearing loss classification.
 
 
 
 
Classification Vocal Equivalent Decibel (dB) Range
Normal
Soft whisper
0-20 dB
Mild
Soft spoken voice 20–40 dB
Moderate
Normal spoken
40–60 dB
Severe
Loud spoken voice 60–80 dB
Profound
Shout
>80 dB
 
Formal audiometric studies are performed in a soundproofed
room. Pure-tone thresholds in decibels (dB) are obtained over the
range of 250–8000 Hz for both air and bone conduction.
Conductive losses create a gap between the air and bone
thresholds, whereas in sensorineural losses both air and bone
thresholds are equally diminished. Speech discrimination measures
the clarity of hearing, reported as percentage correct (90–100% is
normal). The site of the lesion responsible for sensorineural loss
(cochlea versus central auditory system) may be determined with
auditory brainstem-evoked responses; however, an MRI scan is
preferred for its better sensitivity and specificity in the evaluation of
central lesions.
Every patient who complains of a hearing loss should be referred
for audiologic evaluation unless the cause is easily remediable (eg,
cerumen impaction, otitis media). Because idiopathic sudden
sensorineural hearing loss requires treatment (corticosteroids) within
a limited several week time period, any new-onset hearing loss
without obvious ear pathology needs an immediate audiometric
referral. Routine audiologic screening is recommended for adults
who have been exposed to potentially injurious levels of noise or in
those who have reached the age of 65, after which screening
evaluations may be done every few years.
Isaacson B. Hearing loss. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Sep;94(5):973–88. [PMID: 20736107]
 
Jerger J. New horizons in speech audiometry? J Am Acad Audiol.
2010 Jul–Aug;21(7):424–5. [PMID: 20807478]
 
 Hearing Rehabilitation
Patients with hearing loss not correctable by medical therapy may
benefit from hearing amplification. Contemporary hearing aids are
comparatively free of distortion and have been miniaturized to the
point where they often may be contained entirely within the ear
canal or lie inconspicuously behind the ear. To optimize the benefit,
a hearing aid must be carefully selected to conform to the nature of
the hearing loss. Digitally programmable hearing aids are widely
available and allow optimization of speech intelligibility and
improved performance in difficult listening circumstances. Aside
from hearing aids, many assistive devices are available to improve
comprehension in individual and group settings, to help with hearing
television and radio programs, and for telephone communication.
For patients with conductive loss or unilateral profound
sensorineural loss, the bone-anchored hearing aid uses an oscillating
post drilled into the mastoid, directly stimulating the ipsilateral
cochlea (for conductive losses) or contralateral ear (profound
unilateral sensorineural loss).
For patients with severe to profound sensory hearing loss, the
cochlear implant—an electronic device that is surgically implanted
into the cochlea to stimulate the auditory nerve—offers socially
beneficial auditory rehabilitation to most adults with acquired
deafness. New trends in cochlear implantation include its use for
patients with only partial deafness, preserving residual hearing and
allowing both acoustic and electrical hearing in the same ear, as well
as bilateral cochlear implantation.
Carlson ML et al. Cochlear implantation in the octogenarian and
nonagenarian. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Oct;31(8):1343–9. [PMID:
20729782]
 
Hol MK et al. Bone-anchored hearing aids in patients with
acquired and congenital unilateral inner ear deafness (Baha
CROS): clinical evaluation of 56 cases. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol.
2010 Jul;119(7):447–54. [PMID: 20734965]
 
Woodson EA et al. The hybrid cochlear implant: a review. Adv
Otorhinolaryngol. 2010;67:125–34. [PMID: 19955729]
 
DISEASES OF THE AURICLE
Disorders of the auricle are for the most part dermatologic. Skin
cancers due to sun exposure are common and may be treated with
standard techniques. Traumatic auricular hematoma must be
recognized and drained to prevent significant cosmetic deformity
(cauliflower ear) or canal blockage resulting from dissolution of
supporting cartilage. Similarly, cellulitis of the auricle must be treated
promptly to prevent development of perichondritis and its resultant
deformity. Relapsing polychondritis is a rheumatologic disorder
often associated with recurrent, frequently bilateral, painful episodes
of auricular erythema and edema. Treatment with corticosteroids
may help forestall cartilage dissolution. Respiratory compromise
may occur as a result of progressive involvement of the cartilaginous
tracheo-bronchial tree. Chondritis and perichondritis may be
differentiated from auricular cellulitis by sparing of involvement of
the lobule, which does not contain cartilage.
Kubota T et al. Treatment of auricular hematoma by OK-432.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Jun;142(6):863–6. [PMID:
20493359]
 
van der Hulst AE et al. A red ear. J Pediatr. 2009
Apr;154(4):624. [PMID: 19324228]
 
DISEASES OF THE EAR CANAL
1. Cerumen Impaction
Cerumen is a protective secretion produced by the outer portion of
the ear canal. In most persons, the ear canal is self-cleansing.
Recommended hygiene consists of cleaning the external opening
with a washcloth over the index finger without entering the canal
itself. In most cases, cerumen impaction is self-induced through ill-
advised attempts at cleaning the ear. It may be relieved with
detergent ear drops (eg, 3% hydrogen peroxide; 6.5% carbamide
peroxide), mechanical removal, suction, or irrigation. Irrigation is
performed with water at body temperature to avoid a vestibular
caloric response. The stream should be directed at the posterior ear
canal wall adjacent to the cerumen plug. Irrigation should be
performed only when the tympanic membrane is known to be intact.
Use of jet irrigators designed for cleaning teeth (eg, WaterPik)
for wax removal should be avoided since they may result in
tympanic membrane perforations. Following professional irrigation,
the ear canal should be thoroughly dried (eg, by instilling isopropyl
alcohol or using a hair blow-dryer on low-power setting) to reduce
the likelihood of inducing external otitis. Specialty referral for
cleaning under microscopic guidance is indicated when the
impaction is frequently recurrent, has not responded to routine
measures, or if the patient has a history of chronic otitis media or
tympanic membrane perforation.
Roland PS et al. Clinical practice guideline: cerumen impaction.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008 Sep;139(3 Suppl 2):S1–S21.
[PMID: 18707628]
 
2. Foreign Bodies
Foreign bodies in the ear canal are more frequent in children than in
adults. Firm materials may be removed with a loop or a hook,
taking care not to displace the object medially toward the tympanic
membrane; microscopic guidance is helpful. Aqueous irrigation
should not be performed for organic foreign bodies (eg, beans,
insects), because water may cause them to swell. Living insects are
best immobilized before removal by filling the ear canal with
lidocaine.
Burton M et al. Foreign body in the external auditory canal. Ear
Nose Throat J. 2009 Jul;88(7):988. [PMID: 19623522]
 
3. External Otitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painful erythema and edema of the ear canal skin.
 Often with purulent exudate.
 May evolve into osteomyelitis of the skull base, often called
malignant external otitis, particularly in the diabetic or
immunocompromised patient.
 
 General Considerations
External otitis presents with otalgia, frequently accompanied by
pruritus and purulent discharge. There is often a history of recent
water exposure (ie, swimmer's ear) or mechanical trauma (eg,
scratching, cotton applicators). External otitis is usually caused by
gram-negative rods (eg, Pseudomonas, Proteus) or fungi (eg,
Aspergillus), which grow in the presence of excessive moisture.
Persistent external otitis in the diabetic or immunocompromised
patient may evolve into osteomyelitis of the skull base, often called
malignant external otitis. Usually caused by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, osteomyelitis begins in the floor of the ear canal and
may extend into the middle fossa floor, the clivus, and even the
contralateral skull base.
 Clinical Findings
Examination reveals erythema and edema of the ear canal skin,
often with a purulent exudate. Manipulation of the auricle often
elicits pain. Because the lateral surface of the tympanic membrane is
ear canal skin, it is often erythematous. However, in contrast to
acute otitis media, it moves normally with pneumatic otoscopy.
When the canal skin is very edematous, it may be impossible to
visualize the tym-panic membrane. Malignant external otitis
usually presents with persistent foul aural discharge, granulations in
the ear canal, deep otalgia, and in advanced cases, progressive
cranial nerve palsies involving nerves VI, VII, IX, X, XI, or XII.
Diagnosis is confirmed by the demonstration of osseous erosion on
CT and radionuclide scanning.
 Treatment
Fundamental to the treatment of external otitis is protection of the
ear from additional moisture and avoidance of further mechanical
injury by scratching. In cases of swimmer's ear, acidification with a
drying agent (ie, a 50/50 mixture of isopropyl alcohol/white vinegar)
after getting moisture into the ear is often helpful. When infected,
acidic otic antibiotic drops that contain either an aminoglycoside or
fluoroquinolone antibiotic, with or without corticosteroids, are
usually effective (eg, neomycin sulfate, polymyxin B sulfate, and
hydrocortisone). Purulent debris filling the ear canal should be gently
removed to permit entry of the topical medication. Drops should be
used abundantly (five or more drops three or four times a day) to
penetrate the depths of the canal. When substantial edema of the
canal wall prevents entry of drops into the ear canal, a wick is
placed to facilitate entry of the medication. In recalcitrant cases—
particularly when cellulitis of the periauricular tissue has developed
—oral fluoroquinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily for 1
week) are the drugs of choice because of their effectiveness against
Pseudomonas species. Any case of persistent otitis externa in an
immunocompromised or diabetic individual must be referred for
specialty evaluation.
Treatment of malignant external otitis is medical, requiring
prolonged antipseudomonal antibiotic administration, often for
several months. Although intravenous therapy is often required,
selected patients may be treated with ciprofloxacin (500–1000 mg
orally twice daily), which has proved effective against many of the
causative Pseudomonas strains. To avoid relapse, antibiotic
therapy should be continued, even in the asymptomatic patient, until
gallium scanning indicates a marked reduction in the inflammatory
process. Surgical debridement of infected bone is reserved for
cases of deterioration despite medical therapy.
Carfrae MJ et al. Malignant otitis externa. Otolaryngol Clin North
Am. 2008 Jun;41(3):537–49. [PMID: 18435997]
 
Kaushik V et al. Interventions for acute otitis externa. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 20; (1):CD004740. [PMID:
20091565]
 
Patmore H et al. Skull base infection presenting with multiple lower
cranial nerve palsies. Am J Otolaryngol. 2010 Sep–
Oct;31(5):376–80. [PMID: 20015773]
 
Roland PS et al; Cipro HC Study Group. A single topical agent is
clinically equivalent to the combination of topical and oral antibiotic
treatment for otitis externa. Am J Otolaryngol. 2008 Jul–
Aug;29(4):255–61. [PMID: 18598837]
 
Wall GM et al. Ciprofloxacin 0.3%/dexamethasone 0.1% sterile
otic suspension for the topical treatment of ear infections: a review
of the literature. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009 Feb;28(2):141–4.
[PMID: 19116600]
 
4. Pruritus
Pruritus of the external auditory canal, particularly at the meatus, is a
common problem. While it may be associated with external otitis or
with dermatologic conditions such as seborrheic dermatitis and
psoriasis, most cases are self-induced either from excoriation or by
overly zealous ear cleaning. To permit regeneration of the protective
cerumen blanket, patients should be instructed to avoid use of soap
and water or cotton swabs in the ear canal and avoid any
scratching. Patients with excessively dry canal skin may benefit from
application of mineral oil, which helps counteract dryness and repel
moisture. When an inflammatory component is present, topical
application of a corticosteroid (eg, 0.1% triamcinolone) may be
beneficial. Symptomatic reduction of pruritus may also be obtained
by use of oral antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine, 25 mg orally at
bedtime). Topical application of isopropyl alcohol promptly relieves
ear canal pruritus in many patients.
Acar B et al. New treatment strategy and assessment questionnaire
for external auditory canal pruritus: topical pimecrolimus therapy
and Modified Itch Severity Scale. J Laryngol Otol. 2010
Feb;124(2):147–51. [PMID: 19922703]
 
Garvey C et al. A review of common dermatologic disorders of
the external ear. J Am Acad Audiol. 2008 Mar;19(3):226–32.
[PMID: 18672650]
 
5. Exostoses & Osteomas
Bony overgrowths of the ear canal are a frequent incidental finding
and occasionally have clinical significance. Clinically, they present as
skin-covered bony mounds in the medial ear canal obscuring the
tympanic membrane to a variable degree. Solitary osteomas are of
no significance as long as they do not cause obstruction or infection.
Multiple exostoses, which are generally acquired from repeated
exposure to cold water (eg, “surfer's ear”) often progress and
require surgical removal.
King JF et al. Laterality of exostosis in surfers due to evaporative
cooling effect. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Feb;31(2):345–51. [PMID:
19806064]
 
6. Neoplasia
The most common neoplasm of the ear canal is squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC). When an apparent otitis externa does not
resolve on therapy, SCC should be suspected and biopsy
performed. This disease carries a very high 5-year mortality rate
because the tumor tends to invade the lymphatics of the cranial base
and must be treated with wide surgical resection and radiation
therapy. Adenomatous tumors, originating from the ceruminous
glands, generally follow a more indolent course.
Chang CH et al. Treatments and outcomes of malignant tumors of
external auditory canal. Am J Otolaryngol. 2009 Jan–
Feb;30(1):44–8. [PMID: 19027512]
 
Prabhu R et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the external auditory
canal: long-term clinical outcomes using surgery and external-beam
radiotherapy. Am J Clin Oncol. 2009 Aug;32(4):401–4. [PMID:
19398900]
 
DISEASES OF THE EUSTACHIAN TUBE
1. Eustachian Tube Dysfunction
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Aural fullness.
 Fluctuating hearing.
 Discomfort with barometric pressure change.
 At risk for serous otitis media.
 
The tube that connects the middle ear to the nasopharynx—the
eustachian tube—provides ventilation and drainage for the middle
ear cleft. It is normally closed, opening only during swallowing or
yawning. When eustachian tube function is compromised, air
trapped within the middle ear becomes absorbed and negative
pressure results. The most common causes of eustachian tube
dysfunction are diseases associated with edema of the tubal lining,
such as viral upper respiratory tract infections and allergy. The
patient usually reports a sense of fullness in the ear and mild to
moderate impairment of hearing. When the tube is only partially
blocked, swallowing or yawning may elicit a popping or crackling
sound. Examination may reveal retraction of the tympanic
membrane and decreased mobility on pneumatic otoscopy.
Following a viral illness, this disorder is usually transient, lasting days
to weeks. Treatment with systemic and intra-nasal decongestants
(eg, pseudoephedrine, 60 mg orally every 4 hours; oxymetazoline,
0.05% spray every 8–12 hours) combined with autoinflation by
forced exhalation against closed nostrils may hasten relief.
Autoinflation should not be recommended to patients with active
intra-nasal infection, since this maneuver may precipitate middle ear
infection. Allergic patients may also benefit from desensitization or
intranasal corticosteroids (eg, beclomethasone dipropionate, two
sprays in each nostril twice daily for 2–6 weeks). Air travel, rapid
altitudinal change, and underwater diving should be avoided during
an active phase of the disease.
Conversely, an overly patent eustachian tube, termed “patulous
eustachian tube,” is a relatively uncommon problem, though may be
quite distressing. Typical complaints include fullness in the ear and
autophony, an exaggerated ability to hear oneself breathe and
speak. A patulous eustachian tube may develop during rapid weight
loss, or it may be idiopathic. In contrast to a hypofunctioning
eustachian tube, the aural pressure is often made worse by exertion
and may diminish during an upper respiratory tract infection.
Although physical examination is usually normal, respiratory
excursions of the tympanic membrane may occasionally be detected
during vigorous breathing. Treatment includes avoidance of
decongestant products, insertion of a ventilating tube to reduce the
outward stretch of the eardrum during phonation, and, rarely,
surgical narrowing of the eustachian tube.
Bartlett C et al. Simple mass loading of the tympanic membrane to
alleviate symptoms of patulous eustachian tube. J Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2010 Jun;39(3):259–68. [PMID: 20470670]
 
Caffier PP et al. Impact of laser eustachian tuboplasty on middle
ear ventilation, hearing, and tinnitus in chronic tube dysfunction. Ear
Hear. 2011 Feb;32(1):132–9. [PMID: 20585250]
 
Daudia A et al. Long-term middle-ear ventilation with subannular
tubes. J Laryngol Otol. 2010 Sep;124(9):945–9. [PMID:
20403228]
 
2. Serous Otitis Media
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Blocked eustachian tube remains for a prolonged period.
 Resultant negative pressure will result in transudation of fluid.
 
Prolonged eustachian tube dysfunction with resultant negative
middle ear pressure may cause a transudation of fluid. This
condition, known as serous otitis media, is especially common in
children because their eustachian tubes are narrower and more
horizontal in orientation than those in adults. Serous otitis media is
less common in adults, in whom it usually occurs after an upper
respiratory tract infection, with barotraumas, or with chronic allergic
rhinitis. In any adult with persistent unilateral serous otitis media,
nasopharyngeal carcinoma must be excluded. The tympanic
membrane in serous otitis media is dull and hypomobile,
occasionally accompanied by air bubbles in the middle ear and
conductive hearing loss. The treatment of serous otitis media is
similar to that for eustachian tube dysfunction. A short course of
oral corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, 40 mg/d for 7 days) has been
advocated by some clinicians, as have oral antibiotics (eg,
amoxicillin, 250 mg orally three times daily for 7 days)—or even a
combination of the two. The role of these regimens remains
controversial, but they are probably of little lasting benefit.
When medication fails to bring relief after several months, a
ventilating tube placed through the tympanic membrane may restore
hearing and alleviate the sense of aural fullness. Endoscopically
guided laser expansion of the nasopharyngeal orifice of the
eustachian tube may improve function in recalcitrant cases.
Campbell RG et al. Management of otitis media with effusion in
children with primary ciliary dyskinesia: a literature review. Int J
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Dec;73(12):1630–8. [PMID:
19796826]
 
Skoner AR et al. Allergic rhinitis, histamine, and otitis media.
Allergy Asthma Proc. 2009 Sep–Oct;30(5):470–81. [PMID:
19843400]
 
3. Barotrauma
Persons with poor eustachian tube function (eg, congenital
narrowness or acquired mucosal edema) may be unable to equalize
the barometric stress exerted on the middle ear by air travel, rapid
altitudinal change, or underwater diving. The problem is generally
most acute during airplane descent, since the negative middle ear
pressure tends to collapse and block the eustachian tube. Several
measures are useful to enhance eustachian tube function and avoid
otic barotrauma. The patient should be advised to swallow, yawn,
and autoinflate frequently during descent, which may be painful if the
eustachian 
tube 
collapses. 
Systemic 
decongestants 
(eg,
pseudoephedrine, 60–120 mg) should be taken several hours
before anticipated arrival time so that they will be maximally
effective during descent. Topical decongestants such as 1%
phenylephrine nasal spray should be administered 1 hour before
arrival.
For acute negative middle ear pressure that persists on the
ground, treatment includes decongestants and attempts at
autoinflation. Myringotomy (creation of a small eardrum perforation)
provides immediate relief and is appropriate in the setting of severe
otalgia and hearing loss. Repeated episodes of barotrauma in
persons who must fly frequently may be alleviated by insertion of
ventilating tubes.
Underwater diving may represent an even a greater barometric
stress to the ear than flying. The problem occurs most commonly
during the descent phase, when pain develops within the first 15 feet
if inflation of the middle ear via the eustachian tube has not
occurred. Divers must descend slowly and equilibrate in stages to
avoid the development of severely negative pressures in the
tympanum that may result in hemorrhage (hemotympanum) or
perilymphatic fistula. In the latter, the oval or round window
ruptures, resulting in sensory hearing loss and acute vertigo. Emesis
due to acute labyrinthine dysfunction can be very dangerous during
an underwater dive. Sensory hearing loss or vertigo, which
develops during the ascent phase of a saturation dive, may be the
first (or only) symptom of decompression sickness. Immediate
recompression will return intravascular gas bubbles to solution and
restore the inner ear microcirculation. Patients should be warned to
avoid diving when they have upper respiratory infections or
episodes of nasal allergy. Tympanic membrane perforation is an
absolute contraindication to diving, as the patient will experience an
unbalanced thermal stimulus to the semicircular canals and may
experience vertigo, disorientation, and even emesis.
Duplessis C et al. Exploiting otoacoustic emission testing to identify
clinical and subclinical inner ear barotrauma in divers: potential risk
factor for sensorineural hearing loss. J Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2009 Feb;38(1):67–76. [PMID: 19344615]
 
Goplen FK et al. Vestibular effects of diving–a 6-year prospective
study. Occup Med (Lond). 2010 Jan;60(1):43–8. [PMID:
19854795]
 
DISEASES OF THE MIDDLE EAR
1. Acute Otitis Media
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Otalgia, often with an upper respiratory tract infection.
 Erythema and hypomobility of tympanic membrane.
 
 General Considerations
Acute otitis media is a bacterial infection of the mucosally lined air-
containing spaces of the temporal bone. Purulent material forms not
only within the middle ear cleft but also within the pneumatized
mastoid air cells and petrous apex. Acute otitis media is usually
precipitated by a viral upper respiratory tract infection that causes
eustachian tube obstruction. This results in accumulation of fluid and
mucus, which becomes secondarily infected by bacteria. The most
common pathogens both in adults and in children are
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and
Streptococcus pyogenes.
 Clinical Findings
Acute otitis media is most common in infants and children, although
it may occur at any age. Presenting symptoms and signs include
otalgia, aural pressure, decreased hearing, and often fever. The
typical physical findings are erythema and decreased mobility of the
tympanic membrane. Occasionally, bullae will be seen on the
tympanic membrane.
Rarely, when middle ear empyema is severe, the tympanic
membrane can bulge outward. In such cases, tympanic membrane
rupture is imminent. Rupture is accompanied by a sudden decrease
in pain, followed by the onset of otorrhea. With appropriate
therapy, spontaneous healing of the tympanic membrane occurs in
most cases. When perforation persists, chronic otitis media may
evolve. Mastoid tenderness often accompanies acute otitis media
and is due to the presence of pus within the mastoid air cells. This
alone does not indicate suppurative (surgical) mastoiditis. Frank
swelling over the mastoid bone or the association of cranial
neuropathies or central findings indicates severe disease requiring
urgent care.
 Treatment
The treatment of acute otitis media is specific antibiotic therapy,
often combined with nasal decongestants. The first-choice oral
antibiotic treatment is amoxicillin (20–40 mg/kg/d) or erythromycin
(50 mg/kg/d) plus sulfonamide (150 mg/kg/d) for 10 days.
Alternatives useful in resistant cases are cefaclor (20–40 mg/kg/d)
or amoxicillin-clavulanate (20–40 mg/kg/d) combinations.
Tympanocentesis for bacterial (aerobic and anaerobic) and
fungal culture may be performed by any experienced physician. A
20-gauge spinal needle bent 90 degrees to the hub attached to a 3-
mL syringe is inserted through the inferior portion of the tympanic
membrane. Interposition of a pliable connecting tube between the
needle and syringe permits an assistant to aspirate without inducing
movement of the needle. Tympanocentesis is useful for otitis media
in immunocompromised patients and when infection persists or
recurs despite multiple courses of antibiotics.
Surgical drainage of the middle ear (myringotomy) is reserved for
patients with severe otalgia or when complications of otitis (eg,
mastoiditis, meningitis) have occurred.
Recurrent acute otitis media may be managed with long-term
antibiotic prophylaxis. Single daily oral doses of sulfamethoxazole
(500 mg) or amoxicillin (250 or 500 mg) are given over a period of
1–3 months. Failure of this regimen to control infection is an
indication for insertion of ventilating tubes.
Coco A et al. Management of acute otitis media after publication
of the 2004 AAP and AAFP clinical practice guideline. Pediatrics.
2010 Feb;125(2):214–20. [PMID: 20100746]
 
Gunasekera H et al. Management of children with otitis media: a
summary of evidence from recent systematic reviews. J Paediatr
Child Health. 2009 Oct;45(10):554-62. [PMID: 19751382]
 
2. Chronic Otitis Media
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic otorrhea with or without otalgia.
 Tympanic membrane perforation with conductive hearing loss.
 Often amenable to surgical correction.
 
 General Considerations
Chronic infection of the middle ear and mastoid generally develops
as a consequence of recurrent acute otitis media, although it may
follow other diseases and trauma. Perforation of the tympanic
membrane is usually present. This may be accompanied by mucosal
changes such as polypoid degeneration and granulation tissue and
osseous changes such as osteitis and sclerosis. The bacteriology of
chronic otitis media differs from that of acute otitis media. Common
organisms include P aeruginosa, Proteus species, Staphylococcus
aureus, and mixed anaerobic infections.
 Clinical Findings
The clinical hallmark of chronic otitis media is purulent aural
discharge. Drainage may be continuous or intermittent, with
increased severity during upper respiratory tract infection or
following water exposure. Pain is uncommon except during acute
exacerbations. Conductive hearing loss results from destruction of
the tympanic membrane or ossicular chain, or both.
 Treatment
The medical treatment of chronic otitis media includes regular
removal of infected debris, use of earplugs to protect against water
exposure, and topical antibiotic drops for exacerbations. The
activity of ciprofloxacin against Pseudomonas may help dry a
chronically discharging ear when given in a dosage of 500 mg orally
twice a day for 1–6 weeks.
Definitive management is surgical in most cases. Tympanic
membrane repair may be accomplished with temporalis muscle
fascia. Successful reconstruction of the tympanic membrane may be
achieved in about 90% of cases, often with elimination of infection
and significant improvement in hearing. When the mastoid air cells
are involved by irreversible infection, they should be exenterated at
the same time through a mastoidectomy.
Hartzell LD et al. Timing of tympanoplasty in children with chronic
otitis media with effusion. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2010 Nov 1. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21045692]
 
Morris PS et al. Acute and chronic otitis media. Pediatr Clin North
Am. 2009 Dec;56(6):1383–99. [PMID: 19962027]
 
 Complications of Otitis Media
A. Cholesteatoma
Cholesteatoma is a special variety of chronic otitis media (Figure 8–
1). The most common cause is prolonged eustachian tube
dysfunction, with resultant chronic negative middle ear pressure that
draws inward the upper flaccid portion of the tympanic membrane.
This creates a squamous epithelium-lined sac, which—when its
neck becomes obstructed—may fill with desquamated keratin and
become chronically infected. Cholesteatomas typically erode bone,
with early penetration of the mastoid and destruction of the ossicular
chain. Over time they may erode into the inner ear, involve the facial
nerve, and on rare occasions spread intracranially. Otoscopic
examination may reveal an epitympanic retraction pocket or a
marginal tympanic membrane perforation that exudes keratin debris,
or granulation tissue. The treatment of cholesteatoma is surgical
marsupialization of the sac or its complete removal. This may
require the creation of a “mastoid bowl” in which the ear canal and
mastoid are joined into a large common cavity that must be
periodically cleaned.
 
Figure 8–1. Cholesteatoma. (Courtesy of Vladimir Zlinksy, MD
in Rory F. Sullivan, PhD: Audiology Forum: Video Otoscopy,
www.RCSullivan.com; used with permission from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger, J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Nankivell PC et al. Surgery for tympanic membrane retraction
pockets. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jul 7;
(7):CD007943. [PMID: 2061446]
 
Saunders JE. Does early surgical intervention of middle ear
atelectasis improve long-term results and prevent cholesteatoma?
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008 Oct;134(10):1040–4.
[PMID: 18936347]
 
B. Mastoiditis
Acute suppurative mastoiditis usually evolves following several
weeks of inadequately treated acute otitis media. It is characterized
by postauricular pain and erythema accompanied by a spiking fever.
CT scan reveals coalescence of the mastoid air cells due to
destruction of their bony septa. Initial treatment consists of
intravenous antibiotics and myringotomy for culture and drainage.
Failure of medical therapy indicates the need for surgical drainage
(mastoidectomy).
Pang LH et al. Mastoiditis in a paediatric population: a review of
11 years experience in management. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Nov;73(11):1520–4. [PMID: 19758711]
 
Stähelin-Massik J et al. Mastoiditis in children: a prospective,
observational study comparing clinical presentation, microbiology,
computed tomography, surgical findings and histology. Eur J
Pediatr. 2008 May;167(5):541–8. [PMID: 17668240]
 
C. Petrous Apicitis
The medial portion of the petrous bone between the inner ear and
clivus may become a site of persistent infection when the drainage
of its pneumatic cell tracts becomes blocked. This may cause foul
discharge, deep ear and retro-orbital pain, and sixth nerve palsy
(Gradenigo syndrome); meningitis may be a complication.
Treatment is with prolonged antibiotic therapy (based on culture
results) and surgical drainage via petrous apicectomy.
Wanna GB et al. Contemporary management of intracranial
complications of otitis media. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Jan;31(1):111–
7. [PMID: 19887978]
 
D. Facial Paralysis
Facial palsy may be associated with either acute or chronic otitis
media. In the acute setting, it results from inflammation of the
seventh nerve in its middle ear segment, perhaps mediated through
bacterially secreted neurotoxins. Treatment consists of myringotomy
for drainage and culture, followed by intravenous antibiotics (based
on culture results). The use of corticosteroids is controversial. The
prognosis is excellent, with complete recovery in most cases.
Facial palsy associated with chronic otitis media usually evolves
slowly due to chronic pressure on the seventh nerve in the middle
ear or mastoid by cholesteatoma. Treatment requires surgical
correction of the underlying disease. The prognosis is less favorable
than for facial palsy associated with acute otitis media.
Yonamine FK et al. Facial paralysis associated with acute otitis
media. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Mar–Apr;75(2):228–30.
[PMID: 19575108]
 
E. Sigmoid Sinus Thrombosis
Trapped infection within the mastoid air cells adjacent to the
sigmoid sinus may cause septic thrombophlebitis. This is heralded
by signs of systemic sepsis (spiking fevers, chills), at times
accompanied by signs of increased intracranial pressure (headache,
lethargy, nausea and vomiting, papilledema). Diagnosis can be made
noninvasively by magnetic resonance venography. Primary
treatment is with intravenous antibiotics (based on culture results).
Surgical drainage with ligation of the internal jugular vein may be
indicated when embolization is suspected.
Thorne MC et al. Suppurative complications of acute otitis media:
changes in frequency over time. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2009 Jul;135(7):638–41. [PMID: 19620582]
 
Wanna GB et al. Contemporary management of intracranial
complications of otitis media. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Jan;31(1):111–
7. [PMID: 19887978]
 
F. Central Nervous System Infection
Otogenic meningitis is by far the most common intracranial
complication of ear infection. In the setting of acute suppurative
otitis media, it arises from hematogenous spread of bacteria, most
commonly H influenzae and S pneumoniae. In chronic otitis
media, it results either from passage of infections along preformed
pathways such as the petrosquamous suture line or from direct
extension of disease through the dural plates of the petrous pyramid.
Epidural abscesses arise from direct extension of disease in the
setting of chronic infection. They are usually asymptomatic but may
present with deep local pain, headache, and low-grade fever. They
are often discovered as an incidental finding at surgery. Brain
abscess may arise in the temporal lobe or cerebellum as a result of
septic thrombophlebitis adjacent to an epidural abscess. The
predominant causative organisms are S aureus, S pyogenes, and S
pneumoniae. Rupture into the subarachnoid space results in
meningitis and often death. (See Chapter 30.)
Wanna GB et al. Contemporary management of intracranial
complications of otitis media. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Jan;31(1):111–
7. [PMID: 19887978]
 
3. Otosclerosis
Otosclerosis is a progressive disease with a marked familial
tendency that affects the bony otic capsule. Lesions involving the
footplate of the stapes result in increased impedance to the passage
of sound through the ossicular chain, producing conductive hearing
loss. This may be treated either through the use of a hearing aid or
surgical replacement of the stapes with a prosthesis (stapedectomy).
When otosclerotic lesions impinge on the cochlea (‘cochlear
otosclerosis’), permanent sensory hearing loss occurs. Some
evidence suggests that hearing loss associated with cochlear
otosclerosis may be stabilized by treatment with oral sodium
fluoride over prolonged periods of time (Florical—8.3 mg sodium
fluoride and 364 mg calcium carbonate—two tablets orally each
morning).
Cruise AS et al. Sodium fluoride in otosclerosis treatment: review.
J Laryngol Otol. 2010 Jun;124(6):583–6. [PMID: 20163750]
 
Kisilevsky VE et al. Results of stapedotomy in otosclerosis with
severe and profound hearing loss. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2010 Jun;39(3):244–52. [PMID: 20470668]
 
Markou K et al. An overview of the etiology of otosclerosis. Eur
Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Jan;266(1):25–35. [PMID:
18704474]
 
4. Trauma to the Middle Ear
Tympanic membrane perforation may result from impact injury or
explosive acoustic trauma (Figure 8–2). Spontaneous healing
occurs in most cases. Persistent perforation may result from
secondary infection brought on by exposure to water. Patients
should be advised to wear earplugs while swimming or bathing
during the healing period. Hemorrhage behind an intact tympanic
membrane (hemotympanum) may follow blunt trauma or extreme
barotrauma. Spontaneous resolution over several weeks is the usual
course. When a conductive hearing loss > 30 dB persists for more
than 3 months following trauma, disruption of the ossicular chain
should be suspected. Middle ear exploration with reconstruction of
the ossicular chain, combined with repair of the tympanic membrane
when required, will usually restore hearing.
 
Figure 8–2. Traumatic perforation of the left tympanic
membrane. (Courtesy of William Clark, MD; used with permission,
from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger,
J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Conoyer JM et al. Otologic surgery following ear trauma.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007 Nov;137(5):757–61. [PMID:
17967641]
 
Darley DS et al. Otologic considerations of blast injury. Disaster
Med Public Health Prep. 2010 Jun;4(2):145–52. [PMID:
20526137]
 
Mick P et al. Penetrating and blast ear trauma: 7-year review of
two pediatric practices. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008
Dec;37(6):774–6. [PMID: 19128702]
 
5. Middle Ear Neoplasia
Primary middle ear tumors are rare. Glomus tumors arise either in
the middle ear (glomus tympanicum) or in the jugular bulb with
upward erosion into the hypotympanum (glomus jugulare). They
present clinically with pulsatile tinnitus and hearing loss. A vascular
mass may be visible behind an intact tympanic membrane. Large
glomus jugulare tumors are often associated with multiple cranial
neuropathies, especially involving nerves VII, IX, X, XI, and XII.
Treatment usually requires surgery, radiotherapy, or both. Pulsatile
tinnitus thus warrants magnetic resonance angiography and
venography to rule out a vascular mass.
Alaani A et al. The crucial role of imaging in determining the
approach to glomus tympanicum tumours. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Jun;26(6):827–31. [PMID: 18841375]
 
Bierry G et al. Middle ear adenomatous tumor: a not so rare
glomus tympanicum-mimicking lesion. J Neuroradiol. 2009 Jun 30.
[Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 19573921]
 
EARACHE
Earache can be caused by a variety of otologic problems, but most
commonly external otitis and acute otitis media. Differentiation of
the two should be apparent by pneumatic otoscopy (see above
relevant sections on otitis externa and otitis media). Pain out of
proportion to the physical findings may be due to herpes zoster
oticus, especially when vesicles appear in the ear canal or concha.
Persistent pain and discharge from the ear suggest osteomyelitis of
the skull base or cancer, and patients with these complaints should
be referred for specialty evaluation.
Nonotologic causes of otalgia are numerous. The sensory
innervation of the ear is derived from the trigeminal, facial,
glossopharyngeal, vagal, and upper cervical nerves. Because of this
rich 
innervation, 
referred 
otalgia 
is 
quite 
frequent.
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction is a common cause of
referred ear pain. Pain is exacerbated by chewing or psychogenic
grinding of the teeth (bruxism) and may be associated with dental
malocclusion. Management includes soft diet, local heat to the
masticatory muscles, massage, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medications, and dental referral. Repeated episodes of severe
lancinating otalgia may occur in glossopharyngeal neuralgia.
Treatment with carbamazepine (100–300 mg orally every 8 hours)
often 
confers 
substantial 
symptomatic 
relief. 
Severe
glossopharyngeal neuralgia, which is refractory to medical
management, may respond to microvascular decompression of the
ninth cranial nerve. Infections and neoplasia that involve the
oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx frequently cause otalgia.
Persistent earache demands specialty referral to exclude cancer of
the upper aerodigestive tract.
Neilan RE et al. Otalgia. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Sep;94(5):961–71. [PMID: 20736106]
 
DISEASES OF THE INNER EAR
1. Sensory Hearing Loss
Diseases of the cochlea result in sensory hearing loss, a condition
that is usually irreversible. Most cochlear diseases result in bilateral
symmetric hearing loss. The presence of unilateral or asymmetric
sensorineural hearing loss suggests a lesion proximal to the cochlea.
Lesions affecting the eighth cranial nerve and central auditory
system are discussed in the section on neural hearing loss. The
primary goals in the management of sensory hearing loss are
prevention of further losses and functional improvement with
amplification and auditory rehabilitation.
A. Presbyacusis
Presbyacusis, or age-related hearing loss, is the most frequent cause
of sensory hearing loss and is progressive, predominantly high-
frequency, and symmetrical. It is difficult to separate the various
etiologic factors (eg, noise trauma, drug exposure) that may
contribute to presbyacusis, but genetic predisposition and prior
noise exposure appear to play an important role. Most patients
notice a loss of speech discrimination that is especially pronounced
in noisy environments. About 25% of people between the ages of
65 and 75 years and almost 50% of those over 75 experience
hearing difficulties.
Ko J. Presbycusis and its management. Br J Nurs. 2010 Feb 11–
24;19(3):160–5. [PMID: 20220659]
 
Schneider JM et al. Role of general practitioners in managing age-
related hearing loss. Med J Aust. 2010 Jan 4;192(1):20–3.
[PMID: 20047543]
 
Sprinzl GM et al. Current trends in treating hearing loss in elderly
people: a review of the technology and treatment options—a mini-
review. Gerontology. 2010;56(3):351–8. [PMID: 20090297]
 
B. Noise Trauma
Noise trauma is the second most common cause of sensory hearing
loss. Sounds exceeding 85 dB are potentially injurious to the
cochlea, especially with prolonged exposures. The loss typically
begins in the high frequencies (especially 4000 Hz) and progresses
to involve the speech frequencies with continuing exposure. Among
the more common sources of injurious noise are industrial
machinery, weapons, and excessively loud music. Personal music
devices (eg, MP3 and CD players) used at excessive loudness
levels may also be potentially injurious. Monitoring noise levels in
the workplace by regulatory agencies has led to preventive
programs that have reduced the frequency of occupational losses.
Individuals of all ages, especially those with existing hearing losses,
should wear earplugs when exposed to moderately loud noises and
specially designed earmuffs when exposed to explosive noises.
El Dib RP et al. Interventions to promote the wearing of hearing
protection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Oct 7;
(4):CD005234. [PMID: 19821342]
 
Henderson E et al. Prevalence of noise-induced hearing-threshold
shifts and hearing loss among US youths. Pediatrics. 2011
Jan;127(1):e39–46. [PMID: 21187306]
 
C. Physical Trauma
Head trauma has effects on the inner ear similar to those of severe
acoustic trauma. Some degree of sensory hearing loss may occur
following simple concussion and is frequent after skull fracture.
Deployment of air bags during an automobile accident has also been
associated with hearing loss.
Mick P et al. Penetrating and blast ear trauma: 7-year review of
two pediatric practices. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008
Dec;37(6):774–6. [PMID: 19128702]
 
D. Ototoxicity
Ototoxic substances may affect both the auditory and vestibular
systems. The most commonly used ototoxic medications are
aminoglycosides; loop diuretics; and several antineoplastic agents,
notably cisplatin. These medications may cause irreversible hearing
loss even when administered in therapeutic doses. When using these
medications, it is important to identify high-risk patients such as
those with preexisting hearing losses or kidney disease. Patients
simultaneously receiving multiple ototoxic agents are at particular
risk owing to ototoxic synergy. Useful measures to reduce the risk
of ototoxic injury include serial audiometry and monitoring of serum
peak and trough levels and substitution of equivalent nonototoxic
drugs whenever possible. Efforts are underway to develop
strategies, known as ototoxic chemoprotection, using drugs that
shield the inner ear from damage during ototoxic exposure.
It is possible for topical agents that enter the middle ear to be
absorbed into the inner ear via the round window. When the
tympanic membrane is perforated, use of potentially ototoxic ear
drops (eg, neomycin, gentamicin) is best avoided.
Helt-Cameron J et al. Cisplatin ototoxicity in children: implications
for primary care providers. Pediatr Nurs. 2009 Mar-
Apr;35(2):121-7. [PMID: 19472677]
 
Konrad-Martin D et al. Evaluation of audiometric threshold shift
criteria for ototoxicity monitoring. J Am Acad Audiol. 2010
May;21(5):301–14. [PMID: 20569665]
 
E. Sudden Sensory Hearing Loss
Idiopathic sudden loss of hearing in one ear may occur at any age,
but typically, it occurs in persons over age 20 years. The cause is
unknown; however, one hypothesis is that it results from a viral
infection or a sudden vascular occlusion of the internal auditory
artery. Prognosis is mixed, with many patients suffering permanent
deafness in the involved ear while others have complete recovery.
Prompt treatment with corticosteroids has been shown to improve
the odds of recovery. A common regimen is oral prednisone, 1
mg/kg/d, followed by a tapering dose over a 10-day period.
Intratympanic administration of corticosteroids alone or in
association with oral corticosteroids is increasingly being used for
this problem and has been associated with an equal or more
favorable prognosis in some reports. Because treatment appears to
be most effective as close to the onset of the loss as possible, and
appears not to be effective after 6 weeks, a prompt audiogram
should be obtained in all patients who present with sudden hearing
loss without obvious middle ear pathology.
Chau JK et al. Systematic review of the evidence for the etiology
of adult sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope. 2010
May;120(5):1011–21. [PMID: 20422698]
 
Hu A et al. Intratympanic steroids for inner ear disorders: a review.
Audiol Neurootol. 2009;14(6):373–82. [PMID: 19923807]
 
Labus J et al. Meta-analysis for the effect of medical therapy vs.
placebo on recovery of idiopathic sudden hearing loss.
Laryngoscope. 2010 Sep;120(9):1863–71. [PMID: 20803741]
 
Wilson H et al. Sudden sensorineural hearing loss: when is it
idiopathic? J Laryngol Otol. 2010 Jun;124(6):690–3. [PMID:
20233486]
 
F. Hereditary Hearing Loss
Sensory hearing loss with onset during adult life often runs in
families. The mode of inheritance may be either autosomal dominant
or recessive. The age at onset, the rate of progression of hearing
loss, and the audiometric pattern (high-frequency, low-frequency,
or flat) can often be predicted by studying family members. Great
strides have been made in identifying the molecular genetic errors
associated with hereditary hearing loss. The connexin-26 mutation,
the most common cause of genetic deafness, may be tested
clinically. Hearing loss is also frequently found in hereditary
mitochondrial disorders. Progress is being made toward the
development of methods to restore lost hair cells in genetic and
other forms of deafness via gene therapy or stem cell–mediated
techniques.
Dror AA et al. Hearing loss: mechanisms revealed by genetics and
cell biology. Annu Rev Genet. 2009;43:411–37. [PMID:
19694516]
 
Ito T et al. Hereditary hearing loss and deafness genes in Japan. J
Med Dent Sci. 2010 Mar;57(1):1–10. [PMID: 20437760]
 
Kesser BW et al. Gene therapy and stem cell transplantation:
strategies for hearing restoration. Adv Otorhinolaryngol.
2009;66:64–86. [PMID: 19494573]
 
G. Autoimmune Hearing Loss
Sensory hearing loss may be associated with a wide array of
systemic autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus
erythematosus, Wegener granulomatosis, and Cogan syndrome
(hearing loss, keratitis, aortitis). The loss is most often bilateral and
progressive. The hearing level often fluctuates, with periods of
deterioration alternating with partial or even complete remission.
The tendency is for the gradual evolution of permanent hearing loss,
which usually stabilizes with some remaining auditory function but
occasionally proceeds to complete deafness. Vestibular
dysfunction, particularly dysequilibrium and postural instability, may
accompany 
the auditory symptoms. A syndrome resembling
Ménière disease may also occur with intermittent attacks of severe
vertigo.
In many cases, the autoimmune pattern of audiovestibular
dysfunction presents in the absence of recognized systemic
autoimmune disease. Use of laboratory tests to screen for
autoimmune disease (eg, antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate) may be informative. Specific tests of
immune reactivity against inner ear antigens (anticochlear antibodies,
lymphocyte transformation tests) are currently of interest for
research purposes only, demonstrating limited clinical value to date.
Responsiveness to oral corticosteroid treatment is helpful in making
the diagnosis and constitutes first-line therapy. If stabilization of
hearing becomes dependent on long-term corticosteroid use,
steroid-sparing immunosuppressive regimens may become
necessary.
Alexander TH et al. Safety of high-dose corticosteroids for the
treatment of autoimmune inner ear disease. Otol Neurotol. 2009
Jun;30(4):443–8. [PMID: 19395984]
 
Morovic Vergles J et al. Successful use of adalimumab for treating
rheumatoid arthritis with autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss:
two birds with one stone. J Rheumatol. 2010 May;37(5):1080–1.
[PMID: 20439536]
 
2. Tinnitus
Tinnitus is the perception of abnormal ear or head noises. Persistent
tinnitus often, though not always, indicates the presence of sensory
hearing loss. Intermittent periods of mild, high-pitched tinnitus lasting
seconds to minutes are common in normal-hearing persons. When
severe and persistent, tinnitus may interfere with sleep and the ability
to concentrate, resulting in considerable psychological distress.
The most important treatment of tinnitus is avoidance of exposure
to excessive noise, ototoxic agents, and other factors that may
cause cochlear damage. Masking the tinnitus with music or through
amplification of normal sounds with a hearing aid may also bring
some relief. Among the numerous drugs that have been tried, oral
antidepressants (eg, nortriptyline at an initial dosage of 50 mg orally
at bedtime) have proved to be the most effective. Habituation
techniques, such as tinnitus retraining therapy, and masking
techniques may prove beneficial in those with refractory symptoms.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation of the central auditory system has
recently been shown to improve symptoms in some patients.
Progress is also being made toward implantable brain stimulators to
treat tinnitus.
Pulsatile tinnitus—often described by the patient as listening to
one's own heartbeat—should be distinguished from tonal tinnitus.
Although often ascribed to conductive hearing loss, this symptom
may be far more serious and may indicate a vascular abnormality
such as glomus tumor, venous sinus stenosis, carotid vaso-occlusive
disease, arteriovenous malformation, or aneurysm. Magnetic
resonance angiography and venography should be considered to
establish the diagnosis.
In contrast, a staccato “clicking” tinnitus may result from middle
ear muscle spasm, sometimes associated with palatal myoclonus.
The patient typically perceives a rapid series of popping noises,
lasting seconds to a few minutes, accompanied by a fluttering feeling
in the ear.
Adjamian P et al. The mechanisms of tinnitus: perspectives from
human functional neuroimaging. Hear Res. 2009 Jul;253(1–2): 15–
31. [PMID: 19364527]
 
Litré CF et al. Surgical treatment by electrical stimulation of the
auditory cortex for intractable tinnitus. Brain Stimul. 2009
Jul;2(3):132–7. [PMID: 20633412]
 
Madani G et al. Imaging in pulsatile tinnitus. Clin Radiol. 2009
Mar;64(3):319–28. [PMID: 19185662]
 
Meeus O et al. Influence of tonic and burst transcranial magnetic
stimulation characteristics on acute inhibition of subjective tinnitus.
Otol Neurotol. 2009 Sep;30(6):697–703. [PMID: 19623097]
 
3. Hyperacusis
Excessive sensitivity to sound may occur in normal-hearing
individuals either in association with ear disease, following noise
trauma, in patients susceptible to migraines, or for psychological
reasons. Patients with cochlear dysfunction commonly experience
“recruitment,” an abnormal sensitivity to loud sounds despite a
reduced sensitivity to softer ones. Fitting hearing aids and other
amplification devices to patients with recruitment requires use of
compression circuitry to avoid uncomfortable overamplification. For
normal-hearing individuals with hyperacusis, use of an earplug in
noisy environments may be beneficial, though attempts should be
made at habituation.
Gu JW et al. Tinnitus, diminished sound-level tolerance, and
elevated auditory activity in humans with clinically normal hearing
sensitivity. J Neurophysiol. 2010 Dec;104(6):3361–70. [PMID:
20881196]
 
Meeus OM et al. Correlation between hyperacusis measurements
in daily ENT practice. Int J Audiol. 2010 Jan;49(1):7–13. [PMID:
20053152]
 
4. Vertigo
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Either a sensation of motion when there is no motion or an
exaggerated sense of motion in response to a given bodily
movement.
 Duration of vertigo episodes and association with hearing loss is
the key to diagnosis.
 Must differentiate peripheral from central etiologies of vestibular
dysfunction.
 Peripheral: Onset is sudden; often associated with tinnitus and
hearing loss; horizontal nystagmus may be present.
 Central: Onset is gradual; no associated auditory symptoms.
 Evaluation includes audiogram and electronystagmography
(ENG) or videonystagmography (VNG) and MRI.
 
 General Considerations
Vertigo can be caused by either a peripheral and central etiology, or
both (Table 8–2).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Vertigo is the cardinal symptom of vestibular disease. It is either a
sensation of motion when there is no motion or an exaggerated
sense of motion in response to a given bodily movement. While
vertigo is typically experienced as a distinct “spinning” sensation, it
may also present as a sense of tumbling or of falling forward or
backward. It should be distinguished from imbalance, light-
headedness, and syncope, all of which are nonvestibular in origin
(Table 8–3).
 
Table 8–2. Causes of vertigo.
 
Peripheral causes
     Vestibular neuritis/labyrinthitis
     Ménière disease
     Benign positional vertigo
     Ethanol intoxication
     Inner ear barotrauma
     Semicircular canal dehiscence
Central causes
     Seizure
     Multiple sclerosis
     Wernicke encephalopathy
     Chiari malformation
     Cerebellar ataxia syndromes
Mixed central and peripheral causes
     Migraine
     Stroke and vascular insufficiency
        PICA stroke
        AICA stroke
        Vertebral artery insufficiency
     Vasculitides
        Cogan syndrome
        Susac syndrome
        Wegener granulomatosis
        Behçet disease
     Cerebellpontine angle tumors
        Vestibular schwannoma
        Meningioma
     Infections
        Lyme disease
        Syphilis
     Vascular compression
     Hyperviscosity syndromes
        Waldenström macroglobulinemia
     Endocrinopathies
        Hypothyroidism
        Pendred syndrome
1. Peripheral vestibular disease—Peripheral vestibulopathy
usually causes vertigo of sudden onset, may be so severe that the
patient is unable to walk or stand, and is frequently accompanied by
nausea and vomiting. Tinnitus and hearing loss may be associated
and provide strong support for a peripheral (ie, otologic) origin.
A thorough history will often narrow down, if not confirm the
diagnosis. Critical elements of the history include the duration of the
discrete vertiginous episodes (seconds, minutes to hours, or days),
and associated symptoms. Triggers should also be sought, including
diet (eg, high salt in the case of Ménière disease), stress, fatigue,
and bright lights (eg, migraine-associated dizziness).
The physical examination of the patient with vertigo includes
evaluation of the ears, eye motion in response to head turning and
observation for nystagmus, cranial nerve examination, and Romberg
testing. In acute peripheral lesions, nystagmus is usually horizontal
with a rotatory component; the fast phase usually beats away from
the diseased side. Visual fixation tends to inhibit nystagmus except
in very acute peripheral lesions or with central nervous system
disease. Dix-Hallpike testing (quickly lowering the patient to the
supine position with the head extending over the edge and placed
30 degrees lower than the body, turned either to the left or right)
will elicit a delayed onset (~10 sec) fatiguable nystagmus in cases of
benign positional vertigo. Nonfatigable nystagmus in this position
indicates a central etiology for the dizziness.
Since visual fixation often suppresses observed nystagmus, many
of these maneuvers are performed with Frenzel goggles, which
prevent visual fixation, and often bring out subtle forms of
nystagmus. The Fukuda test, in which the patient consistently
rotates when walking in place with eyes closed, can also
demonstrate vestibular asymmetry.
2. Central disease—In contrast to peripheral forms of vertigo,
dizziness arising from central etiologies (Table 8–2) tends to
develop gradually and then become progressively more severe and
debilitating. Nystagmus is not always present but can occur in any
direction and may be dissociated in the two eyes. The associated
nystagmus is often nonfati-gable, vertical rather than horizontal in
orientation, without latency, and unsuppressed by visual fixation.
ENG is useful in documenting these characteristics. The evaluation
of central audiovestibular dysfunction requires imaging of the brain
with MRI.
Episodic vertigo can occur in patients with diplopia from external
ophthalmoplegia and is maximal when the patient looks in the
direction where the separation of images is greatest. Cerebral
lesions involving the temporal cortex may also produce vertigo,
which is sometimes the initial symptom of a seizure. Finally, vertigo
may be a feature of a number of systemic disorders and can occur
as a side effect of certain anticonvulsant, antibiotic, hypnotic,
analgesic, and tranquilizing drugs or of alcohol.
 
Table 8–3. Common vestibular disorders: differential diagnosis
based on classic presentations.
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory investigations such as audiologic evaluation, caloric
stimulation, ENG, or VNG, and MRI are indicated in patients with
persistent vertigo or when central nervous system disease is
suspected. Vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials (VEMPs) are
increasingly becoming part of the diagnostic evaluation. These
studies will help distinguish between central and peripheral lesions
and to identify causes requiring specific therapy. ENG consists of
objective recording of the nystagmus induced by head and body
movements, gaze, and caloric stimulation. It is helpful in quantifying
the degree of vestibular hypofunction and may help with the
differentiation between peripheral and central lesions. Computer-
driven rotatory chairs and posturography platforms offer additional
diagnostic modalities from specialized centers.
Ahmed MF et al. Caloric test versus rotational sinusoidal harmonic
acceleration and step-velocity tests in patients with and without
suspected peripheral vestibulopathy. Otol Neurotol. 2009
Sep;30(6):800–5. [PMID: 19623096]
 
Brantberg K. Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (VEMPs):
usefulness in clinical neurotology. Semin Neurol. 2009
Nov;29(5):541–7. [PMID: 19834866]
 
Post RE. Dizziness: a diagnostic approach. Am Fam Physician.
2010 Aug 15;82(4):361–8, 369. [PMID: 20704166]
 
 Vertigo Syndromes Due to Peripheral
Lesions
A. Endolymphatic Hydrops (Ménière Syndrome)
The cause of Ménière syndrome is unknown. Distention of the
endolymphatic compartment of the inner ear is a pathologic finding
and thought to be part of the pathogenesis of the disorder. Although
a precise cause of hydrops cannot be established in most cases,
two known causes are syphilis and head trauma. The classic
syndrome consists of episodic vertigo, with discrete vertigo spells
lasting 20 minutes to several hours in association with fluctuating
low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus (usually low-tone
and “blowing” in quality), and a sensation of unilateral aural pressure
(Table 8–3). These symptoms in the absence of hearing fluctuations
suggests migraine-associated dizziness. Symptoms wax and wane
as the endolymphatic pressure rises and falls. Caloric testing
commonly reveals loss or impairment of thermally induced
nystagmus on the involved side. Primary treatment involves a low
salt diet and diuretics (eg, acetazolamide). In refractory cases,
patients may undergo intratympanic corticosteroid injections,
endolymphatic sac decompression or vestibular ablation either
through transtympanic gentamicin, vestibular nerve section, or
surgical labyrinthectomy.
Herraiz C et al. Transtympanic steroids for Ménière's disease. Otol
Neurotol. 2010 Jan;31(1):162–7. [PMID: 19924013]
 
Pullens B et al. Surgery for Ménière's disease. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 20; (1):CD005395. [PMID: 20091573]
 
B. Labyrinthitis
Patients with labyrinthitis suffer from acute onset of continuous,
usually severe vertigo lasting several days to a week, accompanied
by hearing loss and tinnitus. During a recovery period that lasts for
several weeks, the vertigo gradually improves. Hearing may return
to normal or remain permanently impaired in the involved ear. The
cause of labyrinthitis is unknown. Treatment consists of antibiotics if
the patient is febrile or has symptoms of a bacterial infection, and
supportive care. Vestibular suppressants are useful during the acute
phase of the attack (eg, diazepam or meclizine) but should be
discontinued as soon as feasible to avoid long-term dysequilibrium
from inadequate compensation.
Charles J et al. Vertiginous syndrome. Aust Fam Physician. 2008
May;37(5):299. [PMID: 18464956]
 
Newman-Toker DE et al. Disconnect between charted vestibular
diagnoses and emergency department management decisions: a
cross-sectional analysis from a nationally representative sample.
Acad Emerg Med. 2009 Oct;16(10):970–7. [PMID: 19799573]
 
C. Benign Paroxysmal Positioning Vertigo
Patients suffering from recurrent spells of vertigo, lasting under
several minutes per spell, associated with changes in head position
(often provoked by rolling over in bed), usually have benign
paroxysmal positioning vertigo. The term “positioning vertigo” is
more accurate than “positional vertigo” because it is provoked by
changes in head position rather than by the maintenance of a
particular posture.
The typical symptoms of positioning vertigo occur in clusters that
persist for several days. There is a brief (10–15 sec) latency period
following a head movement before symptoms develop, and the
acute vertigo subsides within 10–60 seconds, though the patient
may remain imbalanced for several hours. Constant repetition of the
positional change leads to habituation. Since some central nervous
system disorders can mimic BPPV (eg, vertebrobasilar
insufficiency), recurrent cases warrant MRI scanning of the head. In
central lesions, there is no latent period, fatigability, or habituation of
the symptoms and signs. Treatment of BPPV involves physical
therapy protocols (eg, the Epley maneuver or Brandt-Daroff
exercises), based on the theory that peripheral positioning vertigo
results from free-floating otoconia within a semicircular canal.
Bhattacharyya N et al. American Academy of Otolaryngology-
Head and Neck Surgery Foundation. Clinical practice guideline:
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2008 Nov;139(5 Suppl 4):S47–81. [PMID: 18973840]
 
Marom T et al. Revisiting benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
pathophysiology. Am J Otolaryngol. 2009 Jul–Aug;30(4):250–5.
[PMID: 19563936]
 
D. Vestibular Neuronitis
In vestibular neuronitis, a paroxysmal, usually single attack of
vertigo occurs without accompanying impairment of auditory
function and will persist for several days to a week before gradually
clearing. During the acute phase, examination reveals nystagmus and
absent responses to caloric stimulation on one or both sides. The
cause of the disorder is unclear though presumed to be viral.
Treatment consists of supportive care, including diazepam or
meclizine during the acute phases of the vertigo only, followed by
vestibular therapy if the patient does not completely compensate.
Shupak A et al. I. Prednisone treatment for vestibular neuritis. Otol
Neurotol. 2008 Apr;29(3):368–74. [PMID: 18317392]
 
E. Traumatic Vertigo
The most common cause of vertigo following head injury is
labyrinthine concussion. Symptoms generally diminish within several
days but may linger for a month or more. Basilar skull fractures that
traverse the inner ear usually result in severe vertigo lasting several
days to a week and deafness in the involved ear. Chronic
posttraumatic vertigo may result from cupulolithiasis. This occurs
when traumatically detached statoconia (otoconia) settle on the
ampulla of the posterior semicircular canal and cause an excessive
degree of cupular deflection in response to head motion. Clinically,
this presents as episodic positioning vertigo. Treatment consists of
supportive care and vestibular suppressant medication (diazepam or
meclizine) during the acute phase of the attack, and vestibular
therapy.
Scherer MR et al. Traumatic brain injury and vestibular pathology
as a comorbidity after blast exposure. Phys Ther. 2009
Sep;89(9):980–92. [PMID: 19628578]
 
F. Perilymphatic Fistula
Leakage of perilymphatic fluid from the inner ear into the tympanic
cavity via the round or oval window is often discussed as a cause of
vertigo and sensory hearing loss but is actually very rare. Most
cases result from either physical injury (eg, blunt head trauma, hand
slap to ear); extreme barotrauma during airflight, scuba diving, etc;
or vigorous Valsalva maneuvers (eg, during weight lifting).
Treatment may require middle ear exploration and window sealing
with a tissue graft; however, this is seldom indicated without a clear-
cut history of a precipitating traumatic event.
Hatano A et al. Traumatic perilymphatic fistula with the luxation of
the stapes into the vestibule. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2009
Aug;36(4):474–8. [PMID: 19231119]
 
G. Cervical Vertigo
Position receptors located in the facets of the cervical spine are
important physiologically in the coordination of head and eye
movements. Cervical proprioceptive dysfunction is a common cause
of vertigo triggered by neck movements. This disturbance often
commences after neck injury, particularly hyperextension. An
association also exists with degenerative cervical spine disease.
Although symptoms vary, vertigo may be triggered by assuming a
particular head position as opposed to moving to a new head
position (the latter typical of labyrinthine dysfunction). Diagnosis
may often be confused with migraine-associated vertigo, which is
also associated with head movement. Management consists of neck
movement exercises to the extent permitted by orthopedic
considerations.
Schikora N et al. Influence of cervical spine stabilization via Stiff
Neck on the postural system in healthy patients: compensation or
decompensation of the postural system? Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Oct;267(10):1623–8. [PMID: 20443016]
 
H. Migrainous Vertigo
Episodic vertigo is frequently associated with a migraine type of
headache. Head trauma may also be a precipitating feature. The
vertigo may be temporally related to the headache and last up to
several hours, although the vertigo may also occur in the absence of
any headache. It may appear identical to Ménière disease but
without associated hearing loss or tinnitus. Accompanying
symptoms may include head pressure, visual and motion sensitivity,
auditory sensitivity, and photosensitivity. Symptoms typically
worsen with lack of sleep and anxiety or stress. There is often a
history of motion intolerance (easily carsick as a child) and there
may be a familial tendency. Food triggers may also be common,
including caffeine, chocolate, and alcohol among others. Treatment
includes dietary and lifestyle changes (improved sleep pattern,
avoidance of stress) and antimigraine prophylactic medication.
Felisati G et al. Migraine and vertigo: two diseases with the same
pathogenesis? Neurol Sci. 2010 Jun;31(Suppl 1):S107–9. [PMID:
20464597]
 
Fotuhi M et al. Vestibular migraine: a critical review of treatment
trials. J Neurol. 2009 May;256(5):711–6. [PMID: 19252785]
 
Jeong SH et al. Vestibular dysfunction in migraine: effects of
associated vertigo and motion sickness. J Neurol. 2009 Dec 30.
[Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20041331]
 
I. Superior Semicircular Canal Dehiscence
Deficiency in the bony covering of the superior semicircular canal
may be associated with vertigo triggered by loud noise exposure,
straining, and an apparent conductive hearing loss. Diagnosis is with
coronal high-resolution CT scan and VEMPs. Surgically sealing the
dehiscent canal can improve symptoms.
Chi FL et al. Variety of audiologic manifestations in patients with
superior semicircular canal dehiscence. Otol Neurotol. 2010
Jan;31(1):2–10. [PMID: 20050265]
 
Phillips DJ et al. Diagnosis and outcomes of middle cranial fossa
repair for patients with superior semicircular canal dehiscence
syndrome. J Clin Neurosci. 2010 Mar;17(3):339–41. [PMID:
20074960]
 
 Vertigo Syndromes Due to Central
Lesions
Central nervous system causes of vertigo include brainstem vascular
disease, arteriovenous malformations, tumor of the brainstem and
cerebellum, multiple sclerosis, and vertebrobasilar migraine (Table
8–2). Vertigo of central origin often becomes unremitting and
disabling. The associated nystagmus is often nonfatigable, vertical
rather than horizontal in orientation, without latency, and
unsuppressed by visual fixation. ENG is useful in documenting these
characteristics. There are commonly other signs of brainstem
dysfunction (eg, cranial nerve palsies; motor, sensory, or cerebellar
deficits in the limbs) or of increased intracranial pressure. Auditory
function is generally spared. The underlying cause should be treated.
Karatas M. Central vertigo and dizziness: epidemiology, differential
diagnosis, and common causes. Neurologist. 2008
Nov;14(6):355–64. [PMID: 19008741]
 
Kutz JW Jr. The dizzy patient. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Sep;94(5):989–1002. [PMID: 20736108]
 
DISEASES OF THE CENTRAL AUDITORY &
VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS (Table 8–3)
Lesions of the eighth cranial nerve and central audiovestibular
pathways produce neural hearing loss and vertigo. One
characteristic of neural hearing loss is deterioration of speech
discrimination out of proportion to the decrease in pure tone
thresholds. Another is auditory adaptation, wherein a steady tone
appears to the listener to decay and eventually disappear. Auditory
evoked responses are useful in distinguishing cochlear from neural
losses and may give insight into the site of lesion within the central
pathways.
The evaluation of central audiovestibular disorders usually
requires imaging of the internal auditory canal, cerebellopontine
angle, and brain with enhanced MRI.
1. Vestibular Schwannoma (Acoustic Neuroma)
Eighth cranial nerve schwannomas are among the most common
intracranial tumors. Most are unilateral, but about 5% are
associated with the hereditary syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 2,
in which bilateral eighth nerve tumors may be accompanied by
meningiomas and other intracranial and spinal tumors. These benign
lesions arise within the internal auditory canal and gradually grow to
involve the cerebellopontine angle, eventually compressing the pons
and resulting in hydrocephalus. Their typical auditory symptoms are
unilateral hearing loss with a deterioration of speech discrimination
exceeding that predicted by the degree of pure tone loss.
Nonclassic presentations, such as sudden unilateral hearing loss, are
fairly common. Any individual with a unilateral or asymmetric
sensorineural hearing loss should be evaluated for an intracranial
mass lesion. Vestibular dysfunction more often takes the form of
continuous dysequilibrium than episodic vertigo. Other lesions of the
cerebellopontine angle such as meningioma and epidermoids may
p
g
g
p
y
have similar audiovestibular manifestations. Diagnosis is made by
enhanced MRI. Treatment consists of observation, microsurgical
excision, or stereotactic radiotherapy, depending on such factors as
patient age, underlying health, and size of the tumor at presentation.
Bevacizumab (vascular endothelial growth factor blocker) has
recently shown promise for treatment of tumors in patients with
neurofibromatosis type 2.
Gal TJ et al. Current epidemiology and management trends in
acoustic neuroma. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010
May;142(5):677–81. [PMID: 20416455]
 
Plotkin SR et al. Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 2. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jul
23;361(4):358–67. [PMID: 19587327]
 
Tan M et al. Trends in the management of vestibular schwannomas
at Johns Hopkins 1997–2007. Laryngoscope. 2010
Jan;120(1):144–9. [PMID: 19877188]
 
Whitehouse K et al. Vestibular schwannomas—when should
conservative management be reconsidered? Br J Neurosurg. 2009
Nov 3. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 19886818]
 
2. Vascular Compromise
Vertebrobasilar insufficiency is a common cause of vertigo in the
elderly. It is often triggered by changes in posture or extension of
the neck. Reduced flow in the vertebrobasilar system may be
demonstrated 
noninvasively 
through 
magnetic 
resonance
angiography. Empiric treatment is with vasodilators and aspirin.
Vascular loops that impinge upon the brainstem root entry zone
of cranial nerves have been shown to cause dysfunction. Widely
recognized examples are hemifacial spasm and tic douloureux. It
has been suggested that hearing loss, tinnitus, and disabling
positioning vertigo may result from a vascular loop abutting the
eighth cranial nerve, although this is controversial.
Karatas M. Vascular vertigo: epidemiology and clinical syndromes.
Neurologist. 2011 Jan;17(1):1–10. [PMID: 2119218]
Otto V et al. Treatment of vertebrobasilar insufficiency-associated
vertigo with a fixed combination of cinnarizine and dimenhydrinate.
Int Tinnitus J. 2008;14(1):57–67. [PMID: 18616088]
 
3. Multiple Sclerosis
Patients with multiple sclerosis may suffer from episodic vertigo and
chronic imbalance. Hearing loss in this disease is most commonly
unilateral and of rapid onset. Spontaneous recovery may occur.
Bovo R et al. Vertigo and autoimmunity. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Oct 16. [PMID: 19834724]
 
Peyvandi A et al. Neuro-otologic manifestations of multiple
sclerosis. Arch Iran Med. 2010 May;13(3):188–92. [PMID:
20433222]
 
OTOLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS OF AIDS
The otologic manifestations of AIDS are protean. The pinna and
external auditory canal may be affected by Kaposi sarcoma as well
as persistent and potentially invasive fungal infections, particularly
due to Aspergillus fumigatus. The most common middle ear
manifestation of AIDS is serous otitis media due to eustachian tube
dysfunction 
arising 
from 
adenoidal 
hypertrophy 
(HIV
lymphadenopathy), recurrent mucosal viral infections, or an
obstructing nasopharyngeal tumor (eg, lymphoma). For middle ear
effusions, ventilating tubes are seldom helpful and may trigger
profuse watery otorrhea. Acute otitis media is usually caused by the
typical bacterial organisms that occur in nonimmunocompromised
patients, although Pneumocystis jiroveci otitis has been reported.
Sensorineural hearing loss is common and in some cases appears to
result from viral central nervous system infection. In cases of
progressive hearing loss, it is important to evaluate for cryptococcal
meningitis and syphilis. Acute facial paralysis due to herpes zoster
infection (Ramsay Hunt syndrome) is quite common and follows a
clinical course similar to that in nonimmunocompromised patients.
Treatment is primarily with high-dose acyclovir (see Chapters 6 and
32). Corticosteroids may also be effective.
Matas CG et al. Audiological and electrophysiological evaluation
of children with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Braz J Infect Dis. 2006 Aug;10(4):264–8. [PMID: 17293909]
 
DISEASES OF THE NOSE &
PARANASAL SINUSES
 
INFECTIONS OF THE NOSE & PARANASAL SINUSES
1. Acute Viral Rhinosinusitis (Common Cold)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Clear rhinorrhea, hyposmia, and nasal congestion.
 Associated symptoms, including malaise, headache, and cough.
 Erythematous, engorged nasal mucosa on examination without
intranasal purulence.
 Symptoms last < 4 weeks and typically < 10 days.
 Symptoms are self-limited.
 
 Clinical Findings
The nonspecific symptoms of the ubiquitous common cold are
present in the early phases of many diseases that affect the upper
aerodigestive tract. Because there are numerous serologic types of
rhinoviruses, adenoviruses, and other viruses, patients remain
susceptible throughout life. These infections, while generally quite
benign and self-limited, have been implicated in the development or
exacerbation of more serious conditions, such as acute bacterial
sinusitis, acute otitis media, asthma and cystic fibrosis exacerbation,
and bronchitis. Nasal congestion, decreased sense of smell, watery
rhinorrhea, and sneezing accompanied by general malaise, throat
discomfort and, occasionally, headache are typical in viral
infections. Nasal examination usually shows erythematous,
edematous mucosa and a watery discharge. The presence of
purulent nasal discharge suggests bacterial rhinosinusitis.
 Treatment
Despite ongoing research into viral chemotherapy, at this time, there
are no effective antiviral therapies for either the prevention or
treatment of viral rhinitis. There is a common misperception among
patients that antibiotics are helpful. Zinc gluconate has been
demonstrated in both randomized controlled trials and meta-analysis
to be effective in minimizing the duration and severity of symptoms
associated with the common cold. A minimum dose of 13.3 mg of
elemental zinc in lozenge form administered within the first 24-48
hours seems to be effective. Buffered hypertonic saline (3–5%)
nasal irrigation has been shown to improve symptoms and reduce
the need for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Other supportive
measures, such as decongestants (pseudoephedrine, 30–60 mg
every 4–6 hours or 120 mg twice daily), may provide some relief of
rhinorrhea and nasal obstruction. Nasal sprays, such as
oxymetazoline or phenylephrine, are rapidly effective but should not
be used for more than a few days at a time because prolonged use
leads to an almost addictive need to prevent rebound congestion
from withdrawal of the drug called rhinitis medicamentosa.
Treatment of rhinitis medicamentosa requires mandatory cessation
of the sprays, and this is often extremely frustrating for patients.
Topical intranasal corticosteroids (eg, flunisolide, 2 sprays in each
nostril twice daily), intranasal anticholinergic (ipratropium 0.06%
nasal spray, 2–3 sprays every 8 hours as needed) or a short
tapering course of oral prednisone may help during the process of
withdrawal.
 Complications
Other than eustachian tube dysfunction or transient middle ear
effusion, complications of viral rhinitis are unusual. Secondary acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis may occur and is suggested by persistence of
symptoms beyond 10 days, accompanied both by purulent green or
yellow nasal secretions and unilateral facial or tooth pain. (See
Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis below.)
Recent resurgence of the influenza A H1N1 virus strain has
changed the management of otherwise self-limited viral rhinitis under
many circumstances. The H1N1 virus has been in continuous North
American circulation since 1977 and led to a dangerous pandemic
in 2009. This pandemic, also called swine flu because of gene
rearrangements within the original H1N1 virus with segments of
porcine influenza conferring virility and antiviral resistance, led to
more than 30,000 cases in 74 countries within 2 months of its
identification. While the symptoms of influenza A/H1N1 are much
the same as other respiratory viruses, certain persons, including
children younger than 5 years, adults older than 65 years, pregnant
women, patients with underlying respiratory or immune disorders,
and adolescents younger than 19 years receiving aspirin therapy,
are at particular risk for the development of hypoxia and acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Mortality in those in whom
ARDS developed was > 17%. Diagnosis of influenza A/H1N1 is
confirmed by nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal, or endobronchial
swab or aspirate and identification of the virus by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Treatment with
oseltamivir or zanamivir has been effective, but up to date diagnosis,
treatment, and containment guidelines should be sought from the
Centers 
for 
Disease 
Control 
and 
Prevention 
at
www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/if the diagnosis is suspected.
Eby GA 3rd. Zinc lozenges as cure for the common cold—A
review and hypothesis. Med Hypotheses. 2009 Nov 9. [PMID:
19906491]
 
Patick AK. Rhinovirus chemotherapy. Antiviral Res. 2006
Sep;71(2–3):391–6. [PMID: 16675037]
 
Sullivan SJ et al. 2009 H1N1 Influenza. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010
Jan;85(1):64–76. [PMID: 20007905]
 
2. Acute Bacterial Rhinosinusitis (Sinusitis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Purulent yellow-green nasal discharge or expectoration.
 Facial pain or pressure over the affected sinus or sinuses.
 Nasal obstruction.
 Acute onset of symptoms (between 1 and 4 week duration).
 Associated symptoms, including cough, malaise, fever, and
headache.
 
 General Considerations
Acute sinus infections are uncommon compared with viral rhinitis,
but they still affect nearly 20 million Americans annually, accounting
for over 2 billion dollars in health care expenditures for sinusitis
annually. Such infections are often associated with inflammation of
the mucosal of the nasal cavity near the drainage pores of the
sinuses. To acknowledge this inflammation as a major component of
the disease and to differentiate it from such processes as allergic or
acute viral rhinitis, otolaryngologists prefer the term “bacterial
rhinosinusitis.”
Acute bacterial rhinosinusitis usually is a result of impaired
mucociliary clearance and obstruction of the osteomeatal complex,
or sinus “pore.” Edematous mucosa causes obstruction of the
complex, resulting in the accumulation of mucous secretion in the
sinus cavity that becomes secondarily infected by bacteria. The
largest of these osteomeatal complexes is deep to the middle
turbinate in the middle meatus. This complex is actually a confluence
of complexes draining the maxillary, ethmoid, and frontal sinuses.
The sphenoid drains from a separate complex between the septum
and superior turbinate.
The typical pathogens of bacterial sinusitis are the same as those
that cause acute otitis media: S pneumoniae, other streptococci, H
influenzae and, less commonly, S aureus 
and Moraxella
catarrhalis. Pathogens vary regionally in both prevalence and drug
resistance. It should be kept in mind that about 25% of healthy
asymptomatic individuals may, if sinus aspirates are cultured, harbor
such bacteria as well. Understanding of the anatomy, pathogenesis
and microbiology of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis can help the
clinician afford the most expeditious and cost-effective diagnosis
and treatment while avoiding serious complications.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The maxillary sinus, the largest of the paranasal sinuses, is the most
commonly affected sinus. Unilateral facial fullness, pressure and
tenderness over the cheek are common symptoms, but may not be
present in many cases. Pain may refer to the upper incisor and
canine teeth via branches of the trigeminal nerve, which traverse the
floor of the sinus. Purulent nasal drainage should be noted with nasal
airway obstruction or facial pain (pressure). Maxillary sinusitis may
result from dental infection, and teeth that are tender should be
carefully examined for signs of abscess. Removal of the diseased
tooth or drainage of the periapical abscess typically resolves the
sinus infection. Nonspecific symptoms include fever, malaise,
halitosis, headache, hyposmia, and cough. It is important to note
that studies have demonstrated no correlation between patient
reports of “sinus headache” and presence of sinusitis on CT scan.
Bacterial rhinosinusitis can be distinguished from viral rhinitis by
persistence of symptoms more than 10 days after onset or
worsening of symptoms within 10 days after initial improvement.
Acute ethmoiditis in adults is often accompanied by maxillary
sinusitis and symptoms are similar to those described above.
Localized ethmoid sinusitis may present with pain and pressure over
the high lateral wall of the nose between the eyes that may radiate to
the orbit.
Sphenoid sinusitis is usually seen in the setting of pansinusitis, or
infection of all the paranasal sinuses on at least one side. The patient
may complain of a headache “in the middle of the head” and often
points to the vertex.
Acute frontal sinusitis may cause pain and tenderness of the
forehead. This is most easily elicited by palpation of the orbital roof
just below the medial end of the eyebrow.
Hospital-associated sinusitis is a form of acute bacterial
rhinosinusitis that may present without any symptoms in the head
and neck. It is a common source of fever in critically ill patients and
is often associated with prolonged presence of a nasogastric or,
rarely, nasotracheal tube causing inflammation of the nasal mucosa
and osteomeatal complex obstruction. Pansinusitis on the side of the
tube is common on imaging studies.
 
Table 8–4. oral antibiotic regimens for acute sinusitis.
 
1Within last 4–6 weeks.
Adapted, with permission, from Marple BF et al. Acute bacterial
rhinosinusitis: a review of U.S. treatment guidelines. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2006 Sep;135(3):341–8. Copyright © 2006 Sage Publications.
Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications.
B. Imaging
It is usually possible to make the diagnosis of acute bacterial
rhinosinusitis on clinical grounds alone. Although more sensitive than
clinical examination, routine radiographs are not cost-effective and
are not recommended by the Agency for Health Care Policy and
Research or American Association of Otolaryngology Guidelines in
the routine diagnosis of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis. They may,
however, be helpful when clinically based criteria are difficult to
evaluate, when the patient does not respond to appropriate therapy,
or when symptoms of more serious infection are noted.
When necessary, noncontrast, screening coronal CT scans are
more cost-effective and provide more information than conventional
sinus films. CT provides a rapid and effective means to assess all of
the paranasal sinuses, identify areas of greater concern (such as
bony dehiscence, periosteal elevation or maxillary tooth root
exposure within the sinus), and speed appropriate therapy.
Occasionally, a CT scan may be indicated to exclude acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis. While reasonably sensitive, CT scans are not
specific. Swollen soft tissue and fluid may be difficult to distinguish
when opacification of the sinus is present from other conditions,
such as chronic rhinosinusitis, nasal polyposis, or mucus retention
cysts. Sinus abnormalities can be seen in most patients with an
upper respiratory infection, while bacterial rhinosinusitis develops in
only 2%.
If malignancy, intracranial extension or opportunistic infection is
suspected, MRI with gadolinium should be ordered instead of, or in
addition to, CT. MRI will distinguish tumor from fluid, inflammation,
and inspissated mucus far better than CT, as well as better
delineating tumor extent with respect to adjacent structures such as
the orbit, skull base, and palate. Bone destruction can be
demonstrated as well by MRI as by CT.
 Treatment
All patients with acute bacterial rhinosinusitis should have careful
evaluation of pain. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are
generally recommended. Sinus symptoms may be improved with
oral or nasal decongestants (or both)—eg, oral pseudoephedrine,
30–120 mg per dose, up to 240 mg/d; nasal oxymetazoline, 0.05%,
or xylometazoline, 0.05–0.1%, one or two sprays in each nostril
every 6–8 hours for up to 3 days.
Eighty percent of patients with acute bacterial rhinosinusitis
improve symptomatically within 2 weeks without antibiotic therapy.
However, antibiotics may be considered when symptoms last more
than 10–14 days or when symptoms (including fever; facial pain;
and periorbital, facial, or forehead swelling) are severe.
Administration of antibiotics does, however, reduce the incidence of
clinical failure by 50% and, coupled with clinical criteria-based
diagnosis, represents the most cost-effective treatment strategy.
Double-blinded studies exist to support numerous antibiotic
choices. A summary of recent national guidelines for the treatment
of acute sinusitis can be found in Table 8–4. Selection of antibiotics
is usually empiric and based on a number of factors including
regional patterns of antibiotic resistance, antibiotic allergy, cost, and
patient tolerance. Unless the patient is allergic to penicillin, penicillin
or amoxicillin should be used as the first-line agent. Treatment is
usually for 10 days (or as stated above), although longer courses
are sometimes required to prevent relapses. Macrolide therapy has
been recommended as first-line therapy in patients with penicillin
allergy and tetracyclines have also been used.
Multidrug resistant S pneumoniae prevalence is growing in many
urban areas of the United States as are β-lactamase β-lactam
inhibitor producing strains of H influenza and M catarrhalis. In
such regions, guidelines call for empiric use of amoxicillin-
clavulanate or second- or third-generation cephalosporins.
Fluoroquinolones are reserved for treatment failures or for patients
with a recent history of antibiotic therapy for another infection.
Recurrent sinusitis or sinusitis that does not appear to respond
clinically warrants CT imaging and evaluation by a specialist.
Hospital-associated infections in critically ill patients are treated
differently from community-acquired infections. Broad-spectrum
antibiotic coverage for bacteria including P aeruginosa, S aureus
(including methicillin-resistant strains) and anaerobes must be
considered. Removal of the nasogastric tube and improved nasal
hygiene (nasal saline sprays, humidification of supplemental nasal
oxygen, and nasal decongestants) are critical interventions and often
curative in mild cases without aggressive antibiotic use. Endoscopic
or transantral cultures may help direct medical therapy in
complicated cases.
 Complications
Local complications of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis include orbital
cellulitis and abscess, osteomyelitis, intracranial extension and
cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Any change in the ocular examination in a patient with acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis necessitates immediate CT imaging. Orbital
complications typically occur by extension of ethmoid sinusitis
through the lamina papyracea, a thin layer of bone that comprises
the medial orbital wall. Extension in this area may cause orbital
cellulitis leading to proptosis, gaze restriction, and orbital pain.
Select cases are responsive to intravenous antibiotics with or
without corticosteroids and should be managed in close conjunction
with an ophthalmologist or otolaryngologist, or both. Extension
through the lamina papyracea can also lead to subperiosteal abscess
formation (orbital abscess). Such abscesses cause marked prop-
tosis, ophthalmoplegia and pain with medial gaze. While some of
these abscesses will respond to antibiotics, such findings should
prompt an immediate referral to a specialist for consideration of
decompression and evacuation. Failure to intervene quickly may
lead to permanent visual impairment and a “frozen globe.”
Osteomyelitis requires prolonged antibiotics as well as removal of
necrotic bone. The frontal sinus is most commonly affected, with
bone involvement suggested by a tender puffy swelling of the
forehead (Pott puffy tumor). Following treatment, secondary
cosmetic reconstructive procedures may be necessary.
Intracranial complications of sinusitis can occur either through
hematogenous spread, as in cavernous sinus thrombosis and
meningitis, or by direct extension, as in epidural and
intraparenchymal brain abscesses. Fortunately, they are rare today.
Cavernous sinus thrombosis is heralded by ophthalmoplegia,
chemosis, and visual loss. The diagnosis is most commonly
confirmed by MRI and, when identified early, it typically responds
to intravenous antibiotics. Frontal epidural and intracranial
abscesses are often clinically silent, but may present with altered
metal status, persistent fever, or severe headache.
 When to Refer
Failure of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis to resolve after an adequate
course of oral antibiotics may necessitate referral to an
otolaryngologist for evaluation. Endoscopic cultures may direct
further treatment choices. Nasal endoscopy and CT scan are
indicated when symptoms persist longer than 4–12 weeks. Any
patients with suspected extension of disease outside the sinuses
should be evaluated urgently by an otolaryngologist and imaging.
 When to Admit
 
•    Facial swelling and erythema indicative of facial
cellulitis.
•    Proptosis.
•    Vision change or gaze abnormality indicative of orbital
cellulitis.
•    Abscess or cavernous sinus involvement.
•    Mental status changes suggestive of intracranial
extension.
•    Immunocompromised status.
•    Failure to respond to appropriate first-line treatment for
acute bacterial rhinosinusitis or symptoms persisting longer
than 4 weeks.
Ahovuo-Saloranta A et al. Antibiotics for acute maxillary sinusitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Apr 16; (2):CD000243.
[PMID: 18425861]
 
Chan Y et al. An update on the classifications, diagnosis, and
treatment of rhinosinusitis. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2009 Jun;17(3):204–8. [PMID: 19346944]
 
Desrosiers M. Diagnosis and management of acute rhinosinusitis.
Postgrad Med. 2009 May;121(3):83–9. [PMID: 19491544]
 
Pant H et al. The role of allergy in rhinosinusitis. Curr Opin
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Jun;17(3):232–8. [PMID:
19469053]
 
Rosenfeld RM et al. Clinical practice guideline: adult sinusitis.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007 Sep;137(3 Suppl):S1–31.
[PMID: 17761281]
 
Ryan MW. Evaluation and management of the patient with “sinus”.
Med Clin North Am. 2010 Sep;94(5):881–90. [PMID:
20736100]
 
3. Nasal Vestibulitis
Inflammation of the nasal vestibule may result from folliculitis of the
hairs that line this orifice and is usually the result of nasal
manipulation or hair trimming. Systemic antibiotics effective against
S aureus (such as dicloxacillin, 250 mg orally four times daily for 7–
10 days) are indicated. Topical mupirocin or bacitracin (applied
two or three times daily) may be a helpful addition and may prevent
future occurrences. If recurrent, the addition of rifampin (10 mg/kg
orally twice daily for the last 4 days of treatment) may eliminate the
S aureus carrier state. If a furuncle exists, it should be incised and
drained, preferably intranasally. Adequate treatment of these
infections is important to prevent retrograde spread of infection
through valveless veins into the cavernous sinus and intracranial
structures.
4. Invasive Fungal Sinusitis
Invasive fungal sinusitis is rare and includes both rhinocerebral
mucormycosis (Mucor, Absidia, and Rhizopus sp.) and other
invasive fungal infections, such as Aspergillus. The fungus spreads
rapidly through vascular channels and may be lethal if not detected
early. Patients with mucormycosis almost invariably have a
contributing 
factor 
that 
results 
in 
some 
degree 
of
immunocompromise, such as diabetes mellitus, long-term
corticosteroid therapy, or end-stage renal disease. Mucormycosis is
more common, however, in patients who are profoundly
immunocompromised for the treatment of hematologic malignancies.
Occasional cases have been reported in patients with AIDS though
Aspergillus sp. is more common in this setting. The initial symptoms
may be similar to those of acute bacterial rhinosinusitis, although
facial pain is often more severe. Nasal drainage is typically clear or
straw-colored, rather than purulent, and visual symptoms may be
noted at presentation in the absence of significant nasal findings. On
examination, the classic finding of mucormycosis is a black eschar
on the middle turbinate. This finding is not universal and may be
inapparent if the infection is deep or high within the nasal bones.
Often the mucosa appears normal or simply pale and dry. Early
diagnosis requires suspicion of the disease and nasal biopsy with
silver stains, revealing broad nonseptate hyphae within tissues and
necrosis with vascular occlusion. Because CT or MRI may initially
show only soft tissue changes, biopsy and ultimate debridement
should be based on the clinical setting rather than radiographic
demonstration of bony destruction or intracranial changes.
Invasive fungal sinusitis represents a medical and surgical
emergency. Once recognized, prompt wide surgical debridement
and amphotericin B by intravenous infusion are indicated for
patients with reversible immune deficiency. Lipid-based
amphotericin B (Ambisome) may be used in patients who have
renal insufficiency or in those in whom it develops secondary to
nephrotoxic doses of nonlipid amphotericin. Other antifungals,
including voriconazole and caspofungin, may be appropriate therapy
depending on the speciation of the organism. There is evidence that
suggests that iron chelator therapy may also be a useful adjunct.
While necessary for any possibility of cure, surgical management
often results in tremendous disfigurement and functional deficits.
Even with early diagnosis and immediate appropriate intervention,
the prognosis is guarded and often results in the loss of at least one
eye. In persons with diabetes, the mortality rate is about 20%. If
renal failure is present or develops, mortality is over 50%; in the
setting of AIDS or hematologic malignancy with neutropenia,
mortality approaches 100%.
Epstein VA et al. Invasive fungal sinusitis and complications of
rhinosinusitis. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2008 Jun; 41(3):497–
524. [PMID: 18435995]
 
Kasapoglu F et al. Acute invasive fungal rhinosinusitis: evaluation
of 26 patients treated with endonasal or open surgical procedures.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Nov;143(5):614–20. [PMID:
20974328]
 
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Clear rhinorrhea, sneezing, tearing, eye irritation, and pruritus.
 Associated symptoms, including cough, bronchospasm,
eczematous dermatitis.
 Environmental allergen exposure with presence of allergen
specific IgE.
 
 General Considerations
Allergic rhinitis is very common in the United States. Population
studies have reported the prevalence as between 14% and 40%
among Americans, with most consensus panels agreeing on 20%.
Allergic rhinitis adversely affects school and work performance,
costing about $6 billion annually in the United States. These costs
may be underestimated as epidemiology studies consistently show
an association with asthma. Seasonal allergic rhinitis is most
commonly caused by pollens and spores. Flowering shrub and tree
pollens are most common in the spring, flowering plants and grasses
in the summer, and ragweed and molds in the fall. Dust, household
mites, air pollution, and pet dander may produce year-round
symptoms, termed “perennial rhinitis.”
Allergic rhinitis is caused by exposure to an airborne allergen in a
predisposed individual. Activation of both humoral (B-cell) and
cytotoxic (T-cell) immune responses with subsequent allergen-
specific IgE responses causes release of inflammatory mediators.
The response is increased as antigen is passed to regional lymph
nodes for greater T-cell activation. Interleukin and cytokine release
causes specific activation of mast cells, eosinophils, plasma cells,
basophils and other T-cells. Many of these circulating cells then
migrate into the nasal and ocular epithelium where they contribute
directly to symptoms through proinflammatory mediators, including
histamine, prostaglandins, and kinins.
 Clinical Findings
The symptoms of “hay fever” are similar to those of viral rhinitis but
are usually persistent and may show seasonal variation. Nasal
symptoms are often accompanied by eye irritation, pruritus,
conjunctival erythema, and excessive tearing. Many patients will
note a strong family history of atopy or allergy.
The clinician should be careful to distinguish allergic rhinitis from
nonallergic or vasomotor rhinitis. Vasomotor rhinitis is caused by
increased sensitivity of the vidian nerve and is a common cause of
clear rhinorrhea in the elderly. Often patients will report that they
have troubling rhinor-rhea in response to numerous nasal stimuli,
including warm or cold air, odors or scents, light, or particulate
matter.
On physical examination, the mucosa of the turbinates is usually
pale or violaceous because of venous engorgement. This is in
contrast to the erythema of viral rhinitis. Nasal polyps, which are
yellowish boggy masses of hypertrophic mucosa, are associated
with long-standing allergic rhinitis.
 Treatment
A. Antihistamines
Treatment of allergic and perennial rhinitis has improved in recent
years. Antihistamines offer temporary, but immediate, control of
many of the most troubling symptoms of allergic rhinitis. Over-the-
counter antihistamines include nonsedating loratadine (10 mg orally
once daily) and minimally sedating cetirizine (10 mg orally once
daily). Brompheniramine or chlorpheniramine (4 mg orally every 6–
8 hours, or 8–12 mg orally every 8–12 hours as a sustained-release
tablet) and clemastine (1.34–2.68 mg orally twice daily) may be
less expensive, although usually associated with some drowsiness.
Prescription oral H1-receptor antagonists include fexofenadine (60
mg orally twice daily or 120 mg once daily) and desloratadine (5
mg orally once daily). Fexofenadine appears to be nonsedating;
deslorata-dine is minimally sedating. Also shown to be effective in
randomized trials are ebastine (10–20 mg orally once daily) and
misolastine (10 mg once daily). The H1-receptor antagonist
antihistamine nasal spray azelastine (1-2 sprays per nostril daily) has
also been shown to be effective in a randomized trial. Topical nasal
sprays are particularly useful in patients who experience side effects,
mostly xerostomia and sedation, of oral antihistamines. Many
patients who find initial benefit from an antihistamine complain that
allergy symptoms eventually return after several months of use. In
such patients, typically with perennial allergy problems, antihistamine
tolerance seems to develop and alternating effective antihistamines
periodically can control symptoms over the long term.
B. Intranasal Corticosteroids
Intranasal corticosteroid sprays have revolutionized the treatment of
allergic rhinitis. Evidence-based literature reviews show that these
are more effective—and frequently less expensive—than
nonsedating antihistamines. Patients should be reminded that there
may be a delay in onset of relief of 2 or more weeks. Corticosteroid
sprays may also shrink hypertrophic nasal mucosa and nasal polyps,
thereby providing an improved nasal airway and osteomeatal
complex drainage. Because of this effect, intranasal corticosteroids
are critical in treating allergy in patients prone to recurrent acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis or chronic rhinosinusitis. There are many
available preparations, including beclomethasone (42 mcg/spray
twice daily per nostril), flunisolide (25 mcg/spray twice daily per
nostril), mometasone furoate (200 mcg once daily per nostril),
budesonide (100 mcg twice daily per nostril) and fluticasone
propionate (200 mcg once daily per nostril). All intranasal
corticosteroids are considered equally effective. Probably the most
critical factor is compliance with regular use and proper introduction
into the nasal cavity. In order to deliver medication to the region of
the middle meatus, proper application involves holding the bottle
straight up with the head tilted forward and pointing the bottle
toward the ipsilateral ear when spraying. Side effects are limited and
the most annoying is epistaxis. Some experts believe that this is
related to incorrect delivery of the drug to the nasal septum.
C. Adjunctive Treatment Measures
In addition to intranasal corticosteroid sprays and antihistamines,
including H1-receptor antagonists, the literature supports the use of
antileukotriene medications such as montelukast (10 mg/d orally)
alone or with cetirizine (10 mg/d orally) or loratadine (10 mg/d
orally). There are proinflammatory effects of cysteinyl leukotrienes
in upper airway disease, including allergic rhinitis, and hyperplastic
polyposis, and sinusitis. Improved nasal rhinorrhea, sneezing, and
congestion are seen with the use of leukotriene receptor antagonists,
often in conjunction with antihistamines. Cromolyn sodium and
sodium nedocromil are also useful adjunct agents for allergic rhinitis.
They work by stabilizing mast cells and preventing proinflammatory
mediator release. They are not absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract
but do function topically and have very few side effects. The most
useful form of cromolyn is probably the ophthalmologic preparation;
the nasal preparation is not nearly as effective as inhaled
corticosteroids. Intranasal cromolyn is cleared rapidly and must be
administered four times daily for continued relief of symptoms.
Intranasal anticholinergic agents, such as ipratropium bromide
0.03% or 0.06% sprays (42–84 mcg per nostril three times daily),
may be helpful adjuncts when rhinor-rhea is a major symptom.
Ipratropium nasal sprays are not as effective as intranasal
corticosteroids for treating allergic rhinitis but are useful for treating
vasomotor rhinitis.
Avoiding or reducing exposure to airborne allergens is the most
effective means of alleviating symptoms of allergic rhinitis.
Depending on the allergen, this can be extremely difficult, however.
Maintaining an allergen-free environment by covering pillows and
mattresses with plastic covers, substituting synthetic materials (foam
mattress, acrylics) for animal products (wool, horsehair), and
removing dust-collecting household fixtures (carpets, drapes,
bedspreads, wicker) is worth the attempt to help more troubled
patients. Air purifiers and dust filters may also aid in maintaining an
allergen-free environment. Nasal saline irrigations are a very useful
adjunct in the treatment of allergic rhinitis to mechanically flush the
allergens from the nasal cavity. Though debated, there is no clear
benefit to hypertonic saline over commercially available normal
saline preparations (eg, Ayr or Ocean Spray). When symptoms are
extremely bothersome, a search for offending allergens may prove
helpful. This can either be done by skin testing or by serum RAST
testing by an allergist.
In some cases, allergic rhinitis symptoms are inadequately
relieved by medication and avoidance measures. Often, such
patients have a strong family history of atopy and may also have
lower respiratory manifestations such as allergic asthma. Referral to
an allergist may be appropriate in such cases for consideration of
immunotherapy. This treatment course is quite involved, with proper
identification of offending allergens, progressively increasing doses
of allergen (s) and eventual maintenance dose administration over a
period of 3–5 years. Immunotherapy has been proven to reduce
circulating IgE levels in patients with allergic rhinitis and reduce the
need for allergy medications. While oral allergen exposure is
actively being investigated, currently the primary mode of allergen
exposure is by subcutaneous injection. Treatments are given at a
suitable medical facility with monitoring following treatment because
of the risk of anaphylaxis during dose escalation. Local reactions
are common and usually self-limited.
Bousquet J et al. Implementation of guidelines for allergic rhinitis in
specialist practice. A randomized pragmatic controlled trial. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol. 2009;150(1):75–82. [PMID: 19339805]
 
Calderon MA et al. Allergen injection immunotherapy for seasonal
allergic rhinitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24;
(1):CD001936. [PMID: 17253469]
 
Church MK et al. Treating allergic rhinitis: continuous versus on-
demand regime? Executive summary of the Supportive Initiatives
for the Global Management of Allergy (SIGMA): report from the
Belgian Working Group. B-ENT. 2009;5(Suppl
 
12):1–25. [PMID: 19475789]
 
Sheikh A et al. House dust mite avoidance measures for perennial
allergic rhinitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24;
(1):CD001563. [PMID: 17253461]
 
OLFACTORY DYSFUNCTION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Subjective diminished smell or taste sensation.
 Lack of objective nasal obstruction.
 Objective decrease in olfaction demonstrated by testing.
 
 General Considerations
Odorant molecules traverse the nasal vault to reach the cribriform
area and become soluble in the mucus overlying the exposed
dendrites of receptor cells. Anatomic blockage of the nasal cavity
with subsequent airflow disruption is the most common cause of
olfactory dysfunction (hyposmia or anosmia). Polyps, septal
deformities, and nasal tumors may be the cause. Transient olfactory
dysfunction often accompanies the common cold, nasal allergies,
and perennial rhinitis through changes in the nasal and olfactory
epithelium. About 20% of olfactory dysfunction is idiopathic,
although it often follows a viral illness. Central nervous system
neoplasms, especially those that involve the olfactory groove or
temporal lobe, may affect olfaction and must be considered in
patients with no other explanation for their hyposmia or other
neurologic signs. Head trauma accounts for < 5% of cases of
hyposmia but is more commonly associated with anosmia. Absent,
diminished, or distorted smell or taste has been reported in a wide
variety of endocrine, nutritional, and nervous disorders. In
particular, olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson disease and Alzheimer
disease has been the subject of recent research. A great many
medications have also been implicated in altering olfaction.
 Clinical Findings
Evaluation of olfactory dysfunction should include a thorough history
of systemic illnesses and medication use as well as a physical
examination focusing on the nose and nervous system. Nasal
obstruction (from polyps, trauma, foreign bodies or nasal masses)
can cause functional hyposmia and should be excluded before
concluding that the disruption of olfaction is primary. Most clinical
offices are not set up to test olfaction, but such tests may at times be
worthwhile if only to assess whether a patient possesses any sense
of smell at all. The University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification
Test (UPSIT) is available commercially and is a simple, self-
administered “scratch-and-sniff” test that is useful in differentiating
hyposmia, anosmia, and malingering. Odor threshold can be tested
at regional specialty centers using increasing concentrations of
various odorants.
 Treatment
There is no specific treatment for primary disruption of olfaction.
While some disturbances spontaneously resolve, little evidence
supports the use of large doses of vitamin A and zinc to patients
with transient olfactory dysfunction. The degree of hyposmia is the
greatest predictor of recovery, with less severe hyposmia
recovering at a much higher rate. In permanent hyposmia,
counseling should be offered about seasoning foods with spices (eg,
pepper) that stimulate the trigeminal as well as olfactory
chemoreceptors, abuse of table salt as a seasoning, and safety
issues such as the use of smoke alarms and electric rather than gas
home appliances.
Doty RL. The olfactory system and its disorders. Semin Neurol.
2009 Feb;29(1):74–81. [PMID: 19214935]
 
Hummel T et al. Prognostic factors of olfactory dysfunction. Arch
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Apr;136(4):347–51. [PMID:
20403850]
 
Lafreniere D et al. Anosmia: loss of smell in the elderly.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2009 Feb;42(1):123–31. [PMID:
19134495]
 
EPISTAXIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bleeding from the unilateral anterior nasal cavity most commonly.
 Most cases may be successfully treated by direct pressure on the
bleeding site for 15 minutes. When this is inadequate, topical
sympathomimetics and various nasal tamponade methods are
usually effective.
 Posterior, bilateral, or large volume epistaxis should be triaged
immediately to a specialist in a critical care setting.
 
 General Considerations
Epistaxis is an extremely common problem in the primary care
setting. Predisposing factors include nasal trauma (nose picking,
foreign bodies, forceful nose blowing), rhinitis, drying of the nasal
mucosa from low humidity or supplemental nasal oxygen, deviation
of the nasal septum, hypertension, atherosclerotic disease,
hereditary 
hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia 
(Osler-Weber-Rendu
syndrome), inhaled nasal cocaine or other drug use, and alcohol
use. Anticoagulation or anti-platelet medications may be associated
with a higher incidence of epistaxis, more frequent recurrence of
epistaxis, and greater difficulty controlling bleeding, but they do not
cause epistaxis. Bleeding is most common in the anterior septum
where a confluence of veins creates a superficial venous plexus
(Kiesselbach plexus).
 Clinical Findings
It is important in all patients with epistaxis to consider underlying
causes of the bleeding. Laboratory assessment of bleeding
parameters may be indicated, especially in recurrent cases. Once
the acute episode has passed, careful examination of the nose and
paranasal sinuses to rule out neoplasia and hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia is wise.
Patients presenting with epistaxis often have higher blood
pressures than control patients, but in many cases, blood pressure
returns to normal following treatment of acute bleeding. Repeat
evaluation for clinically significant hypertension and treatment should
be performed following control of epistaxis and removal of any
packing.
 Treatment
Most cases of anterior epistaxis may be successfully treated by
direct pressure on the site by compression of the nares continuously
for 15 min. Venous pressure is reduced in the sitting position, and
slight leaning forward lessens the swallowing of blood. Short-acting
topical nasal decongestants (eg, phenylephrine, 0.125–1% solution,
one or two sprays), which act as vasoconstrictors, may also be
helpful. When the bleeding does not readily subside, the nose
should be examined, using good illumination and suction, in an
attempt to locate the bleeding site. Topical 4% cocaine applied
either as a spray or on a cotton strip serves both as an anesthetic
and a vasoconstrictor. If cocaine is unavailable, a topical
decongestant (eg, oxymetazoline) and a topical anesthetic (eg,
tetracaine or lidocaine) provide similar results. When visible, the
bleeding site may be cauterized with silver nitrate, diathermy, or
electrocautery. A supplemental patch of Surgicel or Gelfoam may
be helpful with a moisture barrier, such as petroleum-based
ointment, to prevent drying and crusting.
Occasionally, a site of bleeding may be inaccessible to direct
control, or attempts at direct control may be unsuccessful. In such
cases there are a number of alternatives. When the site of bleeding
is anterior, a hemostatic sealant, pneumatic nasal tamponade, or
anterior packing may suffice. There are a number of ways to do
this, such as with several feet of lubricated iodoform packing
systematically placed in the floor of the nose and then the vault of
the nose, or with various manufactured products designed for nasal
tamponade.
About 5% of nasal bleeding originates in the posterior nasal
cavity. Such bleeds are more commonly associated with
atherosclerotic disease and hypertension. If an anteriorly placed
pneumatic nasal tamponade is unsuccessful, it may be necessary to
consult an otolaryngologist for a pack to occlude the choana before
placing a pack anteriorly. In emergency settings, double balloon
packs (Epistat) may facilitate rapid control of bleeding with little or
no mucosal trauma. Because such packing is uncomfortable,
bleeding may persist, and vasovagal syncope is quite possible,
hospitalization for monitoring and stabilization is indicated. Opioid
analgesics are needed to reduce the considerable discomfort and
elevated blood pressure caused by a posterior pack.
Surgical management of epistaxis, through ligation of the nasal
arterial supply (internal maxillary artery and ethmoid arteries) is an
alternative to posterior nasal packing. Endovascular embolization of
the internal maxillary artery or facial artery is also quite effective and
can allow very specific control of hemorrhage. Such alternatives are
necessary when packing fails to control life-threatening hemorrhage.
On very rare occasions, ligation of the external carotid artery may
be necessary.
After control of epistaxis, the patient is advised to avoid straining
and vigorous exercise for several days. Nasal saline should be
applied to the packing frequently to keep the packing moist.
Avoidance of hot or spicy foods and tobacco is also advisable,
since these may cause nasal vaso-dilation. Avoiding nasal trauma,
including nose picking, is an obvious necessity. Lubrication with
petroleum jelly or bacitracin ointment and increased home humidity
may also be useful ancillary measures. Finally, antistaphylococcal
antibiotics are indicated to reduce the risk of toxic shock syndrome
developing while the packing remains in place (at least 5 days).
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with recurrent epistaxis, large volume epistaxis,
and episodic epistaxis with associated nasal obstruction
should be referred to an otolaryngologist for endoscopic
evaluation and possible imaging.
•    Those with ongoing bleeding beyond 15 minutes should
be taken to a local emergency department if the clinician is
not prepared to manage acute epistaxis.
Manes RP. Evaluating and managing the patient with nosebleeds.
Med Clin North Am. 2010 Sep;94(5):903-12. [PMID:
20736102]
 
Reaven D et al. Management of posterior epistaxis. Acad Emerg
Med. 2008 Jun;15(6):585. [PMID: 18616451]
 
Schlosser RJ. Clinical practice. Epistaxis. N Engl J Med. 2009
Feb 19;360(8):784–9. [PMID: 19228621]
 
NASAL TRAUMA
The nasal pyramid is the most frequently fractured bone in the body.
Fracture is suggested by crepitance or palpably mobile bony
segments. Epistaxis and pain are common, as are soft tissue
hematomas (“black eye”). It is important to make certain that there
is no palpable step-off of the infraorbital rim, which would indicate
the presence of a zygomatic complex fracture. Radiologic
confirmation may at times be helpful but is not necessary in
uncomplicated nasal fractures. It is also important to assess for
possible concomitant additional facial, pulmonary, or intracranial
injuries when the circumstances of injury are suggestive, as in the
case of automobile and motorcycle accidents.
Treatment is aimed at maintaining long-term nasal airway patency
and cosmesis. Closed reduction, using topical 4% cocaine and
locally injected 1% lidocaine, should be attempted within 1 week of
injury. In the presence of marked nasal swelling, it is best to wait
several days for the edema to subside before undertaking reduction.
Persistent functional or cosmetic defects may be repaired by
delayed reconstructive nasal surgery.
Intranasal examination should be performed in all cases to rule
out septal hematoma, which appears as a widening of the anterior
septum, visible just posterior to the columella. The septal cartilage
receives 
its 
only 
nutrition 
from 
its 
closely 
adherent
mucoperichondrium. An untreated subperichondrial hematoma will
result in loss of the nasal cartilage with resultant saddle nose
deformity. Septal hematomas may become infected, with S aureus
most commonly, and should be drained with an incision in the
inferior mucoperichondrium on both sides.
Packing for 2–5 days is often helpful to help prevent re-formation
of the hematoma. Antibiotics with antistaphylococcal efficacy (eg,
cephalexin, 500 mg four times daily, or clindamycin, 150 mg four
times daily) should be given for 3–5 days or the duration of the
packing and the drained fluid sent for culture.
Green KM. Reduction of nasal fractures under local anaesthetic.
Rhinology. 2001 Mar;39(1):43–6. [PMID: 11340695]
 
Ziccardi VB et al. Management of nasal fractures. Oral Maxillofac
Surg Clin North Am. 2009 May;21(2):203–8. [PMID:
19348986]
 
TUMORS & GRANULOMATOUS DISEASE
1. Benign Nasal Tumors
A. Nasal Polyps
Nasal polyps are pale, edematous, mucosally covered masses
commonly seen in patients with allergic rhinitis, but compelling
evidence argues against a purely allergic pathogenesis. They may
result in chronic nasal obstruction and a diminished sense of smell.
In patients with nasal polyps and a history of asthma, aspirin should
be avoided as it may precipitate a severe episode of bronchospasm,
known as triad asthma (Samter triad). Such patients may have an
immunologic salicylate sensitivity. The presence of polyps in children
should suggest the possibility of cystic fibrosis.
Initial treatment with topical nasal corticosteroids (see Allergic
Rhinitis section for specific drugs) for 1–3 months is usually
successful for small polyps and may reduce the need for operation.
A short course of oral corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, 6-day
course using 21 5-mg tablets: 30 mg on day 1 and tapering by 5 mg
each day) may also be of benefit. When polyps are massive or
medical management is unsuccessful, polyps may be removed
surgically. In healthy persons, this is a minor outpatient procedure.
In recurrent cases or when surgery itself is associated with
increased risk (such as in patients with asthma), a more complete
procedure, such as ethmoidectomy, may be advisable. In recurrent
polyposis, it may be necessary to remove polyps from the ethmoid,
sphenoid, and maxillary sinuses to provide longer-lasting relief.
Intranasal corticosteroid should be continued following polyp
removal to prevent recurrence, and the clinician should consider
allergen testing to determine the offending allergen and avoidance
measures.
Alobid I et al. Nasal polyposis and its impact on quality of life:
comparison between the effects of medical and surgical treatments.
Allergy. 2005 Apr;60(4):452–8. [PMID: 15727575]
 
Becker SS. Surgical management of polyps in the treatment of
nasal airway obstruction. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2009
Apr;42(2):377–85. [PMID: 19328899]
 
Patiar S et al. Oral steroids for nasal polyps. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24; (1):CD005232. [PMID: 17253548]
 
Rasp G. Is there a role for leukotriene antagonists in the prevention
of recurrent nasal polyps? Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010
Jun;10(3):200–5. [PMID: 20431368]
 
Williams AN et al. The clinical effectiveness of aspirin
desensitization in chronic rhinosinusitis. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep.
2008 May;8(3):245–52. [PMID: 18589844]
 
B. Inverted Papilloma
Inverted papillomas are benign tumors caused by human
papillomavirus (HPV) that usually arise on the lateral nasal wall.
They present with unilateral nasal obstruction and occasionally
hemorrhage. They are often easily seen on anterior rhinoscopy as
cauliflower-like growths in or around the middle meatus. Because
SCC is seen in about 10% of inverted or schneiderian papillomas,
complete excision is strongly recommended. This usually requires a
medial maxillectomy, but in selected cases an endoscopic approach
may be possible. Because recurrence rates for inverted papilloma
are reported to be as high as 20%, subsequent clinical and
radiologic follow-up is imperative. All excised tissue (not just a
portion) should be carefully reviewed by the pathologist to be sure
no carcinoma is present.
Anari S et al. Sinonasal inverted papilloma: narrative review. J
Laryngol Otol. 2010 Jul;124(7):705–15. [PMID: 20388243]
 
Reh DD et al. The role of endoscopic sinus surgery in the
management of sinonasal inverted papilloma. Curr Opin
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Feb;17(1):6–10. [PMID:
19225300]
 
C. Juvenile Angiofibroma
These highly vascular tumors arise in the nasopharynx, typically in
adolescent males. Initially, they cause nasal obstruction and
hemorrhage. Any adolescent male with recurrent epistaxis should be
evaluated for an angiofibroma. The clinician should take great care
when considering a biopsy because these masses can bleed
profusely. Although benign, these tumors expand locally from the
sphenopalatine foramen to the pterygopalatine fossa at the
pterygoid canal and extend to the pterygoid base, the greater wing
of the sphenoid, the nasal cavity, and the paranasal sinuses. They
may involve the skull base, usually extradurally, and extend into the
superior clivus. Treatment consists of preoperative embolization
followed by surgical excision via an approach appropriate for the
tumor extent. Small angiofibromas that do not involve the
infratemporal fossa may be resected endoscopically. Extensive ones
may require skull base approaches. Recurrences are not uncommon
and should be resected if possible. Unresectable recurrences that
do not appear to grow significantly may be followed radiologically
with serial MR scans in expectation of possible eventual involution
stabilization or involution of tumor. Low-dose (30 Gy) irradiation
may be helpful in nonresectable, continually growing tumors.
Carrillo JF et al. Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma: clinical
factors associated with recurrence, and proposal of a staging
system. J Surg Oncol. 2008 Aug 1;98(2):75–80. [PMID:
18623038]
 
Glad H et al. Juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibromas in Denmark
1981–2003: diagnosis, incidence, and treatment. Acta
Otolaryngol. 2007 Mar;127(3):292–9. [PMID: 17364367]
 
2. Malignant Nasopharyngeal & Paranasal Sinus Tumors
Though rare, malignant tumors of the nose, nasopharynx, and
paranasal sinuses are quite problematic because they tend to remain
asymptomatic until late in their course. SCC is the most common
cancer found in the sinuses and nasopharynx. It is especially
common in the nasopharynx, where it obstructs the eustachian tube
and results in serous otitis media. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(poorly 
differentiated 
SCC, 
nonkeratinizing 
SCC, 
or
lymphoepithelioma) is usually associated with elevated IgA antibody
to the viral capsid antigen of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). It is
particularly common in patients of southern Chinese descent.
Adenocarcinomas, mucosal melanomas, sarcomas, and non-
Hodgkin lymphomas are less commonly encountered neoplasms of
this area.
Early symptoms are nonspecific, mimicking those of rhinitis or
sinusitis. Unilateral nasal obstruction, otitis media, and discharge are
common, with pain and recurrent hemorrhage often clues to the
diagnosis of cancer. Any adult with persistent unilateral nasal
symptoms or new otitis media should be thoroughly evaluated with
nasal endoscopy and nasopharyngoscopy. A high index of suspicion
remains a key to early diagnosis of these tumors. Patients often
present with advanced symptoms such as proptosis, expansion of a
cheek, or ill-fitting maxillary dentures. Malar hypesthesia, due to
involvement of the infraorbital nerve, is common in maxillary sinus
tumors. Biopsy is necessary for definitive diagnosis, and MRI is the
best imaging study to delineate the extent of disease and plan
appropriate surgery and radiation.
Treatment depends on the tumor type and the extent of disease.
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma at this time is best treated by
concomitant radiation and cisplatin followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy with cisplatin and fluorouracil—this protocol
significantly decreases local, nodal, and distant failures and
increased progression-free and overall survival. Locally recurrent
nasopharyngeal carcinoma may in selected cases be treated with
repeat irradiation protocols or surgery with moderate success and a
high degree of concern about local wound healing. Other SCCs are
best treated—when resectable—with a combination of surgery and
irradiation. Numerous protocols investigating the role of
chemotherapy are under evaluation. Cranial base surgery appears
to be an effective modality in improving the overall prognosis in
paranasal sinus malignancies eroding the ethmoid roof. More
centers are capable of performing such resections endoscopically
using image navigation. Although the prognosis is poor for advanced
tumors, the results of treating resectable tumors of paranasal sinus
origin have improved with the wider use of skull base resections and
intensity-modulated radiation therapy. Cure rates are often 45–
60%.
Bourhis J et al; Meta-Analysis of Chemotherapy in Head, Neck
Cancer Collaborative Group; Meta-Analysis of Radiotherapy in
Carcinoma of Head, Neck Collaborative Group; Meta-Analysis of
Chemotherapy in Nasopharynx Carcinoma Collaborative Group.
Individual patients’ data meta-analyses in head and neck cancer.
Curr Opin Oncol. 2007 May;19(3):188–94. [PMID: 17414635]
 
Khademi B et al. Malignant neoplasms of the sinonasal tract:
report of 71 patients and literature review and analysis. Oral
Maxillofac Surg. 2009 Dec;13(4):191–9. [PMID: 19795137]
 
Myers LL et al. Differential diagnosis and treatment options in
paranasal sinus cancers. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2004
Jan;13(1):167–86. [PMID: 15062368]
 
3. Sinonasal Inflammatory Disease (Wegener
Granulomatosis & Sarcoidosis)
The nose and paranasal sinuses are involved in over 90% of cases
of Wegener granulomatosis. It is often not realized that involvement
at these sites is more common than involvement of lungs or kidneys.
Examination shows bloodstained crusts and friable mucosa. Biopsy,
when positive, shows necrotizing granulomas and vasculitis. Other
recognized sites of Wegener granulomatosis in the head and neck
include the subglottis and the middle ear.
Sarcoidosis also commonly involves the paranasal sinuses and is
clinically similar to other chronic sinonasal inflammatory processes.
Sinonasal symptoms, including rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and
hyposmia or anosmia may precede diagnosis of sarcoidosis in other
organ systems. Clinically, the turbinates appear engorged with small
white granulomas. Biopsy shows classic noncaseating granulomas.
Notably, patients with sinonasal involvement generally have more
trouble managing sarcoidosis in other organ systems.
Polymorphic reticulosis (midline malignant reticulosis, idiopathic
midline destructive disease, lethal midline granuloma)—as the
multitude of apt descriptive terms suggest—is not well understood
but appears to be a nasal T-cell or NK cell lymphoma. In contrast
to Wegener granulomatosis, involvement is limited to the mid face,
and there may be extensive bone destruction. Many destructive
lesions of the mucosa and nasal structures labeled as polymorphic
reticulosis are in fact non-Hodgkin lymphoma of either NK cell or T
cell origin. Immunophenotyping, especially for CD56 expression, is
essential in the histologic evaluation. Even when apparently
localized, these lymphomas have a poor prognosis, with progression
and death within a year the rule.
For treatment of Wegener granulomatosis, see Chapter 20.
Aubart FC et al. Sinonasal involvement in sarcoidosis: a case-
control study of 20 patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2006
Nov;85(6):365–71. [PMID: 17108780]
 
Cannady SB et al. Sinonasal Wegener granulomatosis: a single-
institution experience with 120 cases. Laryngoscope. 2009
Apr;119(4):757–61. [PMID: 19263410]
 
Fuchs HA et al. Granulomatous disorders of the nose and para-
nasal sinuses. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009
Feb;17(1):23–7. [PMID: 19225301]
 
Mendenhall WM et al. Lethal midline granuloma-nasal natural
killer/T-cell lymphoma. Am J Clin Oncol. 2006 Apr;29(2):202–6.
[PMID: 16601443]
 
DISEASES OF THE ORAL
CAVITY & PHARYNX
 
LEUKOPLAKIA, ERYTHROPLAKIA, ORAL LICHEN
PLANUS, & ORAL CANCER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Leukoplakia—a white lesion that cannot be removed by
rubbing the mucosal surface.
 Erythroplakia—Similar to leukoplakia except that it has a
definite erythematous component.
 Oral Lichen Planus—Most commonly presents as lacy
leukoplakia but may be erosive; definitive diagnosis requires
biopsy.
 Oral Cancer—Early lesions appear as leukoplakia or
erythroplakia; more advanced lesions will be larger, with invasion
into tongue such that a mass lesion is palpable. Ulceration may be
present.
 
Leukoplakic regions range from small to several centimeters in
diameter (Figure 8–3). Histologically, they are often hyperkeratoses
occurring in response to chronic irritation (eg, from dentures,
tobacco, lichen planus); about 2–6%, however, represent either
dysplasia or early invasive SCC. Distinguishing between
erythroplakia and leukoplakia is important because about 90%
of cases of erythroplakia are either dysplasia or carcinoma. SCC
accounts for 90% of oral cancer. Alcohol and tobacco use are the
major epidemiologic risk factors.
The differential diagnosis may include oral candidiasis, necrotizing
sialometaplasia, 
pseudoepitheliomatous 
hyperplasia, 
median
rhomboid glossitis, and vesiculoerosive inflammatory disease such
as erosive lichen planus. This should not be confused with the
brown-black gingival melanin pigmentation—diffuse or speckled—
common in nonwhites, blue-black embedded fragments of dental
amalgam, or other systemic disorders associated with general
pigmentation (neurofibromatosis, familial polyposis, Addison
disease). Intraoral melanoma is extremely rare and carries a dismal
prognosis.
 
Figure 8–3. Leukoplakia with moderate dysplasia on the lateral
border of the tongue. (Courtesy of Ellen Eisenberg, DMD; used,
with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr,
Chumley H, Tysinger, J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Any area of erythroplakia, enlarging area of leukoplakia, or a
lesion that has submucosal depth on palpation should have an
incisional biopsy or an exfoliative cytologic examination. Ulcerative
lesions are particularly suspicious and worrisome. Specialty referral
should be sought early both for diagnosis and treatment. A
systematic intraoral examination—including the lateral tongue, floor
of the mouth, gingiva, buccal area, palate, and tonsillar fossae—and
palpation of the neck for enlarged lymph nodes should be part of
any general physical examination, especially in patients over the age
of 45 who smoke tobacco or drink immoderately. Indirect or
fiberoptic examination of the nasopharynx, oropharynx,
hypopharynx, and larynx by an otolaryngologist, head and neck
surgeon, or radiation oncologist should also be considered for such
patients when there is unexplained or persistent throat or ear pain,
oral or nasal bleeding, or oral erythroplakia. Fine-needle aspiration
(FNA) biopsy may expedite the diagnosis if an enlarged lymph
node is found. To date, there are no approved therapies for
reversing or stabilizing leukoplakia or erythroplakia.
Oral lichen planus is a relatively common (0.5–2% of the
population) chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease that may be
difficult to diagnose clinically because of its numerous distinct
phenotypic subtypes. For example, the reticular pattern may mimic
candidiasis or hyperkeratosis, while the erosive pattern may mimic
SCC. Management begins with distinguishing it from other oral
lesions. Exfoliative cytology or a small incisional or excisional biopsy
is indicated, especially if SCC is suspected. Therapy is aimed at
managing pain and discomfort. Corticosteroids have been used
widely both locally and systemically. Cyclosporines and retinoids
have also been used. Many think there is a low rate (1%) of SCC
arising within lichen planus (in addition to the possibility of clinical
misdiagnosis).
 
Figure 8–4. oral hairy leukoplakia on the side of the tongue in
aiDS. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission,
from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger,
J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Hairy leukoplakia occurs on the lateral border of the tongue
and is a common early finding in HIV infection (see Chapter 31). It
often develops quickly and appears as slightly raised leukoplakic
areas with a corrugated or “hairy” surface (Figure 8–4). Clinical
response following administration of zidovudine or acyclovir has
been reported, and treatment is under active investigation.
Early detection of SCC is the key to successful management
(Figure 8–5). Lesions < 4 mm in depth have a low propensity to
metastasize. Most patients in whom the tumor is detected before it
is 2 cm in diameter are cured by local resection. Radiation is an
alternative but not generally used as first-line therapy for small
lesions. Large tumors are usually treated with a combination of
resection, neck dissection, and external beam radiation.
Reconstruction, if required, is done at the time of resection and can
involve the use of myocutaneous flaps or vascularized free flaps with
or without bone.
 
Figure 8–5. Squamous cell carcinoma of the palate. (Courtesy
of Frank Miller, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger, J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
A number of clinical trials have suggested a role for beta-
carotene, cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors, vitamin E, and
retinoids in producing regression of leukoplakia and reducing the
incidence of recurrent SCCs. Retinoids suppress head and neck
and lung carcinogenesis in animal models and inhibit carcinogenesis
in individuals with pre-malignant lesions. They also seem to reduce
the incidence of second primary cancers in head and neck and lung
cancer patients previously treated for a primary.
Brennan M et al. Management of oral epithelial dysplasia: a
review. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2007
Mar;103 (Suppl):S19.e1–12. [PMID: 17257863]
 
Carbone M et al. Topical clobetasol in the treatment of atrophic-
erosive oral lichen planus: a randomized controlled trial to compare
two preparations with different concentrations. J Oral Pathol Med.
2009 Feb;38(2):227–33. [PMID: 19141065]
 
Curado MP et al. Recent changes in the epidemiology of head and
neck cancer. Curr Opin Oncol. 2009 May;21(3):194–200.
[PMID: 19363341]
 
Konkimalla VB et al. Diagnosis and therapy of oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2007 Mar;7(3):317–29.
[PMID: 17338652]
 
Liu W et al. Malignant transformation of oral leukoplakia: a
retrospective cohort study of 218 Chinese patients. BMC Cancer.
2010 Dec 16;10:685. [PMID: 21159209]
 
Thongprasom K et al. Steroids in the treatment of lichen planus: a
review. J Oral Sci. 2008 Dec;50(4):377–85. [PMID: 19106464]
 
ORAL CANDIDIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fluctuating throat or mouth discomfort.
 Systemic or local immunosuppression, such as recent
corticosteroid, chemotherapy, or antibiotic use.
 Erythema of the oral cavity or oropharynx with fluffy, white
patches.
 Rapid resolution of symptoms with appropriate treatment.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Oral candidiasis (thrush) is usually painful and looks like creamy-
white curd-like patches overlying erythematous mucosa (see Figure
6–28). Because these white areas are easily rubbed off (eg, by a
tongue depressor)—unlike leukoplakia or lichen planus—only the
underlying irregular erythema may be seen. Oral candidiasis is
commonly encountered among the following adult patients: (1) those
who wear dentures, (2) those who are debilitated and have poor
oral hygiene, (3) those with diabetes, (4) those with anemia, (5)
those undergoing chemotherapy or local irradiation, and (6) those
receiving corticosteroids or broad-spectrum antibiotics. Angular
cheilitis is another manifestation of candidiasis, although it is also
seen in nutritional deficiencies (Figure 8–6).
 
Figure 8–6. Severe angular cheilitis in HIV-positive man with
oral thrush. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger, J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
B. Diagnostic Studies
The diagnosis is made clinically. A wet preparation using potassium
hydroxide will reveal spores and may show nonseptate mycelia.
Biopsy will show intraepithelial pseudomy-celia of Candida
albicans.
Candidiasis is often the first manifestation of HIV infection, and
HIV testing should be considered in patients with no known
predisposing cause for Candida overgrowth (see also Chapter 31).
The US Department of Health Services Clinical Practice Guideline
for Evaluation and Management of Early HIV Infection
recommends examination of the oral mucosa with each clinician visit
as well as at a dental examination every 6 months.
 Treatment
Effective antifungal therapy may be achieved with any of the
following: fluconazole (100 mg/d for 7–14 days), ketoconazole
(200–400 mg with breakfast [requires acidic gastric environment
for absorption] for 7–14 days), clotrimazole troches (10 mg
dissolved orally five times daily), or nystatin vaginal troches
(100,000 units dissolved orally five times daily) or mouth rinses
(500,000 units [5 mL of 100,000 units/mL] held in the mouth
before swallowing three times daily). Shorter-duration therapy using
fluconazole has proved effective. In patients with HIV infection,
however, longer courses may be needed, and oral itraconazole
(200 mg/d) may be indicated in fluconazole-refractory cases. Many
of the Candida species in these patients are resistant to first-line
azoles and may require newer drugs, such as voriconazole. In
addition, 0.12% chlorhexidine or half-strength hydrogen peroxide
mouth rinses may provide local relief. Nystatin powder (100,000
units/g) applied to dentures three or four times daily for several
weeks may help denture wearers.
Egusa H et al. Oral candidosis in HIV-infected patients. Curr HIV
Res. 2008 Nov;6(6):485–99. [PMID: 18991614]
 
Pienaar ED et al. Interventions for the prevention and management
of oropharyngeal candidiasis associated with HIV infection in
adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Nov
10;11:CD003940. [PMID: 21069679]
 
Worthington HV et al. Interventions for treating oral candidiasis for
patients with cancer receiving treatment. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2007 Apr 18; (2):CD001972. [PMID: 17443513]
 
GLOSSITIS, GLOSSODYNIA, DYSGEUSIA, & BURNING
MOUTH SYNDROME
Inflammation of the tongue with loss of filiform papillae leads to a
red, smooth-surfaced tongue (glossitis). Rarely painful, it may be
secondary to nutritional deficiencies (eg, niacin, riboflavin, iron, or
vitamin E), drug reactions, dehydration, irritants, foods and liquids,
and possibly autoimmune reactions or psoriasis. If the primary
cause cannot be identified and corrected, empiric nutritional
replacement therapy may be of value.
Glossodynia is burning and pain of the tongue, which may occur
with or without glossitis. In the absence of any clinical findings, it has
been termed “burning mouth syndrome.” Glossodynia with glossitis
has been associated with diabetes mellitus, drugs (eg, diuretics),
tobacco, xerostomia, and candidiasis as well as the listed causes of
glossitis. Periodontal disease is not apt to be a factor. The burning
mouth syndrome typically has no identifiable associated risk factors
and seems to be most common in postmenopausal women. Treating
possible underlying causes, changing long-term medications to
alternative ones, and smoking cessation may resolve symptoms of
glossitis. Both glossodynia and the burning mouth syndrome are
benign, and reassurance that there is no infection or tumor is likely
to be appreciated. Effective treatments for the burning mouth
syndrome include alpha-lipoic acid and clonazepam. Clonazepam is
most effective as a rapid dissolving tablet placed on the tongue in
doses from 0.25 mg to 0.5 mg every 8–12 hours. Behavioral
therapy has also been shown to be effective. Unilateral symptoms,
symptoms that cannot be related to a specific medication, and
symptoms and signs involving regions supplied by other cranial
nerves all may suggest neuropathology, and imaging of the brain,
brainstem, and skull base with MRI should be considered.
Minor JS et al. Burning mouth syndrome and secondary oral
burning. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2011 Feb;44(1):205–19.
[PMID: 21093630]
 
Patton LL et al. Management of burning mouth syndrome:
systematic review and management recommendations. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2007 Mar;103
(Suppl):S39:e1–13. [PMID: 17379153]
 
INTRAORAL ULCERATIVE LESIONS
1. Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis (Trench Mouth, Vincent
Angina)
Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, often caused by an infection of both
spirochetes and fusiform bacilli, is common in young adults under
stress (classically at examination time). Underlying systemic diseases
may also predispose to this disorder. Clinically, there is painful
acute gingival inflammation and necrosis, often with bleeding,
halitosis, fever, and cervical lymphadenopathy. Warm half-strength
peroxide rinses and oral penicillin (250 mg three times daily for 10
days) may help. Dental gingival curettage may prove necessary.
Feller L et al. Necrotizing periodontal diseases in HIV-seropositive
subjects: pathogenic mechanisms. J Int Acad Periodontol. 2008
Jan;10(1):10–5. [PMID: 18333595]
 
2. Aphthous Ulcer (Canker Sore, Ulcerative Stomatitis)
Aphthous ulcers are very common and easy to recognize. Their
cause remains uncertain, although an association with human
herpesvirus 6 has been suggested. Found on freely moving,
nonkeratinized mucosa (eg, buccal and labial mucosa and not
attached gingiva or palate), they may be single or multiple, are
usually recurrent, and appear as painful small) round ulcerations
with yellow-gray fibrinoid centers surrounded by red halos (Figure
8–7). Minor aphthous ulcers are < 1 cm and generally heal in 10–
14 days. Major aphthous ulcers are > 1 cm and can be disabling
due to the degree of associated oral pain.
Treatment is nonspecific. Topical corticosteroids (triamcinolone
acetonide, 0.1%, or fluocinonide ointment, 0.05%) in an adhesive
base (Orabase Plain) do appear to provide symptomatic relief.
Other topical therapies shown to be effective in controlled studies
include diclofenac 3% in hyaluronan 2.5%, doxymycine-
cyanoacrylate, 
mouthwashes 
containing 
the 
enzymes
amyloglucosidase and glucose oxidase, and amlexanox 5% oral
paste. A 1-week tapering course of prednisone (40–60 mg/d) has
also been used successfully. Cimetidine maintenance therapy may
be useful in patients with recurrent aphthous ulcers. Thalidomide has
been used selectively in recurrent aphthous ulcerations in HIV-
positive patients.
 
Figure 8–7. aphthous stomatitis. (Courtesy of Ellen Eisenberg,
MD and Dr. Joanna Douglas; used, with permission, from Usatine
RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger, J. The
Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
Large or persistent areas of ulcerative stomatitis may be
secondary to erythema multiforme or drug allergies, acute herpes
simplex, pemphigus, pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita,
bullous lichen planus, Behçet disease, or inflammatory bowel
disease. SCC may occasionally present in this fashion. When the
diagnosis is not clear, incisional biopsy is indicated.
Chattopadhyay A et al. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am. 2011 Feb;44(1):79–88. [PMID: 21093624]
 
Scully C et al. Oral mucosal disease: recurrent aphthous stomatitis.
Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2008 Apr;46(3):198–206. [PMID:
17850936]
 
3. Herpetic Stomatitis
Herpetic gingivostomatitis is common, mild, and short-lived and
requires no intervention in most adults. In immuno-compromised
persons, however, reactivation of herpes simplex virus infection is
frequent and may be severe. Clinically, there is initial burning,
followed by typical small vesicles that rupture and form scabs.
Lesions are most commonly found on the attached gingiva and
mucocutaneous junction of the lip, but lesions can also form on the
tongue, buccal mucosa, and soft palate. Acyclovir (200–800 mg
five times daily for 7–14 days) may shorten the course and reduce
postherpetic pain. Differential diagnosis includes aphthous stomatitis
(see above), erythema multiforme, syphilitic chancre, and
carcinoma. Coxsackievirus-caused lesions (grayish white tonsillar
plaques and palatal ulcers of herpangina or buccal and lip ulcers in
hand-foot-and-mouth disease) are seen more commonly in children
under age 6.
Arduino PG et al. Herpes simplex virus type 1 infection: overview
on relevant clinico-pathological features. J Oral Pathol Med. 2008
Feb;37(2):107–21. [PMID: 18197856]
 
Nasser M et al. Acyclovir for treating primary herpetic
gingivostomatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Oct 8;
(4):CD006700. [PMID: 18843726]
 
Sciubba JJ. Oral mucosal diseases in the office setting–part I:
Aphthous stomatitis and herpes simplex infections. Gen Dent.
2007 Jul–Aug;55(4):347–56. [PMID: 17682646]
 
PHARYNGITIS & TONSILLITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sore throat.
 Fever.
 Anterior cervical adenopathy.
 Tonsillar exudate.
 Focus is to treat group A β-hemolytic streptococcus infection to
prevent rheumatic sequelae.
 
 General Considerations
Pharyngitis and tonsillitis account for over 10% of all office visits to
primary care clinicians and 50% of outpatient antibiotic use. The
most appropriate management continues to be debated because
some of the issues are deceptively complex, but consensus has
increased in recent years. The main concern is determining who is
likely to have a group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infection
(GABHS), as this can lead to subsequent complications such as
rheumatic fever and glomerulonephritis. A second public health
policy concern is reducing the extraordinary cost (both in dollars
and in the development of antibiotic-resistant S pneumoniae) in the
United States associated with unnecessary antibiotic use. Questions
now being asked: Is there still a role for culturing a sore throat, or
have the rapid antigen tests supplanted this procedure under most
circumstances? Are clinical criteria alone a sufficient basis for
decisions about which patients should be given antibiotics? Should
any patient receive any antibiotic other than penicillin (or
erythromycin if penicillin-allergic)? For how long should treatment
be continued? Numerous well-done studies in the past few years as
well as increasing experience with rapid laboratory tests for
detection of streptococci (eliminating the delay caused by culturing)
appear to make a consensus approach more possible.
 Clinical Findings
The clinical features most suggestive of GABHS pharyngitis include
fever over 38°C, tender anterior cervical adenopathy, lack of a
cough, and a pharyngotonsillar exudate (Figures 8–8 and 8–9).
These four features (the Centor criteria), when present, strongly
suggest GABHS, and some would treat regardless of laboratory
results. When three of the four are present, laboratory sensitivity of
rapid antigen testing exceeds 90%. When only one criterion is
present, GABHS is unlikely. Sore throat may be severe, with
odynophagia, tender adenopathy, and a scarlatiniform rash. An
elevated white count and left shift are also possible. Hoarseness,
cough, and coryza are not suggestive of this disease.
 
Figure 8–8. Streptococcal pharyngitis showing tonsillar exudate
and erythema. (Courtesy of Michael Nguyen, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger, J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
 
Figure 8–9. Pharyngeal inflammation and petechiae of the soft
palate caused by group a streptococcus. (Courtesy of Dr. Heinz F.
Eichenwald, Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
Marked lymphadenopathy and a shaggy white-purple tonsillar
exudate, often extending into the nasopharynx, suggest
mononucleosis, especially if present in a young adult. With about
90% sensitivity, lymphocyte to white blood cell ratios of > 35%
suggest EBV infection and not tonsillitis. Hepatosplenomegaly and a
positive heterophil agglutination test or elevated anti-EBV titer are
corroborative. However, about one-third of patients with infectious
mononucleosis have secondary streptococcal tonsillitis, requiring
treatment. Ampicillin should routinely be avoided if mononucleosis is
suspected because it induces a rash that might be misinterpreted by
the patient as a penicillin allergy. Diphtheria (extremely rare but
described in the alcoholic population) presents with low-grade fever
and an ill patient with a gray tonsillar pseudomembrane.
The most common pathogens other than GABHS in the
differential diagnosis of “sore throat” are viruses, Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, Mycoplasma, 
and Chlamydia trachomatis.
Rhinorrhea and lack of exudate would suggest a virus, but in
practice it is not possible to confidently distinguish viral upper
respiratory infection from GABHS on clinical grounds alone.
Infections 
with Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 
anaerobic
streptococci, 
and Corynebacterium haemolyticum (which
responds better to erythromycin than penicillin) may also mimic
pharyngitis due to GABHS.
 Treatment
Given the availability of many well-documented studies in recent
years, one would think that a consensus might develop as to the
most appropriate way to treat a sore throat. The Infectious
Diseases Society of America recommends laboratory confirmation
of the clinical diagnosis by means of either throat culture or a rapid
antigen detection test. The American College of Physicians–
American Society of Internal Medicine (ACP-ASIM), in
collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
advocates use of a clinical algorithm alone—in lieu of microbiologic
testing—for confirmation of the diagnosis in adults for whom the
suspicion of streptococcal infection is high. Others examine the
assumptions of the ACP-ASIM guideline for using a clinical
algorithm alone and question whether those recommendations will
achieve the stated objective of dramatically decreasing excess
antibiotic use. Convincing clinical trials as well as clinician reminders
and patient-based interventions may be needed before clinicians are
likely to abandon long-held teachings (even though different
clinicians appear to have been taught different strategies) regarding
diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis. A
Cochrane review concluded that multifaceted interventions where
educational interventions occur on many levels were the only
interventions whose effects were of sufficient magnitude to
potentially reduce the incidence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Thirty years ago, a single intramuscular injection of benzathine
penicillin or procaine penicillin, 1.2 million units once, was the
standard antibiotic treatment. This remains effective, but the
injection is painful. It is now used for patients if compliance with an
oral regimen is an issue. Currently, oral treatment is effective and
preferred. Antibiotic choice aims to reduce the already low (10–
20%) incidence of treatment failures (positive culture after treatment
despite symptomatic resolution) and recurrences. Penicillin V
potassium (250 mg orally three times daily or 500 mg twice daily
for 10 days) or cefuroxime axetil (250 mg orally twice daily for 5–
10 days) are both effective. The efficacy of a 5-day regimen of
penicillin V potassium appears to be similar to that of a 10-day
course, with a 94% clinical response rate and an 84% streptococcal
eradication rate. Erythromycin (also active against Mycoplasma
and Chlamydia) is a reasonable alternative to penicillin in allergic
patients. Cephalosporins are somewhat more effective than
penicillin in producing bacteriologic cures; 5-day administration has
been successful for cefpodoxime and cefuroxime. The macrolide
antibiotics have also been reported to be successful in shorter-
duration regimens. Azithromycin (500 mg once daily), because of its
long half-life, need be taken for only 3 days.
Adequate antibiotic treatment usually avoids the streptococcal
complications of scarlet fever, glomerulonephritis, rheumatic
myocarditis, and local abscess formation.
Antibiotics for treatment failures are also somewhat controversial.
Surprisingly, penicillin-tolerant strains are not isolated more
frequently in those who fail treatment than in those treated
successfully with penicillin. The reasons for failure appear to be
complex, and a second course of treatment with the same drug is
not unreasonable. Alternatives to penicillin include cefuroxime and
other cephalosporins, dicloxacillin (which is β-lactamase–resistant),
and amoxicillin with clavulanate. When there is a history of penicillin
allergy, alternatives should be used, such as erythromycin.
Erythromycin resistance—with failure rates of about 25%—is an
increasing problem in many areas. In cases of severe penicillin
allergy, cephalosporins should be avoided as the cross-reaction is
common (8% or more).
Ancillary treatment of pharyngitis includes analgesics and anti-
inflammatory agents, such as aspirin or acetaminophen. Some
patients find that salt water gargling is soothing. In severe cases,
anesthetic gargles and lozenges (eg, benzocaine) may provide
additional symptomatic relief. Occasionally, odynophagia is so
intense that hospitalization for intravenous hydration and antibiotics
is necessary. (See Chapter 33.)
Patients who have had rheumatic fever should be treated with a
continuous course of antimicrobial prophylaxis (erythromycin, 250
mg twice daily orally, or penicillin G, 500 mg once daily orally) for
at least 5 years.
Linder JA. Evaluation and management of adult pharyngitis.
Compr Ther. 2008 Fall–Winter;34(3–4):196–203. [PMID:
19137763]
 
van Driel ML et al. Different antibiotic treatments for group A
streptococcal pharyngitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Oct
6; (10):CD004406. [PMID: 20927734]
 
PERITONSILLAR ABSCESS & CELLULITIS
When infection penetrates the tonsillar capsule and involves the
surrounding tissues, peritonsillar cellulitis results. Peritonsillar
abscess (quinsy) and cellulitis present with severe sore throat,
odynophagia, trismus, medial deviation of the soft palate and
peritonsillar fold, and an abnormal muffled (“hot potato”) voice.
Following therapy, peritonsillar cellulitis usually either resolves over
several days or evolves into peritonsillar abscess, also known as
quinsy. The existence of an abscess may be confirmed by aspirating
pus from the peritonsillar fold just superior and medial to the upper
pole of the tonsil. A 19-gauge or 21-gauge needle should be passed
medial to the molar and no deeper than 1 cm, because the internal
carotid artery may lie more medially than its usual location and pass
posterior and deep to the tonsillar fossa. Most commonly, patients
with peritonsillar abscess present to the emergency department and
receive a dose of parenteral amoxicillin (1 g), amoxicillin-sulbactam
(3 g), or clindamycin (600–900 mg). Less severe cases and patients
who are able to tolerate oral intake may be treated for 7–10 days
with oral antibiotics, including amoxicillin, 500 mg three times a day;
amoxicillin-clavulanate, 875 mg twice a day; or clindamycin, 300
mg four times daily. Although antibiotic treatment is generally
undisputed, there is controversy regarding the surgical management
of peritonsillar abscess. Methods include needle aspiration, incision
and drainage, and tonsillectomy. Some clinicians incise and drain the
area and continue with parenteral antibiotics, whereas others
aspirate only and monitor as an outpatient. To drain the abscess and
avoid recurrence, it may be appropriate to consider immediate
tonsillectomy (quinsy tonsillectomy). About 10% of patients with
peritonsillar abscess exhibit relative indications for tonsillectomy. All
three approaches are effective and have support in the literature.
Regardless of the method used, one must be sure the abscess is
adequately treated, since complications such as extension to the
retropharyngeal, deep neck, and posterior mediastinal spaces are
possible. Bacteria may also be aspirated into the lungs, resulting in
pneumonia. While there is controversy about whether a single
abscess is sufficient indication for tonsillectomy, most would agree
that patients with recurrent abscesses should have a tonsillectomy.
Johnson RF et al. The contemporary approach to diagnosis and
management of peritonsillar abscess. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2005 Jun;13(3):157–60. [PMID: 15908813]
 
Kilty SJ et al. Clinical predictors of peritonsillar abscess in adults. J
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008 Apr;37(2):165–8. [PMID:
19128606]
 
TONSILLECTOMY
Despite the frequency with which tonsillectomy is performed, the
indications for the procedure remain controversial. Most clinicians
would agree that airway obstruction causing sleep apnea or cor
pulmonale is an absolute indication for tonsillectomy. Similarly,
persistent marked tonsil-lar asymmetry should prompt an excisional
biopsy to rule out lymphoma. Relative indications include recurrent
streptococcal tonsillitis, causing considerable loss of time from
school or work, recurrent peritonsillar abscess, and chronic
tonsillitis.
Tonsillectomy is not an entirely benign procedure. The pros and
cons of tonsillectomy need to be discussed with each prospective
patient. Postoperative bleeding occurs in 2–4% of cases and on
rare occasions can lead to laryngo-spasm and airway obstruction.
Pain may be considerable, especially in the adult. Protracted emesis
or fever may also occasionally occur. Secondary bleeding 5–8 days
postoperatively is far more common than bleeding in the first 24
hours. There is increasing economic pressure for these procedures
to be done as outpatient surgery. At present, it seems clear that
outpatient tonsillectomy is usually safe when followed by a 6-hour
period of uneventful observation, but individual circumstances may
mandate hospitalization.
Although reports in the 1970s suggested an association of
tonsillectomy with Hodgkin disease, careful review of this literature
reveals no conclusively causative association.
Alho OP et al. Tonsillectomy versus watchful waiting in recurrent
streptococcal pharyngitis in adults: randomised controlled trial.
BMJ. 2007 May 5;334(7600):939. [PMID: 17347187]
 
Blakley BW et al. The role of tonsillectomy in reducing recurrent
pharyngitis: a systematic review. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2009 Mar;140(3):291–7. [PMID: 19248931]
 
Burton MJ et al. Tonsillectomy or adeno-tonsillectomy versus non-
surgical treatment for chronic/recurrent acute tonsillitis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):CD001802. [PMID:
19160201]
 
DEEP NECK INFECTIONS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Marked acute neck pain and swelling.
 Abscesses are emergencies because rapid airway compromise
may occur.
 May spread to the mediastinum or cause sepsis.
 
 General Considerations
Ludwig angina is the most commonly encountered neck space
infection. It is a cellulitis of the sublingual and submaxillary spaces,
often arising from infection of the mandibular dentition. Deep neck
abscesses most commonly originate from odontogenic infections.
Other causes include suppurative lymphadenitis, direct spread of
pharyngeal infection, penetrating trauma, pharyngoesophageal
foreign bodies, cervical osteomyelitis, and intravenous injection of
the internal jugular vein, especially in drug abusers. Recurrent deep
neck infection may suggest an underlying congenital lesion such as a
branchial cleft cyst. Suppurative lymphadenopathy in middle-age
persons who smoke and drink alcohol regularly should be
considered a manifestation of malignancy (typically metastatic SCC)
until proven otherwise.
 Clinical Findings
Patients with Ludwig angina have edema and erythema of the
upper neck under the chin and often of the floor of the mouth. The
tongue may be displaced upward and backward by the posterior
spread of cellulitis and coalescence of pus is often present in the
floor of mouth. This may lead to occlusion of the airway.
Microbiologic isolates include streptococci, staphylococci,
Bacteroides, and Fusobacterium.
Patients with deep neck abscesses usually present with marked
neck pain and swelling. Fever is common but not always present.
Deep neck abscesses are emergencies because they may rapidly
compromise the airway. Untreated or inadequately treated, they
may spread to the mediastinum or cause sepsis.
Contrast-enhanced CT usually augments the clinical examination
in defining the extent of the infection. It often will distinguish
inflammation and phlegmon (requiring antibiotics) from abscess
(requiring drainage), and define for the surgeon the extent of an
abscess. CT with MRI may also identify thrombophlebitis of the
internal jugular vein secondary to oropharyngeal inflammation. This
condition, known as Lemierre syndrome, is rare and usually
associated with severe headache. The presence of pulmonary
infiltrates consistent with septic emboli in the setting of a neck
abscess should lead one to suspect Lemierre syndrome.
 Treatment
Usual doses of penicillin plus metronidazole, ampicillinsulbactam,
clindamycin, or selective cephalosporins are good initial choices for
treatment of Ludwig angina. Culture and sensitivity data are then
used to refine the choice. Dental consultation is advisable to address
the offending tooth or teeth. External drainage via bilateral
submental incisions is required if the airway is threatened or when
medical therapy has not reversed the process.
Treatment of deep neck abscesses includes securing the
airway, intravenous antibiotics, and incision and drainage. When the
infection involves the floor of mouth, base of tongue, supraglottic or
paraglottic space, the airway may be secured either by intubation or
tracheotomy. Tracheotomy is preferable in the patients with
substantial pharyngeal edema, since attempts at intubation may
precipitate acute airway obstruction. Bleeding in association with a
deep neck abscess is very rare but suggests carotid artery or
internal jugular vein involvement and requires prompt neck
exploration both for drainage of pus and for vascular control.
Patients with Lemierre syndrome require prompt institution of
antibiotics appropriate for Fusobacterium necrophorum as well as
the more usual upper airway pathogens. The use of anticoagulation
in treatment is debated and of no proven benefit.
Caccamese JF Jr et al. Deep neck infections: clinical
considerations in aggressive disease. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin
North Am. 2008 Aug;20(3):367–80. [PMID: 18603197]
 
Reynolds SC et al. Life-threatening infections of the peripharyngeal
and deep fascial spaces of the head and neck. Infect Dis Clin
North Am. 2007 Jun;21(2):557–76. [PMID: 17561083]
 
Vieira F et al. Deep neck infection. Otolaryngol Clin North Am.
2008 Jun;41(3):459–83. [PMID: 18435993]
 
SNORING
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Noise produced on inspiration during sleep.
 Snoring is associated with obstructive sleep apnea (oSa) but has
no disruption of sleep by clinical sleep evaluation.
 
 General Considerations
Ventilation disorders during sleep are extremely common. While
OSA occurs in 5–10% of Americans, clinically relevant snoring may
occur in as many as 59%. In general, sleep-disordered breathing
problems are attributed to narrowing of the upper aerodigestive
tract during sleep due to changes in position, muscle tone, and soft
tissue hypertrophy or laxity. The most common sites of obstruction
are the oropharynx and the base of the tongue. The spectrum of the
problem ranges from simple snoring without cessation of airflow to
OSA with long periods of apnea and life-threatening physiologic
sequelae. OSA is discussed in Chapter 9. In contrast to OSA,
snoring is almost exclusively a social problem, and despite its
prevalence and association with OSA, there is comparatively little
known about the management of this problem.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
All patients who complain of snoring should be evaluated for OSA
as discussed in Chapter 9. Symptoms of OSA (including snoring,
excessive daytime somnolence, daytime headaches, and weight
gain) may be present in as many as 30% of patients without
demonstrable apnea or hypopnea on formal testing. Clinical
examination should include examination of the nasal cavity,
nasopharynx, oropharynx, and larynx to help exclude other causes
of dynamic airway obstruction. In many cases of isolated snoring,
the palate and uvula appear enlarged and elongated with excessive
mucosa hanging below the muscular portion of the soft palate.
B. Imaging and Diagnostic Testing
Sleep examination with polysomnography is strongly advised in the
evaluation of a patient with complaints of snoring. Radiographic
imaging of the head or neck is generally not necessary for
management of primary snoring.
 Treatment
Frustration around the treatment of primary snoring is due, in part,
to the lack of medical insurance support. As such, expeditious and
inexpensive management solutions are sought, often with little or no
benefit. Diet modification and a regimen of physical exercise can
lead to improvement in snoring through weight loss and
improvement in pharyngeal tone that accompanies overall physical
conditioning. Position change during sleep can be effective, and
time-honored treatments such as taping or sewing a tennis ball to
the back of a shirt worn during sleep may satisfactorily eliminate
symptoms by ensuring recumbency on one side.
Anatomic management of snoring can be challenging. As with
OSA, snoring can come from a number of sites in the upper
aerodigestive tract. While medical or surgical correction of nasal
obstruction may help alleviate snoring problems, most interventions
aim to improve airflow through the nasopharynx and oropharynx.
Nonsurgical options include mandibular advancement appliances
designed to pull the base of tongue forward and continuous positive
airway pressure via face or nasal mask. Compliance with both of
these treatment options is problematic because snorers without
OSA do not notice the physiologic benefits of these devices noted
by patients with sleep apnea.
Surgical correction of snoring is most commonly directed at the
soft palate. Historical approaches involved resection of redundant
mucosa and the uvula similar to uvulopalatopharyngoplasty which is
used for OSA. Regardless of how limited the procedure or what
technique was used, postoperative pain, expense of general
anesthesia and high recurrence rates limit the utility of these
procedures. Office-based approaches have become more widely
used because of these limitations. Most of these procedures aim to
stiffen the palate to prevent vibration rather than remove it. A series
of procedures, including injection snoreplasty, radiofrequency
thermal fibrosis), and implantable palatal device have been used
with variable success and patient tolerance. The techniques can be
technically challenging. Persistent symptoms may occur following
initial treatment necessitating costly (and sometimes painful) repeat
procedures. The durability of these procedures in alleviating
symptoms is also poorly understood and late failures can lead to
patient and clinician frustration.
Bäck LJ et al. Radiofrequency ablation treatment of soft palate for
patients with snoring: a systematic review of effectiveness and
adverse effects. Laryngoscope. 2009 Jun;119(6):1241–50.
[PMID: 19365852]
 
Friedman M et al. Palatal implants for the treatment of snoring and
obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2008 Feb;138(2):209–16. [PMID: 18241718]
 
Saylam G et al. Do palatal implants really reduce snoring in long-
term follow-up? Laryngoscope. 2009 May;119(5):1000–4.
[PMID: 19199348]
 
Ulualp SO. Snoring and obstructive sleep apnea. Med Clin North
Am. 2010 Sep;94(5):1047–55. [PMID: 20736112]
 
DISEASES OF THE SALIVARY
GLANDS
 
ACUTE INFLAMMATORY SALIVARY GLAND
DISORDERS
1. Sialadenitis
Acute bacterial sialadenitis in the adult most commonly affects either
the parotid or submandibular gland. It typically presents with acute
swelling of the gland, increased pain and swelling with meals, and
tenderness and erythema of the duct opening. Pus often can be
massaged from the duct. Sialadenitis often occurs in the setting of
dehydration or in association with chronic illness. Underlying
Sjögren syndrome may contribute. Ductal obstruction, often by an
inspissated mucous plug, is followed by salivary stasis and
secondary infection. The most common organism recovered from
purulent draining saliva is S aureus. Treatment consists of
intravenous antibiotics such as nafcillin (1 g intravenously every 4–6
hours) and measures to increase salivary flow, including hydration,
warm compresses, sialagogues (eg, lemon drops), and massage of
the gland. Treatment can usually then be switched to an oral agent
based on clinical and microbiologic improvement to complete a 10-
day treatment course. Less severe cases can often be treated with
oral antibiotics with similar spectrum. Complete resolution of
parotid swelling and pain can take 2–3 weeks. Failure of the
process to improve and ultimately resolve on this regimen suggests
abscess formation, ductal stricture, stone, or tumor causing
obstruction. Ultrasound or CT scan may be helpful in establishing
the diagnosis. In the setting of acute illness, a severe and potentially
life-threatening form of sialadenitis, sometimes called suppurative
sialadenitis, may develop. The causative organism is usually S
aureus, but often no pus will drain from Stensen papilla. These
patients often do not respond to rehydration and intravenous
antibiotics and thus may require operative incision and drainage to
resolve the infection.
2. Sialolithiasis
Calculus formation is more common in Wharton duct (draining the
submandibular glands) than in Stensen duct (draining the parotid
glands). Clinically, a patient may note postprandial pain and local
swelling, often with a history of recurrent acute sialadenitis. Stones
in Wharton duct are usually large and radiopaque, whereas those in
Stensen duct are usually radiolucent and smaller. Those very close
to the orifice of Wharton duct may be palpated manually in the
anterior floor of the mouth and removed intraorally by dilating or
incising the distal duct. The duct proximal to the stone must be
temporarily clamped (using, for instance, a single throw of a suture)
to keep manipulation of the stone from pushing it back toward the
submandibular gland. Those more than 1.5–2 cm from the duct are
too close to the lingual nerve to be removed safely in this manner.
Similarly, dilation of Stensen duct, located on the buccal surface
opposite the second maxillary molar, may relieve distal stricture or
allow a small stone to pass. Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy
and fluoroscopically guided basket retrieval have been used
successfully, but are being replaced by sialoendoscopy for the
management of chronic sialolithiasis. Repeated episodes of
sialadenitis are usually associated with stricture and chronic
infection. If the obstruction cannot be safely removed or dilated,
excision of the gland may be necessary to relieve recurrent
symptoms.
Brook I. Aerobic and anaerobic microbiology of suppurative
sialadenitis. J Med Microbiol. 2002 Jun;51(6):526–9. [PMID:
12018662]
 
Harrison JD. Causes, natural history, and incidence of salivary
stones and obstructions. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2009
Dec;42(6):927–47. [PMID: 19962002]
 
CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY & INFILTRATIVE
DISORDERS OF THE SALIVARY GLANDS
Numerous infiltrative disorders may cause unilateral or bilateral
parotid gland enlargement. Sjögren syndrome and sarcoidosis are
examples of lymphoepithelial and granulomatous diseases that may
affect the salivary glands. Metabolic disorders, including alcoholism,
diabetes mellitus, and vitamin deficiencies, may also cause diffuse
enlargement. Several drugs have been associated with parotid
enlargement, including thioureas, iodine, and drugs with cholinergic
effects (eg, phenothiazines), which stimulate salivary flow and cause
more viscous saliva.
Salomonsson S et al. Minor salivary gland immunohistology in the
diagnosis of primary Sjögren's syndrome. J Oral Pathol Med.
2009 Mar;38(2):282–8. [PMID: 18793250]
 
SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS
Approximately 80% of salivary gland tumors occur in the parotid
gland. In adults, about 80% of these are benign. In the
submandibular triangle, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish a
primary submandibular gland tumor from a metastatic
submandibular space node. Only 50–60% of primary
submandibular tumors are benign. Tumors of the minor salivary
glands are most likely to be malignant, with adenoid cystic
carcinoma predominating, and may be found throughout the oral
cavity or oropharynx.
Most parotid tumors present as an asymptomatic mass in the
superficial part of the gland. Their presence may have been noted
by the patient for months or years. Facial nerve involvement
correlates strongly with malignancy. Tumors may extend deep to the
plane of the facial nerve or may originate in the parapharyngeal
space. In such cases, medial deviation of the soft palate is visible on
intraoral examination. MRI and CT scans have largely replaced
sialography in defining the extent of tumor.
When the clinician encounters a patient with an otherwise
asymptomatic salivary gland mass where tumor is the most likely
diagnosis, the choice is whether to simply excise the mass via a
parotidectomy with facial nerve dissection or submandibular gland
excision or to obtain an FNA biopsy first. Although the accuracy of
FNA biopsy for malignancy has been reported to be quite high,
results vary among institutions. If a negative FNA biopsy would
lead to a decision not to proceed to surgery, then it should be
considered. Poor overall health of the patient and the possibility of
inflammatory disease as the cause of the mass are situations where
FNA biopsy might be helpful. In otherwise straightforward
nonrecurrent cases, excision is indicated. In benign and small low-
grade malignant tumors, no additional treatment is needed.
Postoperative irradiation is indicated for larger and high-grade
cancers.
Carrillo JF et al. Diagnostic accuracy of fine needle aspiration
biopsy in preoperative diagnosis of patients with parotid gland
masses. J Surg Oncol. 2009 Aug 1;100(2):133–8. [PMID:
19507187]
 
de Oliveira FA et al. Salivary gland tumor: a review of 599 cases
in a Brazilian population. Head Neck Pathol. 2009 Dec;3(4):271–
5. [PMID: 20596844]
 
Mendenhall WM et al. Salivary gland pleomorphic adenoma. Am J
Clin Oncol. 2008 Feb;31(1):95–9. [PMID: 18376235]
 
Scianna JM et al. Contemporary management of tumors of the
salivary glands. Curr Oncol Rep. 2007 Mar;9(2):134–8. [PMID:
17288880]
 
DISEASES OF THE LARYNX
 
DYSPHONIA, HOARSENESS, & STRIDOR
The primary symptoms of laryngeal disease are hoarseness and
stridor. Hoarseness is caused by an abnormal vibration of the vocal
folds. The voice is breathy when too much air passes incompletely
apposed vocal folds, as in unilateral vocal fold paralysis or vocal
fold mass. The voice is harsh when the vocal folds are stiff and
vibrate irregularly, as is the case in laryngitis or malignancy. Heavy,
edematous vocal folds produce a rough, low-pitched vocal quality.
Stridor (a high-pitched, typically inspiratory, sound) is the result of
turbulent airflow from a narrowed upper airway. Airway narrowing
at or above the vocal folds produces inspiratory stridor. Airway
narrowing below the vocal fold level produces either expiratory or
biphasic stridor. The timing and rapidity of onset of stridor are
critically important in determining the seriousness of the airway
problem. All cases of stridor should be evaluated by a specialist and
rapid-onset stridor should be evaluated emergently.
Evaluation of an abnormal voice begins with obtaining a history of
the circumstances preceding its onset and an examination of the
airway.
Any patient with hoarseness that has persisted beyond 2 weeks
should be evaluated by an otolaryngologist with laryngoscopy.
y
y g
g
y g
py
Especially when the patient has a history of tobacco use, laryngeal
cancer or lung cancer (leading to paralysis of a recurrent laryngeal
nerve) must be strongly considered. In addition to structural causes
of dysphonia, laryngoscopy can help identify functional problems
with the voice including vocal fold paralysis, muscle tension
dysphonia, and spasmodic dysphonia.
Johns MM 3rd et al. Shortfalls of the American Academy of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery's Clinical practice
guideline: Hoarseness (Dysphonia). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2010 Aug;143(2):175–7. [PMID: 20647114]
 
Klein AM et al. Vocal emergencies. Otolaryngol Clin North Am.
2007 Oct;40(5):1063–80. [PMID: 17765695]
 
Richardson BE et al. Clinical evaluation of vocal fold paralysis.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2004 Feb;37(1):45–58. [PMID:
15062686]
 
Schwartz SR et al. Clinical practice guideline: hoarseness
(dysphonia). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Sep;141(3
Suppl 2):S1–S31. [PMID: 19729111]
 
COMMON LARYNGEAL DISORDERS
1. Acute Laryngitis
Acute laryngitis is probably the most common cause of hoarseness,
which may persist for a week or so after other symptoms of an
upper respiratory infection have cleared. The patient should be
warned to avoid vigorous use of the voice (singing, shouting) until
their voice returns to normal, since persistent use may lead to the
formation of traumatic vocal fold hemorrhage, polyps, and cysts.
Although thought to be usually viral in origin, both M catarrhalis
and H influenzae may be isolated from the nasopharynx at higher
than expected frequencies. Erythromycin, cefuroxime, or
amoxicillin-clavulanate may reduce the severity of hoarseness and
cough. Oral or intramuscular corticosteroids may be used in highly
selected cases of professional vocalists to speed recovery and allow
scheduled performances. Examination of the vocal folds and
assessment of vocal technique are mandatory prior to corticosteroid
initiation, since inflamed vocal folds are at greater risk for
hemorrhage and the subsequent development of traumatic vocal
fold pathology.
Dworkin JP. Laryngitis: types, causes, and treatments. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am. 2008 Apr;41(2):419–36. [PMID: 18328379]
 
2. Laryngopharyngeal Reflux
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Commonly associated with hoarseness, throat irritation, and
chronic cough.
 Symptoms typically occur when upright and half of patients do
not experience heartburn.
 Laryngoscopy is critical to exclude other causes of hoarseness.
 Diagnosis is made based on response to proton pump inhibitor
therapy, as no gold-standard for the condition exists.
 Treatment failure with proton pump inhibitors is common and
may suggest other etiologies.
 
Gastroesophageal reflux into the larynx (laryngopharyngeal reflux) is
considered a cause of chronic hoarseness when other causes of
abnormal vocal fold vibration (such as tumor or nodules) have been
excluded by laryngoscopy. Gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD) has also been suggested as a contributing factor to other
symptoms such as throat clearing, throat discomfort, chronic cough,
a sensation of postnasal drip, esophageal spasm, and some cases of
asthma. Since less than half of patients with laryngeal acid exposure
have typical symptoms of heartburn and regurgitation, the lack of
such symptoms should not be construed as eliminating this cause.
Indeed, most patients with symptomatic laryngopharyngeal reflux,
as it is now called, do not meet criteria for GERD by pH probe
testing and these entities must be considered separately. The
prevalence of this condition is hotly debated in the literature and
laryngopharyngeal reflux may not be as common as once thought.
Evaluation should initially exclude other causes of dysphonia
through laryngoscopy; consultation with an otolaryngologist is
advisable. Many clinicians opt for an empiric trial of a proton pump
inhibitor as a practical alternative to an initial pH study. Such an
empiric trial should not precede visualization of the vocal folds to
exclude other causes of hoarseness. When used, the American
Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery recommends
twice daily therapy with full strength proton pump inhibitor (eg,
omeprazole 40 mg orally twice daily, or equivalent) for a minimum
of 3 months. Patients may note improvement in symptoms after 3
months, but the changes in the larynx often take 6 months to
resolve. If symptoms improve and cessation of therapy leads to
symptoms again, then a proton pump inhibitor is resumed at the
lowest dose effective for remission, usually daily but at times on a
demand basis. Although H2-receptor antagonists are an alternative
to proton pump inhibitors, they are generally both less clinically
effective and less cost-effective. Nonresponders should undergo pH
testing and manometry. Twenty-four-hour pH monitoring of the
pharynx should best document laryngopharyngeal reflux and is
advocated by some as the initial management step but it is costly,
more difficult, and less available than lower esophageal monitoring
alone. Lower esophageal pH monitoring does not correlate well
with laryngopharyngeal reflux symptoms and double pH probe
(proximal and distal) testing is now accepted as the standard of care
for evaluation.
Ford CN. GERD-related chronic laryngitis: pro. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2010 Sep;136(9):910–3. [PMID: 20855685]
 
Gupta R et al. Laryngopharyngeal reflux: current concepts and
questions. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009
Jun;17(3):143–8. [PMID: 19395970]
 
Hammer HF. Reflux-associated laryngitis and laryngopharyngeal
reflux: a gastroenterologist's point of view. Dig Dis.
2009;27(1):14–7. [PMID: 19439955]
 
Hopkins C et al. Acid reflux treatment for hoarseness. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2006 Jan 25; (1):CD005054. [PMID:
16437513]
 
Koufman JA et al. Laryngopharyngeal reflux: Position statement of
the Committee on Speech, Voice, and Swallowing Disorders of
the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2002 Jul;127(1):32–5.
[PMID: 12161727]
 
Vaezi MF. Gastroesophageal reflux-related chronic laryngitis: con.
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Sep;136(9):908–9.
[PMID: 20855684]
 
3. Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis
Papillomas are common lesions of the larynx and other sites where
ciliated and squamous epithelia meet. Unlike oral papillomas,
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis typically becomes symptomatic,
with hoarseness that occasionally progresses over weeks to months.
These papillomas are almost always due to HPV types 6 and 11.
The disease is more common in children where it causes hoarseness
and stridor. Repeated laser vaporizations or cold knife resections
via operative laryngoscopy are the mainstay of treatment. Severe
cases can cause airway compromise even in adults and require
treatment as often as every 6 weeks to maintain airway patency.
Extension can occur into the trachea and lungs. Tracheotomy should
be avoided, if possible, since it introduces an additional
squamociliary junction for which papillomas appear to have an
affinity. Interferon treatment has been under investigation for many
years but is only indicated in severe cases with pulmonary
involvement. Rarely, cases of malignant transformation have been
reported (often in smokers), but recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
should generally be thought of as a benign condition. Cidofovir (a
cytosine nucleotide analog in use to treat cytomegalovirus retinitis) is
also being investigated as intralesional therapy for recurrent
respiratory papillomatosis and has had reported success in both
adults and children. Because cidofovir causes adenocarcinomas in
laboratory animals, its potential for carcinogenesis is being
monitored. While the quadrivalent recombinant human HPV vaccine
(Gardasil) is not useful as a treatment option for patients with
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, this vaccine offers hope for the
eventual eradication of this benign, but terribly morbid, disease.
Bonagura VR et al. Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a
complex defect in immune responsiveness to human
papillomavirus-6 and -11. APMIS. 2010 Jun;118(6–7):455–70.
[PMID: 20553528]
 
Blumin JH et al. Dysplasia in adults with recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis: incidence and risk factors. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol. 2009 Jul;118(7):481–5. [PMID: 19708485]
 
Carvalho CM et al. Prognostic factors of recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis from a registry of 72 patients. Acta Otolaryngol.
2009 Apr;129(4):462–70. [PMID: 19235575]
 
Chadha NK. Antiviral agents for the treatment of recurrent
respiratory papillomatosis: a systematic review of the English-
language literature. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007
Jun;136(6):863–9. [PMID: 17547971]
 
Gallagher TQ et al. Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: update
2008. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008
Dec;16(6):536–42. [PMID: 19005325]
 
4. Epiglottitis
Epiglottitis (or, more correctly, supraglottitis) in adults should be
suspected when a patient presents with a rapidly developing sore
throat or when odynophagia (pain on swallowing) is out of
proportion to apparently minimal oropharyngeal findings on
examination. It is more common in diabetics and may be viral or
bacterial in origin. Rarely in the era of H influenzae type b vaccine
is this bacterium isolated in adults. Unlike in children, indirect
laryngoscopy is generally safe and may demonstrate a swollen,
erythematous epiglottis. Lateral plain radiographs may demonstrate
an enlarged epiglottis (the epiglottis “thumb sign”). Initial treatment is
hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics—eg, ceftizoxime, 1–2 g
intravenously every 8–12 hours; or cefuroxime, 750–1500 mg
intravenously every 8 hours; and dexamethasone, usually 4–10 mg
as initial bolus, then 4 mg intravenously every 6 hours—and
observation of the airway. Corticosteroids may be tapered as
symptoms and signs resolve. Similarly, substitution of oral antibiotics
may be appropriate to complete a 10-day course. Less than 10%
of adults require intubation. Indications for intubation are dyspnea,
rapid pace of sore throat (where progression to airway compromise
may occur before the effects of corticosteroids and antibiotics), and
endolaryngeal abscess noted on CT imaging. If the patient is not
intubated, prudence suggests monitoring oxygen saturation with
continuous pulse oximetry and initial admission to a monitored unit.
Glynn F et al. Diagnosis and management of supraglottitis
(epiglottitis). Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2008 May;10(3):200–4.
[PMID: 18510881]
 
Lotfizadeh A et al. Viral supraglottitis in an adult. Ear Nose Throat
J. 2009 Feb;88(2):768–70. [PMID: 19224474]
 
Sobol SE et al. Epiglottitis and croup. Otolaryngol Clin North Am.
2008 Jun;41(3):551–66. [PMID: 18435998]
 
MASSES OF THE LARYNX
1. Traumatic Lesions of the Vocal Folds
Vocal fold nodules are smooth, paired lesions that form at the
junction of the anterior one-third and posterior two-thirds of the
vocal folds. They are a common cause of hoarseness resulting from
vocal abuse. In adults, they are referred to as “singer's nodules” and
in children, as “screamer's nodules.” Treatment requires
modification of voice habits, and referral to a speech therapist is
indicated. While nearly all true nodules will resolve with behavior
modification, recalcitrant nodules may require surgical excision.
Often, additional pathology, such as a polyp or cyst, may be
encountered.
Vocal fold polyps are unilateral masses that form within the
superficial lamina propria of the vocal fold. They are related to
vocal trauma and seem to follow resolution of vocal fold
hemorrhage. Small, sessile polyps may resolve with conservative
measures, such as voice rest and corticosteroids, but larger polyps
are often irreversible and require operative removal to restore
normal voice.
Vocal fold cysts are also considered traumatic lesions of the
vocal folds and are either true cysts with an epithelial lining or
pseudocysts. They typically form from mucus-secreting glands on
the inferior aspect of the vocal folds. Cysts may fluctuate in size
from week to week and cause a variable degree of hoarseness.
They rarely, if ever, resolve completely and may leave behind a
sulcus, or vocal fold scar, if they decompress or are marsupialized.
Such scarring can be a frustrating cause of permanent dysphonia.
Polypoid corditis is different from vocal fold polyps and may
form from loss of elastin fibers and loosening of the intracellular
junctions within the lamina propria. This loss allows swelling of the
gelatinous matrix of the superficial lamina propria (called Reinke
edema). These changes in the vocal folds are strongly associated
with smoking, but also with vocal abuse, chemical industrial irritants,
and hypothyroidism. While this problem is common in both male
and female smokers, women seem more troubled by the
characteristic decline in modal pitch caused by the increased mass
of the vocal folds. If the patient stops smoking or the lesions cause
stridor and airway obstruction, surgical resection of the hyperplastic
vocal fold mucosa may be indicated to improve the voice or airway,
or both.
A common but often unrecognized cause of hoarseness and
odynophonia 
are contact ulcers or their close relatives,
granulomas. Both lesions form on the vocal processes of the
arytenoid cartilages, and patients often can correctly inform the
clinician which side is affected. The cause of these ulcers and
granulomas is disputed, but they are clearly related to trauma and
may be related to exposure of the underlying perichondrium. They
are common following intubation and generally resolve quite
quickly. Chronic ulceration or granuloma formation has been
associated with gastroesophageal reflux but is also common in
patients with muscle tension dysphonia. Treatment is often
multimodal and an inhaled corticosteroid (eg, fluticasone 440 mcg
twice daily) may be the most effective pharmacologic therapy.
Adjunct treatment measures include proton pump inhibitor therapy
(omeprazole 40 mg orally twice daily, or equivalent) and voice
therapy with special attention to vocal hygiene. Rare cases can be
quite stubborn and persistent without adequate therapy. Surgical
removal is rarely, if ever, required for non-obstructive lesions.
Altman KW. Vocal fold masses. Otolaryngol Clin North Am.
2007 Oct;40(5):1091–108. [PMID: 17765697]
 
Gökcan KM et al. Vascular lesions of the vocal fold. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Apr;266(4):527–33. [PMID: 18704472]
 
2. Laryngeal Leukoplakia
Leukoplakia of the vocal folds is commonly found in association
with hoarseness in smokers. Direct laryngoscopy with biopsy is
advised in almost all cases. Histologic examination usually
demonstrates mild, moderate, or severe dysplasia. In some cases,
invasive SCC is present in the initial biopsy specimen. Cessation of
smoking may reverse or stabilize mild or moderate dysplasia. A
certain percentage of patients—estimated to be < 5% of those with
mild dysplasia and about 35–60% of those with severe dysplasia—
will subsequently develop SCC. Treatment options include close
follow-up with laryngovideostroboscopy, serial resection, and
external beam radiation therapy. Despite their cost and the lack of
any evidence for their use in the treatment of leukoplakia, proton
pump inhibitors have become the mainstay of treatment for these
lesions.
Isenberg JS et al. Institutional and comprehensive review of
laryngeal leukoplakia. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2008
Jan;117(1):74–9. [PMID: 18254375]
 
3. Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Larynx
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 New and persistent (more than 2 weeks duration) hoarseness in
a smoker.
 Persistent throat or ear pain, especially with swallowing.
 Neck mass.
 Hemoptysis.
 Stridor or other symptoms of a compromised airway.
 
 General Considerations
SCC of the larynx, the most common malignancy of the larynx,
occurs almost exclusively in patients with a history of significant
tobacco use. SCC is usually seen in men age 50–70 years; about
13,000 new cases are seen in United States each year. There may
be an association between laryngeal cancer and HPV type 16 or 18
infection, but this association is much less strong than that between
HPV 16 or 18 and oropharyngeal cancer. In both cancer types, the
association with HPV seems to be strongest in nonsmokers.
Laryngeal cancer is very treatable and early detection is the key to
maximizing posttreatment voice, swallowing, and breathing function.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A change in voice quality is most often the presenting complaint,
although throat or ear pain, hemoptysis, dysphagia, weight loss, and
airway compromise may occur. Because of their early impact on
vocal quality, glottic cancers are among the smallest detectable
human malignancies and treatment success is very high with early
lesions. Neck metastases are not common in early glottic (true vocal
fold) cancer in which the vocal folds are mobile, but a third of
patients in whom there is impaired fold mobility will also have
involved lymph nodes at neck dissection. Supraglottic carcinoma
(false vocal folds, aryepiglottic folds, epiglottis), on the other hand,
often metastasizes to both sides of the neck early in the disease.
Complete head and neck examination, including laryngoscopy, by
an experienced clinician is mandated for any person with the
concerning symptoms listed under Essentials of Diagnosis.
B. Imaging and Laboratory Studies
Radiologic evaluation by CT or MRI is helpful in assessing tumor
extent. Imaging evaluates neck nodes, tumor volume, and cartilage
sclerosis or destruction. A chest CT scan is indicated if there are
level VI enlarged nodes (around the trachea and the thyroid gland)
or IV enlarged nodes (inferior to the cricoid cartilage along the
internal jugular vein) or if a chest film is concerning for a second
primary lesion or metastases. Laboratory evaluation includes
complete blood count and liver function tests. Formal
cardiopulmonary evaluation may be indicated, especially if partial
laryngeal surgery is being considered. All partial laryngectomy
candidates should have good to excellent lung function and exercise
tolerance because chronic microaspiration may be expected
following the procedure. A positron emission tomography (PET)
scan or CT-PET scan may be indicated to assess for distant
metastases when there appears to be advanced local or regional
disease.
C. Biopsy
Diagnosis is made by biopsy at the time of laryngoscopy. At that
time, true fold mobility and arytenoid fixation, as well as surface
tumor extent, can be evaluated. Most otolaryngologists recommend
esophagoscopy and bronchoscopy at the same time to exclude
synchronous primary tumor. Although an FNA biopsy of an
enlarged neck node may have already been done, it is generally
acceptable to assume radiographically enlarged neck nodes (> 1–
p
g p
y
g
(
1.5 cm) or nodes with necrotic centers are neck metastases. Open
biopsies of nodal metastases should be discouraged because they
may lead to higher rates of tumor treatment failure.
D. Tumor Staging
The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging of
laryngeal cancers uses the TNM system to describe tumor extent
and can be used for prognosis. Early laryngeal cancers, T1 and T2
(stage I and II) lesions, involve 1–2 laryngeal subsites locally and
have no nodal metastases or profound functional abnormalities. T3
and T4 lesions may involve multiple laryngeal subsites with limitation
of laryngeal mobility. These locally advanced lesions are stage III or
IV cancers and any size tumor with regional nodal metastases is at
least a stage III tumor. Stage I and II lesions are generally treated
with single modality therapy (surgery or radiation) while
multimodality therapy, usually including chemotherapy with radiation
therapy, is reserved for more advanced stage III and IV lesions.
 Treatment
Treatment of laryngeal carcinoma has four goals: cure, preservation
of safe effective swallowing, preservation of useful voice, and
avoidance of a permanent tracheostoma. For early glottic and
supraglottic cancers, radiation therapy is the standard of care since
cure rates are > 95% and 80%, respectively. That said, radiation
therapy carries substantial morbidity and many early tumors (T1 and
T2 lesions, without involved nodes) and selected advanced tumors
(T3 and T4) may be treated with partial laryngectomy if at least one
cricoarytenoid unit can be preserved. Five-year locoregional cure
rates exceed 80–90% with surgery, and patient-reported
satisfaction is excellent. In supraglottic tumors, even when clinically
N0, elective limited neck dissection is indicated following surgical
resection because of the high risk of neck node involvement.
For advanced stage III and IV tumors, multimodality therapy—
typically including chemotherapy—is warranted. Twenty-five years
ago, total laryngectomy was often recommended for such patients.
However, the 1994 VA study (with induction cisplatin and 5-
fluorouracil followed by irradiation alone in responders)
demonstrated that two-thirds of patients could preserve their larynx.
Since that study, cisplatin-based chemotherapy concomitant with
radiation therapy has been shown to be superior to either irradiation
alone or induction chemotherapy followed by radiation. The same
benefits have been demonstrated with the epidermal growth factor
receptor blocker cetuximab with lower overall systemic toxicity and
better patient tolerance. However, chemoradiation of either form is
associated with prolonged gastrostomy-dependent dysphagia. This
high rate of chemoradiation-associated dysphagia has prompted a
reevaluation of the role of extended, but less-than-total, laryngeal
surgery for selected advanced laryngeal carcinoma in which at least
one cricoarytenoid unit is intact. In addition, overall success in the
treatment of larynx cancer has declined in parallel with the increase
in organ preservation chemoradiation therapy. Some experts have
proposed that this decline is the direct result of the shift in
management of advanced laryngeal cancer away from surgery.
Organ preservation surgery should be considered and discussed as
an alternative to chemoradiation. Patient comorbidities and patient
choice, after thorough discussion, play an important role in the
choice between surgery and chemoradiation. The patient and
treating clinicians must carefully consider different side effects and
complications associated with different treatment modalities.
The presence of malignant adenopathy in the neck affects the
prognosis greatly. Supraglottic tumors metastasize early and
bilaterally to the neck, and this must be included in the treatment
plans even when the neck is apparently uninvolved. Glottic tumors
in which the true vocal folds are mobile (T1 or T2) have less than a
5% rate of nodal involvement; when a fold is immobile, the rate of
ipsilateral nodal involvement climbs to about 30%. An involved
neck is treated by surgery or chemoradiation, or both. This decision
will depend on the treatment chosen for the larynx and the extent of
neck involvement.
Total laryngectomy is largely reserved for patients with advanced
resectable tumors with extralaryngeal spread or cartilage
involvement, for those with persistent tumor following
chemoradiation, and for patients with recurrent or second primary
tumor following previous radiation therapy. Voice rehabilitation via
a primary (or at times secondary) tracheoesophageal puncture
produces intelligible and serviceable speech in about 75–85% of
patients. Indwelling prostheses that are changed every 3–6 months
are a common alternative to patient-inserted prostheses, which need
changing more frequently.
Long-term follow-up is critical in head and neck cancer patients.
In addition to the 3–4% annual rate of second tumors and
monitoring for recurrence, psychosocial aspects of treatment are
common. Dysphagia, impaired communication, and altered
appearance, may result in patient difficulties adapting to the
workplace and to social interactions. In addition, smoking cessation
and alcohol abatement are common challenges. Nevertheless, about
65% of patients with larynx cancer are cured, most have useful
speech, and many resume their prior livelihoods with adaptations.
Agrawal A et al. Transoral carbon dioxide laser supraglottic
laryngectomy and irradiation in stage I, II, and III squamous cell
carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx: report of Southwest
Oncology Group Phase 2 Trial S9709. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2007 Oct;133(10):1044–50. [PMID: 17938330]
 
Bonner JA et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for locoregionally
advanced head and neck cancer: 5-year survival data from a phase
3 randomised trial, and relation between cetuximab-induced rash
and survival. Lancet Oncol. 2010 Jan;11(1):21–8. [PMID:
19897418]
 
Hashibe M et al. Alcohol drinking in never users of tobacco,
cigarette smoking in never drinkers, and the risk of head and neck
cancer: pooled analysis in the International Head and Neck Cancer
Epidemiology Consortium. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007 May
16;99(10):777–89. [PMID: 17505073]
 
Machtay M et al. Factors associated with severe late toxicity after
concurrent chemoradiation for locally advanced head and neck
cancer: an RTOG analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jul
20;26(21):3582–9. [PMID: 18559875]
 
Wang CJ et al. Current concepts of organ preservation in head
and neck cancer. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Nov 25.
[Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21107854]
 
VOCAL FOLD PARALYSIS
Vocal fold paralysis can result from a lesion or damage to either the
vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerve and usually results in breathy
dysphonia and effortful voicing. Common causes of unilateral
recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement include thyroid surgery
(and occasionally thyroid cancer), other neck surgery (anterior
discectomy and carotid endarterectomy), and mediastinal or apical
involvement by lung cancer. Skull base tumors often involve or abut
upon lower cranial nerves and may affect the vagus nerve directly,
or the vagus nerve may be damaged during surgical management of
the lesion. While iatrogenic injury is the most common cause of
unilateral vocal fold paralysis, the second most common cause is
idiopathic. However, before deciding whether the paralysis is due to
iatrogenic injury or is idiopathic, the clinician must exclude other
causes, such as malignancy. In the absence of other cranial
neuropathies, a CT scan with contrast from the skull base to the
aorto-pulmonary window (the span of the recurrent laryngeal nerve)
should be performed. If other cranial nerve deficits or high vagal
weakness with palate paralysis is noted, a MRI scan of the brain
and brainstem is warranted.
Unlike unilateral fold paralysis, bilateral fold paralysis usually
causes inspiratory stridor with deep inspiration. If the onset of
bilateral fold paralysis is insidious, it may be asymptomatic at rest
and the patient may have a normal voice. However, the acute onset
of bilateral vocal fold paralysis with inspiratory stridor at rest should
be managed by a specialist immediately in a critical care
environment. Causes of bilateral fold paralysis include thyroid
surgery, esophageal cancer, and ventricular shunt malfunction.
Unilateral or bilateral fold immobility may also be seen in
cricoarytenoid arthritis secondary to advanced rheumatoid arthritis,
intubation injuries, glottic and subglottic stenosis and, of course,
laryngeal cancer. The goal of intervention is the creation of a safe
airway with minimal reduction in voice quality and airway protection
from aspiration. A number of fold lateralization procedures for
bilateral paralysis have been advocated as a means of removing the
tracheotomy tube.
Unilateral vocal fold paralysis is occasionally temporary and may
take over a year to resolve spontaneously. Surgical management of
persistent or irrecoverable symptomatic unilateral vocal fold
paralysis has evolved over the last several decades. The primary
goal is medialization of the paralyzed fold in order to create a stable
platform for vocal fold vibration. Additional goals include improving
pulmonary toilet by facilitating of cough and advancing diet. Success
has been reported for years with injection laryngoplasty using
Teflon, Gelfoam, fat and collagen. Teflon is the only permanent
injectable material, but its use is discouraged because of granuloma
formation within the vocal folds of some patients. Temporary
injectable materials, such as collagen or fat, provide excellent
temporary restoration of voice and can be placed under local or
general anesthesia. Once the paralysis is determined to be
permanent, formal medialization thyroplasty may be performed by
creating a small window in the thyroid cartilage and placing an
implant between the thyroarytenoid muscle and inner table of the
thyroid cartilage. This procedure moves the vocal fold medially and
creates a stable platform for bilateral, symmetric mucosal vibration.
Azadarmaki R et al. Unilateral true vocal fold synkinesis presenting
with airway obstruction. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2009
Aug;118(8):587–91. [PMID: 19746758]
 
Bajaj Y et al. Vocal fold paralysis: role of bilateral transverse
cordotomy. J Laryngol Otol. 2009 Dec;123(12):1348–51.
[PMID: 19740454]
 
Ollivere B et al. Swallowing dysfunction in patients with unilateral
vocal fold paralysis: aetiology and outcomes. J Laryngol Otol.
2006 Jan;120(1):38–41. [PMID: 16359143]
 
TRACHEOSTOMY &
CRICOTHYROTOMY
 
There are two primary indications for tracheotomy: airway
obstruction at or above the level of the larynx and respiratory failure
requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation. In an acute emergency,
cricothyrotomy secures an airway more rapidly than tracheotomy,
with fewer potential immediate complications such as pneumothorax
and hemorrhage. Percutaneous dilatational tracheotomy as an
elective bedside (or intensive care unit) procedure has undergone
scrutiny in recent years as an alternative to tracheotomy. In
experienced hands, the various methods of percutaneous
tracheotomy have been documented to be safe in carefully selected
patients. Simultaneous videobronchoscopy can reduce the incidence
of major complications. The major cost reduction comes from
avoiding the operating room. Bedside tracheotomy (in the intensive
care unit) achieves similar cost reduction and is advocated by some
experts as slightly less costly than the percutaneous procedures.
The most common indication for elective tracheotomy is the need
for prolonged mechanical ventilation. There is no firm rule about
how many days a patient must be intubated before conversion to
tracheotomy should be advised. The incidence of serious
complications such as subglottic stenosis increases with extended
endotracheal intubation. As soon as it is apparent that the patient
will require protracted ventilatory support, tracheotomy should
replace the endotracheal tube. Less frequent indications for
tracheostomy are life-threatening aspiration pneumonia, the need to
improve pulmonary toilet to correct problems related to insufficient
clearing of tracheobronchial secretions, and sleep apnea.
Posttracheotomy care requires humidified air to prevent
secretions from crusting and occluding the inner cannula of the
tracheotomy tube. The tracheotomy tube should be cleaned several
times daily. The most frequent early complication of tracheotomy is
dislodgment of the tracheotomy tube. Surgical creation of an
inferiorly based tracheal flap sutured to the inferior neck skin may
make reinsertion of a dislodged tube easier. It should be recalled
that the act of swallowing requires elevation of the larynx, which is
limited by tracheotomy. Therefore, frequent tracheal and bronchial
suctioning is often required to clear the aspirated saliva as well as
the increased tracheobronchial secretions. Care of the skin around
the stoma is important to prevent maceration and secondary
infection.
Down J et al. Early vs late tracheostomy in critical care. Br J Hosp
Med (Lond). 2009 Sep 9;70(9):510–13. [PMID: 19749640]
 
Groves DS et al. Tracheostomy in the critically ill: indications,
timing and techniques. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2007 Feb;13(1):90–
7. [PMID: 17198055]
 
Homewood J et al. Tracheostomy care. Br J Hosp Med (Lond).
2005 Nov;66(11):M72–3. [PMID: 16308953]
 
FOREIGN BODIES IN THE
UPPER AERODIGESTIVE
TRACT
 
FOREIGN BODIES OF THE TRACHEA & BRONCHI
Aspiration of foreign bodies occurs much less frequently in adults
than in children. The elderly and denture wearers appear to be at
greatest risk. Wider familiarity with the Heimlich maneuver has
reduced deaths. If the maneuver is unsuccessful, cricothyrotomy
may be necessary. Plain chest radiographs may reveal a radiopaque
foreign body. Detection of radiolucent foreign bodies may be aided
by inspiration-expiration films that demonstrate air trapping distal to
the obstructed segment. Atelectasis and pneumonia may occur later.
Tracheal and bronchial foreign bodies should be removed under
general anesthesia with rigid bronchoscopy by a skilled endoscopist
working with an experienced anesthesiologist.
Digoy GP. Diagnosis and management of upper aerodigestive tract
foreign bodies. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2008 Jun;41(3):485–
96. [PMID: 18435994]
 
ESOPHAGEAL FOREIGN BODIES
Foreign bodies in the esophagus create urgent but not life-
threatening situations as long as the airway is not compromised.
There is probably time to consult an experienced clinician for
management. It is a useful diagnostic sign of complete obstruction if
the patient is drooling or cannot handle secretions. They may often
point to the exact level of the obstruction. Indirect laryngoscopy
often shows pooling of saliva at the esophageal inlet. Plain films may
detect radiopaque foreign bodies such as chicken bones. Coins
tend to align in the coronal plane in the esophagus and sagittally in
the trachea. If a foreign body is suspected, a barium swallow may
help make the diagnosis.
The treatment of an esophageal foreign body depends very much
on identification of its nature. In children, swallowed nonfood
objects are common. In adults, however, food foreign bodies are
more common, and there is the greater possibility of underlying
esophageal pathology. Endoscopic removal and examination is
usually best via flexible esophagoscopy or rigid laryngoscopy and
esophagoscopy. If there is nothing sharp such as a bone, some
clinicians advocate a hospitalized 24-hour observation period prior
to esophagoscopy, noting that spontaneous passage of the foreign
body will occur in 50% of adult patients. In the management of
meat obstruction, the use of papain (meat tenderizer) should be
discouraged because it can damage the esophageal mucosa and
lead to stenosis or perforation.
Weissberg D et al. Foreign bodies in the esophagus. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2007 Dec;84(6):1854–7. [PMID: 18036898]
 
DISEASES PRESENTING AS
NECK MASSES
 
The differential diagnosis of neck masses is heavily dependent on
the location in the neck, the age of the patient, and the presence of
associated disease processes. Rapid growth and tenderness suggest
an inflammatory process, while firm, painless, and slowly enlarging
masses are often neoplastic. In young adults, most neck masses are
benign (branchial cleft cyst, thyroglossal duct cyst, reactive
lymphadenitis), although malignancy should always be considered
(lymphoma, metastatic thyroid carcinoma). Lymphadenopathy is
common in HIV-positive persons, but a growing or dominant mass
may well represent lymphoma. In adults over age 40, cancer is the
most common cause of persistent neck mass. A metastasis from
SCC arising within the mouth, pharynx, larynx, or upper esophagus
should be suspected, especially if there is a history of tobacco or
significant alcohol use. Especially among patients younger than 30
or older than 70, lymphoma should be considered. In any case, a
comprehensive otolaryngologic examination is needed. Cytologic
evaluation of the neck mass via FNA biopsy is likely to be the next
step if an obvious primary tumor is not obvious on physical
examination.
CONGENITAL LESIONS PRESENTING AS NECK
MASSES IN ADULTS
1. Branchial Cleft Cysts
Branchial cleft cysts usually present as a soft cystic mass along the
anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. These lesions
are usually recognized in the second or third decades of life, often
when they suddenly swell or become infected. To prevent recurrent
infection and possible carcinoma, they should be completely
excised, along with their fistulous tracts.
First branchial cleft cysts present high in the neck, sometimes just
below the ear. A fistulous connection with the floor of the external
auditory canal may be present. Second branchial cleft cysts, which
are far more common, may communicate with the tonsillar fossa.
Third branchial cleft cysts, which may communicate with the
piriform sinus, are rare and present low in the neck.
Acierno SP et al. Congenital cervical cysts, sinuses and fistulae.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2007 Feb;40(1):161–76. [PMID:
17346566]
 
Papadogeorgakis N et al. Branchial cleft cysts in adults. Diagnostic
procedures and treatment in a series of 18 cases. Oral Maxillofac
Surg. 2009 Jun;13(2):79–85. [PMID: 19308468]
 
2. Thyroglossal Duct Cysts
Thyroglossal duct cysts occur along the embryologic course of the
thyroid's descent from the tuberculum impar of the tongue base to
its usual position in the low neck. Although they may occur at any
age, they are most common before age 20. They present as a
midline neck mass, often just below the hyoid bone, which moves
with swallowing. Surgical excision is recommended to prevent
recurrent infection. This requires removal of the entire fistulous tract
along with the middle portion of the hyoid bone through which many
of the fistulas pass. Preoperative evaluation should include a thyroid
ultrasound to confirm anatomic position of the thyroid.
Lin ST et al. Thyroglossal duct cyst: a comparison between
children and adults. Am J Otolaryngol. 2008 Mar–Apr;29(2):83–
7. [PMID: 18314017]
 
INFECTIOUS & INFLAMMATORY NECK MASSES
1. Reactive Cervical Lymphadenopathy
Normal lymph nodes in the neck are usually < 1 cm in length.
Infections involving the pharynx, salivary glands, and scalp often
cause tender enlargement of neck nodes. Enlarged nodes are
common in HIV-infected persons. Except for the occasional node
that suppurates and requires incision and drainage, treatment is
directed against the underlying infection. An enlarged node (> 1.5
cm) or node with a necrotic center that is not associated with an
obvious infection should be further evaluated, especially if the
patient has a history of smoking, alcohol use, or prior cancer. Other
common indications for FNA biopsy of a node include its
persistence or continued enlargement. Common causes of cervical
adenopathy include tumor (SCC, lymphoma, occasional metastases
from non-head and neck sites) and infection (eg, reactive nodes,
mycobacteria [discussed below], and cat scratch disease). Rare
causes of adenopathy include Kikuchi disease (histiocytic
necrotizing lymphadenitis) and autoimmune adenopathy.
Leung AK et al. Cervical lymphadenitis: etiology, diagnosis, and
management. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2009 May;11(3):183–9.
[PMID: 19366560]
 
2. Tuberculous & Nontuberculous Mycobacterial
Lymphadenitis
Granulomatous neck masses are not uncommon. The differential
diagnosis includes mycobacterial adenitis, sarcoidosis, and cat-
scratch disease due to Bartonella henselae. Mycobacterial
lymphadenitis is on the rise both in immunocompromised and
immunocompetent 
individuals. 
The usual presentation of
granulomatous disease in the neck is simply single or matted nodes.
Although mycobacterial adenitis can extend to the skin and drain
externally (as described for atypical mycobacteria and referred to
as scrofula), this late presentation is no longer common.
FNA biopsy is usually the best initial diagnostic approach:
cytology, smear for acid-fast bacilli, culture, and sensitivity test can
all be done. Excisional biopsy of a node may be needed.
PCR from FNA (or from excised tissue) is the single most
sensitive test and is particularly useful when conventional methods
have not been diagnostic but clinical impression remains consistent
for tuberculous infection.
Short-course therapy (6 months) consisting of an initial 4 months
of streptomycin, isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide followed by 2
months of rifampin is the current recommended treatment for
tuberculous lymphadenopathy (see Table 9–11). For atypical
(nontuberculous) lymph-adenopathy, treatment depends on
sensitivity results of culture, but antibiotics likely to be useful include
6 months of isoniazid and rifampin and, for at least the first 2
months, ethambutol—all in standard dosages. Some would totally
excise the involved nodes prior to chemotherapy, depending on
location and other factors, but this can lead to chronic draining
fistulas.
Polesky A et al. Peripheral tuberculous lymphadenitis:
epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and outcome. Medicine
(Baltimore). 2005 Nov;84(6):350–62. [PMID: 16267410]
 
3. Lyme Disease
Lyme disease, caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi and
transmitted by ticks of the Ixodes genus, may have protean
manifestation, but over 75% of patients have symptoms involving
the head and neck. Facial paralysis, dysesthesias, dysgeusia, or
other cranial neuropathies are most common. Headache, pain, and
cervical lymphadenopathy may occur. See Chapter 34 for a more
detailed discussion.
DePietropaolo DL et al. Diagnosis of Lyme disease. Am Fam
Physician. 2005 Jul 15;72(2):297–304. [PMID: 16050454]
 
Hagemann G et al. Bilateral facial palsy in neuroborreliosis. Arch
Neurol. 2009 Apr;66(4):534–5. [PMID: 19364942]
 
TUMOR METASTASES
In older adults, 80% of firm, persistent, and enlarging neck masses
are metastatic in origin. The great majority of these arise from SCC
of the upper aerodigestive tract. A complete head and neck
examination may reveal the tumor of origin, but examination under
anesthesia with direct laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and
bronchoscopy is usually required to fully evaluate the tumor and
exclude second primaries.
It is often helpful to obtain a cytologic diagnosis if initial head and
neck examination fails to reveal the primary tumor. An open biopsy
should be done only when neither physical examination by an
experienced clinician specializing in head and neck cancer nor FNA
biopsy performed by an experienced cytopathologist yields a
diagnosis. In such a setting, one should strongly consider obtaining
an MRI or PET scan prior to open biopsy, as these methods may
yield valuable information about a possible presumed primary site or
another site for FNA.
With the exception of papillary thyroid carcinoma, non–
squamous cell metastases to the neck are infrequent. While tumors
that are not primary in the head or neck seldom metastasize to the
cervical lymph nodes, the supraclavicular lymph nodes are quite
often involved by lung, gastroesophageal, and breast tumors.
Infradiaphragmatic tumors, with the exception of renal cell
carcinoma and testicular cancer, rarely metastasize to the neck.
Barzilai G et al. Pattern of regional metastases from cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2005 Jun;132(6):852–6. [PMID: 15944554]
 
Landry CS et al. The evolution of the management of regional
lymph nodes in melanoma. J Surg Oncol. 2007 Sep
15;96(4):316–21. [PMID: 17879333]
 
LYMPHOMA
About 10% of lymphomas present in the head and neck. Multiple
rubbery nodes, especially in the young adult or in patients who have
AIDS, are suggestive of this disease. A thorough physical
examination may demonstrate other sites of nodal or organ
involvement. FNA biopsy may be diagnostic, but open biopsy is
often required to determine architecture and an appropriate
treatment course.
Howlett DC et al. Diagnostic adequacy and accuracy of fine
needle aspiration cytology in neck lump assessment: results from a
regional cancer network over a one year period. J Laryngol Otol.
2007 Jun;121(6):571–9. [PMID: 17134537]
 
 
 
Pulmonary Disorders
Mark S. Chesnutt, MD
Thomas J. Prendergast, MD
DISORDERS OF THE AIRWAYS
 
Airway disorders have diverse causes but share certain common
pathophysiologic and clinical features. Airflow limitation is
characteristic and frequently causes dyspnea and cough. Other
symptoms are common and typically disease-specific. Disorders of
the airways can be classified as those that involve the upper airways
—loosely defined as those above and including the vocal folds—
and those that involve the lower airways.
DISORDERS OF THE UPPER AIRWAYS
Acute upper airway obstruction can be immediately life-
threatening and must be relieved promptly to avoid asphyxia.
Causes of acute upper airway obstruction include trauma to the
larynx or pharynx, foreign body aspiration, laryngospasm, laryngeal
edema from thermal injury or angioedema, infections (acute
epiglottitis, Ludwig angina, pharyngeal or retropharyngeal abscess),
and acute allergic laryngitis.
Chronic obstruction of the upper airway may be caused by
carcinoma of the pharynx or larynx, laryngeal or subglottic stenosis,
laryngeal granulomas or webs, or bilateral vocal fold paralysis.
Laryngeal or subglottic stenosis may become evident weeks or
months following a period of translaryngeal endotracheal intubation.
Inspiratory stridor, intercostal retractions on inspiration, a palpable
inspiratory thrill over the larynx, and wheezing localized to the neck
or trachea on auscultation are characteristic findings. Flow-volume
loops may show flow limitations characteristic of obstruction. Soft
tissue radiographs of the neck may show supraglottic or infraglottic
narrowing. CT and MRI scans can reveal exact sites of obstruction.
Flexible endoscopy may be diagnostic, but caution is necessary to
avoid exacerbating upper airway edema and precipitating critical
airway narrowing.
Vocal fold dysfunction syndrome is a condition characterized
by paradoxical vocal fold adduction, resulting in both acute and
chronic upper airway obstruction. It can cause dyspnea and
wheezing that may present as asthma or exercise-induced asthma
but may be distinguished from asthma by the lack of response to
bronchodilator therapy, normal spirometry immediately after an
attack, spirometric evidence of upper airway obstruction, a negative
bronchial provocation test, or direct visualization of adduction of the
vocal folds on both inspiration and expiration. The condition
appears to be psychogenic in nature. Bronchodilators are of no
therapeutic benefit. Treatment consists of speech therapy, which
uses breathing, voice, and neck relaxation exercises to abort the
symptoms.
Al-Qudah M et al. Acute adult supraglottitis: current management
and treatment. South Med J. 2010 Aug;103(8):800–4. [PMID:
20622745]
 
Deckert J et al. Vocal cord dysfunction. Am Fam Physician. 2010
Jan 15;81(2):156–9. [PMID: 20082511]
 
DISORDERS OF THE LOWER AIRWAYS
Tracheal obstruction may be intrathoracic (below the suprasternal
notch) or extrathoracic. Fixed tracheal obstruction may be caused
by acquired or congenital tracheal stenosis, primary or secondary
tracheal neoplasms, extrinsic compression (tumors of the lung,
thymus, or thyroid; lymphadenopathy; congenital vascular rings;
aneurysms, etc), foreign body aspiration, tracheal granulomas and
papillomas, and tracheal trauma.
Acquired tracheal stenosis is usually secondary to previous
tracheotomy or endotracheal intubation. Dyspnea, cough, and
inability to clear pulmonary secretions occur weeks to months after
tracheal decannulation or extubation. Physical findings may be
absent until tracheal diameter is reduced 50% or more, when
wheezing, a palpable tracheal thrill, and harsh breath sounds may be
detected. The diagnosis is usually confirmed by plain films or CT of
the trachea. Complications include recurring pulmonary infection
and life-threatening respiratory failure. Management is directed
toward ensuring adequate ventilation and oxygenation and avoiding
manipulative procedures that may increase edema of the tracheal
mucosa. Surgical reconstruction, endotracheal stent placement, or
laser photoresection may be required.
Bronchial obstruction may be caused by retained pulmonary
secretions, aspiration, foreign bodies, bronchogenic carcinoma,
compression by extrinsic masses, and tumors metastatic to the
airway. Clinical and radiographic findings vary depending on the
location of the obstruction and the degree of airway narrowing.
Symptoms include dyspnea, cough, wheezing, and, if infection is
present, fever and chills. A history of recurrent pneumonia in the
same lobe or segment or slow resolution (> 3 months) of
pneumonia on successive radiographs suggests the possibility of
bronchial obstruction and the need for bronchoscopy.
Roentgenographic 
findings 
include atelectasis 
(local
parenchymal collapse), postobstructive infiltrates, and air trapping
caused by unidirectional expiratory obstruction. CT scanning may
demonstrate the nature and the exact location of obstruction of the
central bronchi. MRI may be superior to CT for delineating the
extent of underlying disease in the hilum, but it is usually reserved for
cases in which CT findings are equivocal. Bronchoscopy is the
definitive diagnostic study, particularly if tumor or foreign body
aspiration is suspected. The finding of bronchial breath sounds on
physical examination or an air broncho-gram on chest radiograph in
an area of atelectasis rules out complete airway obstruction.
Bronchoscopy is unlikely to be of therapeutic benefit in this
situation.
Boyd M et al. Tracheobronchial foreign body aspiration in adults.
South Med J. 2009 Feb;102(2):171–4. [PMID: 19139679]
 
Kwon KY et al. Middle lobe syndrome: a clinicopathological study
of 21 patients. Hum Pathol. 1995 Mar;26(3):302–7. [PMID:
7890282]
 
Sohrab S et al. Management of central airway obstruction. Clin
Lung Cancer. 2007 Mar;8(5):305–12. [PMID: 17562229]
 
ASTHMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Episodic or chronic symptoms of airflow obstruction.
 Reversibility of airflow obstruction, either spontaneously or
following bronchodilator therapy.
 Symptoms frequently worse at night or in the early morning.
 Prolonged expiration and diffuse wheezes on physical
examination.
 Limitation of airflow on pulmonary function testing or positive
bronchoprovocation challenge.
 
 General Considerations
Asthma is a common disease, affecting approximately 5% of the
population. It is slightly more common in male children (< 14 years
old) and in female adults. A genetic predisposition to asthma is
recognized. Prevalence, hospitalizations, and fatal asthma have all
increased in the United States over the past 20 years. Each year,
approximately 470,000 hospital admissions and 5000 deaths in the
United States are attributed to asthma. Hospitalization rates have
been highest among blacks and children, and death rates for asthma
are consistently highest among blacks aged 15–24 years.
 Definition & Pathogenesis
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways. No single
histopathologic feature is pathognomonic but common findings
include inflammatory cell infiltration with eosinophils, neutrophils,
and lymphocytes (especially T lymphocytes); goblet cell
hyperplasia, sometimes with plugging of small airways with thick
mucus; collagen deposition beneath the basement membrane;
hypertrophy of bronchial smooth muscle; airway edema; mast cell
activation; and denudation of airway epithelium. This airway
inflammation underlies disease chronicity and contributes to airway
hyper-responsiveness and airflow limitation.
The strongest identifiable predisposing factor for the development
of asthma is atopy, but obesity is increasingly recognized as a risk
factor. Exposure of sensitive patients to inhaled allergens increases
airway inflammation, airway hyper-responsiveness, and symptoms.
Symptoms may develop immediately (immediate asthmatic
response) or 4–6 hours after allergen exposure (late asthmatic
response). Common allergens include house dust mites (often found
in pillows, mattresses, upholstered furniture, carpets, and drapes),
cockroaches, cat dander, and seasonal pollens. Substantially
reducing exposure reduces pathologic findings and clinical
symptoms.
Nonspecific precipitants of asthma include exercise, upper
respiratory tract infections, rhinitis, sinusitis, postnasal drip,
aspiration, gastroesophageal reflux, changes in the weather, and
stress. Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke increases asthma
symptoms and the need for medications and reduces lung function.
Increased air levels of respirable particles, ozone, SO2, and NO2
precipitate asthma symptoms and increase emergency department
visits and hospitalizations. Selected individuals may experience
asthma symptoms after exposure to aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, or tartrazine dyes. Certain other medications
may also precipitate asthma symptoms (see Table 9–26).
Occupational asthma is triggered by various agents in the
workplace and may occur weeks to years after initial exposure and
sensitization. Women may experience catamenial asthma at
predictable times during the menstrual cycle. Exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction begins during exercise or within 3 minutes
after its end, peaks within 10–15 minutes, and then resolves by 60
minutes. This phenomenon is thought to be a consequence of the
airways’ attempt to warm and humidify an increased volume of
expired air during exercise. “Cardiac asthma” is wheezing
precipitated by decompensated congestive heart failure.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms and signs vary widely from patient to patient as well as
individually over time. General clinical findings in stable asthma
patients are listed in Figure 9–1 and Table 9–1; findings seen during
asthma exacerbations are listed in Tables 9–2 and 9–3.
Figure 9–1. Classifying asthma severity and initiating treatment.
(Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention
Program. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
Management of Asthma. National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-
4051. Bethesda, MD, 2007. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/
asthma/asthgdln.htm.)
 
A. Symptoms and Signs
Asthma is characterized by episodic wheezing, difficulty in
breathing, chest tightness, and cough. Excess sputum production is
common. The frequency of asthma symptoms is highly variable.
Some patients have infrequent, brief attacks of asthma while others
may suffer nearly continuous symptoms. Asthma symptoms may
occur spontaneously or may be precipitated or exacerbated by
many different triggers as discussed above. Asthma symptoms are
frequently worse at night; circadian variations in bronchomotor tone
and bronchial reactivity reach their nadir between 3 am and 4 am,
increasing symptoms of bronchoconstriction.
 
Table 9–1. Assessing asthma control.
 
1ACQ values of 0.76–1.4 are indeterminate regarding well-controlled
asthma.
EIB, exercise-induced bronchospasm; ICU, intensive care unit.
 
Notes:
 
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace,
the clinical decision-making required to meet individual
patient needs.
 
• The level of control is based on the most severe
impairment or risk category. Assess impairment domain by
patient's recall of previous 2–4 weeks and by spirometry or
peak flow measures. Symptom assessment for longer
periods should reflect a global assessment, such as
inquiring whether the patient's asthma is better or worse
since the last visit.
 
• At present, there are inadequate data to correspond
frequencies of exacerbations with different levels of asthma
control. 
In 
general, 
more 
frequent 
and 
intense
exacerbations (eg, requiring urgent, unscheduled care,
( g,
q
g
g
,
,
hospitalization, or ICU admission) indicate poorer disease
control. For treatment purposes, patients who had ≥ 2
exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids in the
past year may be considered the same as patients who
have not-well-controlled asthma, even in the absence of
impairment levels consistent with not-well-controlled
asthma.
 
• Validated Questionnaires for the impairment domain (the
questionnaire did not assess lung function or the risk
domain). 
ATAQ 
= 
Asthma 
Therapy 
Assessment
Questionnaire ©ACQ = Asthma Control Questionnaire©
(user package may be obtained at www.qoltech.co.uk or
juniper@qoltech.co.uk) ACT = Asthma Control Test ™
Minimal Importance Difference: 1.0 for the ATAQ; 0.5 for
the ACQ; not determined for the ACT.
 
• Before step up in therapy: —Review adherence to
medication, inhaler
—If an alternative treatment option was used in a step,
discontinue and use the preferred treatment for that
step.Adapted from National Asthma Education and
Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for
the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. National
Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-4051. Bethesda, MD, 2007.
www.nhlbi/nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.htm.
 
 
Table 9–2. Classifying severity of asthma exacerbations.
 
 
ED, emergency department; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1
second; ICU, intensive care unit; PEF, peak expiratory flow;
SABA, shortacting β2-agonist.
Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management
of Asthma. National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-4051.
Bethesda, 
MD, 
2007. www.nhibi.nih.gov/guidelines/
asthma/asthgdln.htm.
Some physical examination findings increase the probability of
asthma. Nasal mucosal swelling, increased nasal secretions, and
nasal polyps are often seen in patients with allergic asthma. Eczema,
atopic dermatitis, or other manifestations of allergic skin disorders
may also be present. Wheezing during normal breathing or a
prolonged forced expiratory phase correlates well with the presence
of airflow obstruction. Wheezing during forced expiration does not.
Chest examination may be normal between exacerbations in
patients with mild asthma. During severe asthma exacerbations,
airflow may be too limited to produce wheezing, and the only
diagnostic clue on auscultation may be globally reduced breath
sounds with prolonged expiration. Hunched shoulders and use of
accessory muscles of respiration suggest an increased work of
breathing.
B. Laboratory Findings
Arterial blood gas measurements may be normal during a mild
asthma exacerbation, but respiratory alkalosis and an increase in the
alveolar-arterial oxygen difference (A–a–Do2) are common. During
severe exacerbations, hypoxemia develops and the Paco2 returns to
normal. The combination of an increased Paco2 and respiratory
acidosis may indicate impending respiratory failure and the need for
mechanical ventilation.
C. Pulmonary Function Testing
Clinicians are able to identify airflow obstruction on examination,
but they have limited ability to assess severity or to predict whether
it is reversible. The evaluation for asthma should therefore include
spirometry (FEV1, FVC, FEV1/FVC) before and after the
administration 
of 
a 
short-acting 
bronchodilator. 
These
measurements help determine the presence and extent of airflow
obstruction and whether it is immediately reversible. Airflow
obstruction is indicated by a reduced FEV1/FVC ratio. Significant
reversibility of airflow obstruction is defined by an increase of ≥
12% and 200 mL in FEV1 or ≥ 15% and 200 mL in FVC after
inhaling a short-acting bronchodilator. A positive bronchodilator
response strongly confirms the diagnosis of asthma but a lack of
responsiveness in the pulmonary function laboratory does not
preclude success in a clinical trial of bronchodilator therapy. Severe
airflow obstruction results in significant air trapping, with an increase
in residual volume and consequent reduction in FVC, resulting in a
pattern that may mimic a restrictive ventilatory defect.
Bronchial provocation testing with inhaled histamine or
methacholine may be useful when asthma is suspected but
spirometry is nondiagnostic. Bronchial provocation is not
recommended if the FEV1 is less than 65% of predicted. A positive
methacholine test is defined as a ≥ 20% fall in the FEV1 at exposure
to a concentration of 8 mg/mL or less. A negative test has a
negative predictive value for asthma of 95%. Exercise challenge
testing may be useful in patients with symptoms of exercise-induced
bronchospasm.
Peak expiratory flow (PEF) meters are handheld devices
designed as personal monitoring tools. PEF monitoring can establish
peak flow variability, quantify asthma severity, and provide both the
patient and the clinician with objective measurements on which to
base treatment decisions. There are conflicting data about whether
measuring PEF improves asthma outcomes, but doing so is
recommended to help confirm the diagnosis of asthma, to improve
asthma control in patients with poor perception of airflow
obstruction, and to identify environmental and occupational causes
of symptoms. Predicted values for PEF vary with age, height, and
gender but are poorly standardized. Comparison with reference
values is less helpful than comparison with the patient's own
baseline. PEF shows diurnal variation. It is generally lowest on first
awakening and highest several hours before the midpoint of the
waking day. PEF should be measured in the morning before the
administration of a bronchodilator and in the afternoon after taking a
bronchodilator. A 20% change in PEF values from morning to
afternoon or from day to day suggests inadequately controlled
asthma. PEF values less than 200 L/min indicate severe airflow
obstruction.
 
Table 9–3. Evaluation of asthma exacerbation severity.
 
PEF, peak expiratory low; Sao2, oxygen saturation.
Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
Management of Asthma. National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-
4051. 
Bethesda, 
MD, 
2007. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
guidelines/asthma/ asthgdln.htm.
D. Additional Testing
Routine chest radiographs in patients with asthma are usually normal
or show only hyperinflation. Other findings may include bronchial
wall thickening and diminished peripheral lung vascular shadows.
Chest imaging is indicated when pneumonia, another disorder
mimicking asthma, or a complication of asthma such as
pneumothorax is suspected.
Skin testing or in vitro testing to assess sensitivity to
environmental allergens can identify atopy in patients with persistent
asthma who may benefit from therapies directed at their allergic
diathesis. 
Evaluations 
for 
paranasal 
sinus 
disease 
or
gastroesophageal reflux should be considered in asthma patients
with pertinent symptoms and in those with severe or refractory
asthma symptoms.
Noninvasive assessment of underlying airway inflammation
through measurement of eosinophilia in induced sputum, or
fractional nitric oxide concentration in exhaled breath condensates
(FeNO), offers the promise of improved diagnosis and treatment
strategies. Adjusting corticosteroid dose to minimize sputum
eosinophilia appears to reduce the frequency of exacerbations
compared with conventional clinical management, but the data are
conflicting regarding the impact of FeNO on asthma outcomes.
 Complications
Complications of asthma include exhaustion, dehydration, airway
infection, and tussive syncope. Pneumothorax occurs but is rare.
Acute hypercapnic and hypoxic respiratory failure occurs in severe
disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
It is prudent to consider conditions that mimic asthma in patients
who have atypical symptoms or poor response to therapy. These
disorders typically fall into one of four categories: upper airway
disorders, lower airway disorders, systemic vasculitides, and
psychiatric disorders. Upper airway disorders that mimic asthma
include vocal fold paralysis, vocal fold dysfunction syndrome,
foreign body aspiration, laryngotracheal masses, tracheal narrowing,
tracheomalacia, and airway edema as in the setting of angioedema
or inhalation injury. Lower airway disorders include nonasthmatic
COPD (chronic bronchitis or emphysema), bronchiectasis, allergic
bronchopulmonary mycosis, cystic fibrosis, eosinophilic pneumonia,
and bronchiolitis obliterans. Systemic vasculitides with pulmonary
involvement may have an asthmatic component, such as Churg-
Strauss 
syndrome. Psychiatric causes include conversion
disorders, which have been variably referred to as functional
asthma, emotional laryngeal wheezing, vocal fold dysfunction, or
episodic laryngeal dyskinesis. Münchausen syndrome or malingering
may rarely explain a patient's complaints.
 NAEPP 3 Diagnosis & Management
Guidelines
In 2007, the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
(NAEPP), in conjunction with the Global Initiative for Asthma
(GINA), a collaboration between the National Institutes of Health
(NIH)/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and the
World Health Organization (WHO), released its third Expert Panel
Report providing guidelines for diagnosis and management of
asthma (NAEPP 3). This report identifies four components of
chronic asthma diagnosis and management: (1) assessing and
monitoring asthma severity and asthma control, (2) patient
education designed to foster a partnership for care, (3) control of
environmental factors and comorbid conditions that affect asthma,
and (4) pharmacologic agents for asthma.
1. Assessing and monitoring asthma severity and asthma
control—Severity is the intrinsic intensity of the disease process.
Control is the degree to which symptoms and limitations on activity
are minimized by therapy. Responsiveness is the ease with which
control is achieved with therapy. NAEPP 3 guidelines emphasize
control over classifications of severity, since the latter is variable
over time and in response to therapy. A measure of severity on
initial presentation (see Figure 9–1) is helpful, however, in guiding
the initiation of therapy. Control of asthma is assessed in terms of
impairment (frequency and intensity of symptoms and functional
limitations) and risk (the likelihood of acute exacerbations or
chronic decline in lung function). A key insight is that these two
domains of control may respond differently to treatment: some
patients may have minimal impairment yet remain at risk for severe
exacerbations, for example, in the setting of an upper respiratory
tract infection. Table 9–1 is used to assess the adequacy of asthma
control and is used in conjunction with Figure 9–2 to guide
adjustments in therapy based on the level of control.
2. Patient education designed to foster a partnership for care
—Active self-management reduces urgent care visits and
hospitalizations and improves perceived control of asthma.
Therefore, an outpatient preventive approach that includes self-
management education is an integral part of effective asthma care.
All patients, but particularly those with poorly controlled
symptoms or a history of severe exacerbations, should have a
written asthma action plan that includes instructions for daily
management and measures to take in response to specific changes
in status. Patients should be taught to recognize symptoms—
especially patterns indicating inadequate asthma control or
predicting the need for additional therapy.
3. Control of environmental factors and comorbid conditions
that affect asthma—Significant reduction in exposure to
nonspecific airway irritants or to inhaled allergens in atopic patients
may reduce symptoms as well as medication needs. Comorbid
conditions that impair asthma management, such as rhinosinusitis,
gastroesophageal reflux, obesity, and obstructive sleep apnea,
should be identified and treated. This search for complicating
conditions is particularly crucial in the initial evaluation of a new
diagnosis, and in patients whose asthma is difficult to control or
subject to frequent exacerbations.
4. Pharmacologic agents for asthma—Asthma medications can
be divided into two categories: quick-relief (reliever) medications
that act principally by direct relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle,
thereby promoting prompt reversal of acute airflow obstruction to
relieve accompanying symptoms, and long-term control
(controller) medications that act primarily to attenuate airway
inflammation and are taken daily independent of symptoms to
achieve and maintain control of persistent asthma.
Most asthma medications are administered orally or by
inhalation. Inhalation of an appropriate agent results in a more rapid
onset of pulmonary effects as well as fewer systemic effects
compared with oral administration of the same dose. Metered-dose
inhalers (MDIs) propelled by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) have
been the most widely used delivery system, but non-CFC
propellant systems such as hydrofluoroalkane (HFA), and dry
powder inhalers (DPIs) are increasingly available. Proper inhaler
technique and the use of an inhalation chamber with MDIs improve
drug delivery to the lung and decrease oropharyngeal deposition.
Nebulizer therapy is reserved for acutely ill patients and those who
cannot use inhalers because of difficulties with coordination or
cooperation.
Figure 9–2. Stepwise approach to managing asthma. (Adapted
from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert
Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of
Asthma. National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-4051. Bethesda,
MD, 2007. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/
asthma/asthgdln.htm.)
 
 Treatment
The goals of asthma therapy are to minimize chronic symptoms that
interfere with normal activity (including exercise), to prevent
recurrent exacerbations, to reduce or eliminate the need for
emergency department visits or hospitalizations, and to maintain
normal or near-normal pulmonary function. These goals should be
met while providing pharmacotherapy with the fewest adverse
effects and while meeting patients’ and families’ expectations of
satisfaction with asthma care. NAEPP 3 recommendations
emphasize 
daily 
anti-inflammatory 
therapy 
with 
inhaled
corticosteroids as the cornerstone of treatment of persistent asthma.
A. Long-Term Control Medications
Anti-inflammatory agents, long-acting bronchodilators, and
leukotriene modifiers comprise the important long-term control
medications (Tables 9–4 and 9–5). Other classes of agents are
mentioned briefly below.
1. Anti-inflammatory agents—Corticosteroids are the most
potent and consistently effective anti-inflammatory agents currently
available. They reduce both acute and chronic inflammation,
resulting in fewer asthma symptoms, improvement in airflow,
decreased airway hyper-responsiveness, and fewer asthma
exacerbations. These agents may also potentiate the action of β-
adrenergic agonists.
Inhaled corticosteroids are preferred, first-line agents for all
patients with persistent asthma. Patients with persistent symptoms
or asthma exacerbations who are not taking inhaled corticosteroids
should be started on an inhaled corticosteroid. The most important
determinants of agent selection and appropriate dosing are the
patient's status and response to treatment. Dosages for inhaled
corticosteroids vary depending on the specific agent and delivery
device. For most patients, twice-daily dosing provides adequate
control of asthma. Once-daily dosing may be sufficient in selected
patients. Maximum responses from inhaled corticosteroids may not
be observed for months. The use of an inhalation chamber coupled
with mouth washing after MDI use decreases local side effects
(cough, dysphonia, oropharyngeal candidiasis) and systemic
absorption. DPIs are not used with an inhalation chamber. Systemic
effects (adrenal suppression, osteoporosis, skin thinning, easy
bruising, and cataracts) may occur with high-dose inhaled
corticosteroid therapy.
Systemic corticosteroids (oral or parenteral) are most effective
in achieving prompt control of asthma during exacerbations or when
initiating long-term asthma therapy in patients with severe
symptoms. In patients with refractory, poorly controlled asthma,
systemic corticosteroids may be required for the long-term
suppression of symptoms. Repeated efforts should be made to
reduce the dose to the minimum needed to control symptoms.
Alternate-day treatment is preferred to daily treatment. Concurrent
treatment with calcium supplements and vitamin D should be
initiated to prevent corticosteroid-induced bone mineral loss in long-
term administration. Bisphosphonates may offer additional
protection to these patients. Rapid discontinuation of systemic
corticosteroids after long-term use may precipitate adrenal
insufficiency.
2. Long-acting bronchodilators
A. MEDIATOR INHIBITORS—Cromolyn sodium and nedocromil are
long-term control medications that prevent asthma symptoms and
improve airway function in patients with mild persistent asthma or
exercise-induced symptoms. These agents modulate mast cell
mediator release and eosinophil recruitment and inhibit both early
and late asthmatic responses to allergen challenge and exercise-
induced bronchospasm. They can be effective when taken before
an exposure or exercise but do not relieve asthmatic symptoms
once present. The clinical response to these agents is less
predictable than the response to inhaled corticosteroids.
Nedocromil may help reduce the dose requirements for inhaled
corticosteroids. Both agents have excellent safety profiles.
B. β-ADRENERGIC AGONISTS—Long-acting β2-agonists provide
bronchodilation for up to 12 hours after a single dose. Salmeterol
and formoterol are the two long-acting β2-agonists available in the
United States. They are administered via dry powder delivery
devices. They are indicated for long-term prevention of asthma
symptoms, nocturnal symptoms, and for prevention of exercise-
induced bronchospasm. When added to low and medium daily
doses of inhaled corticosteroids (Table 9–5), long-acting β2-
agonists provide control equivalent to what is achieved by doubling
the inhaled corticosteroid dose. Side effects are minimal at standard
doses. Long-acting β2-agonists should not be used as monotherapy
since they have no anti-inflammatory effect and since monotherapy
with long-acting β2-agonists has been associated in two large
studies with a small but statistically significant increased risk of
severe or fatal asthma attacks. This increased risk may relate to
genetic variation in the β-adrenergic receptor, but it has not been
fully explained and remains an area of controversy. The efficacy of
combined inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting β2-agonist therapy
has led to marketing of combination medications that deliver both
agents simultaneously (see Table 9–4). Combination inhalers
containing formoterol and budesonide have shown efficacy in both
maintenance and rescue, given formoterol's short time to onset.
C. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors—Theophylline provides mild
bronchodilation in asthmatic patients. Theophylline also has anti-
inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties, enhances
mucociliary clearance, and strengthens diaphragmatic contractility.
Sustained-release theophylline preparations are effective in
controlling nocturnal symptoms and as added therapy in patients
with moderate or severe persistent asthma whose symptoms are
inadequately controlled by inhaled corticosteroids. When added to
inhaled corticosteroids, theophylline may allow equivalent control at
lower corticosteroid doses.
 
Table 9–4. Long-term control medications for asthma.
 
 
Table 9–5. Estimated comparative daily dosages for inhaled
corticosteroids for asthma.
 
DPI, dry power inhaler; HFA, hydrofluoroalkaline; MDI, metered-
dose inhaler.
 
Notes:
 
• The most important determinant of appropriate dosing is
the clinician's judgment of the patient's response to therapy.
 
• Potential drug interactions
A number of the inhaled corticosteroids, including
fluticasone, 
budesonide, 
and 
mometasone, 
are
metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract and liver by CYP
3A4 isoenzymes. Potent inhibitors of CYP 3A4, such as
ritonavir and ketoconazole, have the potential for increasing
systemic concentrations of these inhaled corticosteroids by
increasing oral availability and decreasing systemic
clearance. Some cases of clinically significant Cushing
syndrome and secondary adrenal insufficiency have been
reported.
 
Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
Management of Asthma. National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-
4051. Bethesda, MD, 2007. http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/
asthma/asthgdln.htm.
Theophylline serum concentrations need to be monitored closely
owing to the drug's narrow toxic-therapeutic range, individual
differences in metabolism, and the effects of many factors on drug
absorption and metabolism. Potential adverse effects at therapeutic
doses include insomnia, aggravation of dyspepsia and
gastroesophageal reflux symptoms, and urination difficulties in
elderly men with prostatism. Dose-related toxicities include nausea,
vomiting, tachyarrhythmias, headache, seizures, hyperglycemia, and
hypokalemia. 
Newer 
agents 
that 
selectively 
inhibit
phosphodiesterase-4 are in clinical trials.
3. Leukotriene modifiers—Leukotrienes are potent biochemical
mediators that contribute to airway obstruction and asthma
symptoms by contracting airway smooth muscle, increasing vascular
permeability and mucus secretion, and attracting and activating
airway inflammatory cells. Zileuton is a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor that
decreases leukotriene production, and zafirlukast and montelukast
are cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonists. They cause modest
improvements in lung function and reductions in asthma symptoms
and lessen the need for β2-agonist rescue therapy. These agents are
alternatives to low-dose inhaled corticosteroids in patients with mild
persistent asthma, although, as monotherapy, their effect is generally
less than inhaled corticosteroids. Zileuton can cause reversible
elevations in plasma aminotransferase levels, and Churg-Strauss
syndrome has been diagnosed in a small number of patients who
have taken montelukast or zafirlukast, although this is suspected to
be an effect of corticosteroid withdrawal as opposed to a direct
drug effect.
4. Desensitization—Immunotherapy for specific allergens may be
considered in selected asthma patients who have exacerbations of
asthma symptoms when exposed to allergens to which they are
sensitive and who do not respond to environmental control
measures or other forms of conventional therapy. Studies show a
reduction in asthma symptoms in patients treated with single-
allergen immunotherapy. Because of the risk of immunotherapy-
induced bronchoconstriction, it should be administered only in a
setting where such complications can be immediately treated.
5. 
Vaccination—Patients 
with 
asthma 
should 
receive
pneumococcal vaccination (Pneumovax) and annual influenza
vaccinations, including influenza (seasonal and epidemic influenza A
[H1N1]). Inactive vaccines (Pneumovax) are associated with few
side effects but use of the live attenuated influenza vaccine
intranasally may be associated with an increase in asthma
exacerbations in young children.
6. Miscellaneous agents—Oral sustained-release β2-agonists are
reserved for patients with bothersome nocturnal asthma symptoms
or moderate to severe persistent asthma who do not respond to
other therapies. Omalizumab is a recombinant antibody that binds
IgE without activating mast cells. In clinical trials in moderate to
severe asthmatic patients with elevated IgE levels, it reduces the
need for corticosteroids. Clinical trials of soluble tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) antagonists have failed to demonstrate efficacy.
B. Quick-Relief Medications
Short-acting bronchodilators and systemic corticosteroids comprise
the important medications in this group of agents (Table 9–6).
1. β-Adrenergic agonists—Short-acting inhaled β2-agonists,
including albuterol, levalbuterol, bitolterol, pirbuterol, and
terbutaline, are the most effective bronchodilators during
exacerbations. All patients with acute symptoms should take one of
these agents. There is no convincing evidence to support the use of
one agent over another. β2-Agonists relax airway smooth muscle
and cause a prompt increase in airflow and reduction of symptoms.
Administration before exercise effectively prevents exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction. β2-Selective agents may produce less cardiac
stimulation than those with mixed β1 and β2 activities, although
clinical trials have not consistently demonstrated this finding.
Inhaled β-adrenergic therapy is as effective as oral or parenteral
therapy in relaxing airway smooth muscle and improving acute
asthma and offers the advantages of rapid onset of action (< 5
minutes) with fewer systemic side effects. Repetitive administration
produces incremental bronchodilation. One or two inhalations of a
short-acting inhaled β2-agonist from an MDI are usually sufficient
for mild to moderate symptoms. Severe exacerbations frequently
require higher doses: 6–12 puffs every 30–60 minutes of albuterol
by MDI with an inhalation chamber or 2.5 mg by nebulizer provide
equivalent bronchodilation. Administration by nebulization does not
offer more effective delivery than MDIs but does provide higher
doses. With most β2-agonists, the recommended dose by nebulizer
for acute asthma (albuterol, 2.5 mg) is 25–30 times that delivered
by a single activation of the MDI (albuterol, 0.09 mg). This
difference suggests that standard dosing of inhalations from an MDI
will often be insufficient in the setting of an acute exacerbation.
Independent of dose, nebulizer therapy may be more effective in
patients who are unable to coordinate inhalation of medication from
an MDI because of age, agitation, or severity of the exacerbation.
Scheduled daily use of short-acting β2-agonists is not
recommended. Increased use (more than one canister a month) or
lack of expected effect indicates diminished asthma control and
dictates the need for additional long-term control therapy.
2. Anticholinergics—Anticholinergic agents reverse vagally
mediated bronchospasm but not allergen- or exercise-induced
bronchospasm. They may decrease mucus gland hypersecretion
seen in asthma. Ipratropium bromide, a quaternary derivative of
atropine free of atropine's side effects, is less effective than β2-
agonists for relief of acute bronchospasm, but it is the inhaled drug
of choice for patients with intolerance to β2-agonists and with
broncho-spasm due to β-blocker medications. Ipratropium bromide
reduces the rate of hospital admissions when added to inhaled
short-acting β2-agonists in patients with moderate to severe asthma
exacerbations. The role of anticholinergic agents in long-term
management of asthma has not been clarified.
 
Table 9–6. Quick-relief medications for asthma.
 
 
CFC, chlorofluorocarbon; EIB, exercise-induced bronchospasm;
HFA, hydrofluoroalkane; IM, intramuscular; MDI, metered-dose
inhaler; PEF, peak expiratory flow.
Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and
Management of Asthma. National Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-
4051. Bethesda, MD, 2007. http://www.nhlbi.gov/guidelines/
asthma/asthgdln.htm.
3. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors—Methylxanthines are not
recommended for therapy of asthma exacerbations. Aminophylline
has clearly been shown to be less effective than β2-agonists when
used as single-drug therapy for acute asthma and adds little except
toxicity to the acute bronchodilator effects achieved by nebulized
metaproterenol alone. Patients with exacerbations who are currently
taking a theophylline-containing preparation should have their serum
theophylline concentration measured to exclude theophylline
toxicity.
4. Corticosteroids—Systemic corticosteroids are effective primary
treatment for patients with moderate to severe asthma
exacerbations and for patients with exacerbations who do not
respond promptly and completely to inhaled β2-agonist therapy.
These medications speed the resolution of airflow obstruction and
reduce the rate of relapse. Delays in administering corticosteroids
may result in delayed benefits from these important agents.
Therefore, oral corticosteroids should be available for early
administration at home in many patients with moderate to severe
asthma. The minimal effective dose of systemic corticosteroids for
asthma patients has not been identified. Outpatient prednisone
“burst” therapy is 0.5–1 mg/kg/d (typically 40–60 mg) as a single or
in two divided doses for 3–10 days. Severe exacerbations requiring
hospitalization typically require 1 mg/kg of prednisone or
methylprednisolone every 6–12 hours for 48 hours or until the
FEV1 (or PEF rate) returns to 50% of predicted (or 50% of
baseline). The dose is then decreased to 60–80 mg/d until the PEF
reaches 70% of predicted or personal best. No clear advantage has
been found for higher doses of corticosteroids in severe
exacerbations. It may be prudent to administer corticosteroids to
critically ill patients via the intravenous route in order to avoid
concerns about altered gastrointestinal absorption.
5. Antimicrobials—Multiple studies suggest that infections with
viruses (rhinovirus) and bacteria (Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
Chlamydophila pneumoniae) predispose to acute exacerbations
of asthma and may underlie chronic, severe asthma. The use of
empiric antibiotics is, however, not recommended in routine asthma
exacerbations because there is no consistent evidence to support
improved clinical outcomes. Antibiotics should be considered when
there is a high likelihood of acute bacterial respiratory tract
infection. Thus, patients with fever or purulent sputum and evidence
of pneumonia or bacterial sinusitis are reasonable candidates for
such therapy.
 Treatment of Asthma Exacerbations
NAEPP 3 asthma treatment algorithms begin with an assessment of
the severity of a patient's baseline asthma. Adjustments to that
algorithm follow a stepwise approach based on a careful
assessment of asthma control. Most instances of uncontrolled
asthma are mild and can be managed successfully by patients at
home with the telephone assistance of a clinician (Figure 9–3).
More severe exacerbations require evaluation and management
in an urgent care or emergency department setting (Figure 9–4).
A. Mild Exacerbations
Mild asthma exacerbations are characterized by only minor changes
in airway function (PEF > 80%) and minimal symptoms and signs of
airway dysfunction (see Tables 9–2 and 9–3). The majority of such
exacerbations can be managed at home with the telephone
assistance of a clinician. Many patients respond quickly and fully to
an inhaled short-acting β2-agonist alone. However, an inhaled
short-acting β2-agonist may need to be continued at increased
doses, eg, every 3–4 hours for 24–48 hours. In patients not taking
an inhaled corticosteroid, initiation of this agent should be
considered during the mild exacerbation. In patients already taking
an inhaled corticosteroid, a 7-day course of oral corticosteroids
(0.5–1.0 mg/kg/d) may be necessary. Doubling the dose of inhaled
corticosteroid is not effective in the acute setting and is not
recommended in the NAEPP 3 guidelines.
B. Moderate Exacerbations
The principal goals of treatment of moderate asthma exacerbations
are correction of hypoxemia, reversal of airflow obstruction, and
reduction of the likelihood of recurrence of obstruction. Early
intervention may lessen the severity and shorten the duration of an
exacerbation. Of paramount importance is correction of hypoxemia
through the use of supplemental oxygen. Airflow obstruction is
treated with continuous administration of an inhaled short-acting β2-
agonist and the early administration of systemic corticosteroids.
Serial measurements of lung function to quantify the severity of
airflow obstruction and its response to treatment are useful. The
improvement in FEV1 after 30 minutes of treatment correlates
significantly with a broad range of indices of the severity of asthma
exacerbations. Serial measurement of airflow in the emergency
department is an important factor in disposition and may reduce the
rate of hospital admissions for asthma exacerbations. The post-
exacerbation care plan is an important aspect of management.
Regardless of the severity, all patients should be provided with
necessary medications and education in how to use them, instruction
in self-assessment, a follow-up appointment, and instruction in an
action plan for managing recurrence.
Figure 9–3. Management of asthma exacerbations: home
treatment. (Adapted from National Asthma Education and
Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the
Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. National Institutes of Health
Pub. No. 08-4051. Bethesda, MD, 2007.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/ asthma/asthgdln.htm.)
 
Figure 9–4. Management of asthma exacerbations: emergency
department and hospital-based treatment. (Adapted from National
Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report 3:
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. National
Institutes of Health Pub. No. 08-4051. Bethesda, MD, 2007.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/ asthma/asthgdln.htm.)
 
C. Severe Exacerbations
Owing to the life-threatening nature of severe exacerbations of
asthma, treatment should be started immediately once the
exacerbation is recognized. All patients with a severe exacerbation
should immediately receive oxygen, high doses of an inhaled short-
acting β2-agonist, and systemic corticosteroids. A brief history
pertinent to the exacerbation can be completed while treatment is
being initiated. More detailed assessments, including laboratory
studies, usually add little in the early phase of evaluation and
management and should be postponed until after therapy is
instituted.
Oxygen therapy is very important because asphyxia is a
common cause of fatal asthma.
Supplemental oxygen should be given to maintain an Sao2 > 90%
or a Pao2 > 60 mm Hg. Oxygen-induced hypoventilation is
extremely rare, and concern for hypercapnia should never delay
correction of hypoxemia.
Frequent high-dose delivery of an inhaled short-acting β2-
agonist is indicated and is usually well tolerated in the setting of
severe airway obstruction. Some studies suggest that continuous
therapy is more effective than intermittent administration of these
agents, but there is no clear consensus as long as similar doses are
administered. At least three MDI or nebulizer treatments should be
given in the first hour of therapy. Thereafter, the frequency of
administration varies according to the improvement in airflow and
associated symptoms and the occurrence of side effects.
Ipratropium bromide reduces the rate of hospital admissions when
added to inhaled short-acting β2-agonists in patients with moderate
to severe asthma exacerbations.
Systemic corticosteroids are administered as detailed above.
Mucolytic agents (eg, acetylcysteine, potassium iodide) may worsen
cough or airflow obstruction. Anxiolytic and hypnotic drugs are
generally contraindicated in severe asthma exacerbations because of
their respiratory depressant effects.
Intravenous magnesium sulfate (2 g intravenously over 20
minutes) produces a detectable improvement in airflow and may
reduce hospitalization rates in acute severe asthma (FEV1 < 25% of
predicted on presentation, or failure to respond to initial treatment).
Repeat assessment of patients with severe exacerbations
should be made after the initial dose of inhaled bronchodilator and
after three doses of inhaled bronchodilators (60–90 minutes after
initiating treatment). The response to initial treatment is a better
predictor of the need for hospitalization than is the severity of an
exacerbation on presentation. The decision to hospitalize a patient
should be based on the duration and severity of symptoms, severity
of airflow obstruction, course and severity of prior exacerbations,
medication use at the time of the exacerbation, access to medical
care and medications, adequacy of social support and home
conditions, and presence of psychiatric illness. In general, discharge
to home is appropriate if the PEF or FEV1 has returned to ≥ 60%
of predicted or personal best and symptoms are minimal or absent.
Patients with a rapid response to treatment should be observed for
30 minutes after the most recent dose of bronchodilator to ensure
stability of response before discharge to home.
In the critical care setting, a small subset of patients will not
respond to treatment and will progress to impending respiratory
failure due to a combination of worsening airflow obstruction and
respiratory muscle fatigue (see Table 9–3). Such patients can
deteriorate rapidly and thus should be monitored in a critical care
setting. Intubation of an acutely ill asthma patient is technically
difficult and is best done semi-electively, before the crisis of a
respiratory arrest. At the time of intubation, close attention should
be given to maintaining intravascular volume because hypotension
commonly accompanies the administration of sedation and the
initiation of positive-pressure ventilation in patients dehydrated due
to poor recent oral intake and high insensible losses.
The main goals of mechanical ventilation are to ensure adequate
oxygen and to avoid barotrauma. Controlled hypoventilation with
permissive hypercapnia is often required to limit airway pressures.
Frequent high-dose delivery of inhaled short-acting β2-agonists
should be continued along with anti-inflammatory agents as
discussed above. Many questions remain regarding the optimal
delivery of inhaled β2-agonists to intubated, mechanically ventilated
patients. Further studies are needed to determine the comparative
efficacy of MDIs and nebulizers, optimal ventilator settings to use
during drug delivery, ideal site along the ventilator circuit for
introduction of the delivery system, and maximal acceptable drug
doses. Unconventional therapies such as helium-oxygen mixtures
and inhalational anesthetic agents are of unclear benefit but may be
appropriate in selected patients.
 When to Refer
 
•    Atypical presentation or uncertain diagnosis, particularly
if 
additional 
diagnostic 
testing 
is 
required
(bronchoprovocation challenge, skin testing for allergies,
rhinoscopy, consideration of occupational exposure).
•    Complicating comorbid problems, such as
rhinosinusitis, 
tobacco 
use, 
multiple 
environmental
allergies, 
suspected 
allergic 
bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis.
•    Suboptimal response to therapy.
•    Patient is not meeting goals of asthma therapy after 3–6
months of treatment.
•    Requires high-dose inhaled corticosteroids for control.
•    More than two courses of oral prednisone therapy in the
past 12 months.
•    Any life-threatening asthma exacerbation or
exacerbation requiring hospitalization in the past 12
months.
•    Presence of social or psychological issues interfering
with asthma management.
Gibson PG et al. Asthma in older adults. Lancet. 2010 Sep 4;
376(9743):803–13. [PMID: 20816547]
 
Global Initiative for Asthma. http://www.ginasthma.com Krishnan
JA et al. An umbrella review: corticosteroid therapy for adults with
acute asthma. Am J Med. 2009 Nov;122(11):977–91. [PMID:
19854321]
 
Mannam P et al. Analytic review: management of life-threatening
asthma in adults. J Intensive Care Med. 2010 Jan–Feb; 25(1): 3–
15. [PMID: 20085924]
 
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program: Expert panel
report III: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma.
Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2007.
(NIH publication no. 08-4051).
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/ asthma/asthgdln.htm
 
Panettieri RA Jr. In the clinic. Asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Jun
5;146(11):ITC6-1–ITC6-16. [PMID: 17548407]
 
Rey E et al. Asthma in pregnancy. BMJ. 2007 Mar 17;334(7593):
582–5. [PMID: 17363831]
 
Wechsler ME. Managing asthma in primary care: putting new
guideline recommendations into context. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009
Aug;84(8):707–17. [PMID: 19648388]
 
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of cigarette smoking.
 Chronic cough, dyspnea, and sputum production.
 Rhonchi, decreased intensity of breath sounds, and prolonged
expiration on physical examination.
 Airflow limitation on pulmonary function testing that is not fully
reversible and most often progressive.
 
 General Considerations
The American Thoracic Society defines COPD as a disease state
characterized by the presence of airflow obstruction due to chronic
bronchitis or emphysema; the airflow obstruction is generally
progressive, may be accompanied by airway hyperreactivity, and
may be partially reversible. The NHLBI estimates that 14 million
Americans have been diagnosed with COPD; an equal number are
thought to be afflicted but remain undiagnosed. Grouped together,
COPD and asthma now represent the fourth leading cause of death
in the United States, with over 120,000 deaths reported annually.
The death rate from COPD is increasing rapidly, especially among
elderly men.
Most patients with COPD have features of both emphysema and
chronic bronchitis. Chronic bronchitis is a clinical diagnosis
defined by excessive secretion of bronchial mucus and is manifested
by daily productive cough for 3 months or more in at least 2
consecutive years. Emphysema is a pathologic diagnosis that
denotes abnormal permanent enlargement of air spaces distal to the
terminal bronchiole, with destruction of their walls and without
obvious fibrosis.
Cigarette smoking is clearly the most important cause of COPD
in North America and Western Europe. Nearly all smokers suffer
an accelerated decline in lung function that is dose- and duration-
dependent. Fifteen percent develop progressively disabling
symptoms in their 40s and 50s. It is estimated that 80% of patients
seen for COPD have significant exposure to tobacco smoke. The
remaining 20% frequently have a combination of exposures to
environmental tobacco smoke, occupational dusts and chemicals,
and indoor air pollution from biomass fuel used for cooking and
heating in poorly ventilated buildings. Outdoor air pollution, airway
infection, familial factors, and allergy have also been implicated in
chronic bronchitis, and hereditary factors (deficiency of α1-
antiprotease [α1-antitrypsin]) have been implicated in COPD. The
pathogenesis of emphysema may involve excessive lysis of elastin
and other structural proteins in the lung matrix by elastase and other
proteases derived from lung neutrophils, macrophages, and
mononuclear cells. Atopy and the tendency for bronchoconstriction
to develop in response to nonspecific airway stimuli may be
important risks for COPD.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with COPD characteristically present in the fifth or sixth
decade of life complaining of excessive cough, sputum production,
and shortness of breath. Symptoms have often been present for 10
years or more. Dyspnea is noted initially only on heavy exertion, but
as the condition progresses it occurs with mild activity. In severe
disease, dyspnea occurs at rest. As the disease progresses, two
symptom patterns tend to emerge, historically referred to as “pink
puffers” and “blue bloaters” (Table 9–7). Most COPD patients
have pathologic evidence of both disorders, and their clinical course
may reflect other factors such as central control of ventilation and
concomitant sleep-disordered breathing.
Pneumonia, pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, and chronic
respiratory failure characterize the late stage of COPD. A hallmark
of COPD is the exacerbation of symptoms beyond normal day-to-
day variation, often including increased dyspnea, an increased
frequency or severity of cough, increased sputum volume or change
in sputum character. These exacerbations are commonly
precipitated by infection (more often viral than bacterial) or
environmental factors. Exacerbations of COPD vary widely in
severity but typically require a change in regular therapy.
B. Laboratory Findings
Spirometry provides objective information about pulmonary
function and assesses the results of therapy. Pulmonary function
tests early in the course of COPD reveal only evidence of abnormal
closing volume and reduced midexpiratory flow rate. Reductions in
FEV1 and in the ratio of forced expiratory volume to vital capacity
(FEV1% or FEV1/FVC ratio) (Table 9–7) occur later. In severe
disease, the FVC is markedly reduced. Lung volume measurements
reveal a marked increase in residual volume (RV), an increase in
total lung capacity (TLC), and an elevation of the RV/TLC ratio,
indicative of air trapping, particularly in emphysema.
 
Table 9–7. Patterns of disease in advanced COPD.
 
DLCO, single-breath diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide; 
,
ventilation-perfusion.
 
Arterial blood gas measurements characteristically show no
abnormalities early in COPD other than an increased A–a–Do2.
Indeed, they are unnecessary unless (1) hypoxemia or hypercapnia
is suspected, (2) the FEV1 is < 40% of predicted, or (3) there are
clinical signs of right heart failure. Hypoxemia occurs in advanced
disease, particularly when chronic bronchitis predominates.
Compensated respiratory acidosis occurs in patients with chronic
respiratory failure, particularly in chronic bronchitis, with worsening
of acidemia during acute exacerbations.
Examination of the sputum may reveal Streptococcus
pneumoniae, H influenzae, or Moraxella catarrhalis. Positive
sputum cultures are poorly correlated with acute exacerbations, and
research techniques demonstrate evidence of preceding viral
infection in a majority of patients with exacerbations. The ECG may
show sinus tachycardia and, in advanced disease, chronic
pulmonary hypertension may produce electrocardiographic
abnormalities typical of cor pulmonale. Supraventricular arrhythmias
(multifocal atrial tachycardia, atrial flutter, and atrial fibrillation) and
ventricular irritability also occur.
C. Imaging
Radiographs of patients with chronic bronchitis typically show only
nonspecific peribronchial and perivascular markings. Plain
radiographs are insensitive for the diagnosis of emphysema; they
show hyperinflation with flattening of the diaphragm or peripheral
arterial deficiency in about half of cases. CT of the chest,
particularly using a high-resolution reconstruction algorithm, is more
sensitive and specific than plain radiographs for the diagnosis of
emphysema. Pulmonary hypertension may be suggested by
enlargement of central pulmonary arteries in advanced disease.
Doppler echocardiography provides a noninvasive estimate of
pulmonary artery pressure if pulmonary hyper-tension is suspected.
 Differential Diagnosis
Clinical, imaging, and laboratory findings should enable the clinician
to distinguish COPD from other obstructive pulmonary disorders
such as bronchial asthma, bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis,
bronchopulmonary mycosis, and central airflow obstruction. Simple
asthma is characterized by complete or near-complete reversibility
of airflow obstruction. Bronchiectasis is distinguished from COPD
by features such as recurrent pneumonia and hemoptysis, digital
clubbing, and characteristic imaging abnormalities. Patients with
severe α1-antiprotease (α1-antitrypsin) deficiency are recognized by
family history and the appearance of panacinar bibasilar emphysema
early in life, usually in the third or fourth decade; hepatic cirrhosis
and hepatocellular carcinoma may occur. Cystic fibrosis occurs in
children and younger adults. Rarely, mechanical obstruction of the
central airways simulates COPD. Flow-volume loops may help
separate patients with central airway obstruction from those with
diffuse intrathoracic airway obstruction characteristic of COPD.
 Complications
Acute bronchitis, pneumonia, pulmonary thromboembolism, and
concomitant left ventricular failure may worsen otherwise stable
COPD. Pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, and chronic
respiratory failure are common in advanced COPD. Spontaneous
pneumothorax occurs in a small fraction of patients with
emphysema. Hemoptysis may result from chronic bronchitis or may
signal bronchogenic carcinoma.
 Prevention
COPD is largely preventable through elimination of long-term
exposure to tobacco smoke. Smokers with early evidence of
airflow limitation can significantly alter their disease by smoking
cessation. Smoking cessation slows the decline in FEV1 in middle-
aged smokers with mild airways obstruction. Vaccination against
seasonal influenza, epidemic influenza A (H1N1), and
pneumococcal infection may also be of benefit.
 Treatment
The treatment of COPD is guided by the severity of symptoms or
the presence of an exacerbation or stable symptoms. Standards for
the management of patients with stable COPD and COPD
exacerbations by the American Thoracic Society and the Global
Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD), a joint expert
committee of the NHLBI and the WHO, are incorporated in the
recommendations below. See Chapter 37 for a discussion of air
travel in patients with lung disease.
A. Ambulatory Patients
1. Smoking cessation—The single most important intervention in
smokers with COPD is to encourage smoking cessation. Simply
telling a patient to quit succeeds 5% of the time. Behavioral
approaches, ranging from clinician advice to intensive group
programs, may improve cessation rates. Pharmacologic therapy
includes nicotine replacement (transdermal patch, gum, lozenge,
inhaler, or nasal spray), bupropion, and varenicline (a partial agonist
of nicotine acetylcholine receptors) (see Chapter 1). Combined
pharmacotherapies (two forms of nicotine replacement, or nicotine
replacement and bupropion), with or without behavioral approaches
have also been recommended. The Lung Health Study reported
22% sustained abstinence at 5 years in their intervention group
(behavior modification plus nicotine gum). Varenicline has proved
effective but wider use has revealed significant CNS side effects,
including some reports of an increase in suicide.
2. Oxygen therapy—The only drug therapy that is documented to
improve the natural history of COPD is supplemental oxygen in
those patients with resting hypoxemia. Proved benefits of home
oxygen therapy in hypoxemic patients include longer survival,
reduced hospitalization needs, and better quality of life. Survival in
hypoxemic patients with COPD treated with supplemental oxygen
therapy is directly proportionate to the number of hours per day
oxygen is administered: in hypoxemic patients treated with
continuous oxygen, the survival after 36 months is about 65%—
significantly better than the survival rate of about 45% in those who
are treated with only nocturnal oxygen. Oxygen by nasal prongs
must be given at least 15 hours a day unless therapy is intended only
for exercise or sleep.
Requirements for Medicare coverage for a patient's home use of
oxygen and oxygen equipment are listed in Table 9–8. Arterial
blood gas analysis is preferred over oximetry to guide initial oxygen
therapy. Hypoxemic patients with pulmonary hypertension, chronic
cor pulmonale, erythrocytosis, impaired cognitive function, exercise
intolerance, nocturnal restlessness, or morning headache are
particularly likely to benefit from home oxygen therapy.
 
Table 9–8. Home oxygen therapy: Requirements for Medicare
coverage.1
 
Group I (any of the following):
1. Pao2 ≤ 55 mm Hg or Sao2 ≤ 88% taken at rest
breathing room air, while awake.
2. During sleep (prescription for nocturnal oxygen use
only):
a. Pao2 ≤ 55 mm Hg or Sao2 ≤ 88% for a patient whose
awake, resting, room air Pao2 is ≥ 56 mm Hg or Sao2 ≥
89%, or
b. Decrease in Pao2 > 10 mm Hg or decrease in Sao2 >
5% associated with symptoms or signs reasonably
attributed 
to 
hypoxemia 
(eg, 
impaired 
cognitive
processes, nocturnal restlessness, insomnia).
3. During exercise (prescription for oxygen use only during
exercise):
a. Pao2 ≤ 55 mg Hg or Sao2 ≤ 88% taken during exercise
for a patient whose awake, resting, room air Pao2 is ≥ 56
mm Hg or Sao2 ≥ 89%,
and
b. There is evidence that the use of supplemental oxygen
during exercise improves the hypoxemia that was
demonstrated during exercise while breathing room air.
Group II2:
Pao2 = 56–59 mm Hg or Sao2 = 89% if there is evidence
of any of the following:
1. Dependent edema suggesting congestive heart failure.
2. P pulmonale on ECG (P wave > 3 mm in standard leads
II, III, or aVF).
3. Hematocrit > 56%.
1Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2003.
2Patients in this group must have a second oxygen test 3 months after the
initial oxygen set-up.
 
Home oxygen may be supplied by liquid oxygen systems (LOX),
compressed gas cylinders, or oxygen concentrators. Most patients
benefit from having both stationary and portable systems. For most
patients, a flow rate of 1–3 L/min achieves a Pao2 greater than 55
mm Hg. The monthly cost of home oxygen therapy ranges from
$300.00 to $500.00 or more, higher for liquid oxygen systems.
Medicare covers approximately 80% of home oxygen expenses.
Transtracheal oxygen is an alternative method of delivery and
may be useful for patients who require higher flows of oxygen than
can be delivered via the nose or who are experiencing troublesome
side effects from nasal delivery such as nasal drying or epistaxis.
Reservoir nasal cannulas or “pendants” and demand (pulse) oxygen
delivery systems are also available to conserve oxygen.
3. Inhaled bronchodilators—Bronchodilators do not alter the
inexorable decline in lung function that is a hallmark of COPD, but
they offer many patients improvement in symptoms, exercise
tolerance, and overall health status. Aggressiveness of
bronchodilator therapy should be matched to the severity of the
patient's disease. In patients who experience no symptomatic
improvement, bronchodilators should be discontinued.
The most commonly prescribed short-acting bronchodilators are
the anticholinergic ipratropium bromide and β2-agonists (eg,
albuterol, metaproterenol), delivered by MDI or as an inhalation
solution by nebulizer. Ipratropium bromide is generally preferred to
the short-acting β2-agonists as a first-line agent because of its longer
duration of action and absence of sympathomimetic side effects.
Some studies have suggested that ipratropium achieves superior
broncho-dilation in COPD patients. Typical doses are two to four
puffs (36–72 mcg) every 6 hours. Short-acting β2-agonists are less
expensive and have a more rapid onset of action, commonly leading
to greater patient satisfaction. At maximal doses, β2-agonists have
bronchodilator action equivalent to that of ipratropium but may
cause tachycardia, tremor, or hypokalemia. There does not appear
to be any advantage of scheduled use of short-acting β2-agonists
compared with as-needed administration. Use of both short-acting
β2-agonists and anticholinergics at submaximal doses leads to
improved bronchodilation compared with either agent alone but
does not improve dyspnea.
Long-acting β2-agonists (eg, formoterol, salmeterol) and
anticholinergics (tiotropium) appear to achieve bronchodilation that
is equivalent or superior to what is experienced with ipratropium, in
addition to similar improvements on health status. Although they are
more 
expensive 
than 
short-acting 
agents, 
long-acting
bronchodilators may have superior clinical efficacy in persons with
advanced disease. A 2008 randomized controlled trial (RCT) of
long-term administration of tiotropium added to standard therapy
reported fewer exacerbations or hospitalizations, and improved
dyspnea scores, in the tiotropium group. Tiotropium had no effect
on long-term decline in lung function, however. Another RCT
comparing the effects of tiotropium with those of salmeterol-
fluticasone in COPD over 2 years reported no difference in the risk
of exacerbation. The incidence of pneumonia was higher in the
salmeterolfluticasone group, yet dyspnea scores were lower and
there was a mortality benefit compared with tiotropium. This last
finding awaits confirmation in further studies.
The symptomatic benefits of long-acting bronchodilators are
firmly established. Whether there is a mortality benefit associated
with salmeterol-fluticasone therapy remains controversial, especially
since serious concerns have been raised about the safety of both
long-acting β2-agonists and anticholinergics. Two large RCTs in
asthmatic patients reported an increase in exacerbations and
mortality in patients treated with salmeterol. These findings have not
been observed in COPD patients, however, and several studies
report a trend toward lower mortality in patients treated with
salmeterol alone, compared with placebo. Several small studies and
a 2008 meta-analysis reported an increase in cardiovascular events
among patients treated with long- and short-acting anticholinergics.
In contrast, the 4-year tiotropium trial reported fewer
cardiovascular events in the intervention group. Subsequent meta-
analyses that include the 4-year tiotropium trial do not support an
increase in cardiovascular events in these patients. This is an area of
ongoing study but most practitioners believe that the documented
benefits of anticholinergic therapy outweigh potential risks.
4. Corticosteroids—Multiple large clinical trials have reported a
reduction in the frequency of COPD exacerbations and an increase
in self-reported functional status in COPD patients treated with
inhaled corticosteroids. These same trials demonstrate no effect of
inhaled corticosteroids on mortality or the characteristic decline in
lung function experienced by COPD patients. At this time, inhaled
corticosteroids alone should not be considered first-line therapy in
stable COPD patients, who benefit more from bronchodilators,
smoking cessation, and pulmonary rehabilitation.
Combination therapy with an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-
acting β2-agonist reduces the frequency of COPD exacerbations
and improves self-reported functional status in COPD patients,
compared with placebo or sole use of inhaled corticosteroids, long-
acting β2-agonists, or anticholinergics. Addition of an inhaled
corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist to tiotropium therapy in
COPD patients does not reduce the frequency of COPD
exacerbations but did improve hospitalization rates as well as self-
reported functional status in one RCT.
Apart from acute exacerbations, COPD is not generally
responsive to oral corticosteroid therapy. Only 10–20% of stable
outpatients with COPD given oral corticosteroids will have a >
20% increase in FEV1 compared with patients receiving placebo.
There may be a subset of steroid-responsive COPD patients more
likely to benefit from long-term oral or inhaled corticosteroids.
Since there are no clinical predictors to identify such responders,
empiric trials of oral corticosteroids are common. Current research
provides little guidance to interpret clinically relevant benefit and
clinically significant changes in spirometry, however. If empiric trials
of oral corticosteroids are conducted, the baseline FEV1 should be
stable, ie, not measured during an exacerbation, and documented
on maximal bronchodilator therapy. The postbronchodilator FEV1
value is considered the appropriate baseline. After a 3-4 week trial
of 0.25–0.5 mg/kg oral prednisone, the drug should be discontinued
unless there is a 20% or greater increase in FEV1. Responders to
oral agents are usually switched to inhaled corticosteroids, but there
are few data to guide this practice. The use of oral or systemic
corticosteroids has well-recognized adverse effects, and it is
prudent to minimize cumulative oral corticosteroid exposure. Some
patients may be truly “corticosteroid-dependent,” but clinical
experience suggests that this is rare when all other available
therapies are optimized.
5. Theophylline—Oral theophylline is a fourth-line agent for
treating patients with COPD who do not achieve adequate
symptom control with anticholinergics, β2-agonists, and inhaled
corticosteroid therapy. Sustained-release theophylline improves
hemoglobin saturation during sleep in COPD patients and is a first-
line agent for those with sleep-related breathing disorders.
Theophylline improves dyspnea ratings, exercise performance, and
pulmonary function in many patients with stable COPD. Its benefits
result from bronchodilation; anti-inflammatory properties; and
extrapulmonary effects on diaphragm strength, myocardial
contractility, and kidney function. Theophylline toxicity is a
significant concern due to the drug's narrow therapeutic window,
and long-term administration requires careful monitoring of serum
levels. Despite the potential adverse effects, theophylline continues
to have a beneficial role in carefully selected patients.
6. Antibiotics—Antibiotics are commonly prescribed to
outpatients with COPD for the following indications: (1) to treat an
acute exacerbation, (2) to treat acute bronchitis, and (3) to prevent
acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis (prophylactic antibiotics).
Antibiotics appear to improve outcomes slightly in the first two
situations, but there is no convincing evidence to support the use of
prophylactic antibiotics in patients with COPD. Patients with a
COPD exacerbation associated with increased sputum purulence
accompanied by dyspnea or an increase in the quantity of sputum
are thought to benefit the most from antibiotic therapy. An optimal
antibiotic regimen has not been identified. The choice of antibiotic
depends on local bacterial resistance patterns and individual risk of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection (history of Pseudomonas
isolation, FEV1 < 50% of predicted, recent hospitalization (2 or
more days in the past 3 months), more than three courses of
antibiotics within the past year, use of systemic corticosteroids).
Oral antibiotic options include doxycycline (100 mg every 12
hours), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg every 12
hours), a cephalosporin (eg, cefpodoxime 200 mg every 12 hours
or cefprozil 500 mg every 12 hours), a macrolide (eg, azithromycin
500 mg followed by 250 mg daily for 5 days), a fluoroquinolone
(eg, ciprofloxacin 500 mg every 12 hours), and amoxicillin-
clavulanate (875/125 mg every 12 hours). Suggested duration of
therapy is 3–7 days and depends on response to therapy; some
studies suggest that 5 days is as effective as 7 days but with fewer
adverse effects. There are few controlled trials of antibiotics in
severe COPD exacerbations, but prompt administration of
antibiotics is appropriate, particularly in persons with risk factors for
poor outcomes (age > 65 years, FEV1 < 50% predicted, three or
more exacerbations in the past year, antibiotic therapy within the
past 3 months, comorbid conditions such as cardiac disease).
7. Pulmonary rehabilitation—Graded aerobic physical exercise
programs (eg, walking 20 minutes three times weekly or bicycling)
are helpful to prevent deterioration of physical condition and to
improve patients’ ability to carry out daily activities. Training of
inspiratory muscles by inspiring against progressively larger resistive
loads reduces dyspnea and improves exercise tolerance, health
status, and respiratory muscle strength in some but not all patients.
Pursed-lip breathing to slow the rate of breathing and abdominal
breathing exercises to relieve fatigue of accessory muscles of
respiration may reduce dyspnea in some patients. Many patients
undergo these exercise and educational interventions in a structured
rehabilitation program. In a number of studies, pulmonary
rehabilitation has been shown to improve exercise capacity,
decrease hospitalizations, and enhance quality of life. Referral to a
comprehensive rehabilitation program is recommended in patients
who have severe dyspnea, reduced quality of life, or frequent
hospitalizations despite optimal medical therapy.
8. Other measures—In patients with chronic bronchitis, increased
mobilization of secretions may be accomplished through the use of
adequate systemic hydration, effective cough training methods, or
use of a hand-held flutter device and postural drainage, sometimes
with chest percussion or vibration. Postural drainage and chest
percussion should be used only in selected patients with excessive
amounts of retained secretions that cannot be cleared by coughing
and other methods; these measures are of no benefit in pure
emphysema. Expectorant-mucolytic therapy has generally been
regarded as unhelpful in patients with chronic bronchitis. Cough
suppressants and sedatives should be avoided as routine measures.
Human α1-antitrypsin is available for replacement therapy in
emphysema due to congenital deficiency (PiZZ or null genotype) of
α1-antiprotease (α1-antitrypsin). Patients over 18 years of age with
airflow obstruction by spirometry and serum levels less than 11
mcmol/L (~50 mg/dL) are potential candidates for replacement
therapy. There is no evidence that replacement therapy is beneficial
to heterozygotes (eg, PiMZ) with low-normal serum levels, although
such patients may be at slightly increased risk for emphysema,
especially in the setting of tobacco smoke exposure. α1-Antitrypsin
is administered intravenously in a dose of 60 mg/kg body weight
once weekly.
Severe dyspnea in spite of optimal medical management may
warrant a clinical trial of an opioid (eg, morphine 5–10 mg orally
every 3 to 4 hours, oxycodone 5–10 mg orally every 4–6 hours).
Sedative-hypnotic drugs (eg, diazepam, 5 mg three times daily)
marginally improve intractable dyspnea but cause significant
drowsiness; they may benefit very anxious patients. Transnasal
positive-pressure ventilation at home to rest the respiratory muscles
is a promising approach to improve respiratory muscle function and
reduce dyspnea in patients with severe COPD. A bilevel transnasal
ventilation system has been reported to reduce dyspnea in
ambulatory patients with severe COPD, but the long-term benefits
of this approach and compliance with it have not been defined.
B. Hospitalized Patients
Management of the hospitalized patient with an acute exacerbation
of COPD includes supplemental oxygen (titrated to maintain Sao2
between 90% and 94% or Pao2 between 60 mm Hg and 70 mm
Hg), inhaled ipratropium bromide (500 mcg by nebulizer, or 36 mcg
by MDI with spacer, every 4 hours as needed) plus β2-agonists
(eg, albuterol 2.5 mg diluted with saline to a total of 3 mL by
nebulizer, or MDI, 90 mcg per puff, four to eight puffs via spacer,
every 1–4 hours as needed), and broad-spectrum antibiotics.
For patients without risk factors for Pseudomonas, management
options include a fluoroquinolone (eg, levofloxacin 750 mg orally or
intravenously per day, or moxifloxacin 400 mg orally or
intravenously every 24 hours) or a third-generation cephalosporin
(eg, ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously per day, or cefotaxime 1 g
intravenously every 8 hours).
For patients with risk factors for Pseudomonas, therapeutic
options include piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g intravenously every 6
hours), ceftazidime (1 g intravenously every 8 hours), cefepime (1 g
intravenously every 12 hours), levofloxacin (750 mg orally or
intravenously per day for 3–7 days), or corticosteroids (prednisone
30–40 mg orally per day for 7–10 days is usually sufficient) and, in
selected cases, chest physiotherapy.
Theophylline should not be initiated in the acute setting, but
patients taking theophylline prior to acute hospitalization should
have their theophylline serum levels measured and maintained in the
therapeutic range. Oxygen therapy should not be withheld for fear
of worsening respiratory acidemia; hypoxemia is more detrimental
than hypercapnia. Cor pulmonale usually responds to measures that
reduce pulmonary artery pressure, such as supplemental oxygen
and correction of acidemia; bed rest, salt restriction, and diuretics
may add some benefit. Cardiac dysrhythmias, particularly multifocal
atrial tachycardia, usually respond to aggressive treatment of COPD
itself. Atrial flutter may require DC cardioversion after initiation of
the above therapy. If progressive respiratory failure ensues, tracheal
intubation and mechanical ventilation are necessary. In clinical trials
of COPD patients with hyper-capnic acute respiratory failure,
noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NPPV) delivered via face
mask reduced the need for intubation and shortened lengths of stay
in the intensive care unit (ICU). Other studies have suggested a
lower risk of nosocomial infections and less use of antibiotics in
COPD patients treated with NPPV. These benefits do not appear
to extend to hypoxemic respiratory failure or to patients with acute
lung injury or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
C. Surgery for COPD
1. Lung transplantation—Experience with both single and
bilateral sequential lung transplantation for severe COPD is
extensive. Requirements for lung transplantation are severe lung
disease, limited activities of daily living, exhaustion of medical
therapy, ambulatory status, potential for pulmonary rehabilitation,
limited life expectancy without transplantation, adequate function of
other organ systems, and a good social support system. Average
total charges for lung transplantation through the end of the first
postoperative year exceed $250,000. The 2-year survival rate after
lung transplantation for COPD is 75%. Complications include acute
rejection, opportunistic infection, and obliterative bronchiolitis.
Substantial improvements in pulmonary function and exercise
performance have been noted after transplantation.
2. Lung volume reduction surgery—Lung volume reduction
surgery (LVRS), or reduction pneumoplasty, is a surgical approach
to relieve dyspnea and improve exercise tolerance in patients with
advanced diffuse emphysema and lung hyperinflation. Bilateral
resection of 20–30% of lung volume in selected patients results in
modest improvements in pulmonary function, exercise performance,
and dyspnea. The duration of any improvement as well as any
mortality benefit remains uncertain. Prolonged air leaks occur in up
to 50% of patients postoperatively. Mortality rates in centers with
the largest experience with LVRS range from 4% to 10%.
The National Emphysema Treatment Trial compared LVRS with
medical treatment in a randomized, multicenter clinical trial of 1218
patients with severe emphysema. Overall, surgery improved
exercise capacity but not mortality when compared with medical
therapy. The persistence of this benefit remains to be defined.
Subgroup analysis suggested that patients with upper lobe
predominant emphysema and low exercise capacity might have
improved survival, while other groups suffered excess mortality
when randomized to surgery.
3. Bullectomy—Bullectomy is an older surgical procedure for
palliation of dyspnea in patients with severe bullous emphysema.
Bullectomy is most commonly pursued when a single bulla occupies
at least 30–50% of the hemithorax. In this procedure, the surgeon
removes a large emphysematous bulla that demonstrates no
ventilation or perfusion on lung scanning and compresses adjacent
lung with preserved function. Bullectomy can be performed with a
CO2 laser via thoracoscopy.
 Prognosis
The outlook for patients with clinically significant COPD is poor.
The degree of pulmonary dysfunction at the time the patient is first
seen is an important predictor of survival: median survival of patients
with FEV1 ≤ 1 L is about 4 years. A multidimensional index (the
BODE index), which includes body mass index (BMI), airway
obstruction (FEV1), dyspnea (Medical Research Council dyspnea
score), and exercise capacity is a tool that predicts death and
hospitalization better than FEV1 alone. Comprehensive care
programs, cessation of smoking, and supplemental oxygen may
reduce the rate of decline of pulmonary function, but therapy with
bronchodilators and other approaches probably has little, if any,
impact on the natural course of COPD.
Dyspnea at the end of life can be extremely uncomfortable and
distressing to the patient and family. Dyspnea can be effectively
managed with a combination of medications and mechanical
interventions. As patients near the end of life, meticulous attention to
palliative care is essential (see Chapter 5).
 When to Refer
 
•    COPD onset occurs before the age of 40.
•    Frequent exacerbations (two or more a year) despite
optimal treatment.
•    Severe or rapidly progressive COPD.
•    Symptoms disproportionate to the severity of airflow
obstruction.
•    Need for long-term oxygen therapy.
•    Onset of comorbid illnesses (such as bronchiectasis,
heart failure, or lung cancer).
 When to Admit
 
•    Severe symptoms or acute worsening that fails to
respond to outpatient management.
•    Acute or worsening hypoxemia, hypercapnia, peripheral
edema, or change in mental status.
•    Inadequate home care, or inability to sleep or maintain
nutrition/hydration due to symptoms.
•    The presence of high-risk comorbid conditions.
Cote CG et al. Predictors of mortality in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Clin Chest Med. 2007 Sep;28(3):515–24.
[PMID: 17720040]
 
Qaseem A et al. Diagnosis and management of stable chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a clinical practice guideline from the
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Nov
6;147(9):633–8. [PMID: 17975186]
 
Rabe KF et al; Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and
prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: GOLD
executive summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Sep
15;176(6):532–55. [PMID: 17507545]
 
Tashkin DP. Long-acting anticholinergic use in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: efficacy and safety. Curr Opin Pulm Med.
2010 Mar;16(2):97–105. [PMID: 20019615]
 
Tashkin DP et al. A 4-year trial of tiotropium in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct 9;359(15): 1543–
54. [PMID: 18836213]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. JAMA. 2008 Nov 26;300(20):2448. [PMID:
19033597]
 
Walters JA et al. Systemic corticosteroids for acute exacerbations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21;(1):CD001288. [PMID: 19160195]
 
Wedzicha JA et al; INSPIRE Investigators. The prevention of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations by
salmeterol/fluticasone propionate or tiotropium bromide. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan 1;177(1):19–26. [PMID:
17916806]
 
ZuWallack R et al. Primary care of the patient with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease-part 3: pulmonary rehabilitation and
comprehensive care for the patient with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Med. 2008 Jul;121 (7 Suppl):S25–32.
[PMID: 18558104]
 
BRONCHIECTASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic productive cough with dyspnea and wheezing.
 Radiographic findings of dilated, thickened airways and
scattered, irregular opacities.
 
 General Considerations
Bronchiectasis is a congenital or acquired disorder of the large
bronchi characterized by permanent, abnormal dilation and
destruction of bronchial walls. It may be caused by recurrent
inflammation or infection of the airways and may be localized or
diffuse. Cystic fibrosis causes about half of all cases of
bronchiectasis. Other causes include lung infection (tuberculosis,
fungal infections, lung abscess, pneumonia), abnormal lung defense
mechanisms (humoral immunodeficiency, α1-antiprotease [α1-
antitrypsin] deficiency with cigarette smoking, mucociliary clearance
disorders, rheumatic diseases), and localized airway obstruction
(foreign body, tumor, mucoid impaction). Immunodeficiency states
that may lead to bronchiectasis include congenital or acquired
panhypogammaglobulinemia; common variable immunodeficiency;
selective IgA, IgM, and IgG subclass deficiencies; and acquired
immunodeficiency from cytotoxic therapy, AIDS, lymphoma,
multiple myeloma, leukemia, and chronic kidney and liver diseases.
Most 
patients 
with 
bronchiectasis 
have
panhypergammaglobulinemia, however, presumably reflecting an
immune system response to chronic airway infection. Acquired
primary bronchiectasis is now uncommon in the United States
because of improved control of bronchopulmonary infections.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of bronchiectasis include chronic cough with production
of copious amounts of purulent sputum, hemoptysis, and pleuritic
chest pain. Dyspnea and wheezing occur in 75% of patients. Weight
loss, anemia, and other systemic manifestations are common.
Physical findings are nonspecific, but persistent crackles at the lung
bases are common. Clubbing is infrequent in mild cases but is
common in severe disease (see Figure 6–47). Copious, foul-
smelling, purulent sputum is characteristic. Obstructive pulmonary
dysfunction with hypoxemia is seen in moderate or severe disease.
B. Imaging
Radiographic abnormalities include dilated and thickened bronchi
that may appear as “tram-tracks” or as ring-like markings on chest
radiograph. Scattered irregular opacities, atelectasis, and focal
consolidation may be present. High-resolution CT is the diagnostic
study of choice.
C. Microbiology
Haemophilus influenzae is the most common organism recovered
from non-cystic fibrosis patients with bronchiectasis. P aeruginosa,
S pneumoniae, 
and Staphylococcus aureus are commonly
identified. Nontuberculous mycobacteria are seen less commonly.
Patients with Pseudomonas infection experience an accelerated
course, with more frequent exacerbations and more rapid decline in
lung function.
 Treatment
Treatment of acute exacerbations consists of antibiotics, daily chest
physiotherapy with postural drainage and chest percussion, and
inhaled bronchodilators. Hand-held flutter valve devices may be as
effective as chest physiotherapy in clearing secretions. Antibiotic
therapy should be guided by sputum smears and cultures. If a
specific bacterial pathogen cannot be isolated, then empiric oral
antibiotic therapy for 10–14 days is appropriate. Common regimens
include amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanate (500 mg every 8
hours), ampicillin or tetracycline (250–500 mg four times daily),
trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg every 12 hours), or
ciprofloxacin (500-750 mg twice daily). It is important to screen
patients for infection with nontuberculous mycobacteria because
these organisms may underlie a lack of treatment response.
Preventive or suppressive treatment is sometimes given to stable
outpatients with bronchiectasis who have copious purulent sputum.
Clinical trial data to guide this practice are scant. Common regimens
include macrolides (azithromycin, 500 mg three times a week;
erythromycin, 500 mg twice daily), high-dose (3 g/d) amoxicillin or
alternating cycles of the antibiotics listed above given orally for 2–4
weeks. In patients with underlying cystic fibrosis, inhaled
aerosolized aminoglycosides reduce colonization by Pseudomonas
species, improve FEV1 and reduce hospitalizations; in non–cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis, adding inhaled tobramycin to oral
ciprofloxacin for acute exacerbations due to Pseudomonas
decreases microbial sputum burden but without apparent clinical
benefit. Complications of bronchiectasis include hemoptysis, cor
pulmonale, amyloidosis, and secondary visceral abscesses at distant
sites (eg, brain). Bronchoscopy is sometimes necessary to evaluate
hemoptysis, remove retained secretions, and rule out obstructing
airway lesions. Massive hemoptysis may require embolization of
bronchial arteries or surgical resection. Surgical resection is
otherwise reserved for the few patients with localized bronchiectasis
and adequate pulmonary function in whom conservative
management fails.
Ilowite J et al. Pharmacological treatment options for
bronchiectasis: focus on antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
agents. Drugs. 2009;69(4):407–19. [PMID: 19323585]
 
O'Donnell AE. Bronchiectasis. Chest. 2008 Oct;134(4):815–23.
[PMID: 18842914]
 
Pasteur MC et al. British Thoracic Society guideline for non-CF
bronchiectasis. Thorax. 2010 Jul;65 (Suppl 1):i1–58. [PMID:
20627931]
 
ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY MYCOSIS
Allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis is a pulmonary hyper-sensitivity
disorder caused by allergy to fungal antigens that colonize the
tracheobronchial tree. It usually occurs in atopic asthmatic
individuals who are 20–40 years of age, in response to antigens of
Aspergillus species. For this reason, the disorder is commonly
referred to as allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA).
Primary criteria for the diagnosis of ABPA include (1) a clinical
history of asthma, (2) peripheral eosinophilia, (3) immediate skin
reactivity to Aspergillus antigen, (4) precipitating antibodies to
Aspergillus antigen, (5) elevated serum IgE levels, (6) pulmonary
infiltrates (transient or fixed), and (7) central bronchiectasis. If the
first six of these seven primary criteria are present, the diagnosis is
almost certain. Secondary diagnostic criteria include identification of
Aspergillus in sputum, a history of brown-flecked sputum, and late
skin reactivity to Aspergillus antigen. High-dose prednisone (0.5–1
mg/kg orally per day) for at least 2 months is the treatment of
choice, and the response in early disease is usually excellent.
Depending on the overall clinical situation, prednisone can then be
cautiously tapered. Relapses are frequent, and protracted or
repeated treatment with corticosteroids is not uncommon. Patients
with corticosteroid-dependent disease may benefit from
itraconazole (200 mg orally three times a day with food for 3 days
followed by twice daily for at least 16 weeks) without added
toxicity. Bronchodilators (Table 9–6) are also helpful.
Complications include hemoptysis, severe bronchiectasis, and
pulmonary fibrosis.
Agarwal R. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Chest. 2009
Mar;135(3):805–26. [PMID: 19265090]
 
Riscili BP et al. Noninvasive pulmonary Aspergillus infections.
Clin Chest Med. 2009 Jun;30(2):315–35. [PMID: 19375638]
 
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic or recurrent cough, sputum production, dyspnea, and
wheezing.
 Recurrent infections or chronic colonization of the airways with H
influenzae, P aeruginosa, S aureus, or Burkholderia cepacia.
Bronchiectasis and scarring on chest radiographs.
 Airflow obstruction on spirometry.
 Pancreatic insufficiency, recurrent pancreatitis, distal intestinal
obstruction syndrome, chronic hepatic disease, nutritional
deficiencies, or male urogenital abnormalities.
 Sweat chloride concentration above 60 mEq/L on two occasions
or gene mutation known to cause cystic fibrosis.
 
 General Considerations
Cystic fibrosis is the most common cause of severe chronic lung
disease in young adults and the most common fatal hereditary
disorder of whites in the United States. It is an autosomal recessive
disorder affecting about 1 in 3200 whites; 1 in 25 is a carrier.
Cystic fibrosis is caused by abnormalities in a membrane chloride
channel (the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
[CFTR] protein) that results in altered chloride transport and water
flux across the apical surface of epithelial cells. Almost all exocrine
glands produce an abnormal mucus that obstructs glands and ducts.
Obstruction results in glandular dilation and damage to tissue. In the
respiratory tract, inadequate hydration of the tracheobronchial
epithelium impairs mucociliary function. High concentration of DNA
in airway secretions (due to chronic airway inflammation and
autolysis of neutrophils) increases sputum viscosity. Over 1000
mutations in the gene that encodes CFTR have been described, and
at least 230 mutations are known to be associated with clinical
abnormalities. The mutation referred to as Δ F508 accounts for
about 60% of cases of cystic fibrosis.
Over one-third of the nearly 30,000 cystic fibrosis patients in the
United States are adults. Because of the wide range of alterations
seen in the CFTR protein structure and function, cystic fibrosis in
adults may present with a variety of pulmonary and nonpulmonary
manifestations. Patients with cystic fibrosis have an increased risk of
malignancies of the gastrointestinal tract, osteopenia, and
arthropathies.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Cystic fibrosis should be suspected in a young adult with a history
of chronic lung disease (especially bronchiectasis), pancreatitis, or
infertility. Cough, sputum production, decreased exercise tolerance,
and recurrent hemoptysis are typical complaints. Patients also often
complain of facial (sinus) pain or pressure and purulent nasal
discharge. Digital clubbing, increased anteroposterior chest
diameter, hyperresonance to percussion, and apical crackles are
noted on physical examination. Sinus tenderness, purulent nasal
secretions, and nasal polyps may also be seen. Steatorrhea,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain are also common. Biliary cirrhosis and
gallstones may occur. Nearly all men with cystic fibrosis have
congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens with azoospermia.
B. Laboratory Findings
Arterial blood gas studies often reveal hypoxemia and, in advanced
disease, a chronic, compensated respiratory acidosis. Pulmonary
function studies show a mixed obstructive and restrictive pattern.
There is a reduction in FVC, airflow rates, and TLC. Air trapping
(high ratio of RV to TLC) and reduction in pulmonary diffusing
capacity are common.
C. Imaging
Hyperinflation is seen early in the disease process. Peribronchial
cuffing, mucus plugging, bronchiectasis (ring shadows and cysts),
increased interstitial markings, small rounded peripheral opacities,
and focal atelectasis may be seen separately or in various
combinations. Pneumothorax can also be seen. Thin-section CT
scanning may confirm the presence of bronchiectasis.
D. Diagnosis
The quantitative pilocarpine iontophoresis sweat test reveals
elevated sodium and chloride levels (> 60 mEq/L) in the sweat of
patients with cystic fibrosis. Two tests on different days are required
for accurate diagnosis. Facilities must perform enough tests to
maintain laboratory proficiency and quality. A normal sweat
chloride test does not exclude the diagnosis. Genotyping or other
alternative diagnostic studies (such as measurement of nasal
membrane potential difference, semen analysis, or assessment of
pancreatic function) should be pursued if the test is repeatedly
negative but there is a high clinical suspicion of cystic fibrosis.
Standard genotyping is a limited diagnostic tool because it screens
for only a fraction of the known cystic fibrosis mutations, although
complete genetic testing is available.
 Treatment
Early recognition and comprehensive multidisciplinary therapy
improve symptom control and the chances of survival. Referral to a
regional cystic fibrosis center is strongly recommended.
Conventional treatment programs focus on the following areas:
clearance and reduction of lower airway secretions, reversal of
bronchoconstriction, treatment of respiratory tract infections and
airway bacterial burden, pancreatic enzyme replacement, and
nutritional and psychosocial support (including genetic and
occupational counseling). The Pulmonary Therapies Committee,
established by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, has issued
evidenced-based recommendations regarding long-term use of
medications for maintenance of lung function and reduction of
exacerbations in patients with cystic fibrosis.
Clearance of lower airway secretions can be promoted by
postural drainage, chest percussion or vibration techniques, positive
expiratory pressure (PEP) or flutter valve breathing devices,
directed cough, and other breathing techniques; these approaches
require detailed patient instruction by experienced personnel.
Sputum viscosity is increased by the large quantities of extracellular
DNA that result from chronic airway inflammation and autolysis of
neutrophils. Inhaled recombinant human deoxyribonuclease
(rhDNase, dornase alpha) cleaves extracellular DNA in sputum;
when administered long-term at a daily nebulized dose of 2.5 mg,
this therapy leads to improved FEV1 and reduces the risk of cystic
fibrosis–related respiratory exacerbations and the need for
intravenous antibiotics. Pharyngitis, laryngitis, and voice alterations
are common adverse effects. Inhalation of hypertonic saline has
been associated with small improvements in pulmonary function and
fewer pulmonary exacerbations. The beneficial effects of hypertonic
saline may derive from improved airway mucous clearance.
Short-term antibiotics are used to treat active airway infections
based on results of culture and susceptibility testing of sputum. S
aureus (including methicillin-resistant strains) and a mucoid variant
o f P aeruginosa are commonly present. H influenzae,
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and B cepacia (a highly drug-
resistant 
organism) 
are 
occasionally 
isolated. Long-term
antibiotics (azithromycin, 500 mg orally three times a week, and
inhalation of an aerosolized tobramycin solution) are helpful in
slowing disease progression and reducing exacerbations in patients
with cultures of airway secretions persistently positive for P
aeruginosa.
Inhaled bronchodilators (eg, albuterol, two puffs every 4 hours
as needed) should be considered in patients who demonstrate an
increase of at least 12% in FEV1 after an inhaled bronchodilator.
Vaccination against pneumococcal infection and annual influenza
vaccination are advised. Screening of family members and genetic
counseling are suggested.
Lung transplantation is currently the only definitive treatment for
advanced cystic fibrosis. Double-lung or heart-lung transplantation
is required. A few transplant centers offer living lobar lung
transplantation to selected patients. The 3-year survival rate
following transplantation for cystic fibrosis is about 55%.
 Prognosis
The longevity of patients with cystic fibrosis is increasing, and the
median survival age is over 35 years. Death occurs from pulmonary
complications (eg, pneumonia, pneumothorax, or hemoptysis) or as
a result of terminal chronic respiratory failure and cor pulmonale.
Barto TL et al. Treatment of pulmonary exacerbations in adult
cystic fibrosis patients: a review. Hosp Pract (Minneap). 2010
Feb;38(1):26–34. [PMID: 20469621]
 
Flume PA et al. Cystic fibrosis pulmonary guidelines: chronic
medications for maintenance of lung health. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med. 2007 Nov 15;176(10):957–69. [PMID: 17761616]
 
Newton TJ. Respiratory care of the hospitalized patient with cystic
fibrosis. Respir Care. 2009 Jun;54(6):769–75. [PMID:
19467163]
 
O'Sullivan BP et al. Cystic fibrosis. Lancet. 2009 May 30;373
(9678): 1891–904. [PMID: 19403164]
 
BRONCHIOLITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Insidious onset of cough and dyspnea.
 Irreversible airflow obstruction on pulmonary function testing.
 Minimal findings on chest radiograph.
 Relevant exposure or risk factor: toxic fumes, viral infections,
organ transplantation, connective tissue disease.
 
 General Considerations
Bronchiolitis is a generic term applied to varied inflammatory
processes that affect the bronchioles, which are small conducting
airways < 2 mm in diameter. In infants and children, bronchiolitis is
common and usually caused by respiratory syncytial virus or
adenovirus infection. In adults, bronchiolitis is less common but is
encountered in multiple clinical settings. Disorders associated with
bronchiolitis include organ transplantation, connective tissue
diseases, and hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Inhalational injuries as
well as postinfectious and drug-induced causes are identified by
association with a known exposure or illness prior to the onset of
symptoms. Idiopathic cases are characterized by the insidious onset
of dyspnea or cough and include cryptogenic organizing pneumonitis
(COP).
The clinical approach to bronchiolitis divides patients into groups
based on etiology, but different clinical syndromes may have
identical histopathological findings. As a result, no single
classification scheme has been widely accepted, and there is an
overlapping array of terms to describe these disorders from the
viewpoints of the clinician, the pathologist, and the radiologist.
Histopathologic Findings
Acute bronchiolitis has a neutrophilic and mononuclear infiltration
in the absence of fibroblast proliferation or collagen deposition.
Constrictive bronchiolitis (also referred to as obliterative
bronchiolitis, or bronchiolitis obliterans) is characterized by patchy
chronic inflammation, concentric submucosal and peribronchiolar
fibrosis, and smooth muscle hypertrophy causing luminal obstruction
(obliteration).
In contrast to the minimally cellular pattern of constrictive
bronchiolitis, proliferative bronchiolitis occurs when there is an
organizing intraluminal exudate, consisting of fibroblasts, lipid laden
(“foamy”) macrophages, and other cells that obstruct the
bronchiolar lumen. These findings are more common than the
constrictive pattern. When the organizing intraluminal exudate
extends through bronchiole into the alveolar space, with prominent
intraluminal buds of fibroblasts embedded in immature collagen, the
proliferative pattern is referred to as cryptogenic organizing
pneumonitis (COP) formally referred to as bronchiolitis
obliterans with organizing pneumonia (BOOP) (see Table 9–
19) . Follicular bronchiolitis is characterized by chronic
peribronchiolar inflammation and hyperplastic lymphoid follicles with
reactive germinal centers arising from bronchus-associated
lymphoid tissue (BALT). Respiratory bronchiolitis is a disorder
of small airways in cigarette smokers characterized by accumulation
of pigmented alveolar macrophages within respiratory bronchioles,
associated with mild interstitial fibrosis and chronic inflammation. In
some patients, however, respiratory bronchiolitis causes diffuse
parenchymal infiltrates, a syndrome referred to as respiratory
bronchiolitis–associated interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD) and
considered with desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP) to
represent part of the spectrum of the smoking-related interstitial lung
diseases.
Diffuse panbronchiolitis is an idiopathic disorder of respiratory
bronchioles, characterized by a peribronchiolar mixed inflammatory
cell infiltrate and accumulation of lipid laden (“foamy”) macrophages
within the interstitium and alveolar spaces.
 Clinical Findings
Acute bronchiolitis is most commonly seen following viral infection
in children.
Constrictive bronchiolitis is relatively infrequent although it is
the most common finding following inhalation injury. It may also be
seen in rheumatoid arthritis; drug reactions; and chronic rejection
following heart-lung, lung, or bone marrow transplant. Patients with
constrictive bronchiolitis have airflow obstruction on spirometry;
minimal radiographic abnormalities; and a progressive, deteriorating
clinical course.
Proliferative bronchiolitis is associated with diverse pulmonary
disorders including infection, aspiration, ARDS, hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, connective tissue diseases, and organ transplantation.
Compared with constrictive bronchiolitis, proliferative bronchiolitis
is more likely to have an abnormal chest radiograph.
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonitis affects men and women
between the ages of 50 and 70 years, typically with a dry cough,
dyspnea, and constitutional symptoms that may be present for
weeks to months prior to seeking medical attention. A history of a
preceding viral illness is present in half of cases. Pulmonary function
testing typically reveals a restrictive ventilatory defect and impaired
oxygenation. The chest radiograph frequently shows bilateral
patchy, ground-glass or alveolar infiltrates, although other patterns
have been described (see Table 9–19).
Follicular bronchiolitis is most commonly associated with
connective tissue disease, especially rheumatoid arthritis, and with
immunodeficiency states.
Respiratory bronchiolitis usually occurs without symptoms or
physiologic evidence of lung impairment.
Diffuse panbronchiolitis is most frequently diagnosed in Japan.
Men are affected about twice as often as women, two-thirds are
nonsmokers, and most patients have a history of chronic
pansinusitis. Patients complain of dyspnea, cough, and sputum
production, and chest examination shows crackles and rhonchi.
Pulmonary function tests reveal obstructive abnormalities, and the
chest radiograph shows a distinct pattern of diffuse, small, nodular
shadows with hyperinflation.
 Treatment
Constrictive bronchiolitis is relatively unresponsive to
corticosteroids and is frequently progressive. Corticosteroids are
effective in two-thirds of patients with proliferative bronchiolitis,
and improvement can be prompt. Therapy is initiated with
prednisone at 1 mg/kg/d orally for 1–3 months. The dose is then
tapered slowly to 20–40 mg/d, depending on the response, and
weaned over the subsequent 3–6 months as tolerated. Relapses are
common if corticosteroids are stopped prematurely or tapered too
quickly. Most patients with COP recover following corticosteroid
treatment.
Drakopanagiotakis F et al. Organizing pneumonia. Am J Med Sci.
2008 Jan;335(1):34–9. [PMID: 18195581]
 
Pipavath SN et al. Imaging of Small Airway Disease (SAD).
Radiol Clin North Am. 2009 Mar;47(2):307–16. [PMID:
19249458]
 
Rice A et al. The pathologist's approach to small airways disease.
Histopathology. 2009 Jan;54(1):117–33. [PMID: 19187181]
 
Williams KM et al. Bronchiolitis obliterans after allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. JAMA. 2009 Jul 15;
302(3):306–14. [PMID: 19602690]
 
PULMONARY INFECTIONS
 
PNEUMONIA
1. Community-Acquired Pneumonia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever or hypothermia, tachypnea, cough with or without sputum,
dyspnea, chest discomfort, sweats or rigors (or both).
 Bronchial breath sounds or inspiratory crackles on chest
auscultation.
 Parenchymal opacity on chest radiograph.
 Occurs outside of the hospital or within 48 hours of hospital
admission in a patient not residing in a long-term care facility.
 
 General Considerations
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is a common disorder, with
approximately 4–5 million cases diagnosed each year in the United
States, 25% of which require hospitalization. It is the most deadly
infectious disease in the United States and the eighth leading cause
of death. Mortality in milder cases treated as outpatients is < 1%.
Among patients hospitalized for CAP, in-hospital mortality is
approximately 10–12% and 1-year mortality (in those over age 65)
is > 40%. Risk factors for the development of CAP include
advanced age; alcoholism; tobacco use; comorbid medical
conditions, especially asthma or COPD; and immunosuppression.
Markers of more severe illness are given in Table 9–9.
The patient's history, physical examination, and imaging studies
are essential to establishing a diagnosis of CAP. None of these
efforts identifies a specific microbiologic cause, however. Sputum
examination may be helpful in selected patients but 40% of patients
cannot produce an evaluable sputum sample and Gram stain and
culture lack sensitivity for the most common causes of pneumonia.
Since patient outcomes improve when the initial antibiotic choice is
appropriate for the infecting organism, the American Thoracic
Society and Infectious Disease Society of America recommend
empiric treatment based on epidemiologic data. Such treatment
improves initial antibiotic coverage, reduces unnecessary
hospitalization, and appears to improve 30-day survival.
Decisions regarding hospitalization and ICU care should be
based on prognostic criteria (see below).
 
Table 9–9. ATS/IDSA criteria for severe community-acquired
pneumonia.
 
Major criteria1
     Septic shock with need for vasopressor support
     Respiratory failure with need for mechanical ventilation
Minor criteria1
     Respiratory rate ≥ 30 breaths/min
     Hypoxemia, defined as a Pao2/Fio2 ≤ 250
     Hypothermia, with core temperature < 36.0°C
     Hypotension requiring aggressive intravenous fluid
resuscitation
     Confusion/disorientation
     Multilobar pulmonary opacities
     Leukopenia, due to infection, with white blood cell count
< 4.0 × 109/L
     Thrombocytopenia, with platelet count < 100 × 109/L
     Uremia, with blood urea nitrogen level ≥ 7.1 mmol/L
     Metabolic acidosis or elevated lactate level
1Patients meeting either major criterion or three or more minor criteria
generally require care in the intensive care unit. ATS/IDSA, American
Thoracic Society/Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Adapted, with permission, from Mandell LA et al. Infectious Diseases
Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on
the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect
Dis. 2007;44:S27–72. [PMID: 17278083]
 Definition & Pathogenesis
CAP is diagnosed outside of the hospital in ambulatory patients
who are not residents of nursing homes or other long-term care
facilities. It may also be diagnosed in a previously ambulatory
patient within 48 hours after admission to the hospital.
Pulmonary defense mechanisms (cough reflex, mucociliary
clearance system, immune responses) normally prevent the
development of lower respiratory tract infections following
aspiration of oropharyngeal secretions containing bacteria or
inhalation of infected aerosols. CAP occurs when there is a defect
in one or more of these normal defense mechanisms or when a large
infectious inoculum or a virulent pathogen overwhelms the immune
response.
Prospective studies fail to identify the cause of CAP in 40–60%
of cases; two or more causes are identified in up to 5% of cases.
Bacteria are more commonly identified than viruses. The most
common bacterial pathogen identified in most studies of CAP is S
pneumoniae, accounting for approximately two-thirds of bacterial
isolates. Other common bacterial pathogens include H influenzae,
M pneumoniae, C pneumoniae, S aureus, Neisseria
meningitidis, M catarrhalis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, other gram-
negative rods, and Legionella species. Common viral causes of
CAP include influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus,
and parainfluenza virus. A detailed assessment of epidemiologic risk
factors may aid in diagnosing pneumonias due to the following
uncommon causes: Chlamydophila psittaci (psittacosis), Coxiella
burnetii (Q fever), Francisella tularensis (tularemia), endemic
fungi (Blastomyces, Coccidioides, Histoplasma), and sin nombre
virus (hantavirus pulmonary syndrome).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with CAP experience an acute or subacute onset of
fever, cough with or without sputum production, and dyspnea.
Other common symptoms include sweats, chills, rigors, chest
discomfort, pleurisy, hemoptysis, fatigue, myalgias, anorexia,
headache, and abdominal pain.
Common physical findings include fever or hypothermia,
tachypnea, tachycardia, and arterial oxygen desaturation. Many
patients appear acutely ill. Chest examination often reveals
inspiratory crackles and bronchial breath sounds. Dullness to
percussion may be observed if lobar consolidation or a
parapneumonic pleural effusion is present. The clinical evaluation is
< 50% sensitive compared to chest imaging for the diagnosis of
CAP (see Imaging section below). In most patients, therefore, a
chest radiograph is essential to the evaluation of suspected CAP.
B. Diagnostic Testing
Diagnostic testing for a specific infectious cause of CAP is not
generally indicated in ambulatory patients treated as outpatients
because empiric antibiotic therapy is almost always effective in this
population. In ambulatory outpatients whose presentation (travel
history, exposure) suggests an etiology not covered by standard
therapy 
(eg, Coccidioides) or public health concerns (eg,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, influenza), diagnostic testing is
appropriate. Diagnostic testing is recommended in hospitalized
CAP patients for multiple reasons: the likelihood of an infectious
cause unresponsive to standard therapy is higher in more severe
illness, the inpatient setting allows narrowing of antibiotic coverage
as specific diagnostic information is available, and the yield of testing
is improved in more acutely ill patients.
Diagnostic testing results are used to guide initial antibiotic
therapy, permit adjustment of empirically chosen therapy to a
specific infectious cause or resistance pattern, and facilitate
epidemiologic analysis. There are three widely available, rapid
point-of-care diagnostic tests that may guide initial therapy: the
sputum Gram stain, urinary antigen tests for S pneumonia and
Legionella species, and rapid antigen detection tests for influenza.
Sputum Gram stain is neither sensitive nor specific for S
pneumonia, the most common cause of CAP. The usefulness of a
sputum Gram stain lies in broadening initial coverage in patients to
be hospitalized for CAP, most commonly to cover S aureus
(including community-acquired methicillin-resistant strains, CA-
MRSA) or gram-negative rods. Urinary antigen assays for
Legionella pneumophilia and S pneumoniae are at least as
sensitive and specific as sputum Gram stain and culture. Results are
available immediately and are not affected by early initiation of
antibiotic therapy. Positive tests may allow narrowing of initial
antibiotic coverage. Rapid influenza testing has intermediate
sensitivity but high specificity. Positive tests may reduce unnecessary
antibacterial use and direct isolation of hospitalized patients.
Additional microbiologic testing including pre-antibiotic sputum
and blood cultures (at least two sets with needle sticks at separate
sites) has been standard practice for patients with CAP who require
hospitalization. The yield of blood and sputum cultures is low.
However, false-positive results are common, and the impact of
culture results on patient outcomes is small. As a result, targeted
testing based on specific indications is recommended (Table 9–10).
Culture results are not available prior to initiation of antibiotic
therapy. Their role is to allow narrowing of initial empiric antibiotic
coverage, adjustment of coverage based on specific antibiotic
resistance patterns, to identify unsuspected pathogens not covered
by initial therapy, and to provide information for epidemiologic
analysis.
Apart from microbiologic testing, hospitalized patients should
undergo complete blood count with differential and a chemistry
panel (including serum glucose, electrolytes, urea nitrogen,
creatinine, bilirubin, and liver enzymes). Hypoxemic patients should
have arterial blood gases sampled. Test results help assess severity
of illness and guide evaluation and management. HIV testing should
be considered in all adult patients, and performed in those with risk
factors.
C. Imaging
A pulmonary opacity on chest radiography or CT scan is required
to establish a diagnosis of CAP. Radiographic findings range from
patchy airspace opacities to lobar consolidation with air
bronchograms to diffuse alveolar or interstitial opacities. Additional
findings can include pleural effusions and cavitation. Chest imaging
cannot identify a specific microbiologic cause of CAP, however.
There is no pattern of radiographic abnormalities pathognomonic of
any infectious cause.
Chest imaging may help assess severity and response to therapy
over time. Progression of pulmonary opacities during antibiotic
therapy or lack of radiographic improvement over time are poor
prognostic signs and also raise concerns about secondary or
alternative pulmonary processes. Clearing of pulmonary opacities in
patients with CAP can take 6 weeks or longer. Clearance is usually
quickest in younger patients, non-smokers, and those with only
single lobe involvement.
D. Special Examinations
Patients with CAP who have significant pleural fluid collections may
require diagnostic thoracentesis (glucose, lactate dehydrogenase
(LD), and total protein levels; leukocyte count with differential; pH
determination) with pleural fluid Gram stain and culture. Positive
pleural cultures indicate the need for tube thoracostomy drainage.
Sputum induction and fiberoptic bronchoscopy to obtain samples
of lower respiratory secretions are indicated in patients who cannot
provide expectorated sputum samples or who may have
Pneumocystis jiroveci or M tuberculosis pneumonia.
Procalcitonin is a calcitonin precursor released in response to
bacterial toxins and inhibited by viral infections. This divergent
response to bacterial and viral infections offers laboratory support
for a clinical judgment of a viral process in patients with lower
respiratory symptoms. Multiple clinical trials have shown that
procalcitonin measurement allows clinicians to reduce both initial
administration of antibiotics and the duration of antibiotic therapy in
CAP without compromising patient outcomes.
 
Table 9–10. Clinical indications for more extensive diagnostic
testing of patients with CAP.
 
1If intubated, endotracheal aspirate, or bronchoscopic or non-
bronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage.
2Fungal and mycobacterial cultures.
3For pathogens related to specific travel and exposure history, see
reference below.
4Thoracentesis and pleural fluid cultures.
Adapted, with permission, from Mandell LA et al. Infectious
Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus
guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia in
adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44:S27–72. [PMID: 17278083]
Serologic assays, polymerase chain reaction tests, specialized
culture tests, and other new diagnostic tests for organisms such as
viruses, Legionella, M pneumoniae, and C pneumoniae may be
performed when these diagnoses are suspected.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of symptoms and signs of lower
respiratory tract infection is extensive and includes upper respiratory
tract infections, reactive airway diseases, congestive heart failure,
cryptogenic organizing pneumonitis, lung cancer, pulmonary
vasculitis, pulmonary thromboembolic disease, and atelectasis.
 Treatment
Two general principles guide antibiotic therapy once the diagnosis
of CAP is established: prompt initiation of a drug to which the
etiologic pathogen is susceptible.
In patients who require specific diagnostic evaluation, sputum and
culture specimens should be obtained prior to initiation of
antibiotics. Since early administration of antibiotics to acutely ill
patients is associated with improved outcomes, obtaining diagnostic
specimens or test results should not delay the initial dose of
antibiotics by more than 6 hours from presentation.
Optimal antibiotic therapy would be pathogen directed, but a
definitive microbiologic diagnosis is rarely available on or within 6
hours of presentation. A syndromic approach to therapy, based on
clinical presentation and chest imaging, does not reliably predict the
microbiology of CAP. Therefore, initial antibiotic choices are
typically empiric, based on acuity (treatment as an outpatient,
inpatient, or ICU), patient risk factors for specific pathogens, and
local antibiotic resistance patterns (Table 9–11).
Since S pneumoniae remains a common cause of CAP in all
patient groups, local prevalence of drug-resistant S pneumoniae
significantly affects initial antibiotic choice. Prior treatment with one
antibiotic in a pharmacologic class (eg, β-lactam, macrolide,
fluoroquinolone) predisposes the emergence of drug-resistant S
pneumoniae, with resistance developing against that class of
antibiotics to which the pathogen was previously exposed.
Definitions of resistance have shifted based on observations of
continued clinical efficacy at achievable serum levels. In CAP, for
parenteral penicillin G or oral amoxicillin, susceptible strains have a
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) ≤ 2 mcg/mL; intermediate
resistance is defined as an MIC between 2 mcg/mL and 4 mcg/mL
because treatment failures are uncommon with MIC ≤ 4 mcg/mL.
Macrolide resistance has increased; approximately one-third of S
pneumoniae isolates now show in vitro resistance to macrolides.
Treatment failures have been reported but remain rare compared to
the number of patients treated; current in vivo efficacy appears to
justify maintaining macrolides as first-line therapy except in areas
where there is a high prevalence of resistant strains. S pneumoniae
resistant to fluoroquinolones is rare in the United States (1% to
levofloxacin, 2% to ciprofloxacin) but is increasing.
Community-acquired methicillin-resistant S aureus (CA-MRSA)
is genetically and phenotypically different from hospital-acquired
MRSA strains. Most produce Panton-Valentine leukocidin, a
cytotoxin associated with tissue necrosis. CA-MRSA is a rare
cause of necrotizing pneumonia, empyema, respiratory failure, and
shock; it appears to be associated with prior influenza infection.
Linezolid may be preferred to vancomycin in treatment of CA-
MRSA pulmonary infection because linezolid may also act to
reduce Panton-Valentine leukocidin toxin production. For
expanded discussions of specific antibiotics, see Chapter 30.
A. Treatment of Outpatients
See Table 9–11 for specific drug dosages. The most common
etiologies of CAP in outpatients who do not require hospitalization
a r e S pneumoniae; M pneumoniae; C pneumoniae; and
respiratory viruses, including influenza. For previously healthy
patients with no recent (90 days) use of antibiotics, the
recommended treatment is a macrolide (clarithromycin or
azithromycin) or doxycycline.
In patients at risk for drug resistance (antibiotic therapy within the
past 
90 
days, 
age 
> 
65 
years, 
comorbid 
illness,
immunosuppression, exposure to a child in daycare), the
recommended treatment is a respiratory fluoroquinolone
(moxifloxacin, gemifloxacin, or levofloxacin) or a macrolide plus a
β-lactam (high-dose amoxicillin and amoxicillin-clavulanate are
preferred to cefpodoxime and cefuroxime).
In regions where there is a high incidence of macrolide-resistant S
pneumoniae, patients with no comorbidities may have a β-lactam
added to a macrolide or use a respiratory fluoroquinolone as initial
therapy.
There are limited data to guide recommendations for duration of
treatment. The decision should be influenced by the severity of
illness, the etiologic pathogen, response to therapy, other medical
problems, and complications. Most expert recommendations
suggest a minimum of 5 days of therapy and to continue antibiotics
until the patient is afebrile for 48–72 hours. There appears to be no
advantage to routinely extending antibiotic therapy beyond 3 days
following clinical improvement with defervescence.
B. Treatment of Hospitalized Patients
The most common etiologies of CAP in patients who require
hospitalization but not intensive care are S pneumoniae, M
pneumoniae, C pneumoniae, H influenza, Legionella species,
and respiratory viruses. Some patients have aspiration as an
immediate precipitant to the CAP without a specific bacterial
etiology. First-line therapy in hospitalized patients is a respiratory
fluoroquinolone (eg, moxifloxacin, gemifloxacin, or levofloxacin) or
the combination of a macrolide (clarithromycin or azithromycin) plus
a β-lactam (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or ampicillin) (see Table 9–
11).
Almost all patients who are admitted to a hospital for treatment
of CAP receive intravenous antibiotics. However, no studies
demonstrated superior outcomes in hospitalized patients who
received intravenous antibiotics compared with those who received
oral antibiotics, as long as patients were able to tolerate the oral
therapy and the drug was well absorbed. Duration of antibiotic
treatment is the same as for outpatients with CAP.
 
Table 9–11. Recommended empiric antibiotics for community-
acquired pneumonia.
 
Outpatient management
 
1. For previously healthy patients who have not taken
antibiotics within the past 3 months:
a. A macrolide (clarithromycin, 500 mg orally twice a day;
or azithromycin, 500 mg orally as a first dose and then 250
mg orally daily for 4 days, or 500 mg orally daily for 3
days), or
b. Doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice a day.
 
2. For patients with such comorbid medical conditions as
chronic heart, lung, liver, or renal disease; diabetes
mellitus; 
alcoholism; 
malignancy; 
asplenia;
immunosuppressant 
conditions 
or 
use 
of
immunosuppressive drugs; or use of antibiotics within the
previous 3 months (in which case, an alternative from a
different antibiotic class should be selected):
a. A respiratory fluoroquinolone (moxifloxacin, 400 mg
orally daily; gemifloxacin, 320 mg orally daily; levofloxacin,
750 mg orally daily) or
b. A macrolide (as above) plus a β-lactam (amoxicillin, 1 g
orally three times a day; amoxicillin-clavulanate, 2 g orally
twice a day are preferred to cefpodoxime, 200 mg orally
twice a day; cefuroxime, 500 mg orally twice a day).
 
3. In regions with a high rate (> 25%) of infection with high
level 
(MIC 
≥ 
16 
mcg/mL) 
macrolide-resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae, consider use of alternative
agents listed above in (2) for patients without
comorbidities.
 
Inpatient management not requiring intensive care
 
1. A respiratory fluoroquinolone
a. See above for oral therapy.
b. For intravenous therapy, moxifloxacin, 400 mg daily;
levofloxacin, 750 mg daily; ciprofloxacin, 400 mg every 8–
12 hours or
 
2. A macrolide plus a β-lactam
a. See above for oral therapy.
b. For intravenous therapy, ampicillin, 1–2 g every 4–6
hours; cefotaxime, 1–2 g every 4–12 hours; ceftriaxone,
1–2 g every 12–24 hours.
 
Inpatient intravenous management requiring intensive care
 
1. Azithromycin or a respiratory fluoroquinolone plus an
antipneumococcal β-lactam (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or
ampicillin-sulbactam, 1.5–3 g every 6 hours).
 
2. For patients allergic to β-lactam antibiotics, a
fluoroquinolone plus aztreonam (1–2 g every 6–12 hours).
 
3. For patients at risk for Pseudomonas infection
a. An antipneumococcal, antipseudomonal β-lactam
(piperacillin-tazobactam, 3.375–4.5 g every 6 hours;
cefipime, 1–2 g twice a day; imipenem, 0.5–1 g every 6–8
hours; meropenem, 1 g every 8 hours) plus ciprofloxacin
(400 mg every 8–12 hours) or levofloxacin, or
b. 
The 
above 
β-lactam plus an aminoglycoside
(gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, all weight-based
dosing administered daily adjusted to appropriate trough
levels) plus azithromycin or a respiratory fluoroquinolone.
 
4. 
For 
patients 
at 
risk 
for 
methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infection, add vancomycin
(interval dosing based on renal function to achieve serum
tough concentration 15–20 mcg/mL) or linezolid (600 mg
twice a day).
 
MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration.
Adapted, with permission, from Mandell LA et al. Infectious Diseases
Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on
the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect
Dis. 2007;44:S27–72. [PMID: 17278083]
The most common etiologies of CAP in patients who require
admission to intensive care are S pneumoniae, Legionella species ,
H influenza, Enterobacteriaceae 
species , S aureus and
Pseudomonas species. First-line therapy in ICU patients with CAP
is azithromycin or a respiratory fluoroquinolone (moxifloxacin,
gemifloxacin, or levofloxacin) plus an antipneumococcal β-lactam
(cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or ampicillin-sulbactam). In patients at risk
f o r Pseudomonas 
infection, 
use 
an 
antipneumococcal,
antipseudomonal β-lactam (piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime,
imipenem, meropenem) plus ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin; the
above antipneumococcal β-lactam plus an aminoglycoside
(gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin) plus azithromycin or a
respiratory fluoroquinolone (moxifloxacin, gemifloxacin, or
levofloxacin).
 Prevention
Polyvalent 
pneumococcal 
vaccine 
(containing 
capsular
polysaccharide antigens of 23 common strains of S pneumoniae)
has the potential to prevent or lessen the severity of the majority of
pneumococcal infections in immunocompetent patients. Indications
for pneumococcal vaccination include age ≥ 65 years or any
chronic illness that increases the risk of CAP (see Chapter 30).
Immunocompromised patients and those at highest risk for fatal
pneumococcal infections should receive a single revaccination 6
years after the first vaccination. Immunocompetent persons 65
years of age or older should receive a second dose of vaccine if the
patient first received the vaccine 6 or more years previously and
was under 65 years old at the time of vaccination.
The seasonal influenza vaccine is effective in preventing severe
disease due to influenza virus with a resulting positive impact on
both primary influenza pneumonia and secondary bacterial
pneumonias. The seasonal influenza vaccine is administered annually
to persons at risk for complications of influenza infection (age ≥ 65
years, residents of long-term care facilities, patients with pulmonary
or cardiovascular disorders, patients recently hospitalized with
chronic metabolic disorders) as well as health care workers and
others who are able to transmit influenza to high-risk patients.
Hospitalized patients who would benefit from pneumococcal and
influenza vaccines should be vaccinated during hospitalization. The
vaccines can be given simultaneously, and there are no
contraindications to use immediately after an episode of pneumonia.
 When to Admit
Once a diagnosis of CAP is made, the first management decision is
to determine the site of care: Is it safe to treat the patient at home or
does he or she require hospital or intensive care admission? There
are two widely used clinical prediction rules available to guide
admission and triage decisions, the Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI)
and the CURB-65.
The PSI is a validated prediction model that uses 20 items from
demographics, medical history, physical examination, laboratory
and imaging to stratify patients into five risk groups. The PSI is
weighted toward discrimination at low predicted mortality. In
conjunction with clinical judgment, it facilitates safe decisions to
treat CAP in the outpatient setting. An on-line PSI risk calculator is
available at http://pda.ahrq.gov/clinic/psi/psicalc.asp.
The CURB-65 assesses five simple, independent predictors of
increased mortality (confusion, uremia, respiratory rate, blood
pressure and age > 65) to calculate a 30-day predicted mortality. A
modified version (CRB-65) dispenses with serum blood urea
nitrogen and eliminates the need for laboratory testing. The CURB-
65 has the advantage of simplicity. Compared with the PSI, it is less
discriminating at low mortality but excellent at identifying patients
with high mortality who may benefit from ICU level care. Expert
opinion suggests that patients meeting either major criterion or three
or more minor criteria of illness severity generally require ICU level
care (see Table 9–9).
In addition to pneumonia-specific issues, good clinical practice
always makes an admission decision in light of the whole patient.
Additional factors that suggest the need for inpatient hospitalization
include the following:
 
•    Exacerbations of underlying disease that would benefit
from hospitalization.
•    Other medical or psychosocial needs (such as cognitive
dysfunction, psychiatric disease, homelessness, drug
abuse, lack of outpatient resources, or poor overall
functional status).
•    Failure of outpatient therapy, including inability to
maintain oral intake and medications.
Mandell LA et al. Infectious Diseases Society of
America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the
management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin
Infect Dis. 2007 Mar 1;44(Suppl 2):S27–72. [PMID: 17278083]
 
Mizgerd JP. Acute lower respiratory tract infection. N Engl J Med.
2008 Feb 14;358(7):716–27. [PMID: 18272895]
 
Restrepo MI et al. Severe community-acquired pneumonia. Infect
Dis Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;23(3):503–20. [PMID: 19665080]
 
Schuetz P et al; ProHOSP Study Group. Effect of procalcitonin-
based guidelines vs standard guidelines on antibiotic use in lower
respiratory tract infections: the ProHOSP randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2009 Sep 9;302(10):1059–66. [PMID: 19738090]
 
2. Nosocomial Pneumonia (Hospital-Acquired, Ventilator-
Associated, and Health Care–Associated)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) occurs more than 48 hours
after admission to the hospital or other health care facility and
excludes any infection present at the time of admission.
 Health care–associated pneumonia (HCAP) occurs in community
members whose extensive contact with healthcare has changed
their risk for virulent and drug resistant organisms.
 At least two of the following: fever, leukocytosis, purulent
sputum.
 New or progressive parenchymal opacity on chest radiograph.
 Especially common in patients requiring intensive care or
mechanical ventilation.
 
 General Considerations
Hospitalized patients carry different flora with different resistance
patterns than healthy patients in the community, and their health
status may place them at higher risk for more severe infection. The
diagnostic approach and antibiotic treatment of patients with
hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) is, therefore, different from
patients with CAP. Similarly, management of patients in whom
pneumonia develops following endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation (ventilator-associated pneumonia or VAP)
should address issues specific to this group of patients. Some
community members have extensive contact with the healthcare
system and carry flora that more closely resemble hospitalized
patients than healthy community residents. When pneumonia
develops in these persons, the infection is referred to as health
care–associated pneumonia (HCAP). Initial management and
antibiotic therapy should be targeted to the common flora and
specific risk factors for severe disease.
Considered 
together, 
these 
nosocomial 
pneumonias
(HAP/VAP/HCAP) represent an important cause of morbidity and
mortality despite widespread use of preventive measures, advances
in diagnostic testing, and potent new antimicrobial agents. HAP is
the second most common cause of infection among hospital
inpatients and is the leading cause of death due to infection with
mortality rates ranging from 20% to 50%. While a minority of cases
occurs in ICU patients, the highest-risk patients are those in ICUs
or who are being mechanically ventilated; these patients also
experience higher morbidity and mortality from HAP. As
management of more chronic illnesses shifts to the outpatient setting,
more cases of HCAP are caused by unusual organisms, and there is
a high frequency of drug resistance. Definitive identification of the
infectious cause of a lower respiratory infection is rarely available on
presentation, thus, rather than pathogen-directed antibiotic
treatment, the choice of empiric therapy is informed by
epidemiologic and patient data.
 
Table 9–12. Risk factors for health care–associated pneumonia.
 
•    Antibiotic therapy in the preceding 90 days.
•    Acute care hospitalization for at least 2 days in the
preceding 90 days.
•    Residence in a nursing home or extended care facility.
•    Home infusion therapy, including chemotherapy, within
the past 30 days.
•    Long-term dialysis within the past 30 days.
•    Home wound care.
•    Family member with an infection involving a multiple
drug-resistant pathogen.
•    Immunosuppressive disease or immunosuppressive
therapy.
Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-acquired, ventilator-
associated, and healthcare-associated pneumonia 2005; 171:388–416 ©
American Thoracic Society [PMID:15699079]
 
Table 9–13. Organisms prevalent in nosocomial pneumonias.1
 
•    Streptococcus pneumonia, often drug resistant, in
HCAP
•    Staphylococcus aureus, methicillin-sensitive (MSSA)
•    S aureus, methicillin-resistant (MRSA)
•    Gram-negative rods, non-ESBL
•    ESBL-producing gram-negative rods including
Klebsiella pneumonia, Escherichia coli and Enterobacter
species
•    Pseudomonas aeruginosa
•    Acinetobacter species
ESBL, extended spectrum β-lactamase producing.
1Nosocomial pneumonias include hospital-associated pneumonia (HAP),
ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), and health care–associated
pneumonia (HCAP).
 Definition & Pathogenesis
HAP develops more than 48 hours after admission to the hospital
and VAP develops in a mechanically ventilated patient more than
48 hours after endotracheal intubation. HCAP is defined as
pneumonia that occurs in a nonhospitalized patient with extensive
healthcare contact, and the risk factors for HCAP are outlined in
Table 9–12.
Three factors distinguish nosocomial pneumonia from CAP: (1)
different infectious causes; (2) different antibiotic susceptibility
patterns, specifically, a higher incidence of drug resistance; and (3)
the patients’ underlying health status that puts them at risk for more
severe infections. Since access to the lower respiratory tract occurs
primarily through microaspiration, nosocomial pneumonia starts with
a change in upper respiratory tract flora. Colonization of the
pharynx and possibly the stomach with bacteria is the most
important step in the pathogenesis of nosocomial pneumonia.
Pharyngeal colonization is promoted by exogenous factors (eg,
instrumentation of the upper airway with nasogastric and
endotracheal tubes; contamination by dirty hands, equipment, and
contaminated aerosols; and treatment with broad-spectrum
antibiotics that promote the emergence of drug-resistant organisms)
and patient factors (eg, malnutrition, advanced age, altered
consciousness, swallowing disorders, and underlying pulmonary and
systemic diseases). Within 48 hours of admission, 75% of seriously
ill hospitalized patients have their upper airway colonized with
organisms from the hospital environment.
Impaired cellular and mechanical defense mechanisms in the lungs
of hospitalized patients raise the risk of infection after aspiration has
occurred. Tracheal intubation increases the risk of lower respiratory
infection by mechanical obstruction of the trachea, impairment of
mucociliary clearance, trauma to the mucociliary escalator system,
and interference with coughing. Tight adherence of bacteria such as
Pseudomonas to the tracheal epithelium and the biofilm that lines
the endotracheal tube makes clearance of these organisms from the
lower airway difficult.
The role of the stomach in the pathogenesis of HCAP remains
controversial. Observational studies have suggested that elevation of
gastric pH due to antacids, H2-receptor antagonists, proton pump
inhibitors (PPIs), or enteral feeding is associated with gastric
microbial overgrowth, tracheo-bronchial colonization, and
HAP/VAP. Sucralfate, a cytoprotective agent that does not alter
gastric pH, is associated with a trend toward a lower incidence of
VAP. The Infectious Disease Society of America recommends that
acid suppressive medications (H2-receptor antagonists and PPIs)
only be given to patients at high risk for stress gastritis.
The microbiology of the nosocomial pneumonias differs from
CAP but is substantially the same among HAP, VAP, and HCAP
(Table 9–13). The most common organisms responsible for HAP
include S aureus (both methicillin-sensitive S aureus and MRSA),
P aeruginosa, gram-negative rods including non-extended
spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) producing and ESBL-producing
(Enterobacter species, K pneumoniae, and Escherichia coli).
VAP patients may be infected with Acinetobacter species and
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. HCAP patients may have
common organisms (S pneumoniae, H influenzae) that are more
likely to be drug resistant, or flora that resembles HAP. Anaerobic
organisms (bacteroides, anaerobic streptococci, fusobacterium)
may also cause pneumonia in the hospitalized patient; when isolated,
they are commonly part of a polymicrobial flora. Mycobacteria,
fungi, chlamydiae, viruses, rickettsiae, and protozoal organisms are
uncommon causes of nosocomial pneumonias.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms and signs associated with nosocomial pneumonias
are nonspecific; however, two or more clinical findings (fever,
leukocytosis, purulent sputum) in the setting of a new or progressive
pulmonary opacity on chest radio-graph are approximately 70%
sensitive and 75% specific for the diagnosis of VAP in one study.
Other findings include those listed above for CAP.
The differential diagnosis of new lower respiratory tract
symptoms and signs in hospitalized patients includes congestive
heart 
failure, 
atelectasis, 
aspiration, 
ARDS, 
pulmonary
thromboembolism, pulmonary hemorrhage, and drug reactions.
B. Laboratory Findings
Diagnostic evaluation for suspected nosocomial pneumonia includes
blood cultures from two different sites. Blood cultures can identify
the pathogen in up to 20% of all patients with nosocomial
pneumonias; positivity is associated with increased risk of
complications and other sites of infection. Blood counts and clinical
chemistry tests do not establish a specific diagnosis of HCAP;
however, they help define the severity of illness and identify
complications. The assessment of oxygenation by an arterial blood
gas or pulse oximetry determination helps define the severity of
illness and determines the need assisted ventilation. Thoracentesis
for pleural fluid analysis should be considered in patients with
pleural effusions.
Examination of sputum is attended by the same disadvantages as
in CAP. Gram stains and cultures of sputum are neither sensitive nor
specific in the diagnosis of nosocomial pneumonias. The
identification of a bacterial organism by culture of sputum does not
prove that the organism is a lower respiratory tract pathogen.
However, it can be used to help identify bacterial antibiotic
sensitivity patterns and as a guide to adjusting empiric therapy.
C. Imaging
Radiographic findings in HAP/VAP are nonspecific and often
confounded by other processes that led initially to hospitalization or
ICU admission. (See also CAP section above.)
D. Special Examinations
Endotracheal aspiration using a sterile suction catheter and
fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage or a
protected specimen brush can be used to obtain lower respiratory
tract secretions for analysis, most commonly in patients with VAP.
Endotracheal aspiration cultures have significant negative predictive
value but limited positive predictive value in the diagnosis of specific
infectious causes of HAP/VAP. An invasive diagnostic approach
using quantitative culture of bronchoalveolar lavage samples or
protected specimen brush samples in patients in whom VAP is
suspected leads to significantly less antibiotic use, earlier attenuation
of organ dysfunction, and fewer deaths at 14 days. Measurement of
procalcitonin levels holds promise as a noninvasive strategy to
distinguish bacterial pneumonia from noninfectious causes of fever
with pulmonary infiltrates in hospitalized patients.
 Treatment
Treatment of the nosocomial pneumonias, like treatment of CAP, is
usually empiric (Table 9–14). Because of the high mortality rate,
therapy should be started as soon as pneumonia is suspected. There
is no consensus on the best regimens because this patient population
is heterogeneous and local flora and resistance patterns must be
taken into account.
 
Table 9–14. Recommended empirical antibiotics for nosocomial
pneumonias.1
 
When there is low risk for multiple drug–resistant
pathogens, use one of the following:
     Gemifloxacin, 320 mg orally daily
     Moxifloxacin, 400 mg orally or intravenously daily
     Levofloxacin, 750 mg orally or intravenously daily
     Ciprofloxacin, 400 mg intravenously every 8–12 hours
     Ampicillin-sulbactam, 1.5–3 g intravenously every 6
hours
     Piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375–4.5 g intravenously
every 6 hours
     Ertapenem, 1 g intravenously daily
When there is higher risk for multiple drug-resistant
pathogens, use one agent from each of the following
categories:
1. Antipseudomonal coverage
a. Cefipime, 1–2 g intravenously twice a day or
ceftazidime, 1–2 g intravenously every 8 hours
b. Imipenem, 0.5–1 g intravenously every 6–8 hours or
meropenem, 1 g intravenously every 8 hours
c. Piperacillin-tazobactam, 3.375–4.5 g intravenously
every 6 hours
d. For penicillin allergic patients, aztreonam, 1–2 g
intravenously every 6–12 hours
2. A second antipseudomonal agent
a. 
Levofloxacin, 
750 
mg 
intravenously 
daily or
ciprofloxacin, 400 mg intravenously every 8–12 hours
b. Intravenous gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, all
weight-based dosing administered daily adjusted to
appropriate trough levels
3. Coverage for MRSA if appropriate with either
a. Intravenous vancomycin (interval dosing based on renal
function to achieve serum trough concentration 15–20
mcg/mL) or
b. Linezolid, 600 mg intravenously twice a day
1Nosocomial pneumonias includes hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP),
ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), and health care–associated
pneumonia (HCAP).
MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Data from: American Thoracic Society, Infectious Diseases Society of
America. Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-acquired,
ventilator-associated and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med. 2005;171(4):388-416. [PMID: 15699079]
After results of sputum, blood, and pleural fluid cultures are
available, it may be possible to de-escalate initially broad therapy.
Duration of antibiotic therapy should be individualized based on the
pathogen, severity of illness, response to therapy, and comorbid
conditions. Therapy for gram-negative bacterial pneumonia is
typically continued for at least 8 days. Data from a large trial
assessing treatment outcomes in VAP suggest that 8 days of
antibiotics is as effective as 15 days, except in cases caused by P
aeruginosa.
For expanded discussions of specific antibiotics, see Chapter 30.
Bouadma L et al; for the PRORATA trial group. Use of
procalcitonin to reduce patients’ exposure to antibiotics in intensive
p
p
p
care units (PRORATA trial): a multicentre randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2010 Jan 22. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
20097417]
 
Brito V et al. Healthcare-associated pneumonia is a heterogeneous
disease, and all patients do not need the same broad-spectrum
antibiotic therapy as complex nosocomial pneumonia. Curr Opin
Infect Dis. 2009 Jun;22(3):316–25. [PMID: 19352176]
 
Klompas M. Does this patient have ventilator-associated
pneumonia JAMA. 2007 Apr 11;297(14):1583–93. [PMID:
17426278]
 
O'Grady NP et al. Guidelines for evaluation of new fever in
critically ill adult patients: 2008 update from the American College
of Critical Care Medicine and the Infectious Diseases Society of
America. Crit Care Med. 2008 Apr;36(4):1330–49. [PMID:
18379262]
 
Sinuff T et al; Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. Ventilator-
associated pneumonia: improving outcomes through guideline
implementation. J Crit Care. 2008 Mar;23(1):118–25. [PMID:
18359429]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Ventilator-associated
pneumonia. JAMA. 2008 Aug 20;300(7):864. [PMID:
18714069]
 
Venditti M et al; Study Group of the Italian Society of Internal
Medicine. Outcomes of patients hospitalized with community-
acquired, health care-associated, and hospital-acquired
pneumonia. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Jan 6;150(1):19–26. [PMID:
19124816]
 
3. Anaerobic Pneumonia & Lung Abscess
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of or predisposition to aspiration.
 Indolent symptoms, including fever, weight loss, malaise.
 Poor dentition.
 Foul-smelling purulent sputum (in many patients).
 Infiltrate in dependent lung zone, with single or multiple areas of
cavitation or pleural effusion.
 
 General Considerations
Aspiration of small amounts of oropharyngeal secretions occurs
during sleep in normal individuals but rarely causes disease.
Sequelae of aspiration of larger amounts of material include
nocturnal asthma, chemical pneumonitis, mechanical obstruction of
airways by particulate matter, bronchiectasis, and pleuropulmonary
infection. Individuals predisposed to disease induced by aspiration
include those with depressed levels of consciousness due to drug or
alcohol use, seizures, general anesthesia, or central nervous system
disease; those with impaired deglutition due to esophageal disease
or neurologic disorders; and those with tracheal or nasogastric
tubes, which disrupt the mechanical defenses of the airways.
Periodontal disease and poor dental hygiene, which increase the
number of anaerobic bacteria in aspirated material, are associated
with a greater likelihood of anaerobic pleuropulmonary infection.
Aspiration of infected oropharyngeal contents initially leads to
pneumonia in dependent lung zones, such as the posterior segments
of the upper lobes and superior and basilar segments of the lower
lobes. Body position at the time of aspiration determines which lung
zones are dependent. The onset of symptoms is insidious. By the
time the patient seeks medical attention, necrotizing pneumonia, lung
abscess, or empyema may be apparent.
Most aspiration patients with necrotizing pneumonia, lung
abscess, and empyema are found to be infected with multiple
species of anaerobic bacteria. Most of the remainder are infected
with 
both 
anaerobic 
and 
aerobic 
bacteria. Prevotella
melaninogenica, 
Peptostreptococcus, 
Fusobacterium
nucleatum, and Bacteroides species are commonly isolated
anaerobic bacteria.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with anaerobic pleuropulmonary infection usually present
with constitutional symptoms such as fever, weight loss, and
malaise. Cough with expectoration of foul-smelling purulent sputum
suggests anaerobic infection, though the absence of productive
cough does not rule out such an infection. Dentition is often poor.
Patients are rarely edentulous; if so, an obstructing bronchial lesion
is usually present.
B. Laboratory Findings
Expectorated sputum is inappropriate for culture of anaerobic
organisms because of contaminating mouth flora. Representative
material for culture can be obtained only by transthoracic aspiration,
thoracentesis, or bronchoscopy with a protected brush.
Transthoracic aspiration is rarely indicated, because drainage
occurs via the bronchus and anaerobic pleuropulmonary infections
usually respond well to empiric therapy.
C. Imaging
The different types of anaerobic pleuropulmonary infection are
distinguished on the basis of their radiographic appearance. Lung
abscess appears as a thick-walled solitary cavity surrounded by
consolidation. An air-fluid level is usually present. Other causes of
cavitary lung disease (tuberculosis, mycosis, cancer, infarction,
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
[formerly 
Wegener
granulomatosis]) should be excluded. Necrotizing pneumonia is
distinguished by multiple areas of cavitation within an area of
consolidation. Empyema is characterized by the presence of
purulent pleural fluid and may accompany either of the other two
radiographic findings. Ultrasonography is of value in locating fluid
and may also reveal pleural loculations.
 Treatment
Drugs of choice are clindamycin (600 mg intravenously every 8
hours until improvement, then 300 mg orally every 6 hours) or
amoxicillin-clavulanate (875 mg orally every 12 hours). Penicillin
(amoxicillin, 500 mg every 8 hours, or penicillin G, 1–2 million units
intravenously every 4–6 hours) plus metronidazole (500 mg orally
or intravenously every 8–12 hours) is another option. Penicillin
alone is inadequate treatment for anaerobic pleuropulmonary
infections because an increasing number of anaerobic organisms
produce β-lactamases, and up to 20% of patients do not respond
to penicillins. Antibiotic therapy should be continued until the chest
radiograph improves, a process that may take a month or more;
patients with lung abscesses should be treated until radiographic
resolution of the abscess cavity is demonstrated. Anaerobic
pleuropulmonary disease requires adequate drainage with tube
thoracostomy for the treatment of empyema. Open pleural drainage
is sometimes necessary because of the propensity of these infections
to produce loculations in the pleural space.
Paintal HS et al. Aspiration syndromes: 10 clinical pearls every
physician should know. Int J Clin Pract. 2007 May;61(5): 846–
52. [PMID: 17493092]
 
Schiza S et al. Clinical presentation and management of empyema,
lung abscess and pleural effusion. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2006
May;12(3):205–11. [PMID: 16582676]
 
Shigemitsu H et al. Aspiration pneumonias: under-diagnosed and
under-treated. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2007 May;13(3): 192–8.
[PMID: 17414126]
 
PULMONARY INFILTRATES IN THE
IMMUNOCOMPROMISED HOST
Pulmonary infiltrates in immunocompromised patients (patients with
HIV disease, absolute neutrophil counts < 1000/mcL, current or
recent exposure to myelosuppressive or immunosuppressive drugs,
or those currently taking > 5 mg/d prednisone) may arise from
infectious or non-infectious causes. Infection may be due to
bacterial, myco-bacterial, fungal, protozoal, helminthic, or viral
pathogens. Noninfectious processes such as pulmonary edema,
alveolar hemorrhage, drug reactions, pulmonary thromboembolic
disease, malignancy, and radiation pneumonitis may mimic infection.
Although almost any pathogen can cause pneumonia in a
compromised host, two clinical tools help the clinician narrow the
differential diagnosis. The first is knowledge of the underlying
immunologic defect. Specific immunologic defects are associated
with particular infections. Defects in humoral immunity predispose to
bacterial infections; defects in cellular immunity lead to infections
with viruses, fungi, mycobacteria, and protozoa. Neutropenia and
impaired granulocyte function predispose to infections from S
aureus, Aspergillus, gram-negative bacilli, and Candida. Second,
the time course of infection also provides clues to the etiology of
pneumonia in immunocompromised patients. A fulminant pneumonia
is often caused by bacterial infection, whereas an insidious
pneumonia is more apt to be caused by viral, fungal, protozoal, or
mycobacterial infection. Pneumonia occurring within 2–4 weeks
after organ transplantation is usually bacterial, whereas several
months or more after transplantation P jiroveci, viruses (eg,
cytomegalovirus), and fungi (eg, Aspergillus) are encountered more
often.
 Clinical Findings
Chest radiography is rarely helpful in narrowing the differential
diagnosis. Examination of expectorated sputum for bacteria, fungi,
mycobacteria, Legionella, and P jiroveci is important and may
preclude the need for expensive, invasive diagnostic procedures.
Sputum induction is often necessary for diagnosis. The sensitivity of
induced sputum for detection of P jiroveci depends on institutional
expertise, number of specimens analyzed, and detection methods.
Routine evaluation frequently fails to identify a causative
organism. The clinician may begin empiric antimicrobial therapy
before proceeding to invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy,
transthoracic needle aspiration, or open lung biopsy. The approach
to management must be based on the severity of the pulmonary
infection, the underlying disease, the risks of empiric therapy, and
local expertise and experience with diagnostic procedures.
Bronchoalveolar lavage using the flexible bronchoscope is a safe
and effective method for obtaining representative pulmonary
secretions for microbiologic studies. It involves less risk of bleeding
and other complications than bronchial brushing and transbronchial
biopsy. Bronchoalveolar lavage is especially suitable for the
diagnosis of P jiroveci pneumonia in patients with AIDS when
induced sputum analysis is negative. Surgical lung biopsy, now often
performed by video-assisted thoracoscopy, provides the definitive
option 
for 
diagnosis 
of 
pulmonary 
infiltrates 
in 
the
immunocompromised host. However, a specific diagnosis is
obtained in only about two-thirds of cases, and the information
obtained rarely affects the outcome.
Corti M et al. Respiratory infections in immunocompromised
patients. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2009 May;15(3):209–17. [PMID:
19276812]
 
Davis JL et al. Respiratory infection complicating HIV infection.
Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008 Apr;21(2):184–90. [PMID:
18317044]
 
Remund KF et al. Infections relevant to lung transplantation. Proc
Am Thorac Soc. 2009 Jan 15;6(1):94–100. [PMID: 19131534]
 
Safadi AR et al. Diagnostic approach of pulmonary disease in the
HIV negative immunocompromised host. Eur J Intern Med. 2009
May;20(3):268–79. [PMID: 19393494]
 
PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fatigue, weight loss, fever, night sweats, and cough.
 Chest radiograph: pulmonary infiltrates, most often apical.
 Positive tuberculin skin test reaction (most cases).
 Acid-fast bacilli on smear of sputum or sputum culture positive
for M tuberculosis.
 
 General Considerations
Tuberculosis is one of the world's most widespread and deadly
illnesses. M tuberculosis, the organism that causes tuberculosis
infection and disease, infects an estimated 20–43% of the world's
population. Each year, 3 million people worldwide die of the
disease. In the United States, it is estimated that 15 million people
are 
infected 
with M tuberculosis. Tuberculosis occurs
disproportionately among disadvantaged populations such as the
malnourished, homeless, and those living in overcrowded and
substandard housing. There is an increased occurrence of
tuberculosis among HIV-positive individuals.
Infection with M tuberculosis begins when a susceptible person
inhales airborne droplet nuclei containing viable organisms. Tubercle
bacilli that reach the alveoli are ingested by alveolar macrophages.
Infection follows if the inoculum escapes alveolar macrophage
microbicidal activity. Once infection is established, lymphatic and
hematogenous dissemination of tuberculosis typically occurs before
the development of an effective immune response. This stage of
infection, primary tuberculosis, is usually clinically and
radiographically silent. In most persons with intact cell-mediated
immunity, T cells and macrophages surround the organisms in
granulomas that limit their multiplication and spread. The infection is
contained but not eradicated, since viable organisms may lie
dormant within granulomas for years to decades. In approximately
5% of cases, the immune response is inadequate and the host
develops progressive primary tuberculosis, accompanied by
both pulmonary and constitutional symptoms that are described
below.
Individuals with latent tuberculosis infection do not have
active disease and cannot transmit the organism to others.
However, reactivation of disease may occur if the host's immune
defenses are impaired. Active tuberculosis will develop in
approximately 10% of individuals with latent tuberculosis infection
who are not given preventive therapy; half of these cases occur in
the 2 years following primary infection. Up to 50% of HIV-infected
patients will develop active tuberculosis within 2 years after infection
with tuberculosis. Diverse conditions such as gastrectomy, silicosis,
diabetes mellitus, and disorders associated with immunosuppression
(eg, HIV infection or therapy with corticosteroids or other
immunosuppressive drugs) are associated with an increased risk of
reactivation.
Standard teaching has held that 90% of tuberculosis in adults
represents activation of latent disease. However, DNA
fingerprinting of the bacillus suggest that as many as one-third of
new cases of tuberculosis in urban populations are primary
infections resulting from person-to-person transmission.
The percentage of patients with atypical presentations—
particularly elderly patients, patients with HIV infection, and those in
nursing homes—has increased. Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is
especially common in patients with HIV infection, who often display
lymphadenitis or miliary disease.
Strains of M tuberculosis resistant to one or more first-line
antituberculous drugs are being encountered with increasing
frequency. Risk factors for drug resistance include immigration from
parts of the world with a high prevalence of drug-resistant
tuberculosis, close and prolonged contact with individuals with
drug-resistant tuberculosis, unsuccessful previous therapy, and
patient noncompliance. Resistance to one or more antituberculous
drugs has been found in 15% of tuberculosis patients in the United
States. Outbreaks of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in hospitals
and correctional facilities in Florida and New York have been
associated with mortality rates of 70–90% and median survival
rates of 4–16 weeks.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The patient with pulmonary tuberculosis typically presents with
slowly progressive constitutional symptoms of malaise, anorexia,
weight loss, fever, and night sweats. Chronic cough is the most
common pulmonary symptom. It may be dry at first but typically
becomes productive of purulent sputum as the disease progresses.
Blood-streaked sputum is common, but significant hemoptysis is
rarely a presenting symptom; life-threatening hemoptysis may occur
in advanced disease. Dyspnea is unusual unless there is extensive
disease. Rarely, the patient is asymptomatic. On physical
examination, the patient appears chronically ill and malnourished.
On chest examination, there are no physical findings specific for
tuberculosis infection. The examination may be normal or may
reveal classic findings such as posttussive apical rales.
B. Laboratory Findings
Definitive diagnosis depends on recovery of M tuberculosis from
cultures or identification of the organism by DNA or RNA
amplification techniques. Three consecutive morning sputum
specimens are advised. Sputum induction may be helpful in patients
who cannot voluntarily produce satisfactory specimens.
Fluorochrome staining with rhodamine-auramine of concentrated,
digested sputum specimens is performed initially as a screening
method, with confirmation by the Kinyoun or Ziehl-Neelsen stains.
Demonstration of acid-fast bacilli on sputum smear does not
confirm a diagnosis of tuberculosis, since saprophytic
nontuberculous mycobacteria may colonize the airways and rarely
may cause pulmonary disease.
In patients thought to have tuberculosis despite negative sputum
smears, fiberoptic bronchoscopy can be considered. Bronchial
washings are helpful; however, transbronchial lung biopsies increase
the diagnostic yield. Post-bronchoscopy expectorated sputum
specimens may also be useful. Early morning aspiration of gastric
contents after an overnight fast is an alternative to bronchoscopy but
is suitable only for culture and not for stained smear, because
nontuberculous mycobacteria may be present in the stomach in the
absence of tuberculous infection. M tuberculosis may be cultured
from blood in up to 15% of patients with tuberculosis.
Cultures on solid media to identify M tuberculosis may require
12 weeks. Liquid medium culture systems allow detection of
mycobacterial growth in several days, although this depends on the
number of organisms in the inoculum. The slow rate of
mycobacterial growth has fostered interest in rapid diagnostic
techniques. Nucleic acid amplification (DNA and RNA) or high-
performance liquid chromatography can be used to identify the type
of mycobacterium within hours of sputum processing. Rapid
confirmation of M tuberculosis is valuable in the mobilization of
public health resources.
Nucleic acid amplification tests for M tuberculosis should be
interpreted in the clinical context and on the basis of local laboratory
performance. A patient whose sputum culture is positive for acid-
fast bacilli but whose nucleic acid amplification test result is negative
for M tuberculosis may have a false-negative amplification test, a
false-positive smear, or a nontuberculous mycobacterial infection.
Clinical suspicion remains a critical factor in interpreting these
studies. Drug susceptibility testing of culture isolates is considered
routine for the first isolate of M tuberculosis, when a treatment
regimen is failing, and when sputum cultures remain positive after 2
months of therapy.
Needle biopsy of the pleura reveals granulomatous inflammation
in approximately 60% of patients with pleural effusions caused by
M tuberculosis. Pleural fluid cultures for M tuberculosis are
positive in less than 25% of cases of pleural tuberculosis. Culture of
three pleural biopsy specimens combined with microscopic
examination of a pleural biopsy yields a diagnosis in up to 90% of
patients with pleural tuberculosis.
C. Imaging
g g
Radiographic abnormalities in primary tuberculosis include small
homogeneous infiltrates, hilar and paratracheal lymph node
enlargement, and segmental atelectasis. Pleural effusion may be
present, especially in adults, sometimes as the sole radiographic
abnormality. Cavitation may be seen with progressive primary
tuberculosis (Figure 9–5). Ghon (calcified primary focus) and
Ranke (calcified primary focus and calcified hilar lymph node)
complexes are seen in a minority of patients and represent residual
evidence of healed primary tuberculosis.
Figure 9–5. Advanced bilateral pulmonary tuberculosis. (Public
Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
Reactivation tuberculosis is associated with various radiographic
manifestations, including fibrocavitary apical disease, nodules, and
pneumonic infiltrates. The usual location is in the apical or posterior
segments of the upper lobes or in the superior segments of the
lower lobes; up to 30% of patients may present with radiographic
evidence of disease in other locations. This is especially true in
elderly patients, in whom lower lobe infiltrates with or without
pleural effusion are encountered with increasing frequency. Lower
lung tuberculosis may masquerade as pneumonia or lung cancer. A
“miliary” pattern (diffuse small nodular densities) can be seen with
hematologic or lymphatic dissemination of the organism. Resolution
of reactivation tuberculosis leaves characteristic radiographic
findings. Dense nodules in the pulmonary hila, with or without
obvious calcification, upper lobe fibronodular scarring, and
bronchiectasis with volume loss are common findings.
In patients with early HIV infection, the radiographic features of
tuberculosis resemble those in patients without HIV infection. In
contrast, atypical radiographic features predominate in patients with
late stage HIV infection. These patients often display lower lung
zone, diffuse, or miliary infiltrates, pleural effusions, and involvement
of hilar and, in particular, mediastinal lymph nodes.
D. Special Examinations
The tuberculin skin test identifies individuals who have been
infected with M tuberculosis but does not distinguish between
active and latent infection. The test is used to evaluate a person who
has symptoms of tuberculosis, an asymptomatic person who may be
infected with M tuberculosis (eg, after contact exposure), or to
establish the prevalence of tuberculous infection in a population.
Routine testing of individuals at low risk for tuberculosis is not
recommended. The Mantoux test is the preferred method: 0.1 mL
of purified protein derivative (PPD) containing 5 tuberculin units is
injected intradermally on the volar surface of the forearm using a
27-gauge needle on a tuberculin syringe. The transverse width in
millimeters of induration at the skin test site should be measured
after 48–72 hours. Table 9–15 summarizes the criteria established
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for
interpretation of the Mantoux tuberculin skin test. Different criteria
for determination of a positive reaction are used, based on the prior
likelihood of infection, to maximize the performance of the test. In
patients who have serial testing, a tuberculin skin test conversion
is defined as an increase of ≥ 10 mm of induration within a 2-year
period regardless of patient age.
In general, it takes 2–10 weeks after tuberculosis infection for an
immune response to PPD to develop. Both false-positive and false-
negative results occur. False-positive tuberculin skin test reactions
occur in persons previously vaccinated against M tuberculosis with
bacillus Calmette Guérin (BCG) (extract of Mycobacterium bovis)
and in those infected with nontuberculous mycobacteria. False-
negative tuberculin skin test reactions may result from improper
testing technique, concurrent infections, malnutrition, advanced age,
immunologic disorders, lymphoreticular malignancies, corticosteroid
therapy, chronic kidney disease, HIV infection, and fulminant
tuberculosis. Some individuals with latent tuberculosis infection may
have a negative skin test reaction when tested many years after
exposure.
 
Table 9–15. Classification of positive tuberculin skin test
reactions.1
 
 
 
Induration
Size
Group
≥ 5 mm
1. HIV-positive persons.
2. Recent contacts of individuals with active
tuberculosis.
3. Persons with fibrotic changes on chest x-
rays suggestive of prior tuberculosis.
4. Patients with organ transplants and other
immunosuppressed patients (receiving the
equivalent of > 15 mg/d of prednisone for 1
month or more).
≥ 10 mm
1. Recent immigrants (< 5 years) from
countries 
with 
a 
high 
prevalence 
of
tuberculosis (eg, Asia, Africa, Latin America).
2. HIV-negative injection drug users.
3. Mycobacteriology laboratory personnel.
4. Residents of and employees2 in the
following 
high-risk 
congregate 
settings:
correctional institutions; nursing homes and
other long-term facilities for the elderly;
hospitals and other health care facilities;
residential facilities for AIDS patients; and
homeless shelters.
5. Persons with the following medical
conditions 
that 
increase 
the 
risk 
of
tuberculosis: gastrectomy, ≥ 10% below ideal
body weight, jejunoileal bypass, diabetes
mellitus, silicosis, advanced chronic kidney
disease, some hematologic disorders, (eg,
leukemias, lymphomas), and other specific
malignancies (eg, carcinoma of the head or
neck and lung).
6. Children < 4 years of age or infants,
children, and adolescents exposed to adults
at high risk.
≥ 15 mm
1. Persons with no risk factors for
tuberculosis.
1A tuberculin skin test reaction is considered positive if the transverse
diameter of the indurated area reaches the size required for the specific
group. All other reactions are considered negative.
2For persons who are otherwise at low risk and are tested at entry into
employment, a reaction of > 15 mm induration is considered positive.
Data from Screening for tuberculosis and tuberculosis infection in high-
risk populations: recommendations of the Advisory Council for the
Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1995 Sep
8;44(RR-11):19–34. [PMID: 7565540]
Serial testing may create a false impression of skin test
conversion. Dormant mycobacterial sensitivity is sometimes
restored by the antigenic challenge of the initial skin test. This
phenomenon is called “boosting.” A two-step testing procedure is
used to reduce the likelihood that a boosted tuberculin reaction will
be misinterpreted as a recent infection. Following a negative
tuberculin skin test, the person is retested in 1–3 weeks. If the
second test is negative, the person is uninfected or anergic; if
positive, a boosted reaction is likely. Two-step testing should be
used for the initial tuber-culin skin testing of individuals who will be
tested repeatedly, such as health care workers. Anergy testing is not
recommended for routine use to distinguish a true-negative result
from anergy. Poor anergy test standardization and lack of outcome
data limit the evaluation of its effectiveness. Interpretation of the
tuberculin skin test in persons who have previously received BCG
vaccination is the same as in those who have not had BCG.
Novel in vitro T-cell based assays promise significant change in
the identification of persons with latent M tuberculosis infection.
Potential advantages of in vitro testing include reduced variability
and subjectivity associated with placing and reading the PPD, fewer
false-positive results from prior BCG vaccination, and better
discrimination of positive responses due to nontuberculous
mycobacteria.
Persons with concomitant HIV and tuberculosis infection usually
respond best when the HIV infection is treated concurrently. In
some cases, prolonged antituberculous therapy may be warranted.
Therefore, all patients with tuberculosis infection should be tested
for HIV within 2 months after diagnosis.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
The goals of therapy are to eliminate all tubercle bacilli from an
infected individual while avoiding the emergence of clinically
significant drug resistance. The basic principles of antituberculous
treatment are (1) to administer multiple drugs to which the
organisms are susceptible; (2) to add at least two new
antituberculous agents to a regimen when treatment failure is
suspected; (3) to provide the safest, most effective therapy in the
shortest period of time; and (4) to ensure adherence to therapy.
All suspected and confirmed cases of tuberculosis should be
reported promptly to local and state public health authorities. Public
health departments will perform case investigations on sources and
patient contacts to determine if other individuals with untreated,
infectious tuberculosis are present in the community. They can
identify infected contacts eligible for treatment of latent tuber-culous
infection, and ensure that a plan for monitoring adherence to therapy
is established for each patient with tuberculosis. Patients with
tuberculosis should be treated by clinicians who are skilled in the
management of this infection. Clinical expertise is especially
important in cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis.
Nonadherence to antituberculous treatment is a major cause of
treatment failure, continued transmission of tuberculosis, and the
development of drug resistance. Adherence to treatment can be
improved by providing detailed patient education about tuberculosis
and its treatment in addition to a case manager who oversees all
aspects of an individual patient's care. Directly observed therapy
(DOT), which requires that a health care worker physically observe
the patient ingest antituberculous medications in the home, clinic,
hospital, or elsewhere, also improves adherence to treatment. The
importance of direct observation of therapy cannot be
overemphasized. The CDC recommends DOT for all patients with
drug-resistant tuberculosis and for those receiving intermittent
(twice- or thrice-weekly) therapy.
Hospitalization for initial therapy of tuberculosis is not necessary
for most patients. It should be considered if a patient is incapable of
self-care or is likely to expose new, susceptible individuals to
tuberculosis. Hospitalized patients with active disease require a
private room with negative-pressure ventilation until tubercle bacilli
are no longer found in their sputum (“smear-negative”) on three
consecutive smears taken on separate days.
Characteristics of antituberculous drugs are provided in Table 9–
16. Additional treatment considerations can be found in Chapter
33. More complete information can be obtained from the CDC's
Division 
of 
Tuberculosis 
Elimination 
Web 
site 
at
http://www.cdc.gov/tb/.
B. Treatment of Tuberculosis in HIV-Negative Persons
Most patients with previously untreated pulmonary tuberculosis can
be effectively treated with either a 6-month or a 9-month regimen,
though the 6-month regimen is preferred. The initial phase of a 6-
month regimen consists of 2 months of daily isoniazid, rifampin,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Once the isolate is determined to be
isoniazid-sensitive, ethambutol may be discontinued. If the M
tuberculosis isolate is susceptible to isoniazid and rifampin, the
second phase of therapy consists of isoniazid and rifampin for a
minimum of 4 additional months, with treatment to extend at least 3
months beyond documentation of conversion of sputum cultures to
negative for M tuberculosis. If DOT is used, medications may be
given intermittently using one of three regimens: (1) Daily isoniazid,
rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 2 months, followed by
isoniazid and rifampin two or three times each week for 4 months if
susceptibility to isoniazid and rifampin is demonstrated. (2) Daily
isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 2 weeks, then
administration of the same agents twice weekly for 6 weeks
followed by administration of isoniazid and rifampin twice each
week for 4 months if susceptibility to isoniazid and rifampin is
demonstrated. (3) Thrice-weekly administration of isoniazid,
rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 6 months.
 
Table 9–16. Characteristics of antituberculous drugs.
 
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase;
BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count.
 
Table 9–17. Recommended dosages for the initial treatment of
tuberculosis.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book, 2010, Thomas Reuters (Healthcare) Inc.
AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide
contractual variations exist among institutions.
2All intermittent dosing regimens should be used with directly observed
therapy.
Patients who cannot or should not (eg, pregnant women) take
pyrazinamide should receive daily isoniazid and rifampin along with
ethambutol for 4–8 weeks. If susceptibility to isoniazid and rifampin
is demonstrated or drug resistance is unlikely, ethambutol can be
discontinued and isoniazid and rifampin may be given twice a week
for a total of 9 months of therapy. If drug resistance is a concern,
patients should receive isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol for 9
months. Patients with smear- and culture-negative disease (eg,
pulmonary tuberculosis diagnosed on clinical grounds) and patients
for whom drug susceptibility testing is not available can be treated
with 6 months of isoniazid and rifampin combined with pyrazinamide
for the first 2 months. This regimen assumes low prevalence of drug
resistance. 
Previous 
guidelines 
have 
used 
streptomycin
interchangeably 
with 
ethambutol. 
Increasing 
worldwide
streptomycin resistance has made this drug less useful as empiric
therapy.
When a twice-weekly or thrice-weekly regimen is used instead
of a daily regimen, the dosages of isoniazid, pyrazin-amide, and
ethambutol or streptomycin must be increased. Recommended
dosages for the initial treatment of tuberculosis are listed in Table 9–
17. Fixed-dose combinations of isoniazid and rifampin (Rifamate)
and of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide (Rifater) are available
to simplify treatment. Single tablets improve compliance but are
more expensive than the individual drugs purchased separately.
C. Treatment of Tuberculosis in HIV-Positive Persons
Management of tuberculosis is complex in patients with concomitant
HIV disease. Experts in the management of both tuberculosis and
HIV disease should be involved in the care of such patients. The
CDC has published detailed recommendations for the treatment of
tuberculosis in HIV-positive patients. These documents can be
obtained by accessing the CDC Division of Tuberculosis Elimination
Web site at http://www.cdc.gov/tb/.
The basic approach to HIV-positive patients with tuberculosis is
similar to that detailed above for patients without HIV disease.
Additional considerations in HIV-positive patients include: (1)
longer duration of therapy and (2) drug interactions between
rifamycin derivatives such as rifampin and rifabutin, used to treat
tuberculosis, and some of the protease inhibitors and nonnucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), used to treat HIV (see
above Web site). DOT should be used for all HIV-positive
tuberculosis patients. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 25–50 mg orally each
day, should be administered to all HIV-positive patients being
treated with isoniazid to reduce central and peripheral nervous
system side effects.
D. Treatment of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis
Patients with drug-resistant M tuberculosis infection require careful
supervision and management. Clinicians who are unfamiliar with the
treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis should seek expert advice.
Tuberculosis resistant only to isoniazid can be successfully treated
with a 6-month regimen of rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol
or streptomycin or a 12-month regimen of rifampin and ethambutol.
When isoniazid resistance is documented during a 9-month regimen
without pyrazinamide, isoniazid should be discontinued. If
ethambutol was part of the initial regimen, rifampin and ethambutol
should be continued for a minimum of 12 months. If ethambutol was
not part of the initial regimen, susceptibility tests should be repeated
and two other drugs to which the organism is susceptible should be
added. Treatment of M tuberculosis isolates resistant to agents
other than isoniazid and treatment of drug resistance in HIV-
infected patients require expert consultation.
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDRTB) calls for an
individualized daily directly observed treatment plan under the
supervision of a clinician experienced in the management of this
entity. Treatment regimens are based on the patient's overall status
and the results of susceptibility studies. Most MDRTB isolates are
resistant to at least isoniazid and rifampin and require a minimum of
three drugs to which the organism is susceptible. These regimens
are continued until culture conversion is documented, and then a
two-drug regimen is continued for at least another 12 months. Some
experts recommend at least 18–24 months of a three-drug regimen.
E. Treatment of Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis
In most cases, regimens that are effective for treating pulmonary
tuberculosis are also effective for treating extrapulmonary disease.
However, many experts recommend 9 months of therapy when
miliary, meningeal, or bone and joint disease is present. Treatment
of skeletal tuberculosis is enhanced by early surgical drainage and
debridement of necrotic bone. Corticosteroid therapy has been
shown to help prevent cardiac constriction from tuberculous
pericarditis and to reduce neurologic complications from
tuberculous meningitis (see Chapter 33).
F. Treatment of Pregnant or Lactating Women
Tuberculosis in pregnancy is usually treated with isoniazid, rifampin,
and ethambutol. Ethambutol can be excluded if isoniazid resistance
is unlikely. Therapy is continued for 9 months. Since the risk of
teratogenicity with pyrazinamide has not been clearly defined,
pyrazinamide should be used only if resistance to other drugs is
documented and susceptibility to pyrazinamide is likely.
Streptomycin is contraindicated in pregnancy because it may cause
congenital deafness. Pregnant women taking isoniazid should
receive pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 10–25 mg orally once a day, to
prevent peripheral neuropathy.
Small concentrations of antituberculous drugs are present in
breast milk and are not known to be harmful to nursing newborns.
Therefore, breastfeeding is not contraindicated while receiving
antituberculous therapy.
G. Treatment Monitoring
Adults should have measurements of serum bilirubin, hepatic
enzymes, urea nitrogen, creatinine, and a complete blood count
(including platelets) before starting chemo-therapy for tuberculosis.
Visual acuity and red-green color vision tests are recommended
before initiation of ethambutol and serum uric acid before starting
pyrazinamide. Audiometry should be performed if streptomycin
therapy is initiated.
Routine monitoring of laboratory tests for evidence of drug
toxicity during therapy is not recommended, unless baseline results
are abnormal or liver disease is suspected. Monthly questioning for
symptoms of drug toxicity is advised. Patients should be educated
about common side effects of antituberculous medications and
instructed to seek medical attention should these symptoms occur.
Monthly follow-up of outpatients is recommended, including sputum
smear and culture for M tuberculosis until cultures convert to
negative. Patients with negative sputum cultures after 2 months of
treatment should have at least one additional sputum smear and
culture performed at the end of therapy. Patients with MDRTB
should have sputum cultures performed monthly during the entire
course of treatment. A chest radiograph at the end of therapy
provides a useful baseline for any future films.
Patients whose cultures do not become negative or whose
symptoms do not resolve despite 3 months of therapy should be
evaluated for drug-resistant organisms and for nonadherence to the
treatment regimen. DOT is required for the remainder of the
treatment regimen, and the addition of at least two drugs not
previously given should be considered pending repeat drug
susceptibility testing. The clinician should seek expert assistance if
drug resistance is newly found, if the patient remains symptomatic,
or if smears or cultures remain positive.
Patients with only a clinical diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis
(smears and cultures negative for M tuberculosis) whose symptoms
and radiographic abnormalities are unchanged after 3 months of
treatment usually either have another process or have had
tuberculosis in the past.
H. Treatment of Latent Tuberculosis
Treatment of latent tuberculous infection is essential to controlling
and eliminating tuberculosis in the United States. Treatment of latent
tuberculous infection substantially reduces the risk that infection will
progress to active disease. Targeted testing is used to identify
persons who are at high risk for tuberculosis and who stand to
benefit from treatment of latent infection. Table 9–15 gives the
tuberculin skin test criteria for treatment of latent tuberculous
infection. In general, patients with a positive tuberculin skin test who
are at increased risk for exposure or disease are treated. It is
essential that each person who meets the criteria for treatment of
latent tuberculous infection undergo a careful assessment to exclude
active disease. A history of past treatment for tuberculosis and
contraindications to treatment should be sought. All patients at risk
for HIV infection should be tested for HIV. Patients suspected of
having tuberculosis should receive one of the recommended
multidrug regimens for active disease until the diagnosis is confirmed
or excluded.
Some close contacts of persons with active tuberculosis should
be evaluated for treatment of latent tuberculous infection despite a
negative tuberculin skin test reaction (< 5 mm induration). These
include immunosuppressed persons and those who may develop
disease quickly after tuberculous infection. Close contacts who have
a negative tuberculin skin test reaction on initial testing should be
retested 10–12 weeks later.
Several treatment regimens for both HIV-negative and HIV-
positive persons are available for the treatment of latent tuberculous
infection: (1) Isoniazid: A 9-month oral regimen (minimum of 270
doses administered within 12 months) is considered optimal. Dosing
options include a daily dose of 300 mg or twice-weekly doses of
15 mg/kg. Persons at risk for developing isoniazid-associated
peripheral neuropathy (diabetes mellitus, uremia, malnutrition,
alcoholism, HIV infection, pregnancy, seizure disorder) may be
given supplemental pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 10–50 mg/d. (2)
Rifampin and pyrazinamide: A 2-month oral regimen (60 doses
administered within 3 months) of daily rifampin (10 mg/kg up to a
maximum dose of 600 mg) and pyrazinamide (15–20 mg/kg up to a
maximum dose of 2 g) is recommended. (3) Rifampin: Patients
who cannot tolerate isoniazid or pyrazinamide can be considered
for a 4-month regimen (minimum of 120 doses administered within
6 months) of rifampin. HIV-positive patients receiving protease
inhibitors or NNRTIs who are given rifampin require management
by experts in both tuberculosis and HIV disease (see Treatment of
Tuberculosis in HIV-Positive Persons, above).
Contacts of persons with isoniazid-resistant, rifampin-sensitive
tuberculosis should receive a 2-month regimen of rifampin and
pyrazinamide or a 4-month regimen of daily rifampin alone.
Contacts of persons with MDRTB should receive two drugs to
which the infecting organism has demonstrated susceptibility.
Tuberculin skin test-negative and HIV-negative contacts may be
observed without treatment or treated for 6 months. HIV-positive
contacts should be treated for 12 months. All contacts of persons
with MDRTB should have 2 years of follow-up regardless of
treatment.
Persons with a positive tuberculin skin test (≥ 5 mm of
induration) and fibrotic lesions suggestive of old tuberculosis on
chest radiographs who have no evidence of active disease and no
history of treatment for tuberculosis should receive 9 months of
isoniazid, or 2 months of rifampin and pyrazinamide, or 4 months of
rifampin (with or without isoniazid). Pregnant or breastfeeding
women with latent tuberculosis should receive either daily or twice-
weekly isoniazid with pyridoxine (vitamin B6).
Baseline laboratory testing is indicated for patients at risk for liver
disease, patients with HIV infection, women who are pregnant or
within 3 months of delivery, and persons who use alcohol regularly.
Patients receiving treatment for latent tuberculous infection should
be evaluated once a month to assess for symptoms and signs of
active tuberculosis and hepatitis and for adherence to their treatment
regimen. Routine laboratory testing during treatment is indicated for
those with abnormal baseline laboratory tests and for those at risk
for developing liver disease.
Vaccine BCG is an antimycobacterial vaccine developed from an
attenuated strain of M bovis. Millions of individuals worldwide have
been vaccinated with BCG. However, it is not generally
recommended in the United States because of the low prevalence
of tuberculous infection, the vaccine's interference with the ability to
determine latent tuberculous infection using tuberculin skin test
reactivity, and its variable effectiveness against pulmonary
tuberculosis. BCG vaccination in the United States should only be
undertaken after consultation with local health officials and experts
in the management of tuberculosis. Vaccination of health care
workers should be considered on an individual basis in settings in
which a high percentage of tuberculosis patients are infected with
strains resistant to both isoniazid and rifampin, in which transmission
of such drug-resistant M tuberculosis and subsequent infection are
likely, and in which comprehensive tuberculous infection-control
precautions have been implemented but have not been successful.
The BCG vaccine is contraindicated in persons with impaired
immune responses due to disease or medications.
 Prognosis
Almost all properly treated patients with tuberculosis can be cured.
Relapse rates are less than 5% with current regimens. The main
cause of treatment failure is nonadherence to therapy.
American Thoracic Society; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Controlling
tuberculosis in the United States. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2005 Nov 1;172(9):1169–227. [PMID: 16249321]
 
Blumberg HM et al; American Thoracic Society/Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of
America: Treatment of tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2003 Feb 15;167(4):603–62. [PMID: 12588714]
 
Diagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis in Adults
and Children. American Thoracic Society and Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000
Apr;161(4 Part 1):1376–95. [PMID: 10764337]
 
Grant A et al. Managing drug resistant tuberculosis. BMJ. 2008
Aug 28;337:a1110. [PMID: 18755763]
 
Lobue P et al. Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection: An
update. Respirology. 2010 May;15(4):603–22. [PMID:
20409026]
 
PULMONARY DISEASE CAUSED BY
NONTUBERCULOUS MYCOBACTERIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic cough, sputum production, and fatigue; less commonly:
malaise, dyspnea, fever, hemoptysis, and weight loss.
 Parenchymal infiltrates on chest radiograph, often with thin-
walled cavities, that spread contiguously and often involve
overlying pleura.
 Isolation of nontuberculous mycobacteria in a sputum culture.
 
 General Considerations
Mycobacteria 
other 
than M tuberculosis—nontuberculous
mycobacteria (NTM), sometimes referred to as “atypical”
mycobacteria—are ubiquitous in water and soil and have been
isolated from tap water. There appears to be a continuing increase
in the number and prevalence of NTM species. Marked geographic
variability exists, both in the NTM species responsible for disease
and in the prevalence of disease. These organisms are not
considered communicable from person to person, have distinct
laboratory characteristics, and are often resistant to most
antituberculous drugs. See Chapter 33 for further information.
 Definition & Pathogenesis
The diagnosis of lung disease caused by NTM is based on a
combination of clinical, radiographic, and bacteriologic criteria and
the exclusion of other diseases that can resemble the condition.
Specific diagnostic criteria are discussed below. Complementary
data are important for diagnosis because NTM organisms can
reside in or colonize the airways without causing clinical disease,
especially in patients with AIDS, and many patients have preexisting
lung disease that may make their chest radiographs abnormal.
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) is the most frequent
cause of NTM pulmonary disease in humans in the United States.
Mycobacterium kansasii is the next most frequent pulmonary
pathogen. Other NTM causes of pulmonary disease include
Mycobacterium abscessus, Mycobacterium xenopi, and
Mycobacterium malmoense; the list of more unusual etiologic
NTM species is long. Most NTM cause a chronic pulmonary
infection that resembles tuberculosis but tends to progress more
slowly. Disseminated disease is rare in immunocompetent hosts;
however, disseminated MAC disease is common in patients with
AIDS.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
NTM infection among immunocompetent hosts frequently presents
in one of three prototypical patterns: cavitary, upper lobe lesions in
older male smokers that may mimic M tuberculosis; nodular
bronchiectasis affecting the mid lung zones in middle-aged women
with chronic cough; and hypersensitivity pneumonitis following
environmental exposure. Most patients with NTM infection
experience a chronic cough, sputum production, and fatigue. Less
common symptoms include malaise, dyspnea, fever, hemoptysis,
and weight loss. Symptoms from coexisting lung disease (COPD,
bronchiectasis, previous mycobacterial disease, cystic fibrosis, and
pneumoconiosis) may confound the evaluation. In patients with
bronchiectasis, coinfection with NTM and Aspergillus is a negative
prognostic factor. New or worsening infiltrates as well as
adenopathy or pleural effusion (or both) are described in HIV-
positive patients with NTM infection as part of the immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome following institution of highly
active antiretroviral therapy.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of NTM infection rests on recovery of the pathogen
from cultures. Sputum cultures positive for atypical mycobacteria do
not prove infection because NTM may exist as saprophytes
colonizing the airways or may be environmental contaminants.
Bronchial washings are considered to be more sensitive than
expectorated sputum samples; however, their specificity for clinical
disease is not known.
Bacteriologic criteria have been proposed based on studies of
patients with cavitary disease with MAC or M kansasii. Diagnostic
criteria in immunocompetent persons include the following: positive
culture results from at least two separate expectorated sputum
samples; or positive culture from at least one bronchial wash; or a
positive culture from pleural fluid or any other normally sterile site.
The diagnosis can also be established by demonstrating NTM
cultured from a lung biopsy, bronchial wash, or sputum plus
histopathologic changes such as granulomatous inflammation in a
lung biopsy. Rapid species identification of some NTM is possible
using DNA probes or high-pressure liquid chromatography.
Diagnostic criteria are less stringent for patients with severe
immune suppression. HIV-infected patients may show significant
MAC growth on culture of bronchial washings without clinical
infection; therefore, HIV patients being evaluated for MAC
infection must be considered individually.
In general, drug susceptibility testing on cultures of NTM is not
recommended except for the following NTM: (1) M kansasii to
rifampin; and (2) rapid growers (such as Mycobacterium
fortuitum, Mycobacterium chelonae, M abscessus) to amikacin,
doxycycline, imipenem, fluoroquinolones, clarithromycin, cefoxitin,
and sulfonamides.
C. Imaging
Chest radiographic findings include infiltrates that are progressive or
persist for at least 2 months, cavitary lesions, and multiple nodular
densities. The cavities are often thin-walled and have less
surrounding parenchymal infiltrate than is commonly seen with MTB
infections. Evidence of contiguous spread and pleural involvement is
often present. High-resolution CT of the chest may show multiple
small nodules with or without multifocal bronchiectasis. Progression
of pulmonary infiltrates during therapy or lack of radiographic
improvement over time are poor prognostic signs and also raise
concerns about secondary or alternative pulmonary processes.
Clearing of pulmonary infiltrates due to NTM is slow.
 Treatment
Establishing NTM infection does not mandate treatment in all cases,
for two reasons. First, clinical disease may never develop in some
patients, particularly asymptomatic patients with few organisms
isolated from single specimens. Second, the spectrum of clinical
disease severity is very wide; in patients with mild or slowly
progressive symptoms, traditional chemotherapeutic regimens using
a combination of agents may lead to drug-induced side effects
worse than the disease itself.
Specific treatment regimens and responses to therapy vary with
the species of NTM. Non-HIV-infected patients with MAC
pulmonary disease usually receive a combination of daily
clarithromycin or azithromycin, rifampin or rifabutin, and ethambutol
(Table 9–17). Streptomycin is considered for the first 2 months as
tolerated. The optimal duration of treatment is unknown, but
therapy should be continued for 12 months after sputum conversion.
Medical treatment is initially successful in about two-thirds of cases,
but relapses after treatment are common; long-term benefit is
demonstrated in about half of all patients. Those who do not
respond favorably generally have active but stable disease. Surgical
resection is an alternative for the patient with progressive disease
that responds poorly to chemotherapy; the success rate with
surgical therapy is good. Disease caused by M kansasii responds
well to drug therapy. A daily regimen of rifampin, isoniazid, and
ethambutol for at least 18 months with a minimum of 12 months of
negative cultures is usually successful. Rapidly growing
mycobacteria (M abscessus, M fortuitum, M chelonae) are
generally resistant to standard antituberculous therapy.
 When to Refer
Patients with rapidly growing mycobacteria infection should be
referred for expert management.
Glassroth J. Pulmonary disease due to non-tuberculous myco-
bacteria. Chest. 2008 Jan;133(1):243–51. [PMID: 18187749]
 
Griffith DE et al. An official ATS/IDSA statement: diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial
diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Feb 15;175(4):367–
416. [PMID: 17277290]
 
PULMONARY NEOPLASMS
 
See Chapter 39 for discussions of Lung Cancer, Secondary
Lung Cancer, and Mesothelioma.
SCREENING FOR LUNG CANCER
Periodic evaluation of asymptomatic people at high risk for lung
cancer is an attractive strategy without demonstrated benefit.
Available evidence from the Mayo Lung Project suggests that serial
chest radiographs can identify a significant number of early stage
malignancies but that neither disease-specific mortality from lung
cancer nor all-cause mortality is affected by screening. The illusory
benefits of screening have been attributed to lead time, length time,
and overdiagnosis biases. To date, no major advisory organization
recommends screening for lung cancer.
The availability of rapid-acquisition, low-dose helical computed
tomography (LDCT) has rekindled enthusiasm for lung cancer
screening. LDCT is a very sensitive test. Compared with chest
radiography, LDCT identifies between four and ten times the
number of asymptomatic lung malignancies. LDCT may also
increase the number of false-positive tests, unnecessary diagnostic
procedures, and overdiagnosis. A mortality benefit remains to be
proved. The National Lung Cancer Screening Trial is an ongoing
NCI-funded multicenter trial to determine whether using LDCT to
g
screen current or former heavy smokers for lung cancer will
improve mortality in this population. Information is available at
http://www.cancer.gov/NLST/.
Screening for lung cancer with biomolecular markers remains an
area of study. A variety of strategies that evaluate patterns of
volatile organic compounds in exhaled breath, or DNA alterations in
exhaled breath condensate have been described, although lack
clinical validation.
Bach PB et al. Screening for lung cancer: ACCP evidence-based
clinical practice guidelines (2nd edition). Chest. 2007 Sep; 132(3
Suppl):69S–77S. [PMID: 17873161]
 
SOLITARY PULMONARY NODULE
A solitary pulmonary nodule, sometimes referred to as a “coin
lesion,” is a < 3 cm isolated, rounded opacity on the chest imaging
outlined by normal lung and not associated with infiltrate, atelectasis,
or adenopathy. Most are asymptomatic and represent an
unexpected finding on chest radiography or CT scanning. The
finding is important because it carries a significant risk of
malignancy. The frequency of malignancy in surgical series ranges
from 10% to 68% depending on patient population. Most benign
nodules are infectious granulomas. Benign neoplasms such as
hamartomas account for less than 5% of solitary nodules.
The goals of evaluation are to identify and resect malignant
tumors in patients who will benefit from resection while avoiding
invasive procedures in benign disease. The task is to identify
nodules with a sufficiently high probability of malignancy to warrant
biopsy or resection or a sufficiently low probability of malignancy to
justify observation.
Symptoms alone rarely establish the cause, but clinical and
radiographic data can be used to assess the probability of
malignancy. The patient's age is important. Malignant nodules are
rare in persons under age 30. Above age 30, the likelihood of
malignancy increases with age. Smokers are at increased risk, and
the likelihood of malignancy increases with the number of cigarettes
smoked daily. Patients with a prior malignancy have a higher
likelihood of having a malignant solitary nodule.
The first and most important step in the radiographic evaluation is
to review old radiographs. Comparison with prior studies allows
estimation of doubling time, which is an important marker for
malignancy. Rapid progression (doubling time less than 30 days)
suggests infection; long-term stability (doubling time greater than
465 days) suggests benignity. Certain radiographic features help in
estimating the probability of malignancy. Size is correlated with
malignancy. A study of solitary nodules identified by CT scan
showed a 1% malignancy rate in those measuring 2–5 mm, 24% in
6–10 mm, 33% in 11–20 mm, and 80% in 21–45 mm. The
appearance of a smooth, well-defined edge is characteristic of a
benign process. Ill-defined margins or a lobular appearance suggest
malignancy. A high-resolution CT finding of spiculated margins and
a peripheral halo are both highly associated with malignancy.
Calcification and its pattern are also helpful clues. Benign lesions
tend to have dense calcification in a central or laminated pattern.
Malignant lesions are associated with sparser calcification that is
typically stippled or eccentric. Cavitary lesions with thick (> 16
mm) walls are much more likely to be malignant. High-resolution
CT offers better resolution of these characteristics than chest
radiography and is more likely to detect lymph-adenopathy or the
presence of multiple lesions. Chest CT is indicated in any suspicious
solitary pulmonary nodule.
 Treatment
Based on clinical and radiologic data, the clinician should assign a
specific probability of malignancy to the lesion. The decision
whether and how to obtain a diagnostic biopsy depends on the
interpretation of this probability in light of the patient's unique clinical
situation. The probabilities in parentheses below represent
guidelines only and should not be interpreted as prescriptive.
In the case of solitary pulmonary nodules, a continuous
probability function may be grouped into three categories. In
patients with a low probability (< 5%) of malignancy (eg, age under
30, lesions stable for more than 2 years, characteristic pattern of
benign calcification), watchful waiting is appropriate. Management
consists of serial imaging studies (CT scans or chest radiographs) at
intervals that identify growth suggestive of malignancy. Three-
dimensional reconstruction of high-resolution CT images provides a
more sensitive test for growth.
Patients with a high probability (> 60%) of malignancy should
proceed directly to resection following staging, provided the surgical
risk is acceptable. Biopsies rarely yield a specific benign diagnosis
and are not indicated.
Optimal management of patients with an intermediate probability
of malignancy (5–60%) remains controversial. The traditional
approach is to obtain a diagnostic biopsy either through
transthoracic needle aspiration (TTNA) or bronchoscopy.
Bronchoscopy yields a diagnosis in 10–80% of procedures
depending on the size of the nodule and its location. In general, the
bronchoscopic yield for nodules that are < 2 cm and peripheral is
low, although complications are generally rare. Newer
bronchoscopic modalities such as electromagnetic navigation and
ultrathin bronchoscopy are being studied, although their impact
upon diagnostic yield remains uncertain. TTNA has a higher
diagnostic yield, reported to be between 50% and 97%. The yield
is strongly operator-dependent, however, and is affected by the
location and size of the lesion. Complications are higher than
bronchoscopy, with pneumothorax occurring in up to 30% of
patients, with up to one-third of these patients requiring placement
of a chest tube.
Disappointing diagnostic yields and a high false-negative rate (up
to 20–30% in TTNA) have prompted alternative approaches.
Positron emission tomography (PET) detects increased glucose
metabolism within malignant lesions with high sensitivity (85–97%)
and specificity (70–85%). Many diagnostic algorithms have
incorporated PET into the assessment of patients with inconclusive
high-resolution CT findings. A positive PET increases the likelihood
of malignancy, and a negative PET correctly excludes cancer in
most cases. False-negative PET scans can occur with tumors with
low metabolic activity (well-differentiated adenocarcinomas,
carcinoids, and bronchioloalveolar tumors), and follow-up imaging
is typically performed at discrete intervals to ensure absence of
growth. PET has several drawbacks, however: resolution below 1
cm is poor, the test is expensive, and availability remains limited.
Sputum cytology is highly specific but lacks sensitivity. It is used
in central lesions and in patients who are poor candidates for
invasive diagnostic procedures. Researchers have attempted to
improve the sensitivity of sputum cytology through the use of
monoclonal antibodies to proteins that are up-regulated in
pulmonary malignancies. Such tests offer promise but remain
research tools at this time.
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) offers a more
aggressive approach to diagnosis. VATS is more invasive than
bronchoscopy or TTNA but is associated with less postoperative
pain, shorter hospital stays, and more rapid return to function than
traditional thoracotomy. These advantages have led some centers to
recommend VATS resection of all solitary pulmonary nodules with
intermediate probability of malignancy. In some cases, surgeons will
remove the nodule and evaluate it in the operating room with frozen
section. If the nodule is malignant, they will proceed to lobectomy
and lymph node sampling, either thoracoscopically or through
conversion to standard thoracotomy.
All patients should be provided with an estimate of the likelihood
of malignancy, and their preferences should be used to help guide
diagnostic and therapeutic decisions. A strategy that recommends
observation may not be preferred by a patient who desires a
definitive diagnosis. Similarly, a surgical approach may not be
agreeable to all patients unless the presence of cancer is definitive.
Patient preferences should be elicited, and patients should be well
informed regarding the specific risks and benefits associated with
the recommended approach as well as the alternative strategies.
Gould MK et al. Evaluation of patients with pulmonary nodules:
when is it lung cancer? ACCP evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines (2nd edition). Chest. 2007 Sep;132(3 Suppl):108S–
130S. [PMID: 17873164]
 
Klein JS et al. Imaging evaluation of the solitary pulmonary nodule.
Clin Chest Med. 2008 Mar;29(1):15 38. [PMID: 18267182]
 
Mott TF et al. Clinical inquiries. What is the best approach to a
solitary pulmonary nodule identified by chest x-ray? J Fam Pract.
2007 Oct;56(10):845–7. [PMID: 17908518]
 
Winer-Muram HT. The solitary pulmonary nodule. Radiology.
2006 Apr;239(1):34–49. [PMID: 16567482]
 
RIGHT MIDDLE LOBE SYNDROME
Right middle lobe syndrome is recurrent or persistent atelectasis of
the right middle lobe. This collapse is related to the relatively long
length and narrow diameter of the right middle lobe bronchus and
the oval (“fish mouth”) opening to the lobe, in the setting of impaired
collateral ventilation. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy or CT scan is often
necessary to rule out obstructing tumor. Foreign body or other
benign causes are common.
BRONCHIAL CARCINOID TUMORS
Carcinoid and bronchial gland tumors are sometimes termed
“bronchial adenomas.” This term should be avoided because it
implies that the lesions are benign when, in fact, carcinoid tumors
and bronchial gland carcinomas are low-grade malignant
neoplasms.
Carcinoid tumors are about six times more common than
bronchial gland carcinomas, and most of them occur as
pedunculated or sessile growths in central bronchi. Men and women
are equally affected. Most patients are under 60 years of age.
Common symptoms of bronchial carcinoid tumors are hemoptysis,
cough, focal wheezing, and recurrent pneumonia. Peripherally
located bronchial carcinoid tumors are rare and present as
asymptomatic solitary pulmonary nodules. Carcinoid syndrome
(flushing, diarrhea, wheezing, hypotension) is rare. Fiberoptic
bronchoscopy may reveal a pink or purple tumor in a central
airway. These lesions have a well-vascularized stroma, and biopsy
may be complicated by significant bleeding. CT scanning is helpful
to localize the lesion and to follow its growth over time. Octreotide
scintigraphy is also available for localization of these tumors.
Bronchial carcinoid tumors grow slowly and rarely metastasize.
Complications involve bleeding and airway obstruction rather than
invasion by tumor and metastases. Surgical excision of clinically
symptomatic lesions is often necessary, and the prognosis is
generally favorable. Most bronchial carcinoid tumors are resistant to
radiation and chemotherapy (see Chapter 39).
Gustafsson BI et al. Bronchopulmonary neuroendocrine tumors.
Cancer. 2008 Jul 1;113(1):5–21. [PMID: 18473355]
 
Oberg K et al; ESMO Guidelines Working Group.
Neuroendocrine bronchial and thymic tumors: ESMO clinical
recommendation for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann
Oncol. 2008 May;19(Suppl 2):ii102–3. [PMID: 18456740]
 
Thomas R et al. Clinico-pathologic study of pulmonary carcinoid
tumours—a retrospective analysis and review of literature. Respir
Med. 2008 Nov;102(11):1611–4. [PMID: 18614346]
 
MEDIASTINAL MASSES
Various developmental, neoplastic, infectious, traumatic, and
cardiovascular disorders may cause masses that appear in the
mediastinum on chest radiograph. A useful convention arbitrarily
divides the mediastinum into three compartments—anterior, middle,
and posterior—in order to classify mediastinal masses and assist in
differential diagnosis. Specific mediastinal masses have a
predilection for one or more of these compartments; most are
located in the anterior or middle compartment. The differential
diagnosis of an anterior mediastinal mass includes thymoma,
teratoma, thyroid lesions, lymphoma, and mesenchymal tumors
(lipoma, fibroma). The differential diagnosis of a middle
mediastinal mass includes lymphadenopathy, pulmonary artery
enlargement, aneurysm of the aorta or innominate artery,
developmental cyst (bronchogenic, enteric, pleuropericardial),
dilated azygous or hemiazygous vein, and foramen of Morgagni
hernia. The differential diagnosis of a posterior mediastinal mass
includes hiatal hernia, neurogenic tumor, meningocele, esophageal
tumor, foramen of Bochdalek hernia, thoracic spine disease, and
extramedullary hematopoiesis. The neurogenic tumor group includes
neurilemmoma, neurofibroma, neurosarcoma, ganglioneuroma, and
pheochromocytoma.
Symptoms and signs of mediastinal masses are nonspecific and
are usually caused by the effects of the mass on surrounding
structures. Insidious onset of retrosternal chest pain, dysphagia, or
dyspnea is often an important clue to the presence of a mediastinal
mass. In about half of cases, symptoms are absent, and the mass is
detected on routine chest radiograph. Physical findings vary
depending on the nature and location of the mass.
CT scanning is helpful in management; additional radiographic
studies of benefit include barium swallow if esophageal disease is
suspected, Doppler sonography or venography of brachiocephalic
veins and the superior vena cava, and angiography. MRI is useful;
its advantages include better delineation of hilar structures and
distinction between vessels and masses. MRI also allows imaging in
multiple planes, whereas CT permits only axial imaging. Tissue
diagnosis is necessary if a neoplastic disorder is suspected.
Treatment and prognosis depend on the underlying cause of the
mediastinal mass.
Date H. Diagnostic strategies for mediastinal tumors and cysts.
Thorac Surg Clin. 2009 Feb;19(1):29-35. [PMID: 19288818]
 
Tomaszek S et al. Thymomas: review of current clinical practice.
Ann Thorac Surg. 2009 Jun;87(6):1973-80. [PMID: 19463649]
 
Whitten CR et al. A diagnostic approach to mediastinal
abnormalities. Radiographics. 2007 May–Jun;27(3):657–71.
[PMID: 17495284]
 
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE
(DIFFUSE PARENCHYMAL
LUNG DISEASE)
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Insidious onset of progressive dyspnea and non-productive
chronic cough; extra-pulmonary findings may accompany specific
diagnoses.
 Tachypnea, small lung volumes, bibasilar dry rales; digital
clubbing and right heart failure with advanced disease.
 Chest radiographs with low lung volumes and patchy distribution
of ground glass, reticular, nodular, reticulonodular, or cystic
opacities.
 Reduced lung volumes, pulmonary diffusing capacity and 6-
minute walk distance; hypoxemia with exercise
 
Interstitial lung disease, or diffuse parenchymal lung disease,
comprises a heterogeneous group of disorders that share common
presentations (dyspnea), physical findings (late inspiratory crackles),
and chest radiographs (septal thickening and reticulonodular
changes).
The term “interstitial” is misleading since the pathologic process
usually begins with injury to the alveolar epithelial or capillary
endothelial cells (alveolitis). Persistent alveolitis may lead to
obliteration of alveolar capillaries and reorganization of the lung
parenchyma, accompanied by irreversible fibrosis. The process
does not affect the airways proximal to the respiratory bronchioles.
At least 180 disease entities may present as interstitial lung disease.
Table 9–18 outlines a selected list of differential diagnoses of
interstitial lung disease. In most patients, no specific cause can be
identified. In the remainder, drugs and a variety of organic and
inorganic dusts are the principal causes. The history—particularly
the occupational and medication history—may provide evidence of
a specific cause.
The connective tissue diseases are a group of immuno-logically
mediated inflammatory disorders including rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic 
lupus 
erythematosus, 
scleroderma, 
polymyositis-
dermatomyositis, Sjögren syndrome, and other overlap conditions.
The presence of diffuse parenchymal lung disease in the setting of an
established connective tissue disease is suggestive of the etiology. In
some cases, lung disease precedes the more typical manifestations
of the underlying connective tissue disease by months or years.
Known causes of interstitial lung disease are dealt with in their
specific sections. The important idiopathic forms are discussed
below.
 
Table 9–18. Differential diagnosis of interstitial lung disease.
 
Drug-related
     Antiarrhythmic agents (amiodarone)
     Antibacterial agents (nitrofurantoin, sulfonamides)
     Antineoplastic agents (bleomycin, cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, nitrosoureas)
     Antirheumatic agents (gold salts, penicillamine)
     Phenytoin
Environmental and occupational (inhalation exposures)
     Dust, inorganic (asbestos, silica, hard metals,
beryllium)
     Dust, organic (thermophilic actinomycetes, avian
antigens, Aspergillus species)
     Gases, fumes, and vapors (chlorine, isocyanates,
paraquat, sulfur dioxide)
     Ionizing radiation
     Talc (injection drug users)
Infections
     Fungus, disseminated (Coccidioides immitis,
Blastomyces dermatitidis, Histoplasma capsulatum)
     Mycobacteria, disseminated
     Pneumocystis jiroveci
     Viruses
Primary pulmonary disorders
     Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP)
     Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia: Acute interstitial
pneumonia, desquamative interstitial pneumonia,
nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, usual interstitial
pneumonia, respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial
lung disease
     Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Systemic disorders
     Acute respiratory distress syndrome
     Amyloidosis
     Ankylosing spondylitis
     Autoimmune disease: Dermatomyositis, polymyositis,
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis (scleroderma),
systemic lupus erythematosus
     Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
     Goodpasture syndrome
     Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
     Inflammatory bowel disease
     Langerhans cell histiocytosis (eosinophilic granuloma)
     Lymphangitic spread of cancer (lymphangitic
carcinomatosis)
     Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
     Pulmonary edema
     Sarcoidosis
     granulomatosis polyangiitis [formerly Wegener
granulomatosis]
IDIOPATHIC INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIAS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Important to identify specific fibrosing disorders.
 Idiopathic disease may require biopsy for diagnosis.
 Accurate diagnosis identifies patients most likely to benefit from
therapy.
 
 General Considerations
The most common diagnosis among patients with interstitial lung
disease is idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. Historically, this
diagnosis was based on clinical and radiographic criteria with only a
small number of patients undergoing surgical lung biopsy. When
biopsies were obtained, the common element of fibrosis led to the
grouping together of several histologic patterns under the category
of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. These distinct histopathologic
features are now recognized as being associated with different
natural histories and responses to therapy (see Table 9–19).
Therefore, in the evaluation of patients with interstitial lung disease,
clinicians should attempt to identify specific disorders.
Patients with idiopathic interstitial pneumonia may have any of the
histologic patterns described in Table 9–19. The first step in
evaluation is to identify patients whose disease is truly idiopathic. As
indicated in Table 9–18, most identifiable causes of interstitial lung
disease are infectious, drug-related, or environmental or
occupational agents. Interstitial lung diseases associated with other
medical conditions (pulmonary-renal syndromes, collagen-vascular
disease) may be identified through a careful medical history. Apart
from acute interstitial pneumonia, the clinical presentations of the
idiopathic interstitial pneumonias are sufficiently similar to preclude a
specific diagnosis. Chest radiographs and high-resolution CT scans
are occasionally diagnostic. Ultimately, many patients with
apparently idiopathic disease require surgical lung biopsy to make a
definitive diagnosis. The importance of accurate diagnosis is
twofold. First, it allows the clinician to provide accurate information
about the cause and natural history of the illness. Second, accurate
diagnosis helps distinguish patients most likely to benefit from
therapy. Surgical lung biopsy may spare patients with UIP treatment
with potentially morbid therapies.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms, Signs, and Imaging
The diagnosis of UIP can be made on clinical grounds alone in
selected patients (Table 9-19). A diagnosis of UIP can be made
with 90% confidence in patients over 65 years of age who have (1)
idiopathic disease by history and who demonstrate inspiratory
crackles on physical examination; (2) restrictive physiology on
pulmonary function testing; (3) characteristic radiographic evidence
of progressive fibrosis over several years; and (4) diffuse, patchy
fibrosis with pleural-based honeycombing on high-resolution CT
scan. Such patients do not need surgical lung biopsy.
B. Special Studies
Three diagnostic techniques are in common use: broncho-alveolar
lavage, transbronchial biopsy, and surgical lung biopsy, either
through an open procedure or using VATS.
Bronchoalveolar lavage may provide a specific diagnosis in
cases of infection, particularly with P jiroveci or mycobacteria, or
when cytologic examination reveals the presence of malignant cells.
The findings may be suggestive and sometimes diagnostic of
eosinophilic pneumonia, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, and alveolar
proteinosis. Analysis of the cellular constituents of lavage fluid may
suggest a specific disease, but these findings are not diagnostic.
 
Table 9–19. Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias.
 
1 Includes desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP).
ANA, antinuclear antibody; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; RF,
rheumatoid factor; UIP, usual interstitial pneumonia.
Transbronchial biopsy through the flexible broncho-scope is
easily performed in most patients. The risks of pneumothorax (5%)
and hemorrhage (1–10%) are low. However, the tissue specimens
recovered are small, sampling error is common, and crush artifact
may complicate diagnosis. Transbronchial biopsy can make a
definitive diagnosis of sarcoidosis, lymphangitic spread of
carcinoma, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, miliary tuberculosis, and
Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Note that the diagnosis of UIP cannot
be confirmed on transbronchial lung biopsy since the histo-logic
diagnosis requires a pattern of changes rather than a single
pathognomonic finding. Transbronchial biopsy may exclude UIP by
confirming a specific alternative diagnosis. Transbronchial biopsy
also cannot establish a specific diagnosis of idiopathic interstitial
pneumonia. These patients generally require surgical lung biopsy.
Surgical lung biopsy is the standard for diagnosis of interstitial
lung disease. Two or three biopsies taken from multiple sites in the
same lung, including apparently normal tissue, may yield a specific
diagnosis as well as prognostic information regarding the extent of
fibrosis versus active inflammation. Patients under age 60 without a
specific diagnosis generally should undergo surgical lung biopsy. In
older and sicker patients, the risks and benefits must be weighed
carefully for three reasons: (1) the morbidity of the procedure can
be significant; (2) a definitive diagnosis may not be possible even
with surgical lung biopsy; and (3) when a specific diagnosis is made,
there may be no effective treatment. Empiric therapy or no
treatment may be preferable to surgical lung biopsy in some
patients.
 Treatment
Treatment of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia is controversial. No
randomized study has demonstrated that any treatment improves
survival or quality of life compared with no treatment. Clinical
experience suggests that patients with RB-ILD, nonspecific
interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), or COP (see Table 9–19) frequently
respond to corticosteroids and should be given a trial of therapy—
typically prednisone, 1–2 mg/kg/d for a minimum of 2 months. The
same therapy is almost uniformly ineffective in patients with usual
interstitial pneumonia (UIP). Since this therapy carries significant
morbidity, experts do not recommend routine use of corticosteroids
in patients with UIP. There are a number of ongoing clinical trials of
antifibrotic therapies, such as pirfenidone and interferon gamma-1b,
as well as smaller investigations of sildenafil, thalidomide, and
biologic modifiers.
Collard HR et al. Acute exacerbations of idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Oct 1;176(7):636–43.
[PMID: 17585107]
 
Noth I et al. Recent advances in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Chest. 2007 Aug;132(2):637–50. [PMID: 17699135]
 
Ryu JH et al. Diagnosis of interstitial lung diseases. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2007 Aug;82(8):976–86. [PMID: 17673067]
 
Travis WD et al. Idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia:
report of an American Thoracic Society project. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med. 2008 Jun 15;177(12):1338–47. [PMID: 18388353]
 
SARCOIDOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms related to the lung, skin, eyes, peripheral nerves, liver,
kidney, heart, and other tissues.
 Demonstration of noncaseating granulomas in a biopsy specimen.
 Exclusion of other granulomatous disorders.
 
 General Considerations
Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown etiology characterized
in about 90% of patients by granulomatous inflammation of the lung.
The incidence is highest in North American blacks and northern
European whites; among blacks, women are more frequently
affected than men. Onset of disease is usually in the third or fourth
decade.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients may have malaise, fever, and dyspnea of insidious onset.
Symptoms from skin involvement (erythema, lupus pernio [Figure
9–6]), iritis, peripheral neuropathy, arthritis (see Chapter 20), or
cardiomyopathy may also cause the patient to seek care. Some
individuals are asymptomatic and come to medical attention after
abnormal findings (typically bilateral hilar and right paratracheal
lymphadenopathy) on chest radiographs. Physical findings are
atypical of interstitial lung disease in that crackles are uncommon on
chest examination. Other symptoms and findings may include
parotid 
gland 
enlargement, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
and
lymphadenopathy.
Figure 9–6. Skin involvement in sarcoidosis (lupus pernio), here
involving the nasal rim. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used,
with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr,
Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory tests may show leukopenia, an elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, and hypercalcemia (about 5% of patients) or
hypercalciuria (20%). Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels
are elevated in 40–80% of patients with active disease. This finding
is neither sensitive nor specific enough to have diagnostic
p
g
g
significance. Physiologic testing may reveal evidence of airflow
obstruction, but restrictive changes with decreased lung volumes
and diffusing capacity are more common. Skin test anergy is present
in 70%. ECG may show conduction disturbances and dysrhythmias.
C. Imaging
Radiographic findings are variable and include bilateral hilar
adenopathy alone (radiographic stage I), hilar adenopathy and
parenchymal involvement (radiographic stage II), or parenchymal
involvement alone (radiographic stage III). Parenchymal
involvement is usually manifested radio-graphically by diffuse
reticular infiltrates, but focal infiltrates, acinar shadows, nodules and,
rarely, cavitation may be seen. Pleural effusion is noted in fewer
than 10% of patients.
D. Special Examinations
The diagnosis of sarcoidosis generally requires histologic
demonstration of noncaseating granulomas in biopsies from a patient
with other typical associated manifestations. Other granulomatous
diseases (eg, berylliosis, tuberculosis, fungal infections) and
lymphoma must be excluded. Biopsy of easily accessible sites (eg,
palpable lymph nodes, skin lesions, or salivary glands) is likely to be
positive. Transbronchial lung biopsy has a high yield (75–90%) as
well, especially in patients with radiographic evidence of
parenchymal involvement. Some clinicians believe that tissue biopsy
is not necessary when stage I radiographic findings are detected in a
clinical situation that strongly favors the diagnosis of sarcoidosis (eg,
a young black woman with erythema nodosum). Biopsy is essential
whenever clinical and radiographic findings suggest the possibility of
an alternative diagnosis such as lymphoma. Bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid in sarcoidosis is usually characterized by an increase in
lymphocytes and a high CD4/CD8 cell ratio. Bronchoalveolar
lavage does not establish a diagnosis but may be useful in following
the activity of sarcoidosis in selected patients. All patients require a
complete ophthalmologic evaluation.
 Treatment
Indications for treatment with oral corticosteroids (prednisone, 0.5–
1.0 mg/kg/d) include disabling constitutional symptoms,
hypercalcemia, iritis, uveitis, arthritis, central nervous system
involvement, cardiac involvement, granulomatous hepatitis,
cutaneous lesions other than erythema nodosum, and progressive
pulmonary lesions. Long-term therapy is usually required over
months to years. Serum ACE levels usually fall with clinical
improvement. Immunosuppressive drugs and cyclosporine have
been tried, primarily when corticosteroid therapy has been
exhausted, but experience with these drugs is limited.
 Prognosis
The outlook is best for patients with hilar adenopathy alone;
radiographic involvement of the lung parenchyma is associated with
a worse prognosis. Erythema nodosum portends a good outcome.
About 20% of patients with lung involvement suffer irreversible lung
impairment, characterized by progressive fibrosis, bronchiectasis,
and cavitation. Pneumothorax, hemoptysis, mycetoma formation in
lung cavities, and respiratory failure often complicate this advanced
stage. Myocardial sarcoidosis occurs in about 5% of patients,
sometimes leading to restrictive cardiomyopathy, cardiac
dysrhythmias, and conduction disturbances. Death from pulmonary
insufficiency occurs in about 5% of patients.
Patients require long-term follow-up; at a minimum, yearly
physical examination, pulmonary function tests, chemistry panel,
ophthalmologic evaluation, chest radio-graph, and ECG.
Dempsey OJ et al. Sarcoidosis. BMJ. 2009 Aug 28;339:b3206.
[PMID: 19717499]
 
Iannuzzi MC et al. Sarcoidosis. N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 22;
357(21):2153–65. [PMID: 18032765]
 
Judson MA. Sarcoidosis: clinical presentation, diagnosis, and
approach to treatment. Am J Med Sci. 2008 Jan;335(1):26–33.
[PMID: 18195580]
 
Mihailovic-Vucinic V et al. Pulmonary sarcoidosis. Clin Chest
Med. 2008 Sep;29(3):459–73. [PMID: 18539238]
 
PULMONARY ALVEOLAR PROTEINOSIS
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis is a rare disease in which
phospholipids accumulate within alveolar spaces. The condition may
be primary (idiopathic) or secondary (occurring in immune
deficiency; hematologic malignancies; inhalation of mineral dusts; or
following lung infections, including tuberculosis and viral infections).
Progressive dyspnea is the usual presenting symptom, and chest
radiograph shows bilateral alveolar infiltrates suggestive of
pulmonary edema. The diagnosis is based on demonstration of
characteristic findings on bronchoalveolar lavage (milky appearance
and PAS-positive lipoproteinaceous material) in association with
typical clinical and radiographic features. In some cases,
transbronchial or surgical lung biopsy (revealing amorphous intra-
alveolar phospholipid) is necessary.
The course of the disease varies. Some patients experience
spontaneous remission; others develop progressive respiratory
insufficiency. Pulmonary infection with nocardia or fungi may occur.
Therapy for alveolar proteinosis consists of periodic whole lung
lavage.
Frazier AA et al. From the archives of the AFIP: pulmonary
alveolar proteinosis. Radiographics. 2008 May–Jun;28(3):883–
99. [PMID: 18480490]
 
Juvet SC et al. Rare lung disease II: pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis. Can Respir J. 2008 May–Jun;15(4):203–10. [PMID:
18551202]
 
EOSINOPHILIC PULMONARY SYNDROMES
Eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes are a diverse group of disorders
typically characterized by eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates,
dyspnea, and cough. Many patients have constitutional symptoms,
including fever. Common causes include exposure to medications
(nitrofurantoin, phenytoin, ampicillin, acetaminophen, ranitidine) or
infection with helminths (eg, Ascaris, hookworms, Strongyloides)
or filariae (eg, Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, tropical
pulmonary 
eosinophilia). Löffler syndrome refers to acute
eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates in response to transpulmonary
passage of helminth larvae. Pulmonary eosinophilia can also be a
feature of other illnesses, including ABPA, Churg-Strauss
syndrome, systemic hypereosinophilic syndromes, eosinophilic
granuloma of the lung (properly referred to as pulmonary
Langerhans cell histiocytosis), neoplasms, and numerous interstitial
lung diseases. If an extrinsic cause is identified, therapy consists of
removal of the offending drug or treatment of the underlying
parasitic infection.
One-third of cases are idiopathic, and there are two common
syndromes. Chronic 
eosinophilic 
pneumonia 
is 
seen
predominantly in women and is characterized by fever, night sweats,
weight loss, and dyspnea. Asthma is present in half of cases. Chest
radiographs often show peripheral infiltrates, the “photographic
negative” of pulmonary edema. Bronchoalveolar lavage typically has
a marked eosinophilia; peripheral blood eosinophilia is present in
greater than 80%. Therapy with oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/d for 1–2
weeks followed by a gradual taper over many months) usually
results in dramatic improvement; however, most patients require at
least 10–15 mg of prednisone every other day for a year or more
(sometimes indefinitely) to prevent relapses. Acute eosinophilic
pneumonia is an acute, febrile illness characterized by cough and
dyspnea, sometimes rapidly progressing to respiratory failure. The
chest radiograph is abnormal but nonspecific. Bronchoalveolar
lavage frequently shows eosinophilia but peripheral blood
eosinophilia is rare at the onset of symptoms. The response to
corticosteroids is usually dramatic.
Alam M et al. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia: a review. South
Med J. 2007 Jan;100(1):49–53. [PMID: 17269525]
 
Wechsler ME. Pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes. Immunol
Allergy Clin North Am. 2007 Aug;27(3):477–92. [PMID:
17868860]
 
DISORDERS OF THE
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
 
PULMONARY VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Predisposition to venous thrombosis, usually of the lower
extremities.
 One or more of the following: dyspnea, chest pain, hemoptysis,
syncope.
 Tachypnea and a widened alveolar-arterial Po2 difference.
 Characteristic defects on ventilation-perfusion lung scan, helical
CT scan of the chest, or pulmonary angiogram.
 
 General Considerations
Pulmonary venous thromboembolism, often referred to as
pulmonary embolism (PE), is a common, serious, and potentially
fatal complication of thrombus formation within the deep venous
circulation. PE is the third leading cause of death among hospitalized
patients. Despite this prevalence, most cases are not recognized
antemortem, and less than 10% of patients with fatal emboli have
received specific treatment for the condition. Management demands
a vigilant systematic approach to diagnosis and an understanding of
risk factors so that appropriate preventive therapy can be given.
Many substances can embolize to the pulmonary circulation,
including air (during neurosurgery, from central venous catheters),
amniotic fluid (during active labor), fat (long bone fractures), foreign
bodies (talc in injection drug users), parasite eggs (schistosomiasis),
septic emboli (acute infectious endocarditis), and tumor cells (renal
cell carcinoma). The most common embolus is thrombus, which
may arise anywhere in the venous circulation or heart but most often
originates in the deep veins of the lower extremities. Thrombi
confined to the calf rarely embolize to the pulmonary circulation.
However, about 20% of calf vein thrombi propagate proximally to
the popliteal and ileofemoral veins, at which point they may break
off and embolize to the pulmonary circulation. Pulmonary emboli
will develop in 50–60% of patients with proximal deep venous
thrombosis (DVT); half of these embolic events will be
asymptomatic. Approximately 50–70% of patients who have
symptomatic pulmonary emboli will have lower extremity DVT
when evaluated.
PE and DVT are two manifestations of the same disease. The
risk factors for PE are the risk factors for thrombus formation within
the venous circulation: venous stasis, injury to the vessel wall, and
hypercoagulability (Virchow triad). Venous stasis increases with
immobility (bed rest—especially postoperative—obesity, stroke),
hyperviscosity (polycythemia), and increased central venous
pressures (low cardiac output states, pregnancy). Vessels may be
damaged by prior episodes of thrombosis, orthopedic surgery, or
trauma. Hypercoagulability can be caused by medications (oral
contraceptives, hormonal replacement therapy) or disease
(malignancy, surgery) or may be the result of inherited gene defects.
The most common inherited cause in white populations is resistance
to activated protein C, also known as factor V Leiden. The trait is
present in approximately 3% of healthy American men and in 20–
40% of patients with idiopathic venous thrombosis. Other major
risks for hypercoagulability include the following: deficiencies or
dysfunction of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin; prothrombin
gene mutation; and the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies
(lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibody).
PE has multiple physiologic effects. Physical obstruction of the
vascular bed and vasoconstriction from neurohu-moral reflexes both
increase pulmonary vascular resistance. Massive thrombus may
cause right ventricular failure. Vascular obstruction increases
physiologic dead space (wasted ventilation) and leads to hypoxemia
through right-to-left shunting, decreased cardiac output, and
surfactant depletion causing atelectasis. Reflex bronchoconstriction
promotes wheezing and increased work of breathing.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical diagnosis of PE is notoriously difficult for two reasons.
First, the clinical findings depend on both the size of the embolus
and the patient's preexisting cardiopulmonary status. Second,
common symptoms and signs of pulmonary emboli are not specific
to this disorder (Table 9–20).
Indeed, no single symptom or sign or combination of clinical
findings is specific to PE. Some findings are fairly sensitive: dyspnea
and pain on inspiration occur in 75–85% and 65–75% of patients,
respectively. Tachypnea is the only sign reliably found in more than
half of patients. A common clinical strategy is to use combinations
of clinical findings to identify patients’ risk for PE. For example,
97% of patients in the original Prospective Investigation of
Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis (PIOPED I) study with
angiographically proved pulmonary emboli had one or more of three
findings: dyspnea, chest pain with breathing, or tachypnea. Wells
and colleagues have published and validated a simple clinical
decision rule that quantifies and dichotomizes this clinical risk
assessment, allowing diversion of patients deemed unlikely to have
PE to a simpler diagnostic algorithm (see Integrated Approach to
Diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism).
B. Laboratory Findings
The ECG is abnormal in 70% of patients with PE. However, the
most common abnormalities are sinus tachycardia and nonspecific
ST and T wave changes, each seen in approximately 40% of
patients. Five percent or less of patients in the PIOPED I study had
P pulmonale, right ventricular hypertrophy, right axis deviation, and
right bundle branch block.
Arterial blood gases usually reveal acute respiratory alkalosis
due to hyperventilation. The arterial Po2 and the alveolar-arterial
oxygen difference (A–a–Do2) are usually abnormal in patients with
PE compared with healthy, age-matched controls. However,
arterial blood gases are not diagnostic: among patients who were
evaluated in the PIOPED I study, neither the Po2 nor the A–a–Do2
differentiated between those with and those without pulmonary
emboli. Profound hypoxia with a normal chest radiograph in the
absence of preexisting lung disease is highly suspicious for PE.
 
Table 9–20. Frequency of specific symptoms and signs in patients
at risk for pulmonary thromboembolism.
 
1Data from the Urokinase-Streptokinase Pulmonary Embolism Trial, as
reported in Bell WR, et al. The clinical features of submassive and
massive pulmonary emboli. Am J Med. 1977 Mar;62(3):355–60.
2Data from patients enrolled in the PIOPED I study, as reported in Stein PD
et al. Clinical, laboratory, roentgenographic, and electrocardiographic
findings in patients with acute pulmonary embolism and no preexisting
cardiac or pulmonary disease. Chest. 1991 Sep;100(3):598–603. [PMID:
1909617]
P ≤ .05 comparing patients in the PIOPED I study.
PE+, confirmed diagnosis of pulmonary embolism; PE-, diagnosis of
pulmonary embolism ruled out; nr, not reported.
Plasma levels of D-dimer, a degradation product of cross-linked
fibrin, are elevated in the presence of thrombus. Using a D-dimer
threshold between 300 and 500 ng/mL, a rapid quantitative
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has shown a
sensitivity for venous thromboembolism of 95–97% and a
specificity of 45%. Therefore, a D-dimer < 500 ng/mL using the
rapid ELISA provides strong evidence against venous
thromboembolism, with a likelihood ratio of 0.11–0.13.
Appropriate diagnostic thresholds have not been established for
patients in whom D-dimer is elevated.
p
Serum troponin I, troponin T, and plasma beta-natriuretic
peptide (BNP) levels are typically higher in patients with PE
compared with those without embolism; the presence and
magnitude of the elevation are not useful in diagnosis, but correlate
with adverse outcomes, including death, mechanical ventilation and
prolonged hospitalization.
C. Imaging and Special Examinations
1. Chest radiography—The chest radiograph is necessary to
exclude other common lung diseases and to permit interpretation of
the ventilation-perfusion (
) scan, but it does not establish the
diagnosis by itself. The chest radio-graph was normal in only 12%
of patients with confirmed PE in the PIOPED I study. The most
frequent findings were atelectasis, parenchymal infiltrates, and
pleural effusions. However, the prevalence of these findings was the
same in hospitalized patients without PE. A prominent central
pulmonary artery with local oligemia (Westermark sign) or pleural-
based areas of increased opacity that represent intraparenchymal
hemorrhage (Hampton hump) are uncommon. Paradoxically, the
chest radiograph may be most suggestive of PE when normal in the
setting of hypoxemia.
2. CT—Helical CT pulmonary angiography has essentially
supplanted 
 scanning as the initial diagnostic study in North
America for suspected PE. Helical CT pulmonary angiography
requires administration of intravenous radio-contrast dye but is
otherwise noninvasive. A high quality study is very sensitive for the
detection of thrombus in the proximal pulmonary arteries but less so
in more distal arteries where it may miss as many as 75% of
subsegmental defects, compared with pulmonary angiography.
Comparing helical CT pulmonary angiography to the 
 scan as
the initial test for PE, detection of thrombi is roughly comparable,
although more alternative pulmonary diagnoses are made with CT
scanning.
Test characteristics of helical CT pulmonary angiography vary
widely by study and facility. Factors influencing results include
patient size and cooperation, the type and quality of the scanner, the
imaging protocol, and the experience of the interpreting radiologist.
Early studies comparing single-detector helical CT with standard
angiography reported sensitivity of 53–60% and specificity of 81–
97% for the diagnosis of PE. The 2006 PIOPED II study, using
multidetector (four-row) helical CT and excluding the 6% of
patients whose studies were “inconclusive,” reported sensitivity of
83% and specificity of 96%.
A 15–20% false-negative rate is high for a screening test, and
raises the practical question whether it is safe to withhold
anticoagulation in patients with a negative helical CT. Research data
provide two complementary answers. The insight of PIOPED I, that
the clinical assessment of pretest probability improves the
performance of the 
 scan, was confirmed with helical CT
pulmonary angiography in PIOPED II, where positive and negative
predictive values were highest in patients with concordant clinical
assessments but poor with conflicting assessments. The negative
predictive value of a normal helical CT in patients with a high pretest
probability was only 60%. Therefore, a normal helical CT alone
does not exclude PE in high-risk patients, and either empiric therapy
or further testing is indicated.
A large, prospective trial, the Christopher Study, incorporated
objective, validated pretest clinical assessment into diagnostic
algorithms using D-dimer measurement. In this study, patients with a
high pretest probability and a negative helical CT pulmonary
angiogram who were not receiving anticoagulation had a low (<
2%) 3-month incidence of subsequent PE. This low rate of
complications supports the contention that many false-negative
studies represent clinically insignificant, small distal thrombi and
provides support for monitoring most patients with a high-quality
negative helical CT pulmonary angiogram off therapy (see
Integrated Approach to Diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism below).
The rate of false-positive helical CT pulmonary angiograms and
overtreatment of PE has not been as well studied to date.
3. Ventilation-perfusion lung scanning—A perfusion scan is
performed by injecting radiolabeled microaggre-gated albumin into
the venous system, allowing the particles to embolize to the
pulmonary capillary bed. To perform a ventilation scan, the patient
breathes a radioactive gas or aerosol while the distribution of
radioactivity in the lungs is recorded. A defect on perfusion scanning
represents diminished blood flow to that region of the lung. This
finding is not specific for PE. Defects in the perfusion scan are
interpreted in conjunction with the ventilation scan to give a high,
low, or intermediate (indeterminate) probability that PE is the cause
of the abnormalities. Criteria for the combined interpretation of
ventilation and perfusion scans (commonly referred to as a single
test, the 
 scan) are complex, confusing, and not completely
standardized. A normal perfusion scan excludes the diagnosis of
clinically significant PE (negative predictive value of 91% in the
PIOPED I study). A high-probability 
 scan is most often
defined as having two or more segmental perfusion defects in the
presence of normal ventilation and is sufficient to make the diagnosis
of PE in most instances (positive predictive value of 88% among
PIOPED I patients). 
 scans are most helpful when they are
either normal or indicate a high probability of PE. Such readings are
reliable—interobserver agreement is best for normal and high-
probability scans—and they carry predictive power. The likelihood
ratios associated with normal and high-probability scans are 0.10
and 18, respectively, indicating significant and frequently conclusive
changes from pretest to posttest probability.
However, 75% of PIOPED I 
 scans were nondiagnostic, ie,
of low or intermediate probability. At angiography, these patients
had an overall incidence of PE of 14% and 30%, respectively.
One of the most important findings of PIOPED I was that the
clinical assessment of pretest probability could be used to aid the
interpretation of the 
 scan. For patients with low-probability 
 scans and a low (20% or less) clinical pretest probability of
PE, the diagnosis was confirmed in only 4%. Such patients may
reasonably be observed off therapy without angiography. All other
patients with nondiagnostic 
 scans require further testing to
determine the presence of venous thromboembolism.
4. Venous thrombosis studies—Seventy percent of patients with
PE will have DVT on evaluation, and approximately half of patients
with DVT will have PE on angiography. Since the history and
physical examination are neither sensitive nor specific for PE and
since the results of 
 scanning are frequently equivocal,
documentation of DVT in a patient with suspected PE establishes
the need for treatment and may preclude further testing.
Commonly available diagnostic techniques include venous
ultrasonography, impedance plethysmography, and contrast
venography. In most centers, venous ultrasonography is the test of
choice to detect proximal DVT. Inability to compress the common
femoral or popliteal veins in symptomatic patients is diagnostic of
first-episode DVT (positive predictive value of 97%); full
compressibility of both sites excludes proximal DVT (negative
predictive value of 98%). The test is less accurate in distal thrombi,
recurrent thrombi, or in asymptomatic patients. Impedance
plethysmography relies on changes in electrical impedance between
patent and obstructed veins to determine the presence of thrombus.
Accuracy is comparable though not quite as high as ultra-
sonography. Both ultrasonography and impedance plethysmography
are useful in the serial examination of patients with high clinical
suspicion of venous thromboembolism but negative leg studies. In
patients with suspected first-episode DVT and a negative
ultrasound or impedance plethysmography examination, multiple
studies have confirmed the safety of withholding anticoagulation
while conducting two sequential studies on days 1–3 and 7–10.
Similarly, patients with nondiagnostic 
 scans and an initial
negative venous ultrasound or impedance plethysmography
examination may be monitored off therapy with serial leg studies
over 2 weeks. When serial examinations are negative for proximal
DVT, the risk of subsequent venous thromboembolism over the
following 6 months is less than 2%.
Contrast venography remains the reference standard for the
diagnosis of DVT. An intraluminal filling defect is diagnostic of
venous thrombosis. However, venography has significant
shortcomings and has been replaced by venous ultrasound as the
diagnostic procedure of choice. Venography may be useful in
complex situations where there is discrepancy between clinical
suspicion and noninvasive testing.
5. Pulmonary angiography—Pulmonary angiography remains the
reference standard for the diagnosis of PE. An intraluminal filling
defect in more than one projection establishes a definitive diagnosis.
Secondary findings highly suggestive of PE include abrupt arterial
cutoff, asymmetry of blood flow—especially segmental oligemia—
or a prolonged arterial phase with slow filling. Pulmonary
angiography was performed in 755 patients in the PIOPED I study.
A definitive diagnosis was established in 97%; in 3% the studies
were nondiagnostic. Four patients (0.8%) with negative angiograms
subsequently had pulmonary thromboemboli at autopsy. Serial
angiography has demonstrated minimal resolution of thrombus prior
to day 7 following presentation. Thus, negative angiography within 7
days of presentation excludes the diagnosis.
Pulmonary angiography is a safe but invasive procedure with
well-defined morbidity and mortality data. Minor complications
occur in approximately 5% of patients. Most are allergic contrast
reactions, transient kidney dysfunction, or related to percutaneous
catheter insertion; cardiac perforation and arrhythmias are reported
but rare. Among the PIOPED I patients who underwent
angiography, there were five deaths (0.7%) directly related to the
procedure.
The appropriate role of pulmonary angiography in the diagnosis
of PE remains a subject of ongoing debate. There is wide
agreement that angiography is indicated in any patient in whom the
diagnosis is in doubt when there is a high clinical pretest probability
of PE or when the diagnosis of PE must be established with
certainty, as when anticoagulation is contraindicated or placement of
an inferior vena cava filter is contemplated.
6. MRI—MRI has sensitivity and specificity equivalent to contrast
venography in the diagnosis of DVT. It has improved sensitivity
when compared with venous ultrasound in the diagnosis of DVT,
without loss of specificity. The test is noninvasive and avoids the use
of potentially nephrotoxic radio-contrast dye. However, artifacts
introduced by respiratory and cardiac motion have limited the use of
MRI in the diagnosis of PE. New techniques have improved
sensitivity and specificity to levels comparable with helical CT, but
MRI remains primarily a research tool for PE.
 Integrated Approach to Diagnosis of
Pulmonary Embolism
An integrated approach to diagnosis of PE uses the clinical
likelihood of venous thromboembolism derived from a clinical
prediction rule (Table 9–21) along with the results of diagnostic
tests to come to one of three decision points: to establish venous
thromboembolism (PE or DVT) as the diagnosis, to exclude venous
thromboembolism with sufficient confidence to follow the patient off
anticoagulation, or to refer the patient for additional testing. An ideal
diagnostic algorithm would proceed in a cost-effective, stepwise
fashion to come to these decision points at minimal risk to the
patient. Most North American centers use a rapid D-dimer and
helical CT pulmonary angiography based diagnostic algorithm
(Figure 9–7). The standard 
 scan based algorithm (Table 9–
22) remains useful in many patients, especially those who are not
able to undergo CT pulmonary angiography (eg, those with
advanced chronic kidney disease). In the rigorously conducted
Christopher Study, the incidence of venous thromboembolism was
only 1.3% and fatal PE occurred in just 0.5% of persons monitored
for 3 months off anticoagulation therapy after objective, validated
tools for clinical assessment, quantitative rapid D-dimer assays and
a negative helical CT pulmonary angiography. The incidence of PE
following a negative evaluation by these three means is comparable
to that seen following negative pulmonary angiography.
 
Table 9–21. Clinical prediction rule for pulmonary embolism (PE).
 
 
 
Variable
Points
Clinical symptoms and signs of deep venous
thrombosis (DVT) (leg swelling and pain with
palpation of deep veins)
3.0
Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE
3.0
Heart rate > 100 beats/min
1.5
Immobilization for more than 3 days or surgery in
previous 4 weeks
1.5
Previous PE or DVT
1.5
Hemoptysis
1.0
Cancer (with treatment within past 6 months or
palliative care)
1.0
Three-tiered clinical probability assessment
Score
High
> 6.0
Moderate
2.0 to
6.0
Low
< 2.0
Dichotomous clinical probability assessment
Score
PE likely
> 4.0
PE unlikely
< or =
4.0
Data from Wells PS et al. Derivation of a simple clinical model to
categorize patients probability of pulmonary embolism: increasing the
models utility with the SimpliRED D-dimer. Thromb Haemost. 2000
Mar;83(3):416–20. [PMID: 10744147]
 Prevention
Venous thromboembolism is often clinically silent until it presents
with significant morbidity or mortality. It is a prevalent disease,
clearly associated with identifiable risk factors. For example, the
incidence of proximal DVT, PE, and fatal PE in untreated patients
undergoing hip fracture surgery is reported to be 10–20%, 4–10%,
and 0.2–5%, respectively. There is unambiguous evidence of the
efficacy of prophylactic therapy in this and other clinical situations,
yet it remains underused. Only about 50% of surgical deaths from
PE had received any form of preventive therapy. A discussion of
strategies for the prevention of venous thromboembolism can be
found in Chapter 14.
 Treatment
A. Anticoagulation
Anticoagulation is not definitive therapy but a form of secondary
prevention. Heparin binds to and accelerates the ability of
antithrombin to inactivate thrombin, factor Xa, and factor IXa. It
thus retards additional thrombus formation, allowing endogenous
fibrinolytic mechanisms to lyse existing clot. The standard regimen
of heparin followed by 6 months of oral warfarin results in an 80–
90% reduction in the risk of both recurrent venous thrombosis and
death from PE. LMWHs are as effective as unfractionated heparin
in the treatment of venous thromboembolism (see Tables 14–15,
14–19, 14–20).
The optimal duration of anticoagulation therapy for venous
thromboembolism is unknown. There appears to be a protective
benefit to continued anticoagulation in first-episode venous
thromboembolism (twice the rate of recurrence in 6 weeks
compared with 6 months of therapy) and recurrent disease
(eightfold risk of recurrence in 6 months compared with 4 years of
therapy). These studies do not distinguish patients with reversible
risk factors, such as surgery or transient immobility, from patients
who have a nonreversible hypercoagulable state such as factor V
yp
g
Leiden, inhibitor deficiency, antiphospholipid syndrome, or
malignancy. A randomized controlled trial of low-dose warfarin
(INR 1.5–2.0) versus no therapy following 6 months of standard
therapy in patients with idiopathic DVT was stopped early. The
protective benefits of continued anticoagulation include fewer DVTs
in addition to a trend toward lower mortality despite more
hemorrhage in the warfarin group. Risk reductions were consistent
across groups with and without inherited thrombophilia.
Figure 9–7. D-dimer and helical CT-Pa based diagnostic
algorithm for PE. CT-Pa, CT pulmonary angiogram; PE, pulmonary
embolism; ELiSa, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; VTE,
venous thromboembolic disease; LE US, lower extremity venous
ultrasound for deep venous thrombosis; Pa, pulmonary angiogram.
(Reproduced, with permission, from van Belle A et al. Effectiveness
of managing suspected pulmonary embolism using an algorithm
combining clinical probability, D-dimer testing, and computed
tomography. JAMA. 2006 Jan 11;295(2):172–9.)
 
 
Table 9–22. Pulmonary ventilation-perfusion scan based diagnostic
algorithm for PE.
 
Data from The PIOPED Investigators. Value of the ventilation/perfusion
scan in acute pulmonary embolism: results of the Prospective
Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis (PIOPED). JAMA. 1990
May 23–30;263(20):2753–9. [PMID: 2332918]CT-PA, helical CT pulmonary
angiography; LE US, lower extremity venous ultrasound for DVT; PE,
pulmonary embolism.
For many patients, venous thrombosis is a recurrent disease, and
continued therapy results in a lower rate of recurrence at the cost of
an increased risk of hemorrhage. Therefore, the appropriate
duration of therapy needs to take into consideration potentially
reversible risk factors, the individual's age, the likelihood and
potential consequences of hemorrhage, and patient preferences for
continued therapy. It is reasonable to continue therapy for 6 months
after a first episode when there is a reversible risk factor, 12 months
after a first-episode of idiopathic thrombosis, and 6–12 months to
indefinitely in patients with nonreversible risk factors or recurrent
disease. D-dimer testing has been suggested to have a role in
identifying those who may benefit from continued anticoagulation
after 3 months of therapy. This is an area of active research.
The major complication of anticoagulation is hemorrhage. Risk
factors for hemorrhage include the intensity of the anticoagulant
effect; the duration of therapy; concomitant administration of drugs
such as aspirin that interfere with platelet function; and patient
characteristics, particularly increased age, previous gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, and coexistent chronic kidney disease.
The reported incidence of major hemorrhage following
intravenous administration of unfractionated heparin is nil to 7%;
that of fatal hemorrhage is nil to 2%. The incidence with LMWHs is
not statistically different. There is no information comparing
hemorrhage rates at different doses of heparin. The risk of death
from another pulmonary embolism during subtherapeutic heparin
administration in the first 24–48 hours after diagnosis is significant; it
appears to outweigh the risk of short-term supratherapeutic heparin
levels. The incidence of hemorrhage during therapy with warfarin is
reported to be between 3% and 4% per patient year. The
frequency varies with the target INR and is consistently higher when
the INR exceeds 4.0. There is no apparent additional
antithrombotic benefit in venous thromboembolism with a target
INR above 2.0–3.0 (see Chapter 14).
B. Thrombolytic Therapy
Streptokinase, urokinase, and recombinant tissue plasminogen
activator (rt-PA; alteplase) increase plasmin levels and thereby
directly lyse intravascular thrombi. In patients with established PE,
thrombolytic therapy accelerates resolution of emboli within the first
24 hours compared with standard heparin therapy. This is a
consistent 
finding 
using 
angiography, 
 
scanning,
echocardiography, and direct measurement of pulmonary artery
pressures. However, at 1 week and 1 month after diagnosis, these
agents show no difference in outcome compared with heparin and
warfarin. There is no evidence that thrombolytic therapy improves
mortality. Subtle improvements in pulmonary function, including
improved single-breath diffusing capacity and a lower incidence of
exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension, have been observed.
The reliability and clinical importance of these findings is unclear.
The major disadvantages of thrombolytic therapy compared with
heparin are its greater cost and a significant increase in major
hemorrhagic complications. The incidence of intracranial
hemorrhage in patients with PE treated with alteplase is 2.1%
compared with 0.2% in patients treated with heparin.
Current evidence supports thrombolytic therapy for PE in
patients at high risk for death in whom the more rapid resolution of
thrombus may be lifesaving. Such patients are usually
hemodynamically unstable despite heparin therapy. Absolute
contraindications to thrombolytic therapy include active internal
bleeding and stroke within the past 2 months. Major
contraindications include uncontrolled hypertension and surgery or
trauma within the past 6 weeks. The role of thrombolysis in patients
who are hemodynamically stable but with echocardiographic
evidence of right heart strain from acute pulmonary embolism is
unclear and is subject to considerable practice variation.
C. Additional Measures
Interruption of the inferior vena cava may be indicated in patients
with a major contraindication to anticoagulation who have or are at
high risk for development of proximal DVT or PE. Placement of an
inferior vena cava filter is also recommended for recurrent
thromboembolism despite adequate anticoagulation, for chronic
recurrent embolism with a compromised pulmonary vascular bed
(eg, in pulmonary hypertension), and with the concurrent
performance of surgical pulmonary embolectomy or pulmonary
thromboendarterectomy. Percutaneous transjugular placement of a
mechanical filter is the preferred mode of inferior vena cava
interruption. These devices reduce the short-term incidence of PE in
patients presenting with proximal lower extremity DVT. However,
they are associated with a twofold increased risk of recurrent DVT
in the first 2 years following placement.
In rare critically ill patients for whom thrombolytic therapy is
contraindicated or unsuccessful, mechanical or surgical extraction of
thrombus may be indicated. Pulmonary embolectomy is an
emergency procedure of last resort with a very high mortality rate. It
is performed only in a few specialized centers. Several catheter
devices to fragment and extract thrombus through a transvenous
approach have been reported in small numbers of patients.
Comparative outcomes with surgery, thrombolytic therapy, or
heparin have not been studied.
 Prognosis
PE is estimated to cause more than 50,000 deaths annually. In the
majority of deaths, PE is not recognized antemortem or death
occurs before specific treatment can be initiated. These statistics
highlight the importance of preventive therapy in high-risk patients
(see Chapter 14). The outlook for patients with diagnosed and
appropriately treated PE is generally good. Overall prognosis
depends on the underlying disease rather than the PE itself. Death
from recurrent thromboemboli is uncommon, occurring in less than
3% of cases. Perfusion defects resolve in most survivors. Chronic
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension develops in approximately
1% of patients. Selected patients may benefit from pulmonary
endarterectomy.
Dong BR et al. Thrombolytic therapy for pulmonary embolism.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8;(3):CD004437. [PMID:
19588357]
 
Kearon C et al. Antithrombotic therapy for venous
thromboembolic disease: American College of Chest Physicians
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest.
2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):454S–545S. [PMID: 18574272]
 
Konstantinides S. Clinical practice. Acute pulmonary embolism. N
Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 25;359(26):2804–13. [PMID: 19109575]
 
Tapson VF. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2008
Mar 6;358(10):1037–52. [PMID: 18322285]
 
van Belle A et al; Christopher Study Investigators. Effectiveness of
managing suspected pulmonary embolism using an algorithm
combining clinical probability, D-dimer testing, and computed
tomography. JAMA. 2006 Jan 11;295(2):172–9. [PMID:
16403929]
 
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Dyspnea, fatigue, chest pain, and syncope on exertion.
 Narrow splitting of second heart sound with loud pulmonary
component; findings of right ventricular hypertrophy and cardiac
failure in advanced disease.
 Hypoxemia and increased wasted ventilation on pulmonary
function tests.
 Electrocardiographic evidence of right ventricular strain or
hypertrophy and right atrial enlargement.
 Enlarged central pulmonary arteries on chest radiograph.
 
 General Considerations
The pulmonary circulation is unique because of its high blood flow,
low pressure (normally 25/8 mm Hg, mean 12), and low resistance
(normally 200–250 dynes/sec/cm–5). It can accommodate large
increases in blood flow during exercise with only modest increases
in pressure because of its ability to recruit and distend lung blood
vessels. Contraction of smooth muscle in the walls of pulmonary
arteriolar resistance vessels becomes an important factor in
numerous pathologic states. Pulmonary hypertension is present
when pulmonary artery pressure rises to a level inappropriate for a
given cardiac output. Once present, pulmonary hypertension is self-
perpetuating. It introduces secondary structural abnormalities in
pulmonary vessels, including smooth muscle hypertrophy and intimal
proliferation, and these may eventually stimulate atheromatous
changes and in situ thrombosis, leading to further narrowing of the
arterial bed.
Idiopathic (formerly primary) pulmonary hypertension (see
Chapter 10) is pulmonary arterial hypertension that occurs in the
absence of other disease of the lungs or heart. This condition is also
called plexogenic pulmonary arteriopathy, in reference to the
characteristic histopathologic plexiform lesion found in muscular
pulmonary arteries. Untreated, it is characterized by progressive
dyspnea, a rapid downhill course, and an invariably fatal outcome.
Idiopathic pulmonary hypertension must be distinguished from
secondary pulmonary hypertension that occurs with many
disorders including systemic sclerosis, hepatic cirrhosis and portal
hypertension, HIV infection, chronic thromboembolic disease, and
the use of anorectic drugs. Selected mechanisms responsible for
secondary pulmonary hypertension and examples of
corresponding clinical conditions are set forth in Table 9–23.
Pulmonary arteriolar vasoconstriction due to chronic hypoxemia
may complicate any chronic lung disease and compound the effects
of loss of pulmonary blood vessels (as seen with disorders such as
emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis) and obstruction of the
pulmonary vascular bed (as seen with disorders such as chronic
pulmonary thromboembolic disease). Sustained increases in
pulmonary venous pressure from left ventricular failure (systolic,
diastolic, or both), mitral stenosis, and pulmonary venoocclusive
disease may cause “postcapillary” pulmonary hypertension.
Increased pulmonary blood flow due to intracardiac shunts and
increased blood viscosity due to polycythemia can also cause
pulmonary hypertension.
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease is a rare cause of
postcapillary pulmonary hypertension occurring in children and
young adults. The cause is unknown, but associations with various
conditions such as viral infection, bone marrow transplantation,
chemotherapy, and malignancy have been described. The disease is
characterized by progressive fibrotic occlusion of pulmonary veins
and venules, along with secondary hypertensive changes in the
pulmonary arterioles and muscular pulmonary arteries. Nodular
areas of pulmonary congestion, edema, hemorrhage, and
hemosiderosis are found. Chest radiography reveals prominent,
symmetric interstitial markings, Kerley B lines, pulmonary artery
dilation, and normally sized left atrium and left ventricle.
Antemortem diagnosis is often difficult but is occasionally
established by open lung biopsy. There is no effective therapy, and
most patients die within 2 years as a result of progressive pulmonary
hypertension.
 
Table 9–23. Mechanisms of pulmonary hypertension and examples
of corresponding clinical conditions.
 
Reduction in cross-sectional area of pulmonary arterial bed
     Vasoconstriction
     Hypoxemia from any cause (chronic lung disease,
sleep-disordered breathing, etc)
     Acidosis
     Loss of vessels
     Lung resection
     Emphysema
     Vasculitis
     Interstitial lung disease
     Collagen-vascular disease
     Plexogenic narrowing of vessels
     Pulmonary embolism (thromboemboli, tumor emboli,
etc)
     In situ thrombosis
     Schistosomiasis
     Sickle cell disease
     Narrowing of vessels
     Secondary structural changes due to pulmonary
hypertension
Increased pulmonary venous pressure
     Constrictive pericarditis
     Left ventricular failure or reduced compliance
     Mitral stenosis
     Left atrial myxoma
     Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease
     Mediastinal diseases compressing pulmonary veins
Increased pulmonary blood flow
     Congenital left-to-right intracardiac shunts
Increased blood viscosity
     Polycythemia
Miscellaneous
     Pulmonary hypertension occurring in association with
hepatic cirrhosis and portal hypertension
     HIV infection
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pulmonary hypertension may cause or contribute to dyspnea,
present initially on exertion and later at rest. Dull, retrosternal chest
pain resembling angina pectoris may be present. Fatigue and
syncope on exertion also occur, presumably a result of reduced
cardiac output related to elevated pulmonary artery pressures or
bradycardia. Secondary pulmonary hypertension is difficult to
recognize clinically in the early stages, when symptoms and signs are
primarily those of the underlying disease.
The signs of pulmonary hypertension include narrow splitting of
the second heart sound, accentuation of the pulmonary component
of the second heart sound, and a systolic ejection click. In
advanced cases, tricuspid and pulmonary valve insufficiency and
signs of right ventricular failure and cor pulmonale are found.
B. Laboratory Findings
Polycythemia is found in many cases of pulmonary hyper-tension
that are associated with chronic hypoxemia. Electrocardiographic
changes are those of right axis deviation, right ventricular
hypertrophy, right ventricular strain, or right atrial enlargement.
C. Imaging and Special Examinations
Radiographs and high-resolution CT scans of the chest can assist in
the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension and determination of the
cause. In chronic disease, dilation of the right and left main and
lobar pulmonary arteries and enlargement of the pulmonary outflow
tract are seen; in advanced disease, right ventricular and right atrial
enlargement are seen. Peripheral “pruning” of large pulmonary
arteries is characteristic of pulmonary hypertension in severe
emphysema.
Echocardiography is helpful in evaluating patients thought to have
mitral stenosis, left atrial myxoma, and pulmonary valvular disease
and may also reveal right ventricular enlargement and paradoxical
motion of the inter-ventricular septum. Doppler ultrasonography is a
reliable noninvasive means of estimating pulmonary artery systolic
pressure. However, precise hemodynamic measurements can only
be obtained with right heart catheterization, which is helpful when
postcapillary pulmonary hypertension, intracardiac shunting, or
thromboembolic disease is considered as part of the differential
diagnosis.
The diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension cannot be made on
routine pulmonary function tests. Some results may help identify the
cause; eg, diminution of the pulmonary capillary bed may cause
reduction in the single breath diffusing capacity.
The following studies may be useful to exclude causes of
secondary pulmonary hypertension: liver function tests, HIV test,
collagen-vascular serologic studies, polysomnography, 
 lung
scanning, pulmonary angiography, and surgical lung biopsy. 
lung scanning is very helpful in identifying patients with pulmonary
hypertension caused by recurrent pulmonary thromboemboli, a
condition that is often difficult to recognize clinically.
 Treatment
Treatment of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension is discussed in
Chapter 10. Treatment of secondary pulmonary hypertension
consists mainly of treating the underlying disorder. Early recognition
of pulmonary hypertension is crucial to interrupt the self-
perpetuating cycle responsible for rapid clinical progression. Most
patients who present with symptoms and signs of pulmonary
hypertension, however, already have advanced disease. If
hypoxemia or acidosis is detected, corrective measures should be
started immediately. Supplemental oxygen administered for at least
15 hours per day has been demonstrated to slow the progression of
pulmonary hypertension in patients with hypoxemic COPD.
Permanent anticoagulation is indicated in idiopathic pulmonary
hypertension but should be given only to those patients with
secondary 
pulmonary 
hypertension 
at 
high 
risk 
for
thromboembolism. Vasodilator therapy using various pharmacologic
agents (eg, calcium antagonists, hydralazine, isoproterenol,
diazoxide, nitroglycerin) has shown disappointing results in
secondary pulmonary hypertension. Patients most likely to benefit
from long-term pulmonary vasodilator therapy are those who
respond favorably to a vasodilator challenge at right heart
catheterization. It is clear that long-term oral vasodilator therapy
should be used only if hemodynamic benefit is documented.
Complications of pulmonary vasodilator therapy include systemic
hypotension, hypoxemia, and even death.
Continuous long-term intravenous infusion (using a portable
pump) of prostacyclin (PGI2; epoprostenol), a potent pulmonary
vasodilator, has been shown to confer hemodynamic and
symptomatic benefits in selected patients with idiopathic pulmonary
hypertension. This is the first therapy to demonstrate improved
survival of patients with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension.
Limitations of continuous infusion prostacyclin are difficulties in
titration, technical problems with portable delivery systems, and the
high cost of the drug. Other agents in research trials include
subcutaneous (treprostinil), inhaled (iloprost), and oral (beraprost)
prostacyclin analogs, endothelin receptor antagonists (bosentan),
and phosphodiesterase inhibitors (sildenafil). Some of these agents
have shown improvement in functional status but, so far, there is no
evidence for improved outcomes. Combination therapy is an area of
active research.
Patients with marked polycythemia (hematocrit > 60%) should
undergo repeated phlebotomy in an attempt to reduce blood
viscosity. Cor pulmonale complicating pulmonary hypertension is
treated by managing the underlying pulmonary disease and by using
diuretics, salt restriction and, in appropriate patients, supplemental
oxygen. The use of digitalis in cor pulmonale remains controversial.
Pulmonary thromboendarterectomy may benefit selected patients
with pulmonary hypertension secondary to chronic thrombotic
obstruction of major pulmonary arteries.
Single or double lung transplantation may be performed on
patients 
with 
end-stage 
idiopathic 
(primary) 
pulmonary
hypertension. The 2-year survival rate is 50%.
 Prognosis
The prognosis in secondary pulmonary hypertension depends on the
course of the underlying disease. The prognosis is favorable when
pulmonary hypertension is detected early and the conditions leading
to it are readily reversed. Patients with pulmonary hypertension due
to fixed obliteration of the pulmonary vascular bed generally
respond poorly to therapy; development of cor pulmonale in these
cases implies a poor prognosis.
Badesch DB et al. Diagnosis and assessment of pulmonary arterial
hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jun 30;54(1 Suppl): S55–
66. [PMID: 19555859]
 
Barst RJ et al. Updated evidence-based treatment algorithm in
pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jun
30;54(1 Suppl):S78–84. [PMID: 19555861]
 
Ghofrani HA et al. Uncertainties in the diagnosis and treatment of
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Circulation. 2008 Sep 9;
118(11):1195–201. [PMID: 18779455]
 
Zeller JL et al. JAMA patient page. Pulmonary hypertension.
JAMA. 2008 Jan 23;299(3):372. [PMID: 18212322]
 
PULMONARY VASCULITIS
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis [formerly Wegener
granulomatosis] is an idiopathic disease manifested by a
combination of glomerulonephritis, necrotizing granulomatous
vasculitis of the upper and lower respiratory tracts, and varying
degrees of small vessel vasculitis. Chronic sinusitis, arthralgias,
fever, skin rash, and weight loss are frequent presenting symptoms.
Specific pulmonary complaints occur less often. The most common
sign of lung disease is nodular pulmonary infiltrates, often with
cavitation, seen on chest radiography. Tracheal stenosis and
endobronchial disease are sometimes seen. The diagnosis is most
often based on serologic testing and biopsy of lung, sinus tissue, or
kidney with demonstration of necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis.
See Chapter 20.
Allergic angiitis and granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss
syndrome) is an idiopathic multisystem vasculitis of small and
medium-sized arteries that occurs in patients with asthma. The skin
and lungs are most often involved, but other organs, including the
paranasal sinuses, the heart, gastrointestinal tract, liver, and
peripheral nerves, may also be affected. Peripheral eosinophilia >
1500 cells/mcL or > 10% of peripheral WBCs is the rule.
Abnormalities on chest radiographs range from transient opacities to
multiple nodules. This illness may be part of a spectrum that includes
polyarteritis nodosa. The diagnosis requires demonstration of
histologic features including fibrinoid necrotizing epithelioid and
eosinophilic granulomas.
 Treatment
Treatment of pulmonary vasculitis usually requires corticosteroids
and cyclophosphamide. Oral prednisone (1 mg/kg ideal body
weight per day initially, tapering slowly to alternate-day therapy
over 3–6 months) is the corticosteroid of choice; in granulomatosis
with polyangiitis [formerly Wegener granulomatosis], some clinicians
may use cyclophosphamide alone. For fulminant vasculitis, therapy
may be initiated with intravenous methylprednisolone (up to 1 g
intravenously per day) for several days. Cyclophosphamide (1–2
mg/kg ideal body weight per day initially, with dosage adjustments
to avoid neutropenia) is given daily by mouth until complete
remission is obtained and then is slowly tapered, and often replaced
with methotrexate or azathioprine for maintenance therapy.
 Prognosis
Five-year survival rates in patients with these vasculitis syndromes
have been improved by the combination therapy. Complete
remissions can be achieved in over 90% of patients with
granulomatosis with polyangiitis [formerly Wegener granulomatosis].
The addition of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength
tablet by mouth twice daily) to standard therapy may help prevent
relapses.
Alberts WM. Pulmonary manifestations of the Churg-Strauss
syndrome and related idiopathic small vessel vasculitis syndromes.
Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2007 Sep;13(5):445–50. [PMID:
17940492]
 
Grau RG. Churg-Strauss syndrome: 2005–2008 update. Curr
Rheumatol Rep. 2008 Dec;10(6):453-8. [PMID: 19007535]
 
Seo P. Wegener's granulomatosis: managing more than
inflammation. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2008 Jan;20(1):10-6.
[PMID: 18281851]
 
ALVEOLAR HEMORRHAGE SYNDROMES
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage may occur in a variety of immune and
nonimmune disorders. Hemoptysis, alveolar infiltrates on chest
radiograph, anemia, dyspnea, and occasionally fever are
characteristic. Rapid clearing of diffuse lung infiltrates within 2 days
is a clue to the diagnosis of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Pulmonary
hemorrhage can be associated with an increased DlCO.
Causes of immune alveolar hemorrhage have been classified
as anti-basement membrane antibody disease (Goodpasture
syndrome), vasculitis and collagen vascular disease (systemic lupus
erythematosus, [granulomatosis with polyangiitis [formerly,
Wegener granulomatosis], systemic necrotizing vasculitis, and
others), and pulmonary capillaritis associated with idiopathic rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis. Nonimmune causes of diffuse
hemorrhage include coagulopathy, mitral stenosis, necrotizing
pulmonary infection, drugs (penicillamine), toxins (trimellitic
anhydride), and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis.
Goodpasture syndrome is idiopathic recurrent alveolar
hemorrhage and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. The disease
is mediated by anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies.
Goodpasture syndrome occurs mainly in men who are in their 30s
and 40s. Hemoptysis is the usual presenting symptom, but
pulmonary hemorrhage may be occult. Dyspnea, cough, hypoxemia,
and diffuse bilateral alveolar infiltrates are typical features. Iron
deficiency anemia and microscopic hematuria are usually present.
The diagnosis is based on characteristic linear IgG deposits
detected by immunofluorescence in glomeruli or alveoli and on the
presence of anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody in serum.
Combinations 
of 
immunosuppressive 
drugs 
(initially
methylprednisolone, 30 mg/kg intravenously over 20 minutes every
other day for three doses, followed by daily oral prednisone, 1
mg/kg/d; with cyclophosphamide, 2 mg/kg orally per day) and
plasmapheresis have yielded excellent results.
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis is a disease of children
or young adults characterized by recurrent pulmonary hemorrhage;
in contrast to Goodpasture syndrome, renal involvement and anti-
glomerular basement membrane antibodies are absent, but iron
deficiency is typical. Treatment of acute episodes of hemorrhage
with corticosteroids may be useful. Recurrent episodes of
pulmonary hemorrhage may result in interstitial fibrosis and
pulmonary failure.
Ioachimescu OC et al. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage: diagnosing it
and finding the cause. Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Apr;75(4):258,
260, 264–5. [PMID: 18491433]
 
ENVIRONMENTAL &
OCCUPATIONAL LUNG
DISORDERS
 
SMOKE INHALATION
The inhalation of products of combustion may cause serious
respiratory complications. As many as one-third of patients
admitted to burn treatment units have pulmonary injury from smoke
inhalation. Morbidity and mortality due to smoke inhalation may
exceed those attributed to the burns themselves. The death rate of
patients with both severe burns and smoke inhalation exceeds 50%.
All patients in whom significant smoke inhalation is suspected
must be assessed for three consequences of smoke inhalation:
impaired tissue oxygenation, thermal injury to the upper airway, and
injury to the lower airways and lung parenchyma. Impaired tissue
oxygenation may result from inhalation of a hypoxemia gas mixture,
carbon monoxide or cyanide, or from alterations in 
 matching,
and is an immediate threat to life. Immediate treatment with 100%
oxygen is essential. The management of patients with carbon
monoxide and cyanide poisoning is discussed in Chapter 38. The
clinician must recognize that patients with carbon monoxide
poisoning display a normal partial pressure of oxygen in arterial
blood (Pao2) but have a low measured (ie, not oximetric)
hemoglobin saturation (Sao2). Treatment with 100% oxygen should
be continued until the measured carboxyhemoglobin level falls to
less than 10% and concomitant metabolic acidosis has resolved.
Thermal injury to the mucosal surfaces of the upper airway
occurs from inhalation of super-heated gases. Complications
including mucosal edema, upper airway obstruction, and impaired
ability to clear oral secretions usually become evident by 18–24
hours and produce inspiratory stridor. Respiratory failure occurs in
severe cases. Early management (see also Chapter 37) includes the
use of a high-humidity face mask with supplemental oxygen, gentle
suctioning to evacuate oral secretions, elevation of the head 30
degrees to promote clearing of secretions, and topical epinephrine
to reduce edema of the oropharyngeal mucous membrane. Helium-
oxygen gas mixtures (Heliox) may reduce labored breathing due to
critical upper airway narrowing. Close monitoring with arterial
blood gases and later with oximetry is important. Examination of the
upper airway with a fiberoptic laryngoscope or bronchoscope is
superior to routine physical examination. Endotracheal intubation is
often necessary to establish airway patency and is likely to be
necessary in patients with deep facial burns or oropharyngeal or
laryngeal edema. Tracheotomy should be avoided if possible
because of an increased risk of pneumonia and death from sepsis.
Injury to the lower airways and lung parenchyma results from
inhalation of toxic gases and products of combustion, including
aldehydes and organic acids. The site of lung injury depends on the
solubility of the gases inhaled, the duration of exposure, and the size
of inhaled particles that transport noxious gases to distal lung units.
Bronchorrhea and bronchospasm are seen early after exposure
along with dyspnea, tachypnea, and tachycardia. Labored breathing
and cyanosis may follow. Physical examination at this stage reveals
diffuse wheezing and rhonchi. Bronchiolar and alveolar edema (eg,
ARDS) may develop within 1–2 days after exposure. Sloughing of
the bronchiolar mucosa may occur within 2–3 days, leading to
airway obstruction, atelectasis, and worsening hypoxemia. Bacterial
colonization and pneumonia are common by 5–7 days after the
exposure.
Treatment of smoke inhalation consists of supplemental oxygen,
bronchodilators, suctioning of mucosal debris and mucopurulent
secretions via an indwelling endotracheal tube, chest physical
therapy to aid clearance of secretions, and adequate humidification
of inspired gases. Positive endexpiratory pressure (PEEP) has been
advocated to treat bronchiolar edema. Judicious fluid management
and close monitoring for secondary bacterial infection with daily
sputum Gram stains round out the management protocol.
The routine use of corticosteroids for lung injury from smoke
inhalation has been shown to be ineffective and may even be
harmful. Routine or prophylactic use of antibiotics is not
recommended.
Patients who survive should be watched for the late development
of bronchiolitis obliterans.
Mlcak RP et al. Respiratory management of inhalation injury.
Burns. 2007 Feb;33(1):2–13. [PMID: 17223484]
 
PULMONARY ASPIRATION SYNDROMES
Aspiration of material into the tracheobronchial tree results from
various disorders that impair normal deglutition, especially
disturbances of consciousness and esophageal dysfunction.
1. Aspiration of Inert Material
Aspiration of inert material may cause asphyxia if the amount
aspirated is massive and if cough is impaired, in which case
immediate tracheobronchial suctioning is necessary. Most patients
suffer no serious sequelae from aspiration of inert material.
2. Aspiration of Toxic Material
Aspiration of toxic material into the lung usually results in clinically
evident pneumonia. Hydrocarbon pneumonitis is caused by
aspiration of ingested petroleum distillates, eg, gasoline, kerosene,
furniture polish, and other household petroleum products. Lung
injury results mainly from vomiting of ingested products and
secondary aspiration. Therapy is supportive. The lung should be
protected from repeated aspiration with a cuffed endotracheal tube
if necessary. Lipoid pneumonia is usually a chronic syndrome
related to the repeated aspiration of oily materials, eg, mineral oil,
cod liver oil, and oily nose drops; it often occurs in elderly patients
with impaired swallowing. Patchy opacities in dependent lung zones
and lipid-laden macrophages in expectorated sputum are
characteristic findings.
3. “Café Coronary”
Acute obstruction of the upper airway by food is associated with
difficulty swallowing, old age, dental problems that impair chewing,
and use of alcohol and sedative drugs. The Heimlich procedure is
lifesaving in many cases.
4. Retention of an Aspirated Foreign Body
Retention of an aspirated foreign body in the tracheobronchial tree
may produce both acute and chronic conditions, including
atelectasis, postobstructive hyperinflation, both acute and recurrent
pneumonia, bronchiectasis, and lung abscess. Occasionally, a
misdiagnosis of asthma, COPD, or lung cancer is made in adult
patients who have aspirated a foreign body. The plain chest
radiograph usually suggests the site of the foreign body. In some
cases, an expiratory film, demonstrating regional hyperinflation due
to a check-valve effect, is helpful. Bronchoscopy is usually
necessary to establish the diagnosis and attempt removal of the
foreign body.
5. Acute Aspiration of Gastric Contents (Mendelson
Syndrome)
Acute aspiration of gastric contents is often catastrophic. The
pulmonary response depends on the characteristics and amount of
the gastric contents aspirated. The more acidic the material, the
greater the degree of chemical pneumonitis. Aspiration of pure
gastric acid (pH < 2.5) causes extensive desquamation of the
bronchial epithelium, bronchiolitis, hemorrhage, and pulmonary
edema. Acute gastric aspiration is one of the most common causes
of ARDS. The clinical picture is one of abrupt onset of respiratory
distress, with cough, wheezing, fever, and tachypnea. Crackles may
be audible at the bases of the lungs. Hypoxemia may be noted
immediately after aspiration occurs. Radiographic abnormalities,
consisting of patchy alveolar opacities in dependent lung zones,
appear within a few hours. If particulate food matter has been
aspirated along with gastric acid, radiographic features of bronchial
obstruction may be observed. Fever and leukocytosis are common
even in the absence of superinfection.
Treatment of acute aspiration of gastric contents consists of
supplemental oxygen, measures to maintain the airway, and the
usual measures for treatment of acute respiratory failure. There is no
evidence to support the routine use of corticosteroids or
prophylactic antibiotics after gastric aspiration has occurred.
Secondary pulmonary infection, which occurs in about one-fourth of
patients, typically appears 2–3 days after aspiration. Management
of this complication depends on the observed flora of the
tracheobronchial tree. Hypotension secondary to alveolar capillary
membrane injury and intravascular volume depletion is common and
is managed with the judicious administration of intravenous fluids.
6. Chronic Aspiration of Gastric Contents
Chronic aspiration of gastric contents may result from primary
disorders of the larynx or the esophagus, such as achalasia,
esophageal stricture, systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), esophageal
carcinoma, esophagitis, and gastroesophageal reflux. In the last
condition, relaxation of the tone of the lower esophageal sphincter
allows reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus and predisposes
to chronic pulmonary aspiration, especially at night. Cigarette
smoking, consumption of alcohol or caffeine, and use of
theophylline are known to relax the lower esophageal sphincter.
Pulmonary disorders linked to gastroesophageal reflux and chronic
aspiration include asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, and bronchiectasis.
Even in the absence of aspiration, acid in the esophagus may trigger
bronchospasm or bronchial hyperreactivity through reflex
mechanisms.
The diagnosis and management of gastroesophageal reflux and
chronic aspiration is challenging. A discussion of strategies for the
evaluation, prevention, and management of extraesophageal reflux
manifestations can be found in Chapter 15.
Boyd M et al. Tracheobronchial foreign body aspiration in adults.
South Med J. 2009 Feb;102(2):171–4. [PMID: 19139679]
 
Paintal HS et al. Aspiration syndromes: 10 clinical pearls every
physician should know. Int J Clin Pract. 2007 May;61(5): 846–
52. [PMID: 17493092]
 
OCCUPATIONAL PULMONARY DISEASES
Many acute and chronic pulmonary diseases are directly related to
inhalation of noxious substances encountered in the workplace.
Disorders that are linked to occupational exposures may be
classified as follows: (1) pneumoconioses, (2) hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, (3) obstructive airway disorders, (4) pulmonary
edema, (5) lung cancer, (6) pleural diseases, and (7) miscellaneous
disorders.
1. Pneumoconioses
Pneumoconioses are chronic fibrotic lung diseases caused by the
inhalation of inorganic dusts. Pneumoconioses due to inhalation of
inert dusts may be asymptomatic disorders with diffuse nodular
opacities on chest radiograph or may be severe, symptomatic, life-
shortening disorders. Clinically important pneumoconioses include
coal worker's pneumoconiosis, silicosis, and asbestosis (Table 9–
24). Treatment for each is supportive.
A. Coal Worker's Pneumoconiosis
In coal worker's pneumoconiosis, ingestion of inhaled coal dust by
alveolar macrophages leads to the formation of coal macules,
usually 2–5 mm in diameter, that appear on chest radiograph as
diffuse small opacities that are especially prominent in the upper
lung. Simple coal worker's pneumoconiosis is usually asymptomatic;
pulmonary function abnormalities are unimpressive. Cigarette
smoking does not increase the prevalence of coal worker's
pneumoconiosis but may have an additive detrimental effect on
ventilatory function. In complicated coal worker's pneumoconiosis
(“progressive 
massive 
fibrosis”), 
conglomeration 
and
contraction in the upper lung zones occur, with radiographic
features resembling complicated silicosis. Caplan syndrome is a
rare condition characterized by the presence of necrobiotic
rheumatoid nodules (1–5 cm in diameter) in the periphery of the
lung in coal workers with rheumatoid arthritis.
B. Silicosis
In silicosis, extensive or prolonged inhalation of free silica (silicon
dioxide) particles in the respirable range (0.3–5 mcm) causes the
formation of small rounded opacities (silicotic nodules) throughout
the lung. Calcification of the periphery of hilar lymph nodes
(“eggshell” calcification) is an unusual radiographic finding that
strongly suggests silicosis. Simple silicosis is usually asymptomatic
and has no effect on routine pulmonary function tests; in
complicated silicosis, large conglomerate densities appear in the
upper lung and are accompanied by dyspnea and obstructive and
restrictive pulmonary dysfunction. The incidence of pulmonary
tuberculosis is increased in patients with silicosis. All patients with
silicosis should have a tuberculin skin test and a current chest
radiograph. If old, healed pulmonary tuberculosis is suspected,
multidrug treatment for tuberculosis (not single-agent preventive
therapy) should be instituted.
 
Table 9–24. Selected pneumoconioses.
 
C. Asbestosis
Asbestosis is a nodular interstitial fibrosis occurring in workers
exposed to asbestos fibers (shipyard and construction workers,
pipe fitters, insulators) over many years (typically 10–20 years).
Patients with asbestosis usually first seek medical attention at least
15 years after exposure with the following symptoms and signs:
progressive dyspnea, inspiratory crackles, and in some cases,
clubbing and cyanosis. The radiographic features of asbestosis
include linear streaking at the lung bases, opacities of various shapes
and sizes, and honeycomb changes in advanced cases. The
presence of pleural calcifications may be a clue to diagnosis. High-
resolution CT scanning is the best imaging method for asbestosis
because of its ability to detect parenchymal fibrosis and define the
presence of coexisting pleural plaques. Cigarette smoking in
asbestos workers increases the prevalence of radiographic pleural
and parenchymal changes and markedly increases the incidence of
lung carcinoma. It may also interfere with the clearance of short
asbestos fibers from the lung. Pulmonary function studies show
restrictive dysfunction and reduced diffusing capacity. The presence
of a ferruginous body in tissue suggests significant asbestos
exposure; however, other histologic features must be present for
diagnosis. There is no specific treatment.
Cohen RA et al. Lung disease caused by exposure to coal mine
and silica dust. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Dec;
29(6):651–61. [PMID: 19221963]
 
O'Reilly KM et al. Asbestos-related lung disease. Am Fam
Physician. 2007 Mar 1;75(5):683–8. [PMID: 17375514]
 
2. Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (also called extrinsic allergic alveolitis)
is a nonatopic, nonasthmatic inflammatory pul-monary disease. It is
manifested mainly as an occupational disease (Table 9–25), in
which exposure to inhaled organic antigens leads to an acute illness.
Prompt diagnosis is essential since symptoms are usually reversible
if the offending antigen is removed from the patient's environment
early in the course of illness. Continued exposure may lead to
progressive disease. The histopathology of acute hypersensitivity
pneumonitis is characterized by interstitial infiltrates of lymphocytes
and plasma cells, with noncaseating granulomas in the interstitium
and air spaces.
 
Table 9–25. Selected causes of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Acute Illness
The symptoms are characterized by sudden onset of malaise, chills,
fever, cough, dyspnea, and nausea 4–8 hours after exposure to the
offending antigen. This may occur after the patient has left work or
even at night and thus may mimic paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Bibasilar crackles, tachypnea, tachycardia, and (occasionally)
cyanosis are noted. Small nodular densities sparing the apices and
bases of the lungs are noted on chest radiograph. Laboratory
studies reveal an increase in the white blood cell count with a shift to
the left, hypoxemia, and the presence of precipitating antibodies to
the offending agent in serum. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis antibody
panels against common offending antigens are available; positive
results, while supportive, do not establish a definitive diagnosis.
Pulmonary function studies reveal restrictive dysfunction and
reduced diffusing capacity.
B. Subacute Illness
A subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis syndrome (15% of cases)
is characterized by the insidious onset of chronic cough and slowly
progressive dyspnea, anorexia, and weight loss. Chronic exposure
leads to progressive respiratory insufficiency and the appearance of
pulmonary fibrosis on chest imaging. Surgical lung biopsy may be
necessary for the diagnosis of subacute and chronic hypersensitivity
pneumonitis. Even with surgical lung biopsy, however, chronic
hypersensitivity pneumonitis may be difficult to diagnose because
histopathologic patterns overlap with several idiopathic interstitial
pneumonias.
 Treatment
Treatment of acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis consists of
identification of the offending agent and avoidance of further
exposure. In severe acute or protracted cases, oral corticosteroids
(prednisone, 0.5 mg/kg daily as a single morning dose for 2 weeks,
tapered to nil over 4–6 weeks) may be given. Change in occupation
is often unavoidable.
Girard M et al. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Allergy. 2009 Mar;
64(3):322–34. [PMID: 19210361]
 
Lacasse Y et al. Myths and controversies in hypersensitivity
pneumonitis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Dec;29(6): 631–
42. [PMID: 19221961]
 
3. Obstructive Airway Disorders
Occupational pulmonary diseases manifested as obstructive airway
disorders include occupational asthma, industrial bronchitis, and
byssinosis.
A. Occupational Asthma
It has been estimated that from 2% to 5% of all cases of asthma are
related to occupation. Offending agents in the workplace are
numerous; they include grain dust, wood dust, tobacco, pollens,
enzymes, gum arabic, synthetic dyes, isocyanates (particularly
toluene diisocyanate), rosin (soldering flux), inorganic chemicals
(salts of nickel, platinum, and chromium), trimellitic anhydride,
phthalic anhydride, formaldehyde, and various pharmaceutical
agents. Diagnosis of occupational asthma depends on a high index
of suspicion, an appropriate history, spirometric studies before and
after exposure to the offending substance, and peak flow rate
measurements in the workplace. Bronchial provocation testing may
be helpful in some cases. Treatment consists of avoidance of further
exposure to the offending agent and bronchodilators, but symptoms
may persist for years after workplace exposure has been
terminated.
B. Industrial Bronchitis
Industrial bronchitis is chronic bronchitis found in coal miners and
others exposed to cotton, flax, or hemp dust. Chronic disability
from industrial bronchitis is infrequent.
q
C. Byssinosis
Byssinosis is an asthma-like disorder in textile workers caused by
inhalation of cotton dust. The pathogenesis is obscure. Chest
tightness, cough, and dyspnea are characteristically worse on
Mondays or the first day back at work, with symptoms subsiding
later in the week. Repeated exposure leads to chronic bronchitis.
4. Toxic Lung Injury
Toxic lung injury from inhalation of irritant gases is discussed in the
section on smoke inhalation. Silo-filler's disease is acute toxic
high-permeability pulmonary edema caused by inhalation of nitrogen
dioxide encountered in recently filled silos. Bronchiolitis obliterans is
a common late complication, which may be prevented by early
treatment of the acute reaction with corticosteroids. Extensive
exposure to silage gas may be fatal. Inhalation of the compound
diacetyl, a constituent of butter-flavoring, has been linked to the
development of bronchiolitis obliterans among microwave popcorn
production workers.
5. Lung Cancer
Many industrial pulmonary carcinogens have been identified,
including asbestos, radon gas, arsenic, iron, chromium, nickel, coal
tar fumes, petroleum oil mists, isopropyl oil, mustard gas, and
printing ink. Cigarette smoking acts as a cocarcinogen with asbestos
and radon gas to cause bronchogenic carcinoma. Asbestos alone
causes malignant mesothelioma. Almost all histologic types of lung
cancer have been associated with these carcinogens. Chloromethyl
methyl ether specifically causes small cell carcinoma of the lung.
6. Pleural Diseases
Occupational diseases of the pleura may result from exposure to
asbestos (see above) or talc. Inhalation of talc causes pleural
plaques that are similar to those caused by asbestos. Benign
asbestos pleural effusion occurs in some asbestos workers and may
cause chronic blunting of the costophrenic angle on chest
radiograph.
7. Other Occupational Pulmonary Diseases
Occupational agents are also responsible for other pulmonary
disorders. These include exposure to beryllium, which now occurs
in machining and handling of beryllium products and alloys.
Beryllium miners are not at risk for berylliosis and beryllium is no
longer used in fluorescent lamp production, which was a source of
exposure before 1950. Berylliosis, an acute or chronic pulmonary
disorder, occurs from absorption of beryllium through the lungs or
skin and widely disseminated throughout the body. Acute berylliosis
is a toxic, ulcerative tracheobronchitis and chemical pneumonitis
following intense and severe exposure to beryllium. Chronic
berylliosis, a systemic disease closely resembling sarcoidosis, is
more common. Chronic pulmonary beryllium disease is thought to
be an alveolitis mediated by the proliferation of beryllium-specific
helper-inducer T cells in the lung.
Dykewicz MS. Occupational asthma: current concepts in
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2009 Mar;123(3):519–28. [PMID: 19281900]
 
Smith AM et al. Management of work-related asthma. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2009 Mar;123(3):551–7. [PMID: 19281902]
 
DRUG-INDUCED LUNG DISEASE
Typical patterns of pulmonary response to drugs implicated in drug-
induced respiratory disease are summarized in Table 9–26.
Pulmonary injury due to drugs occurs as a result of allergic
reactions, idiosyncratic reactions, overdose, or undesirable side
effects. In most patients, the mechanism of pulmonary injury is
unknown.
Precise diagnosis of drug-induced pulmonary disease is often
difficult, because results of routine laboratory studies are not helpful
and radiographic findings are not specific. A high index of suspicion
and a thorough medical history of drug usage are critical to
establishing the diagnosis of drug-induced lung disease. The clinical
response to cessation of the suspected offending agent is also
helpful. Acute episodes of drug-induced pulmonary disease usually
disappear 24–48 hours after the drug has been discontinued, but
chronic syndromes may take longer to resolve. Challenge tests to
confirm the diagnosis are risky and rarely performed.
Treatment of drug-induced lung disease consists of discontinuing
the offending agent immediately and managing the pulmonary
symptoms appropriately.
Inhalation of crack cocaine may cause a spectrum of acute
pulmonary syndromes, including pulmonary infiltration with
eosinophilia, pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum, bronchiolitis
obliterans, and acute respiratory failure associated with diffuse
alveolar damage and alveolar hemorrhage. Corticosteroids have
been used with variable success to treat alveolar hemorrhage.
Babu KS et al. Drug-induced airway diseases. Clin Chest Med.
2004 Mar;25(1):113–22. [PMID: 15062603]
 
Huggins JT et al. Drug-induced pleural disease. Clin Chest Med.
2004 Mar;25(1):141–53. [PMID: 15062606]
 
 
Table 9–26. Pulmonary manifestations of selected drug toxicities.
 
Asthma
     β-Blockers
     Aspirin
     Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
     Histamine
     Methacholine
     Acetylcysteine
     Aerosolized pentamidine
     Any nebulized medication
Chronic cough
     Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
Pulmonary infiltration
     Without eosinophilia
        Amitriptyline
        Azathioprine
        Amiodarone
     With eosinophilia
        Sulfonamides
        L-Tryptophan
        Nitrofurantoin
        Penicillin
        Methotrexate
        Crack cocaine
Drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus
     Hydralazine
     Procainamide
     Isoniazid
     Chlorpromazine
     Phenytoin
Interstitial pneumonitis/fibrosis
     Nitrofurantoin
     Bleomycin
     Busulfan
     Cyclophosphamide
     Methysergide
     Phenytoin
Pulmonary edema
     Noncardiogenic
        Aspirin
        Chlordiazepoxide
        Cocaine
        Ethchlorvynol
        Heroin
     Cardiogenic
        β-Blockers
Pleural effusion
     Bromocriptine
     Nitrofurantoin
     Any drug inducing systemic lupus erythematosus
     Methysergide
     Chemotherapeutic agents
Mediastinal widening
     Phenytoin
     Corticosteroids
     Methotrexate
     Respiratory failure
     Neuromuscular blockade
        Aminoglycosides
        Succinylcholine
        Gallamine
        Dimethyltubocurarine (metocurine)
     Central nervous system depression
        Sedatives
        Hypnotics
        Opioids
        Alcohol
        Tricyclic antidepressants
        Oxygen
RADIATION LUNG INJURY
The lung is an exquisitely radiosensitive organ that can be damaged
by external beam radiation therapy. The degree of pulmonary injury
is determined by the volume of lung irradiated, the dose and rate of
exposure, and potentiating factors (eg, concurrent chemotherapy,
previous radiation therapy in the same area, and simultaneous
withdrawal of corticosteroid therapy). Symptomatic radiation lung
injury occurs in about 10% of patients treated for carcinoma of the
breast, 5–15% of patients treated for carcinoma of the lung, and 5–
35% of patients treated for lymphoma. Two phases of the
pulmonary response to radiation are apparent: an acute phase
(radiation pneumonitis) and a chronic phase (radiation fibrosis).
1. Radiation Pneumonitis
Acute radiation pneumonitis usually occurs 2–3 months (range 1–6
months) after completion of radiotherapy and is characterized by
insidious onset of dyspnea, intractable dry cough, chest fullness or
pain, weakness, and fever. Late radiation pneumonitis may develop
6–12 months after completion of radiation. The pathogenesis of
acute radiation pneumonitis is unknown, but there is speculation that
hypersensitivity mechanisms are involved. The dominant
histopathologic findings are a lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis
progressing to an exudative alveolitis. Inspiratory crackles may be
heard in the involved area. In severe disease, respiratory distress
and cyanosis occur that are characteristic of ARDS. An increased
white blood cell count and elevated sedimentation rate are common.
Pulmonary function studies reveal reduced lung volumes, reduced
lung compliance, hypoxemia, reduced diffusing capacity, and
reduced maximum voluntary ventilation. Chest radiography, which
correlates poorly with the presence of symptoms, usually
demonstrates alveolar or nodular opacities limited to the irradiated
area. Air bronchograms are often observed. Sharp borders of an
opacity may help distinguish radiation pneumonitis from other
conditions such as infectious pneumonia, lymphangitic spread of
carcinoma, and recurrent tumor; however, the opacity may extend
beyond the radiation field. No specific therapy is proved to be
effective in radiation pneumonitis, but prednisone (1 mg/kg/d orally)
is commonly given immediately for about 1 week. The dose is then
reduced and maintained at 20–40 mg/d for several weeks, then
slowly tapered. Radiation pneumonitis may improve in 2–3 weeks
following onset of symptoms as the exudative phase resolves. Acute
respiratory failure, if present, is treated supportively. Death from
ARDS is unusual in radiation pneumonitis.
2. Pulmonary Radiation Fibrosis
Radiation fibrosis may occur with or without antecedent radiation
pneumonitis. Cor pulmonale and chronic respiratory failure are rare.
Radiographic findings include obliteration of normal lung markings,
dense interstitial and pleural fibrosis, reduced lung volumes, tenting
of the diaphragm, and sharp delineation of the irradiated area. No
specific therapy is proven effective, and corticosteroids have no
value. Pulmonary fibrosis may develop after an intervening period
(6–12 months) of well being in patients who experience radiation
pneumonitis. Pulmonary radiation fibrosis occurs in most patients
who receive a full course of radiation therapy for cancer of the lung
or breast. Most patients are asymptomatic, although slowly
progressive dyspnea may occur.
3. Other Complications of Radiation Therapy
Other complications of radiation therapy directed to the thorax
include 
pericardial 
effusion, 
constrictive 
pericarditis,
tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal candidiasis, radiation
dermatitis, and rib fractures. Small pleural effusions, radiation
pneumonitis outside the irradiated area, spontaneous pneumothorax,
and complete obstruction of central airways are unusual
occurrences.
Camus P et al. Interstitial lung disease induced by drugs and
radiation. Respiration. 2004 Jul–Aug;71(4):301–26. [PMID:
15316202]
 
Ghafoori P et al. Radiation-induced lung injury. Assessment,
management, and prevention. Oncology (Williston Park). 2008
Jan;22(1):37–47. [PMID: 18251282]
 
PLEURAL DISEASES
 
PLEURITIS
Pain due to acute pleural inflammation is caused by irritation of the
parietal pleura. Such pain is localized, sharp, and fleeting; it is made
worse by coughing, sneezing, deep breathing, or movement. When
the central portion of the diaphragmatic parietal pleura is irritated,
pain may be referred to the ipsilateral shoulder. There are numerous
causes of pleuritis. The setting in which pleuritic pain develops helps
narrow the differential diagnosis. In young, otherwise healthy
individuals, pleuritis is usually caused by viral respiratory infections
or pneumonia. The presence of pleural effusion, pleural thickening,
or air in the pleural space requires further diagnostic and therapeutic
measures. Simple rib fracture may cause severe pleurisy.
Treatment of pleuritis consists of treating the underlying disease.
Analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs (eg, indomethacin, 25 mg
orally two or three times daily) are often helpful for pain relief.
Codeine (30–60 mg orally every 8 hours) may be used to control
cough associated with pleuritic chest pain if retention of airway
secretions is not a likely complication. Intercostal nerve blocks are
sometimes helpful but the benefit is usually transient.
PLEURAL EFFUSION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 May be asymptomatic; chest pain frequently seen in the setting of
pleuritis, trauma, or infection; dyspnea is common with large
effusions.
 Dullness to percussion and decreased breath sounds over the
effusion.
 Radiographic evidence of pleural effusion.
 Diagnostic findings on thoracentesis.
 
 General Considerations
There is constant movement of fluid from parietal pleural capillaries
into the pleural space at a rate of 0.01 mL/kg body weight/h.
Absorption of pleural fluid occurs through parietal pleural
lymphatics. The resultant homeostasis leaves 5–15 mL of fluid in the
normal pleural space. A pleural effusion is an abnormal
accumulation of fluid in the pleural space. Pleural effusions may be
classified by differential diagnosis (Table 9–27) or by underlying
pathophysiology. Five pathophysiologic processes account for most
pleural effusions: increased production of fluid in the setting of
normal capillaries due to increased hydrostatic or decreased oncotic
pressures (transudates); increased production of fluid due to
abnormal capillary permeability (exudates); decreased lymphatic
clearance of fluid from the pleural space (exudates); infection in the
pleural space (empyema); and bleeding into the pleural space
(hemothorax).
 
Table 9–27. Causes of pleural fluid transudates and exudates.
 
 
 
Transudates
Exudates
Congestive heart failure (>
90% of cases)
Cirrhosis with ascites
Nephrotic syndrome
Peritoneal dialysis
Myxedema
Atelectasis (acute)
Constrictive pericarditis
Superior vena cava
obstruction
Pulmonary embolism
Pneumonia
(parapneumonic effusion)
Cancer
Pulmonary embolism
Bacterial infection
Tuberculosis
Connective tissue disease
Viral infection
Fungal infection
Rickettsial infection
Parasitic infection
Asbestos
Meigs syndrome
Pancreatic disease
Uremia
Chronic atelectasis
Trapped lung
Chylothorax
Sarcoidosis
Drug reaction
Post-myocardial injury
syndrome
Diagnostic thoracentesis should be performed whenever there is
a new pleural effusion and no clinically apparent cause. Observation
is appropriate in some situations (eg, symmetric bilateral pleural
effusions in the setting of congestive heart failure), but an atypical
presentation or failure of an effusion to resolve as expected
warrants thoracentesis. Sampling allows visualization of the fluid in
addition to chemical and microbiologic analyses to identify the
pathophysiologic processes listed above. A definitive diagnosis is
made through positive cytology or identification of a specific
causative organism in approximately 25% of cases. In another 50–
60% of patients, identification of relevant pathophysiology in the
appropriate clinical setting greatly narrows the differential diagnosis
and leads to a presumptive diagnosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with pleural effusions most often report dyspnea, cough, or
respirophasic chest pain. Symptoms are more common in patients
with existing cardiopulmonary disease. Small pleural effusions are
less likely to be symptomatic than larger effusions. Physical findings
are usually absent in small effusions. Larger effusions may present
with dullness to percussion and diminished or absent breath sounds
over the effusion. Compressive atelectasis may cause bronchial
breath sounds and egophony just above the effusion. A massive
effusion with increased intrapleural pressure may cause contralateral
shift of the trachea and bulging of the intercostal spaces. A pleural
friction rub indicates infarction or pleuritis.
B. Laboratory Findings
The gross appearance of pleural fluid helps identify several types of
pleural effusion. Grossly purulent fluid signifies empyema. Milky
white pleural fluid should be centrifuged. A clear supernatant above
a pellet of white cells indicates empyema, whereas a persistently
turbid supernatant suggests a chylous effusion. Analysis of this
supernatant reveals chylomicrons and a high triglyceride level (>
100 mg/dL [1 mmol/L]), often from traumatic disruption of the
thoracic duct. Hemorrhagic pleural effusion is a mixture of blood
and pleural fluid. Ten thousand red cells per milliliter create blood-
tinged pleural fluid; 100,000/mL create grossly bloody pleural fluid.
Hemothorax is the presence of gross blood in the pleural space,
usually following chest trauma or instrumentation. It is defined as a
ratio of pleural fluid hematocrit to peripheral blood hematocrit >
0.5.
Pleural fluid samples should be sent for measurement of protein,
glucose, and LD in addition to total and differential white blood cell
counts. Chemistry determinations are used to classify effusions as
transudates or exudates. This classification is important because the
differential diagnosis for each entity is vastly different (Table 9–27).
A pleural exudate is an effusion that has one or more of the
following laboratory features: (1) ratio of pleural fluid protein to
serum protein > 0.5; (2) ratio of pleural fluid LD to serum LD >
0.6; (3) pleural fluid LD greater than two-thirds the upper limit of
normal serum LD.
Transudates have none of these features. Transudates occur in
the setting of normal capillary integrity and suggest the absence of
local pleural disease. Distinguishing laboratory findings include a
glucose equal to serum glucose, pH between 7.40 and 7.55, and
fewer than 1.0 × 103 white blood cells/mcL (1.0 × 109/L) with a
predominance of mononuclear cells. Causes include increased
hydrostatic pressure (congestive heart failure accounts for 90% of
transudates), decreased oncotic pressure (hypoalbuminemia,
cirrhosis), and greater negative pleural pressure (acute atelectasis).
Exudates form as a result of pleural disease associated with
increased capillary permeability or reduced lymphatic drainage.
Bacterial pneumonia and cancer are the most common causes of
exudative effusion, but there are many other causes with
characteristic laboratory findings. These findings are summarized in
Table 9–28.
Pleural fluid pH is useful in the assessment of parapneumonic
effusions. A pH below 7.30 suggests the need for drainage of the
pleural space. An elevated amylase level in pleural fluid suggests
pancreatitis, pancreatic pseudocyst, adenocarcinoma of the lung or
pancreas, or esophageal rupture.
 
Table 9–28. Characteristics of important exudative pleural
effusions.
 
LD, lactate dehydrogenase; M, mononuclear cell predominance; P,
polymorphonuclear leukocyte predominance.
Thoracentesis with culture and pleural biopsy is indicated in
suspected tuberculous pleural effusion. Pleural fluid culture is 44%
sensitive, and the combination of closed pleural biopsy with culture
and histologic examination for granulomas is 70–90% sensitive for
the diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis.
Pleural fluid specimens should be sent for cytologic examination
in all cases of exudative effusions in patients suspected of harboring
an underlying malignancy. The diagnostic yield depends on the
nature and extent of the underlying malignancy. Sensitivity is
between 50% and 65%. A negative cytologic examination in a
patient with a high prior probability of malignancy should be
followed by one repeat thoracentesis. If that examination is
negative, thoracoscopy is preferred to closed pleural biopsy. The
sensitivity of thoracoscopy is 92–96%.
C. Imaging
The lung is less dense than water and floats on pleural fluid that
accumulates in dependent regions. Subpulmonary fluid may appear
as lateral displacement of the apex of the diaphragm with an abrupt
slope to the costophrenic sulcus or a greater than 2 cm separation
between the gastric air bubble and the lung. On a standard upright
chest radio-graph, approximately 75–100 mL of pleural fluid must
accumulate in the posterior costophrenic sulcus to be visible on the
lateral view, and 175–200 mL must be present in the lateral
costophrenic sulcus to be visible on the frontal view. Chest CT
scans may identify as little as 10 mL of fluid. At least 1 cm of fluid
on the decubitus view is necessary to permit blind thoracentesis.
Ultrasonography is useful to guide thoracentesis in the setting of
smaller effusions.
Pleural fluid may become trapped (loculated) by pleural
adhesions, thereby forming unusual collections along the lateral
chest wall or within lung fissures. Round or oval fluid collections in
fissures that resemble intraparenchymal masses are called
pseudotumors. Massive pleural effusion causing opacification of an
entire hemithorax is most commonly caused by cancer but may be
seen in tuberculosis and other diseases.
 Treatment
A. Transudative Pleural Effusion
Transudative pleural effusions characteristically occur in the absence
of pleural disease. Treatment is directed at the underlying condition.
Therapeutic thoracentesis for severe dyspnea typically offers only
transient benefit. Pleurodesis and tube thoracostomy are rarely
indicated.
B. Malignant Pleural Effusion
Between 40% and 80% of exudative pleural effusions are
malignant, while over 90% of malignant pleural effusions are
exudative. Approximately 15% of patients dying of cancer are
reported to have malignant pleural effusions. Almost any form of
cancer may cause effusions, but the most common causes are lung
cancer (one-third of cases) and breast cancer. In 5–10% of
malignant pleural effusions, no primary tumor is identified. See
Chapter 39.
The term “paramalignant pleural effusion” refers to an effusion in
a patient with cancer when repeated attempts to identify tumor cells
in the pleura or pleural fluid are non-diagnostic but when there is a
presumptive relation to the underlying malignancy. For example,
superior vena cava syndrome with elevated systemic venous
pressures causing a transudative effusion would be “paramalignant.”
C. Parapneumonic Pleural Effusion
Parapneumonic pleural effusions are exudates that accompany
approximately 40% of bacterial pneumonias. They are divided into
three categories: simple or uncomplicated, complicated, and
empyema. Uncomplicated parapneumonic effusions are free-flowing
sterile exudates of modest size that resolve quickly with antibiotic
treatment of pneumonia. They do not need drainage. Empyema is
gross infection of the pleural space indicated by positive Gram stain
or culture. Empyema should always be drained by tube
thoracostomy to facilitate clearance of infection and to reduce the
probability of fibrous encasement of the lung, causing permanent
pulmonary impairment.
Complicated parapneumonic effusions present the most difficult
management decisions. They tend to be larger than simple
parapneumonic effusions and to show more evidence of
inflammatory stimuli such as low glucose level, low pH, or evidence
of loculation. Inflammation probably reflects ongoing bacterial
invasion of the pleural space despite rare positive bacterial cultures.
The morbidity associated with complicated effusions is due to their
tendency to form a fibropurulent pleural “peel,” trapping otherwise
functional lung and leading to permanent impairment. Tube
thoracostomy is indicated when pleural fluid glucose is < 60 mg/dL
(3.3 mmol/L) or the pH is < 7.2. These thresholds have not been
prospectively validated and should not be interpreted strictly. The
clinician should consider drainage of a complicated effusion if the
pleural fluid pH is between 7.2 and 7.3 or the LD is > 1000 units/L
(20 mckat/L). Pleural fluid cell count and protein have little
diagnostic value in this setting.
Tube thoracostomy drainage of empyema or parapneumonic
effusions is frequently complicated by loculation that prevents
adequate drainage. Intrapleural instillation of fibrinolytic agents
(streptokinase, 250,000 units, or urokinase, 100,000 units, in 50–
100 mL of normal saline once or twice daily) is often used to
improve drainage, although data are mixed as to whether this
intervention improves outcomes.
D. Hemothorax
A small-volume hemothorax that is stable or improving on chest
radiographs may be managed by close observation. In all other
cases, hemothorax is treated by immediate insertion of a large-bore
thoracostomy tube to: (1) drain existing blood and clot, (2) quantify
the amount of bleeding, (3) reduce the risk of fibrothorax, and (4)
permit apposition of the pleural surfaces in an attempt to reduce
hemorrhage. Thoracotomy may be indicated to control hemorrhage,
remove clot, and treat complications such as bronchopleural fistula
formation.
Froudarakis ME. Diagnostic work-up of pleural effusions.
Respiration. 2008;75(1):4–13. [PMID: 18185024]
 
Heffner JE et al. Recent advances in the diagnosis and
management of malignant pleural effusions. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008
Feb;83(2):235–50. [PMID: 18241636]
 
Hildreth CJ et al. JAMA patient page. Pleural effusion. JAMA.
2009 Jan 21;301(3):344. [PMID: 19155463]
 
Sahn SA. The value of pleural fluid analysis. Am J Med Sci. 2008
Jan;335(1):7–15. [PMID: 18195577]
 
SPONTANEOUS PNEUMOTHORAX
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute onset of unilateral chest pain and dyspnea.
 Minimal physical findings in mild cases; unilateral chest expansion,
decreased tactile fremitus, hyperresonance, diminished breath
sounds, mediastinal shift, cyanosis and hypotension in tension
pneumothorax.
 Presence of pleural air on chest radiograph.
 
 General Considerations
Pneumothorax, or accumulation of air in the pleural space, is
classified as spontaneous (primary or secondary) or traumatic.
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the absence of an
underlying lung disease, whereas secondary spontaneous
pneumothorax is a complication of preexisting pulmonary disease.
Traumatic pneumothorax results from penetrating or blunt trauma.
Iatrogenic pneumothorax may follow procedures such as
thoracentesis, pleural biopsy, subclavian or internal jugular vein
catheter placement, percutaneous lung biopsy, bronchoscopy with
transbronchial biopsy, and positive-pressure mechanical ventilation.
Tension pneumothorax usually occurs in the setting of penetrating
trauma, lung infection, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or positive-
pressure mechanical ventilation. In tension pneumothorax, the
pressure of air in the pleural space exceeds ambient pressure
throughout the respiratory cycle. A check-valve mechanism allows
air to enter the pleural space on inspiration and prevents egress of
air on expiration.
Primary pneumothorax affects mainly tall, thin boys and men
between the ages of 10 and 30 years. It is thought to occur from
rupture of subpleural apical blebs in response to high negative
intrapleural pressures. Family history and cigarette smoking may
also be important factors.
Secondary pneumothorax occurs as a complication of COPD,
asthma, cystic fibrosis, tuberculosis, Pneumocystis pneumonia,
menstruation (catamenial pneumothorax), and a wide variety of
interstitial 
lung 
diseases 
including 
sarcoidosis,
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, and
tuberous sclerosis. Aerosolized pentami-dine and a prior history of
Pneumocystis pneumonia are considered risk factors for the
development of pneumothorax. One-half of patients with
pneumothorax in the setting of recurrent (but not primary)
Pneumocystis pneumonia will develop pneumothorax on the
contralateral side. The mortality rate of pneumothorax in
Pneumocystis pneumonia is high.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Chest pain ranging from minimal to severe on the affected side and
dyspnea occur in nearly all patients. Symptoms usually begin during
rest and usually resolve within 24 hours even if the pneumothorax
persists. Alternatively, pneumothorax may present with life-
threatening respiratory failure if underlying COPD or asthma is
present.
If pneumothorax is small (< 15% of a hemithorax), physical
findings, other than mild tachycardia, are normal. If pneumothorax is
large, diminished breath sounds, decreased tactile fremitus, and
decreased movement of the chest are often noted. Tension
pneumothorax should be suspected in the presence of marked
tachycardia, hypotension, and mediastinal or tracheal shift.
B. Laboratory Findings
Arterial blood gas analysis is often unnecessary but reveals
hypoxemia and acute respiratory alkalosis in most patients. Left-
sided primary pneumothorax may produce QRS axis and precordial
T wave changes on the ECG that may be misinterpreted as acute
myocardial infarction.
C. Imaging
Demonstration of a visceral pleural line on chest radio-graph is
diagnostic and may only be seen on an expiratory film. A few
patients have secondary pleural effusion that demonstrates a
characteristic air-fluid level on chest radiography. In supine patients,
pneumothorax on a conventional chest radiograph may appear as
an abnormally radiolucent costophrenic sulcus (the “deep sulcus”
sign). In patients with tension pneumothorax, chest radiographs
show a large amount of air in the affected hemithorax and
contralateral shift of the mediastinum.
 Differential Diagnosis
If the patient is a young, tall, thin, cigarette-smoking man, the
diagnosis of primary spontaneous pneumothorax is usually obvious
and can be confirmed by chest radiograph. In secondary
pneumothorax, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish loculated
pneumothorax from an emphysematous bleb. Occasionally,
pneumothorax may mimic myocardial infarction, pulmonary
embolism, or pneumonia.
 Complications
Tension pneumothorax may be life-threatening. Pneumomediastinum
and subcutaneous emphysema may occur as complications of
spontaneous pneumothorax. If pneumomediastinum is detected,
rupture of the esophagus or a bronchus should be considered.
 Treatment
Treatment depends on the severity of pneumothorax and the nature
of the underlying disease. In a reliable patient with a small (< 15%
of a hemithorax), stable spontaneous primary pneumothorax,
observation alone may be appropriate. Many small pneumothoraces
resolve spontaneously as air is absorbed from the pleural space;
supplemental oxygen therapy may increase the rate of reabsorption.
Simple aspiration drainage of pleural air with a small-bore catheter
(eg, 16 gauge angio-catheter or larger drainage catheter) can be
performed for spontaneous primary pneumothoraces that are large
or progressive. Placement of a small-bore chest tube (7F to 14F)
attached to a one-way Heimlich valve provides protection against
development of tension pneumothorax and may permit observation
from home. The patient should be treated symptomatically for
cough and chest pain, and followed with serial chest radiographs
every 24 hours.
Patients with secondary pneumothorax, large pneumothorax,
tension pneumothorax, or severe symptoms or those who have a
pneumothorax on mechanical ventilation should undergo chest tube
placement (tube thoracostomy). The chest tube is placed under
water-seal drainage, and suction is applied until the lung expands.
The chest tube can be removed after the air leak subsides.
All patients who smoke should be advised to discontinue
smoking and warned that the risk of recurrence is 50%. Future
exposure to high altitudes, flying in unpressurized aircraft, and scuba
diving should be avoided.
Indications for thoracoscopy or open thoracotomy include
recurrences of spontaneous pneumothorax, any occurrence of
bilateral pneumothorax, and failure of tube thoracostomy for the first
episode (failure of lung to reexpand or persistent air leak). Surgery
permits resection of blebs responsible for the pneumothorax and
pleurodesis by mechanical abrasion and insufflation of talc.
Management of pneumothorax in patients with Pneumocystis
pneumonia is challenging because of a tendency toward recurrence,
and there is no consensus on the best approach. Use of a small
chest tube attached to a Heimlich valve has been proposed to allow
the patient to leave the hospital. Some clinicians favor its insertion
early in the course.
 Prognosis
An average of 30% of patients with spontaneous pneumothorax
experience recurrence of the disorder after either observation or
tube thoracostomy for the first episode. Recurrence after surgical
therapy is less frequent. Following successful therapy, there are no
long-term complications.
Chan SS. The role of simple aspiration in the management of
primary spontaneous pneumothorax. J Emerg Med. 2008 Feb;
34(2):131–8. [PMID: 17961959]
 
Kelly AM. Treatment of primary spontaneous pneumothorax. Curr
Opin Pulm Med. 2009 Jul;15(4):376–9. [PMID: 19373088]
 
Noppen M et al. Pneumothorax. Respiration. 2008;76(2):121–7.
[PMID: 18708734]
 
DISORDERS OF CONTROL OF
VENTILATION
 
The principal influences on ventilatory control are arterial Pco2, pH,
Po2, and brainstem tissue pH. These variables are monitored by
peripheral and central chemoreceptors. Under normal conditions,
the ventilatory control system maintains arterial pH and Pco2 within
narrow limits; arterial Po2 is more loosely controlled.
Abnormal control of ventilation can be seen with a variety of
conditions ranging from rare disorders such as Ondine curse,
neuromuscular disorders, myxedema, starvation, and carotid body
resection to more common disorders such as asthma, COPD,
obesity, congestive heart failure, and sleep-related breathing
disorders. A few of these disorders will be discussed in this section.
Annane D et al. Nocturnal mechanical ventilation for chronic
hypoventilation in patients with neuromuscular and chest wall
disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Oct 17;(4):
CD001941. [PMID: 17943762]
 
Ward SA. Ventilatory control in humans: constraints and
limitations. Exp Physiol. 2007 Mar;92(2):357–66. [PMID:
17234715]
 
PRIMARY ALVEOLAR HYPOVENTILATION
Primary alveolar hypoventilation (“Ondine curse”) is a rare
syndrome of unknown cause characterized by inadequate alveolar
ventilation despite normal neurologic function and normal airways,
lungs, chest wall, and ventilatory muscles. Hypoventilation is even
more marked during sleep. Individuals with this disorder are usually
nonobese males in their third or fourth decades who have lethargy,
headache, and somnolence. Dyspnea is absent. Physical
examination may reveal cyanosis and evidence of pulmonary
hypertension and cor pulmonale. Hypoxemia and hypercapnia are
present and improve with voluntary hyperventilation. Erythrocytosis
is common. Treatment with ventilatory stimulants is usually
unrewarding. Augmentation of ventilation by mechanical methods
(phrenic nerve stimulation, rocking bed, mechanical ventilators) has
been helpful to some patients. Adequate oxygenation should be
maintained with supplemental oxygen, but nocturnal oxygen therapy
should be prescribed only if diagnostic nocturnal polysomnography
has demonstrated its efficacy and safety. Primary alveolar
hypoventilation resembles—but should be distinguished from
—central alveolar hypoventilation, in which impaired ventilatory
drive with chronic respiratory acidemia and hypoxemia follows an
insult to the brainstem (eg, bulbar poliomyelitis, infarction,
meningitis, encephalitis, trauma).
Weese-Mayer DE et al; ATS Congenital Central Hypoventilation
Syndrome Subcommittee. An official ATS clinical policy statement:
congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: genetic basis,
diagnosis, and management. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010
Mar 15;181(6):626–44. [PMID: 20208042]
 
OBESITY-HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROME
(Pickwickian Syndrome)
In obesity-hypoventilation syndrome, alveolar hypoventilation
appears to result from a combination of blunted ventilatory drive
and increased mechanical load imposed upon the chest by obesity.
Voluntary hyperventilation returns the Pco2 and the Po2 toward
normal values, a correction not seen in lung diseases causing chronic
respiratory failure such as COPD. Most patients with
obesityhypoventilation syndrome also suffer from obstructive sleep
apnea (see below), which must be treated aggressively if identified
as a comorbid disorder. Therapy of obesityhypoventilation
syndrome consists mainly of weight loss, which improves
hypercapnia and hypoxemia as well as the ventilatory responses to
hypoxia and hypercapnia. NPPV is helpful in some patients.
Respiratory stimulants may be helpful and include theophylline,
acetazolamide, and medroxyprogesterone acetate, 10–20 mg every
8 hours orally. Improvement in hypoxemia, hypercapnia,
erythrocytosis, and cor pulmonale are goals of therapy.
Berger KI et al. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome. Semin Respir
Crit Care Med. 2009 Jun;30(3):253–61. [PMID: 19452386]
 
Mokhlesi B et al. Assessment and management of patients with
obesity hypoventilation syndrome. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2008
Feb 15;5(2):218–25. [PMID: 18250215]
 
HYPERVENTILATION SYNDROMES
Hyperventilation is an increase in alveolar ventilation that leads to
hypocapnia. It may be caused by a variety of conditions, such as
pregnancy, hypoxemia, obstructive and infiltrative lung diseases,
sepsis, hepatic dysfunction, fever, and pain. The term “central
neurogenic hyperventilation” denotes a monotonous, sustained
pattern of rapid and deep breathing seen in comatose patients with
brainstem injury of multiple causes. Functional hyperventilation may
be acute or chronic. Acute hyperventilation presents with
hyperpnea, paresthesias, carpopedal spasm, tetany, and anxiety.
Chronic hyperventilation may present with various nonspecific
symptoms, including fatigue, dyspnea, anxiety, palpitations, and
dizziness. The diagnosis of chronic hyperventilation syndrome is
established if symptoms are reproduced during voluntary
hyperventilation. Once organic causes of hyperventilation have been
excluded, treatment of acute hyperventilation consists of rebreathing
expired gas from a paper bag held over the face in order to
decrease respiratory alkalemia and its associated symptoms.
Anxiolytic drugs may also be useful.
Foster GT et al. Respiratory alkalosis. Respir Care. 2001 Apr;
46(4):384–91. [PMID: 11262557]
 
Laffey JG et al. Hypocapnia. N Engl J Med. 2002 Jul 4;347(1):
43–53. [PMID: 12097540]
 
SLEEP-RELATED BREATHING DISORDERS
Abnormal ventilation during sleep is manifested by apnea (breath
cessation for at least 10 seconds) or hypopnea (decrement in
airflow with drop in hemoglobin saturation of at least 4%). Episodes
of apnea are central if ventilatory effort is absent for the duration of
the apneic episode, obstructive if ventilatory effort persists
throughout the apneic episode but no airflow occurs because of
transient obstruction of the upper airway, and mixed if absent
ventilatory effort precedes upper airway obstruction during the
apneic episode. Pure central sleep apnea is uncommon; it may be
an isolated finding or may occur in patients with primary alveolar
hypoventilation or with lesions of the brainstem. Obstructive and
mixed sleep apneas are more common and may be associated with
life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias, severe hypoxemia during sleep,
daytime somnolence, pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale,
systemic hypertension, and secondary erythrocytosis.
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Daytime somnolence or fatigue.
 A history of loud snoring with witnessed apneic events.
 Overnight polysomnography demonstrating apneic episodes with
hypoxemia.
 
 General Considerations
Upper airway obstruction during sleep occurs when loss of normal
pharyngeal muscle tone allows the pharynx to collapse passively
during inspiration. Patients with anatomically narrowed upper
airways (eg, micrognathia, macroglossia, obesity, tonsillar
hypertrophy) are predisposed to the development of obstructive
sleep apnea. Ingestion of alcohol or sedatives before sleeping or
nasal obstruction of any type, including the common cold, may
precipitate or worsen the condition. Hypothyroidism and cigarette
smoking are additional risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea.
Before making the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, a drug
history should be obtained and a seizure disorder, narcolepsy, and
depression should be excluded.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with obstructive or mixed sleep apnea are obese,
middle-aged men. Systemic hypertension is common. Patients may
complain of excessive daytime somnolence, morning sluggishness
and headaches, daytime fatigue, cognitive impairment, recent weight
gain, and impotence. Bed partners usually report loud cyclical
snoring, breath cessation, witnessed apneas, restlessness, and
thrashing movements of the extremities during sleep. Personality
changes, poor judgment, work-related problems, depression, and
intellectual deterioration (memory impairment, inability to
concentrate) may also be observed.
Physical examination may be normal or may reveal systemic and
pulmonary hypertension with cor pulmonale. The patient may
appear sleepy or even fall asleep during the evaluation. The
oropharynx is frequently found to be narrowed by excessive soft
tissue folds, large tonsils, pendulous uvula, or prominent tongue.
Nasal obstruction by a deviated nasal septum, poor nasal airflow,
and a nasal twang to the speech may be observed. A “bull neck”
appearance is common.
B. Laboratory Findings
Erythrocytosis is common. Thyroid function tests should be
obtained.
C. Other Studies
Observation of the sleeping patient may reveal loud snoring
interrupted by episodes of increasingly strong ventilatory effort that
fail to produce airflow. A loud snort often accompanies the first
breath following an apneic episode. Definitive diagnostic evaluation
for suspected sleep apnea includes otorhinolaryngologic
examination and overnight polysomnography (the monitoring of
multiple physiologic factors during sleep). Screening may be
performed using home nocturnal pulse oximetry, which when normal
has a high negative predictive value in ruling out significant sleep
apnea. A complete polysomnography examination includes
electroencephalography, electro-oculography, electromyography,
ECG, pulse oximetry, and measurement of respiratory effort and
airflow. Polysomnography reveals apneic episodes lasting as long
as 60 seconds. Oxygen saturation falls, often to very low levels.
Bradydysrhythmias, such as sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, or
atrioventricular block, may occur. Tachydysrhythmias, including
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and
ventricular tachycardia, may be seen once airflow is reestablished.
 Treatment
Weight loss and strict avoidance of alcohol and hypnotic
medications are the first steps in management. Weight loss may be
curative, but most patients are unable to lose the 10–20% of body
weight required. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure
(nasal CPAP) at night is curative in many patients.
Polysomnography is frequently necessary to determine the level of
CPAP (usually 5–15 cm H2O) necessary to abolish obstructive
apneas. Unfortunately, only about 75% of patients continue to use
nasal CPAP after 1 year. Pharmacologic therapy for obstructive
sleep apnea is disappointing. Supplemental oxygen may lessen the
severity of nocturnal desaturation but may also lengthen apneas; it
should not be routinely prescribed. Polysomnography is necessary
to assess the effects of oxygen therapy. Mechanical devices inserted
into the mouth at bedtime to hold the jaw forward and prevent
pharyngeal occlusion have modest effectiveness in relieving apnea;
however, patient compliance is not optimal.
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP), a procedure consisting
of resection of pharyngeal soft tissue and amputation of
approximately 15 mm of the free edge of the soft palate and uvula,
is helpful in approximately 50% of selected patients. It is more
effective in eliminating snoring than apneic episodes. UPPP may
now be performed on an outpatient basis with a laser. Nasal
septoplasty is performed if gross anatomic nasal septal deformity is
present. Tracheostomy relieves upper airway obstruction and its
physiologic consequences and represents the definitive treatment for
obstructive sleep apnea. However, it has numerous adverse effects,
including granuloma formation, difficulty with speech, and stoma and
airway infection. Furthermore, the long-term care of the
tracheostomy, especially in obese patients, can be difficult.
Tracheostomy and other maxillofacial surgery approaches are
reserved for patients with life-threatening arrhythmias or severe
disability who have not responded to conservative therapy.
Some patients with sleep apnea have nocturnal brady-cardia. A
pilot study in 15 patients with either central or obstructive sleep
apnea showed some improvement in oxygen saturation with atrial
pacing. This single study must be considered preliminary.
Chowdhuri S et al. Central sleep apnoea. Indian J Med Res. 2010
Feb;131:150–64. [PMID: 20308740]
 
Eastwood PR et al. Obstructive sleep apnoea: from pathogenesis
to treatment: current controversies and future directions.
Respirology. 2010 May;15(4):587–95. [PMID: 20136736]
 
Eckert DJ et al. Central sleep apnea: Pathophysiology and
treatment. Chest. 2007 Feb;131(2):595–607. [PMID: 17296668]
 
Ulualp SO. Snoring and obstructive sleep apnea. Med Clin North
Am. 2010 Sep;94(5):1047–55. [PMID: 20736112]
 
Yaggi HK et al. Adult obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea
syndrome: definitions, risk factors, and pathogenesis. Clin Chest
Med. 2010 Jun;31(2):179–86. [PMID: 20488280]
 
ACUTE RESPIRATORY
FAILURE
 
Respiratory failure is defined as respiratory dysfunction resulting in
abnormalities of oxygenation or ventilation (CO2 elimination) severe
enough to threaten the function of vital organs. Arterial blood gas
criteria for respiratory failure are not absolute but may be arbitrarily
established as a Po2 under 60 mm Hg (7.8 kPa) or a Pco2 over 50
mm Hg (6.5 kPa). Acute respiratory failure may occur in a variety
of pulmonary and nonpulmonary disorders (Table 9–29). A
complete discussion of treatment of acute respiratory failure is
beyond the scope of this chapter. Only a few selected general
principles of management will be reviewed here.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms and signs of acute respiratory failure are those of the
underlying disease combined with those of hypoxemia or
hypercapnia. The chief symptom of hypoxemia is dyspnea, though
profound hypoxemia may exist in the absence of complaints. Signs
of hypoxemia include cyanosis, restlessness, confusion, anxiety,
delirium, tachypnea, bradycardia or tachycardia, hypertension,
cardiac dysrhythmias, and tremor. Dyspnea and headache are the
cardinal symptoms of hypercapnia. Signs of hypercapnia include
peripheral and conjunctival hyperemia, hypertension, tachycardia,
tachypnea, impaired consciousness, papilledema, and asterixis. The
symptoms and signs of acute respiratory failure are both insensitive
and nonspecific; therefore, the physician must maintain a high index
of suspicion and obtain arterial blood gas analysis if respiratory
failure is suspected.
 
Table 9–29. Selected causes of acute respiratory failure in adults.
 
Airway disorders
     Asthma
     Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis or
emphysema
     Obstruction of pharynx, larynx, trachea, main stem
bronchus, or lobar bronchus by edema, mucus, mass, or
foreign body
Pulmonary edema
     Increased hydrostatic pressure
        Left ventricular dysfunction (eg, myocardial ischemia,
heart failure)
     Mitral regurgitation
     Left atrial outflow obstruction (eg, mitral stenosis)
        Volume overload states
        Increased pulmonary capillary permeability
        Acute respiratory distress syndrome
     Acute lung injury
        Unclear etiology
        Neurogenic
        Negative pressure (inspiratory airway obstruction)
        Reexpansion
        Tocolytic-associated
Parenchymal lung disorders
     Pneumonia
     Interstitial lung diseases
     Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndromes
     Aspiration
     Lung contusion
Pulmonary vascular disorders
     Thromboembolism
     Air embolism
     Amniotic fluid embolism
Chest wall, diaphragm, and pleural disorders
     Rib fracture
     Flail chest
     Pneumothorax
     Pleural effusion
     Massive ascites
     Abdominal distention and abdominal compartment
syndrome
Neuromuscular and related disorders
     Primary neuromuscular diseases
        Guillain-Barré syndrome
        Myasthenia gravis
        Poliomyelitis
        Polymyositis
     Drug- or toxin-induced
        Botulism
        Organophosphates
        Neuromuscular blocking agents
        Aminoglycosides
     Spinal cord injury
     Phrenic nerve injury or dysfunction
     Electrolyte disturbances: hypokalemia, hypophos-
phatemia
     Myxedema
Central nervous system disorders
     Drugs: sedative, hypnotic, opioid, anesthetics
     Brainstem respiratory center disorders: trauma, tumor,
vascular disorders, hypothyroidism
     Intracranial hypertension
     Central nervous system infections
Increased CO2 production
     Fever
     Infection
     Hyperalimentation with excess caloric and carbohy-
drate intake
     Hyperthyroidism
     Seizures
     Rigors
     Drugs
 Treatment
Treatment of the patient with acute respiratory failure consists of:
(1) specific therapy directed toward the underlying disease; (2)
( ) p
py
y g
; ( )
respiratory supportive care directed toward the maintenance of
adequate gas exchange; and (3) general supportive care. Only the
last two aspects are discussed below.
A. Respiratory Support
Respiratory support has both nonventilatory and ventilatory aspects.
1. Nonventilatory aspects—The main therapeutic goal in acute
hypoxemic respiratory failure is to ensure adequate oxygenation of
vital organs. Inspired oxygen concentration should be the lowest
value that results in an arterial hemoglobin saturation of ≥ 90% (Po2
≥ 60 mm Hg [7.8 kPa]). Higher arterial oxygen tensions are of no
proven benefit. Restoration of normoxia may rarely cause
hypoventilation in patients with chronic hypercapnia; however,
oxygen therapy should not be withheld for fear of causing
progressive respiratory acidemia. Hypoxemia in patients with
obstructive airway disease is usually easily corrected by
administering low-flow oxygen by nasal cannula (1–3 L/min) or
Venturi mask (24–40%). Higher concentrations of oxygen are
necessary to correct hypoxemia in patients with ARDS, pneumonia,
and other parenchymal lung diseases.
2. Ventilatory aspects—Ventilatory support consists of
maintaining patency of the airway and ensuring adequate alveolar
ventilation. Mechanical ventilation may be provided via face mask
(noninvasive) or through tracheal intubation.
A. 
Noninvasive 
positive-pressure 
ventilation—NPPV
delivered via a full face mask or nasal mask has become first-line
therapy in COPD patients with hypercapnic respiratory failure who
can protect and maintain the patency of their airway, handle their
own secretions, and tolerate the mask apparatus. Several studies
have demonstrated the effectiveness of this therapy in reducing
intubation rates and ICU stays in patients with ventilatory failure.
Patients with acute lung injury or ARDS or those who suffer from
severely impaired oxygenation do not benefit and should be
intubated if they require mechanical ventilation. A bilevel positive
pressure ventilation mode is preferred for most patients.
B. Tracheal intubation—Indications for tracheal intubation
include: (1) hypoxemia despite supplemental oxygen, (2) upper
airway obstruction, (3) impaired airway protection, (4) inability to
clear secretions, (5) respiratory acidosis, (6) progressive general
fatigue, tachypnea, use of accessory respiratory muscles, or mental
status deterioration, and (7) apnea. In general, orotracheal
intubation is preferred to nasotracheal intubation in urgent or
emergency situations because it is easier, faster, and less traumatic.
The position of the tip of the endotracheal tube at the level of the
aortic arch should be verified by chest radiograph immediately
following intubation, and auscultation should be performed to verify
that both lungs are being inflated. Only tracheal tubes with high-
volume, low-pressure air-filled cuffs should be used. Cuff inflation
pressure should be kept below 20 mm Hg if possible to minimize
tracheal mucosal injury.
C. Mechanical ventilation—Indications for mechanical ventilation
include: (1) apnea, (2) acute hypercapnia that is not quickly
reversed by appropriate specific therapy, (3) severe hypoxemia,
and (4) progressive patient fatigue despite appropriate treatment.
Several modes of positive-pressure ventilation are available.
Controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV; also known as assist-
control or A-C) and synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation
(SIMV) are ventilatory modes in which the ventilator delivers a
minimum number of breaths of a specified tidal volume each minute.
In both CMV and SIMV, the patient may trigger the ventilator to
deliver additional breaths. In CMV, the ventilator responds to
breaths initiated by the patient above the set rate by delivering
additional full tidal volume breaths. In SIMV, additional breaths are
not supported by the ventilator unless the pressure support mode is
added. Numerous alternative modes of mechanical ventilation now
exist, the most popular being pressure support ventilation (PSV),
pressure control ventilation (PCV), and CPAP.
PEEP is useful in improving oxygenation in patients with diffuse
parenchymal lung disease such as ARDS. It should be used
cautiously in patients with localized parenchymal disease,
hyperinflation, or very high airway pressure requirements during
mechanical ventilation.
D. Complications of mechanical ventilation—Potential
complications of mechanical ventilation are numerous. Migration of
the tip of the endotracheal tube into a main bronchus can cause
atelectasis of the contralateral lung and overdistention of the
intubated 
lung. Barotrauma (alternatively referred to as
“volutrauma”), 
manifested 
by 
subcutaneous 
emphysema,
pneumomediastinum, subpleural air cysts, pneumothorax, or
systemic gas embolism, may occur in patients whose lungs are
overdistended by excessive tidal volumes, especially those with
hyperinflation caused by airflow obstruction. Subtle parenchymal
lung injury due to overdistention of alveoli is another potential
hazard. Strategies to avoid barotrauma include deliberate
hypoventilation through the use of low mechanical tidal volumes and
respiratory rates, resulting in “permissive hypercapnia.”
Acute respiratory alkalosis caused by overventilation is common.
Hypotension induced by elevated intrathoracic pressure that results
in decreased return of systemic venous blood to the heart may
occur in patients treated with PEEP, those with severe airflow
obstruction, and those with intravascular volume depletion.
Ventilator-associated pneumonia is another serious complication of
mechanical ventilation.
B. General Supportive Care
Maintenance of adequate nutrition is vital; parenteral nutrition should
be used only when conventional enteral feeding methods are not
possible. Overfeeding, especially with carbohydrate-rich formulas,
should be avoided, because it can increase CO2 production and
may potentially worsen or induce hypercapnia in patients with
limited ventilatory reserve. However, failure to provide adequate
nutrition is more common. Hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia
may worsen hypoventilation due to respiratory muscle weakness.
Sedative-hypnotics and opioid analgesics are frequently used. They
should be titrated carefully to avoid oversedation, leading to
prolongation of intubation. Temporary paralysis with a
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent is occasionally used
to facilitate mechanical ventilation and to lower oxygen
consumption. Prolonged muscle weakness due to an acute
myopathy is a potential complication of these agents. Myopathy is
more common in patients with kidney dysfunction and in those given
concomitant corticosteroids.
Psychological and emotional support of the patient and family,
skin care to avoid decubitus ulcers, and meticulous avoidance of
health care–associated infection and complications of tracheal tubes
are vital aspects of comprehensive care for patients with acute
respiratory failure.
Attention must also be paid to preventing complications
associated with serious illness. Stress gastritis and ulcers may be
avoided by administering sucralfate (1 g orally twice a day),
histamine H2-receptor antagonists, or PPIs. There is some concern
that the latter two agents, which raise the gastric pH, may permit
increased growth of gram-negative bacteria in the stomach,
predisposing to pharyngeal colonization and ultimately HCAP; many
clinicians therefore prefer sucralfate. The risk of DVT and PE may
be reduced by subcutaneous administration of heparin (5000 units
every 12 hours), the use of LMWH (see Table 14–13), or
placement of a sequential compression device on an extremity.
 Course & Prognosis
The course and prognosis of acute respiratory failure vary and
depend on the underlying disease. The prognosis of acute
respiratory failure caused by uncomplicated sedative or narcotic
drug overdose is excellent. Acute respiratory failure in patients with
COPD who do not require intubation and mechanical ventilation has
a good immediate prognosis. On the other hand, ARDS associated
with sepsis has an extremely poor prognosis, with mortality rates of
about 90%. Overall, adults requiring mechanical ventilation for all
causes of acute respiratory failure have survival rates of 62% to
weaning, 43% to hospital discharge, and 30% to 1 year after
hospital discharge.
Keenan SP et al. Noninvasive ventilation for patients presenting
with acute respiratory failure: the randomized controlled trials.
Respir Care. 2009 Jan;54(1):116–26. [PMID: 19111111]
 
Roca O et al. High-flow oxygen therapy in acute respiratory
failure. Respir Care. 2010 Apr;55(4):408–13. [PMID: 20406507]
 
Soo Hoo GW. Noninvasive ventilation in adults with acute
respiratory distress: a primer for the clinician. Hosp Pract
(Minneap). 2010 Feb;38(1):16–25. [PMID: 20469620]
 
ACUTE RESPIRATORY
DISTRESS SYNDROME
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute onset of respiratory failure.
 Bilateral radiographic pulmonary opacities.
 Absence of elevated left atrial pressure (if measured, pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure ≤ 18 mm Hg).
 Ratio of partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (Pao2) to
fractional concentration of inspired oxygen (FIo2) < 200,
regardless of the level of PEEP.
 
 General Considerations
ARDS denotes acute hypoxemic respiratory failure following a
systemic or pulmonary insult without evidence of heart failure.
ARDS is the most severe form of acute lung injury and is
characterized by bilateral, widespread radio-graphic pulmonary
infiltrates, normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (≤ 18 mm
Hg) and a Pao2/FIO2 ratio < 200. ARDS may follow a wide variety
of clinical events (Table 9–30). Common risk factors for ARDS
include sepsis, aspiration of gastric contents, shock, infection, lung
contusion, nonthoracic trauma, toxic inhalation, near-drowning, and
multiple blood transfusions. About one-third of ARDS patients
initially have sepsis syndrome. Pro-inflammatory cytokines released
from stimulated inflammatory cells appear to be pivotal in lung
injury. Although the mechanism of lung injury varies with the cause,
damage to capillary endothelial cells and alveolar epithelial cells is
common to ARDS regardless of cause. Damage to these cells
causes increased vascular permeability and decreased production
and activity of surfactant; these abnormalities lead to interstitial and
alveolar pulmonary edema, alveolar collapse, and hypoxemia.
 Clinical Findings
ARDS is marked by the rapid onset of profound dyspnea that
usually occurs 12–48 hours after the initiating event. Labored
breathing, tachypnea, intercostal retractions, and crackles are noted
on physical examination. Chest radiography shows diffuse or patchy
bilateral infiltrates that rapidly become confluent; these
characteristically spare the costophrenic angles. Air bronchograms
occur in about 80% of cases. Upper lung zone venous engorgement
is distinctly uncommon. Heart size is normal, and pleural effusions
are small or nonexistent. Marked hypoxemia occurs that is
refractory to treatment with supplemental oxygen. Many patients
with ARDS demonstrate multiple organ failure, particularly involving
the kidneys, liver, gut, central nervous system, and cardiovascular
system.
 
Table 9–30. Selected disorders associated with ARDS.
 
 
 
Systemic Insults
Pulmonary Insults
Trauma
Sepsis
Pancreatitis
Shock
Multiple transfusions
Disseminated
intravascular coagulation
Burns
Drugs and drug overdose
Opioids
Aspirin
Phenothiazines
Aspiration of gastric contents
Embolism of thrombus, fat, air,
or amniotic fluid
Miliary tuberculosis
Diffuse pneumonia (eg,
SARS)
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia
Cryptogenic organizing
pneumonitis
Upper airway obstruction
Free-base cocaine smoking
Near-drowning
Phenothiazines
Tricyclic antidepressants
Amiodarone
Chemotherapeutic agents
Nitrofurantoin
Protamine
Thrombotic
thrombocytopenic
purpura
Cardiopulmonary bypass
Head injury
Paraquat
Toxic gas inhalation
Nitrogen dioxide
Chlorine
Sulfur dioxide
Ammonia
Smoke
Oxygen toxicity
Lung contusion
Radiation exposure
High-altitude exposure
Lung reexpansion or
reperfusion
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; SARS, severe acute
respiratory syndrome.
 Differential Diagnosis
Since ARDS is a physiologic and radiographic syndrome rather
than a specific disease, the concept of differential diagnosis does not
strictly apply. Normal-permeability (“cardiogenic” or hydrostatic)
pulmonary edema must be excluded, however, because specific
therapy is available for that disorder. Measurement of pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure by means of a flow-directed pulmonary
artery catheter may be required in selected patients with suspected
cardiac dysfunction. Routine use of the Swan-Ganz catheter in
ARDS is discouraged.
 Prevention
No measures that effectively prevent ARDS have been identified;
specifically, prophylactic use of PEEP in patients at risk for ARDS
has not been shown to be effective. Intravenous methylprednisolone
does not prevent ARDS when given early to patients with sepsis
syndrome or septic shock.
 Treatment
Treatment of ARDS must include identification and specific
treatment of the underlying precipitating and secondary conditions
(eg, sepsis). Meticulous supportive care must then be provided to
compensate for the severe dysfunction of the respiratory system
associated with ARDS and to prevent complications (see above).
Treatment of the hypoxemia seen in ARDS usually requires
tracheal intubation and positive-pressure mechanical ventilation. The
lowest levels of PEEP (used to recruit atelectatic alveoli) and
supplemental oxygen required to maintain the Pao2 above 55 mm
Hg (7.13 kPa) or the Sao2 above 88% should be used. Efforts
should be made to decrease FIO2 to less than 60% as soon as
possible in order to avoid oxygen toxicity. PEEP can be increased
as needed as long as cardiac output and oxygen delivery do not
decrease and airway pressures do not increase excessively. Prone
positioning may transiently improve oxygenation in selected patients
by helping recruit atelectatic alveoli; however, great care must be
taken during the maneuver to avoid dislodging catheters and tubes.
A variety of mechanical ventilation strategies are available. A
multicenter study of 800 patients demonstrated that a protocol using
volume-control ventilation with low tidal volumes (6 mL/kg of ideal
body weight) resulted in a 10% absolute mortality reduction over
therapy with standard tidal volumes (defined as 12 mL/kg of ideal
body weight); this trial reported the lowest mortality (31%) of any
intervention to date for ARDS.
Approaches to hemodynamic monitoring and fluid management in
patients with acute lung injury have been carefully studied. A
prospective, randomized trial comparing hemodynamic management
guided by a pulmonary artery catheter with hemodynamic
management guided by a central venous catheter using an explicit
management protocol demonstrated that a pulmonary artery
catheter should not be routinely used for the management of acute
lung injury. A subsequent randomized, prospective clinical study of
restrictive fluid intake and diuresis as needed to maintain central
venous pressure < 4 mm Hg or pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
< 8 mm Hg (conservative strategy group) versus a fluid
management protocol to target a central venous pressure of 10–14
mm Hg or a pulmonary artery occlusion pressure 14–18 mm Hg
(liberal strategy group), showed that patients in the conservative
strategy group experienced faster improvement in lung function and
spent significantly fewer days on mechanical ventilation and in the
ICU without an improvement in death by 60 days or worsening
nonpulmonary organ failure at 28 days. Oxygen delivery can be
increased in anemic patients by ensuring that hemoglobin
concentrations are at least 7 g/dL (70 g/L); patients are not likely to
benefit from higher levels. Increasing oxygen delivery to
supranormal levels through the use of inotropes and high
hemoglobin concentrations is not clinically useful and may be
harmful. Strategies to decrease oxygen consumption include the
appropriate use of sedatives, analgesics, and antipyretics.
A large number of innovative therapeutic interventions to improve
outcomes in ARDS patients have been or are being investigated.
Unfortunately, to date, none have consistently shown benefit in
clinical trials. Systemic corticosteroids have been studied extensively
with variable and inconsistent results. While a few small studies
suggest some specific improved outcomes when given within the
first 2 weeks after the onset of ARDS, the routine use of
corticosteroids is not recommended.
 Course & Prognosis
The mortality rate associated with ARDS is 30–40%. If ARDS is
accompanied by sepsis, the mortality rate may reach 90%. The
major causes of death are the primary illness and secondary
complications such as multiple organ system failure or sepsis.
Median survival is about 2 weeks. Many patients who succumb to
ARDS and its complications die after withdrawal of support (see
Withdrawal of Support in Chapter 5). Most survivors of ARDS are
left with some pulmonary symptoms (cough, dyspnea, sputum
production), which tend to improve over time. Mild abnormalities of
oxygenation, diffusing capacity, and lung mechanics persist in some
individuals.
Deja M et al. Evidence-based therapy of severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome: an algorithm-guided approach. J Int Med Res.
2008 Mar–Apr;36(2):211–21. [PMID: 18380929]
 
Petrucci N et al. Lung protective ventilation strategy for the acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2007 Jul 18;(3):CD003844. [PMID: 17636739]
 
Wheeler AP et al. Acute lung injury and the acute respiratory
distress syndrome: a clinical review. Lancet. 2007 May 5;
369(9572):1553–64. [PMID: 17482987]
 
Wiedemann HP. A perspective on the Fluids and Catheters
Treatment Trial (FACTT). Fluid restriction is superior in acute lung
injury and ARDS. Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Jan; 75(1):42–8.
[PMID: 18236729]
 
 
 
Heart Disease
Thomas M. Bashore, MD
Christopher B. Granger, MD
Patrick Hranitzky, MD
Manesh R. Patel, MD
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF HEART DISEASE
In the management of patients with heart disease, it is important to
quantify and monitor the severity of symptoms. A commonly used
classification system is that of the New York Heart Association
(NYHA), shown below. However, in monitoring individual patients,
it is better to document specific activities that produce symptoms,
such as walking a distance; climbing stairs; or performing activities
of daily living, such as using a vacuum sweeper or going grocery
shopping.
 
Class I: No limitation of physical activity. Ordinary physical
activity does not cause undue fatigue, dyspnea, or anginal
pain.
Class II: Slight limitation of physical activity. Ordinary
physical activity results in symptoms.
Class III: Marked limitation of physical activity. Comfortable
at rest, but less than ordinary activity causes symptoms.
Class IV: Unable to engage in any physical activity without
discomfort. Symptoms may be present even at rest.
Other classifications have been proposed, but these are
universally accepted, and clinically can be applied to both heart
failure and anginal symptoms. Some experts use the category of
Class V to describe symptoms that are atypical and can occur
either at rest or with exertion.
A task force from the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association (ACC/AHA) proposed that patients with heart
failure be classified into four stages:
 
Stage A: Those at high risk for congestive heart failure (CHF)
but no structural heart disease (ie, hypertension, coronary
artery disease [CAD]) and no symptoms.
Stage B: Those with structural heart disease associated with
CHF and no symptoms.
Stage C: Those with structural heart disease who have
current or prior symptoms.
Stage D: Those with refractory CHF requiring some device
or special intervention.
Bonow RO et al. ACC/AHA clinical performance measures for
p
adults with chronic heart failure: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Performance Measures (Writing Committee to Develop Heart
Failure Clinical Performance Measures) endorsed by the Heart
Failure Society of America. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 Sep
20;46(6):1144–78. [PMID: 16168305]
 
CONGENITAL HEART
DISEASE
 
Congenital lesions account for only about 2% of heart disease that
presents in adulthood. As surgical and medical techniques have
improved, more and more children are now reaching adulthood,
and it is estimated that there are well over 1 million adults in the
United States surviving with congenital heart disease. In fact, there
are more adults with congenital heart disease than children. The
ACC/AHA has published guidelines for the management of adults
with congenital heart disease.
Brown ML et al. The adult with congenital heart disease: medical
and surgical considerations for management. Curr Opin Pediatr.
2009 Oct;21(5):561–4. [PMID: 19606038]
 
Khairy P et al. Adult congenital heart disease: toward prospective
risk assessment of a multisystemic condition. Circulation. 2008
May 6;117(18):2311–2. [PMID: 18458179]
 
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2; 118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
PULMONARY STENOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Asymptomatic unless patient has at least moderately severe
lesions.
 Severe cases may present with right-sided heart failure.
 High-pitched systolic ejection murmur maximal in the second left
interspace with radiation to the left shoulder.
 P2 Delayed and soft or absent. Ejection click often present and
decreases with inspiration—the only right heart auscultatory
event that decreases with inspiration, all others increase.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 Patients with peak pulmonic valve gradients > 60 mm Hg or
mean of 40 mm Hg by echocardiography/Doppler should
undergo intervention regardless of symptoms.
 A dysplastic pulmonary valve usually requires surgical treatment,
while a domed pulmonary valve stenosis usually can be treated
with balloon valvuloplasty.
 RV outflow tract obstruction due to conduit stenosis may be
treated with a percutaneous pulmonary valve.
 
 General Considerations
Stenosis of the pulmonary valve or RV infundibulum increases the
resistance to RV outflow, raises the RV pressure, and limits
pulmonary blood flow. Pulmonic stenosis is often congenital,
associated with other cardiac lesions. Pulmonary blood flow
preferentially goes to the left lung in valvular pulmonic stenosis.
Most patients with valvular pulmonic stenosis have a domed valve,
though some patients have a dysplastic valve, especially those with
Noonan syndrome. The phenotype of Noonan syndrome includes
short stature, web neck, dental malocclusion, anti-mongoloid
slanting of the eyes, mental retardation, and hypogonadism. Unlike
those with a domed valve, patients with a dysplastic valve do not
have a dilated main pulmonary artery (PA) or commissural fusion.
In the absence of associated shunts, arterial saturation is normal.
Infundibular stenosis may be so severe that the right ventricle (RV)
is divided into a low-pressure and high-pressure chamber (double-
chambered RV). Peripheral pulmonic stenosis can accompany
valvular pulmonic stenosis and may be part of a variety of clinical
syndromes, including the congenital rubella syndrome. Patients who
have had the Ross procedure for aortic valve disease (transfer of
the pulmonary valve to the aortic position with a homograft
pulmonary valve placed in the pulmonary position) may experience
postoperative (noncongenital) pulmonic stenosis due to an immune
response in the homograft.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The gradients obtained by echocardiography/Doppler, rather than
cardiac catheterization data, are now used clinically. Mild pulmonic
stenosis 
is 
present 
if 
the 
peak 
gradient 
by
echocardiography/Doppler is < 30 mm Hg, moderate pulmonic
stenosis is present if the peak gradient is between 30 mm Hg and
60 mm Hg, and severe pulmonic stenosis is present if the peak
gradient is > 60 mm Hg or the mean gradient is > 40 mm Hg. Mild
cases of pulmonic stenosis are asymptomatic; moderate to severe
pulmonic stenosis may cause symptoms of dyspnea on exertion,
syncope, chest pain, and eventually RV failure.
On examination, there is often a palpable parasternal lift due to
right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) and the pulmonary outflow
tract may be palpable if it is enlarged. A loud, harsh systolic murmur
and occasionally a prominent thrill are present in the left second and
third inter-spaces parasternally. The murmur radiates toward the left
shoulder due to the flow pattern and increases with inspiration. In
mild to moderate pulmonic stenosis, a loud ejection click can be
heard to precede the murmur; this sound decreases with inspiration
as the increased RV filling from inspiration prematurely opens the
valve during atrial systole. This is the only right-sided auscultatory
event that decreases with inspiration. The valve excursion in systole
is less with inspiration, and the click therefore diminishes in intensity.
The second sound is obscured by the murmur in severe cases; the
pulmonary component may be diminished, delayed, or absent. A
right-sided S4 and a prominent a wave in the venous pulse are
present when there is RV diastolic dysfunction or a c-v wave if
there is tricuspid regurgitation present. Right-sided S4 gallops may
be best heard in the right subclavicular area (where left-sided
gallops would be distinctly uncommon). Pulmonic valve
regurgitation is relatively uncommon in primary pulmonic stenosis
and may be very difficult to hear, as the gradient between the
reduced PA diastolic pressure and the elevated RV diastolic
pressure may be quite small (low-pressure pulmonic regurgitation).
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
Right axis deviation or RVH is noted; peaked P waves provide
evidence of right atrial (RA) overload. Heart size may be normal on
radiographs, or there may be a prominent RV and RA or gross
cardiac enlargement, depending on the severity. There is often
poststenotic dilation of the main and left pulmonary arteries. The
dilatation is primarily due to intrinsic abnormalities of the vessel wall.
Pulmonary vascularity is usually normal. A careful look at the chest
radiograph may reveal greater vascular perfusion of the left than the
right base (Chen sign) due to the flow differential discussed earlier.
Calcium may also be present in the main PA or pulmonic valve.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography/Doppler is the diagnostic tool of choice, can
provide evidence for a doming valve versus a dysplastic valve, can
determine the gradient across the valve, and can provide
information regarding subvalvular obstruction and the presence or
absence of tricuspid or pulmonic valvular regurgitation.
Catheterization is usually unnecessary for the diagnosis; it should be
used only if the data are unclear or in preparation for either a
percutaneous intervention or surgery. MRI and CT do not add
additional information unless there is concern regarding associated
cardiac lesions or peripheral pulmonary arterial lesions.
 Prognosis & Treatment
Patients with mild pulmonic stenosis have a normal life span with no
intervention. Moderate stenosis may be asymptomatic in childhood
and adolescence, but symptoms often appear as patients grow
older. The degree of stenosis does worsen with time in many
patients, so serial follow-up is important. Severe stenosis is rarely
associated with sudden death but can cause right heart failure in
patients as early as in their 20s and 30s. Pregnancy and exercise
tends to be well tolerated except in severe stenosis.
Class I indications for intervention include all symptomatic
patients and all those with a resting peak gradient over 60 mm Hg
or mean > 40 mm Hg, regardless of symptoms. Percutaneous
balloon valvuloplasty is highly successful in domed valve patients
and is the treatment of choice. Surgical commissurotomy can also
be done, or pulmonary valve replacement (with either a
bioprosthetic valve or homograft) when pulmonic regurgitation is
too severe or the valve is dysplastic. Pulmonary outflow tract
obstruction due to RV to PA conduit obstruction or to homograft
pulmonary valve stenosis can be relieved with a percutaneously
implanted pulmonary valve. The applicability of this approach to
primary pulmonic valve stenosis remains under investigation.
In accordance with the newest guideline recommendations,
endocarditis prophylaxis is unnecessary unless there has been prior
pulmonary valve endocarditis (a very rare entity).
 When to Refer
All symptomatic patients and all asymptomatic patients whose peak
pulmonary valve gradient is > 60 mm Hg or mean gradient > 40 mm
Hg should be referred to a cardiologist with an interest and
expertise in adult congenital heart disease.
Bashore TM. Adult congenital heart disease: right ventricular
outflow tract lesions. Circulation. 2007 Apr 10;115(14):1933–47.
[PMID: 17420363]
 
McElhinney DB et al. Short- and medium-term outcomes after
transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement in the expanded
multicenter US Melody valve trial. Circulation. 2010 Aug 3;
122(5):507–16. [PMID: 20644013]
 
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2; 118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
COARCTATION OF THE AORTA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usual presentation is systemic hypertension.
 A gradient of > 20 mm Hg by echocardiography/Doppler may be
significant due to collaterals around the coarctation area reducing
gradient despite severe obstruction.
 Associated bicuspid aortic valve (in 50% of patients).
 Some patients have a webbed neck (Xo karyo-type, Turner
syndrome).
 Absent or weak femoral pulses. Delay of the palpable pulse
between the femoral and brachial or radial artery.
 Systolic pressure is higher in upper extremities than in lower
extremities; diastolic pressures are similar.
 ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy; chest radiograph shows
rib notching; echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 
 General Considerations
Coarctation of the aorta consists of localized narrowing of the aortic
arch just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. Collateral
circulation develops around the coarctation through the intercostal
arteries and the branches of the subclavian arteries and can result in
a lower transcoarctation gradient by enabling blood flow to bypass
the obstruction. Coarctation is a cause of secondary hypertension
and should be considered in young patients with elevated blood
pressure (BP). The renin–angiotensin system is reset, however, and
contributes to the hypertension occasionally seen even after
coarctation repair. A bicuspid valve is seen in over 50% of the
cases, and there is an increased incidence of cerebral berry
aneurysms.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
If cardiac failure does not occur in infancy, there are usually no
symptoms until the hypertension produces left ventricular (LV)
failure or cerebral hemorrhage occurs. Strong arterial pulsations are
seen in the neck and suprasternal notch. Hypertension is present in
the arms, but the pressure is normal or low in the legs. This
difference is exaggerated by exercise. Femoral pulsations are weak
and are delayed in comparison with the brachial or radial pulse.
Patients may have severe coarctation, but with large collateral blood
vessels may have relatively small gradients because of high flow
through the collaterals to the aorta distal to the coarctation. A
continuous murmur heard superiorly and midline in the back or over
the left anterior chest may be present when collaterals carry a lot of
flow. A significant gradient is > 20 mm Hg. The coarctation itself
may result in systolic ejection murmurs at the base, often heard
posteriorly. There may be an associated aortic regurgitation or
stenosis murmur due to the bicuspid aortic valve.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
The ECG usually shows LV hypertrophy (LVH). Radiography
shows scalloping of the ribs due to enlarged collateral intercostal
arteries, dilation of the left subclavian artery and poststenotic aortic
dilation, and LV enlargement. The coarctation region and the
poststenotic dilation of the descending aorta may result in a “3” sign
along aortic shadow on the PA chest radiograph (the notch in the
“3” representing the area of coarctation).
C. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography/Doppler is usually diagnostic and may provide
additional evidence for a bicuspid aortic valve. Both MRI and CT
can also provide excellent images of the coarctation local anatomy.
MRI and echocardiography/Doppler can also provide estimates of
the gradient across the lesion. Cardiac catheterization provides
definitive gradient information and is necessary if percutaneous
stenting is to be considered.
 Prognosis & Treatment
Cardiac failure is common in infancy and in older untreated patients;
it is uncommon in late childhood and young adulthood. Patients with
a demonstrated gradient of > 20 mm Hg should be considered for
intervention, especially if there is evidence of collateral blood
vessels. Most untreated patients with the adult form of coarctation
die before age 50 years from the complications of hypertension,
rupture of the aorta, infective endarteritis, or cerebral hemorrhage.
Aortic dissection also occurs with increased frequency. Coarctation
of any significance may be poorly tolerated in pregnancy because of
the inability to support the placental flow.
Resection of the coarctation site has a surgical mortality rate of
1–4% and includes risk of spinal cord injury. The percutaneous
interventional procedure of choice is endovascular stenting when
anatomically feasible. Recently, self-expanding and balloon-
expandable covered stents have been shown to have a potential
advantage over bare metal stents. Otherwise, surgical resection
(usually with end-to-end anastomosis) should be performed. About
25% of surgically corrected patients continue to be hypertensive
years after surgery because of permanent changes in the renin–
angiotensin system, endothelial dysfunction, aortic stiffness, altered
arch morphology, and increased ventricular stiffness.
 When to Refer
All patients with coarctation and a detectable gradient should be
referred to a cardiologist with an interest in adult congenital heart
disease.
Kenny S et al. Self-expanding and balloon expandable covered
stents in the treatment of aortic coarctation with or without
aneurysm formation. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2008 Jul
1;72(1):65–71. [PMID: 18412235]
 
Tanous D et al. Coarctation of the aorta: evaluation and
management. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2009 Nov;24(6):509–15.
[PMID: 19667980]
 
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2;118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECT & PATENT FORAMEN
OVALE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often asymptomatic and discovered on routine physical
examination.
 RV lift; S2 widely split and fixed.
 All atrial septal defects should be closed either by a percutaneous
device or by surgery if there is any evidence of an RV volume
overload regardless of symptoms.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 A patent foramen ovale is present in 25% of the population but
can lead to paradoxic emboli and cerebrovascular events.
Suspicion should be highest in patients who have cryptogenic
stroke before age 55 years.
 
 General Considerations
The most common form of atrial septal defect (ASD) (80% of
cases) is persistence of the ostium secundum in the mid septum; less
common is the persistence of the ostium primum (low in the
septum). In many patients with an ostium primum defect, there are
mitral or tricuspid valve clefts as well as a ventricular septal defect
(VSD) as part of the atrioventricular (AV) canal defect. A third
form of ASD is the sinus venosus defect, a hole usually at of the
upper part of the atrial septum due to failure of the embryonic
superior vena cava (SVC) or the inferior vena cava (IVC) to merge
with the atria properly. The IVC sinus venosus defect is very rare.
The SVC sinus venosus is usually associated with anomalous
drainage of the right upper pulmonary vein into the SVC. A very
uncommon form of ASD is the coronary sinus ASD that is
basically an unroofed coronary sinus. In all cases, normally
oxygenated blood from the higher-pressure LA passes into the RA,
increasing RV output and pulmonary blood flow. In children, the
degree of shunting across these defects may be quite large (3:1 or
so). As the RV diastolic pressure rises from the chronic volume
overload, the RA pressure may rise and the degree of left-to-right
shunting may decrease. Eventually, if the RA pressure exceeds the
LA, the shunt may reverse and be primarily right-to-left and
systemic cyanosis appears.
The pulmonary pressures are modestly elevated in most patients
with an ASD due to the high pulmonary blood flow, but severe
pulmonary hypertension with cyanosis (Eisenmenger physiology) is
actually unusual, occurring in only about 15% of the patients with an
ASD alone. Eventual RV failure may occur though, and most shunts
should be corrected unless they are quite small (< 1.5:1 left-to-right
shunt). In adults, a large left-to-right shunt may have begun to
reverse, so the absolute left-to-right shunt measurement (Qp/Qs,
where Qp = pulmonary flow and Qs = systemic flow) at the time
the patient is studied may underestimate the original shunt size. In
addition, in most patients the LV and LA compliance normally
declines more over time than the RV and RA, and the natural
history of small atrial septal shunts is to increase the left-to-right
shunt as the patient ages.
ASDs predispose to atrial fibrillation due to RA enlargement, and
paradoxic right-to-left emboli do occur. Interestingly, paradoxic
emboli may be more common in patients with a patent foramen
ovale (PFO) than a true ASD, as the eustachian valve in the RA
directs flow from the IVC toward the atrial septum, and the usual
significant left-to-right flow from an ASD is often not present with a
simple PFO. An aneurysm of the atrial septum is not a true
aneurysm but rather simply redundancy of the atrial septum. When
present with a PFO, the back and forth swinging of the redundant
atrial septum (“jump rope septum”) tends to pull open the PFO.
This helps explain why more right-to-left shunting occurs in patients
with an atrial septal aneurysm and PFO than in those with a PFO
alone.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with a small or moderate ASD or with a PFO are
asymptomatic unless a complication occurs. There is only trivial
shunting in a PFO. With larger ASD shunts, exertional dyspnea or
cardiac failure may develop, most commonly in the fourth decade of
life or later. Prominent RV and PA pulsations are readily visible and
palpable. A moderately loud systolic ejection murmur can be heard
in the second and third interspaces parasternally as a result of
increased flow through the pulmonary valve. S2 is widely split and
does not vary with breathing due to the fact that the left-to-right
shunt decreases as the RA pressure increases with inspiration and
the increased RV flow is held relatively constant in inspiration and
expiration (“fixed” splitting of the second sound results). In very
large left-to-right shunts, a tricuspid rumble may be heard due to the
high flow across the tricuspid valve.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
Right axis deviation or RVH may be present depending on the size
of the RV volume overload. Incomplete or complete right bundle
branch block is present in nearly all cases of ASD, and superior
axis deviation is noted in the AV canal defect, where complete heart
block is often seen as well. With sinus venosus defects, the P axis is
leftward of +15° due to abnormal atrial activation with loss of the
upper RA tissue from around the sinus node. The chest radiograph
shows large pulmonary arteries, increased pulmonary vascularity, an
enlarged RA and RV, and a small aortic knob with all pre-tricuspid
valve cardiac left-to-right shunts.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography demonstrates evidence of RA and RV volume
overload. The atrial defect is usually observed, though sinus venosus
defects may be elusive. Many patients with a PFO also have an
atrial septal aneurysm. Echocardiography with agitated saline
bubble contrast can demonstrate a right-to-left shunt, and both
pulsed and color flow Doppler flow studies can demonstrate
shunting in either direction. A transesophageal echocardiogram
(TEE) is helpful when transthoracic echocardiography quality is not
optimal because it improves the sensitivity for detection of small
shunts and provides a better assessment of PFO anatomy.
Radionuclide flow studies quantify left-to-right shunting by
observing the bolus of contrast within the lung fields and
demonstrating early recirculation. Both CT and MRI can elucidate
the atrial septal anatomy and demonstrate associated lesions, such
as 
anomalous 
pulmonary 
venous 
connections. 
Cardiac
catheterization can define the size and location of the shunt and
determine the pulmonary pressure and pulmonary vascular
resistance (PVR). Cardiac catheterization is required if
percutaneous closure is to be contemplated.
Prognosis & Treatment
Patients with small atrial shunts live a normal life span with no
intervention. Large shunts usually cause disability by age 40 years.
Because left-to-right shunts tend to increase with age-related
changes in LV compliance, most clinicians believe that closure of all
left-to-right shunts over 1.5:1 should be accomplished. This
situation always results in RV volume overload. Current guidelines
suggest that all ASDs should be closed if there is any evidence of
RV volume overload on the echocardiogram. Increased PVR and
pulmonary hypertension secondary to pulmonary vascular disease
rarely occur in childhood or young adult life in secundum defects but
are more common in primum defects. After age 40 years, cardiac
arrhythmias (especially atrial fibrillation) and heart failure may occur
due to the chronic right heart volume overload. Paradoxical
systemic arterial embolization becomes more of a concern as RV
compliance is lost and the left-to-right shunt begins to reverse.
PFOs are usually not associated with significant shunting, and
therefore the patients are asymptomatic and the heart size is normal.
However, PFOs are responsible for most paradoxical emboli and
are one of the most frequent causes of cryptogenic strokes in
patients under age 55 years.
Occasionally, a PFO may be responsible for cyanosis, especially
if the RA pressure is elevated from pulmonary or RV hypertension
or from severe tricuspid regurgitation. Rarely, an enlarged aorta can
torque the atrial septum and enlarge the PFO. Right-to-left shunting
can usually be demonstrated by saline contrast (“bubbles”) injected
during echocardiography.
Surgery involves anything from simple stitching of the foramen
closed to patching of the hole with Dacron or a pericardial patch.
Anomalous pulmonary venous connections are baffled to the LA
through the sinus venosus defect when such anomalous veins are
present. For ostium secundum ASDs, percutaneous closure by use
of a variety of devices is preferred over surgery. The percutaneous
closure devices often resemble double umbrellas that lock the
septum between the Dacron umbrellas when opened, although
many designs are becoming available, including a “coil-like” device
(Helex) with Dacron attachment where a few Dacron covered coils
are placed on each side of the septum.
Patients with a PFO who have symptoms related to stroke or
transient ischemic attack (especially if the age is under 55) or who
have hypoxemia (especially upon standing—so called platypnea
orthodeoxia) should probably have the PFO closed if no other
cause for symptoms is evident. Migraine headaches with aura may
be more common in patients with a PFO, suggesting some unknown
substance normally metabolized in the lung is entering the systemic
circulation through the PFO. However, a randomized trial of use of
a PFO closure device generally did not demonstrate benefit and a
case-control study did not confirm the relationship between
migraine plus aura and a PFO. For patients with cryptogenic stroke
or transient ischemic attack, it is uncertain whether closure of the
PFO, either by open surgical or percutaneous techniques, has any
advantage over anticoagulation with either warfarin or aspirin.
Although there are no data yet suggesting that PFO closure is better
than medical therapy, ongoing randomized trials will help settle this
issue. When cyanosis might be improved, a PFO with significant
right-to-left shunting might also require closure. PFO closure is
occasionally recommended for deep sea divers to help prevent the
“bends” due to nitrous oxide shunting.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients with an ASD initially discovered at
echocardiography/Doppler should be evaluated by a
cardiologist with expertise in adult congenital disease to
ensure no other structural disease is present.
•    If the RA and RV sizes remain normal, serial
echocardiography (yearly) should be performed.
•    If the RA and RV volumes increase, then referral to a
cardiologist who performs percutaneous closure is
warranted.
•    Patients < 55 years of age with an apparent paradoxical
embolus and a PFO should be referred for possible closure
p
of the defect. This also applies to patients with cyanosis
who might improve with PFO closure.
Garg P et al. Lack of association between migraine headache and
patent foramen ovale: results of a case-control study. Circulation.
2010 Mar 30;121(12):1406–12. [PMID: 20231534]
 
Hoffmann A et al. Cerebrovascular accidents in adult patients with
congenital heart disease. Heart. 2010 Aug;96(15):1223–6.
[PMID: 20639238]
 
Marsh JD et al. Stroke prevention and treatment. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2010 Aug 24;54(9):683–91. [PMID: 20723798]
 
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2;118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A restrictive VSD is small and makes a louder murmur than an
unrestricted one.
 Small defects may be asymptomatic.
 Larger defects may result in pulmonary hypertension
(Eisenmenger physiology) if not repaired.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 
 General Considerations
De novo VSDs are uncommon in adults. Congenital VSDs occur in
various parts of the ventricular septum. Four types are often
described: in type A, the VSD lies underneath the semilunar valves;
in type B, the VSD is membranous with three variations; in type C,
the inlet VSD is present below the tricuspid valve and often part of
the AV canal defect; and type D is the muscular VSD.
Membranous and muscular septal defects may spontaneously close
in childhood as the septum grows and hypertrophies. A left-to-right
shunt is present unless there is associated RV hypertension. The
smaller the defect, the greater the gradient from the LV to the RV
and the louder the murmur. The presentation in adults is dependent
on the size of the shunt and whether there is associated pulmonic or
subpulmonic stenosis that has protected the lung from the systemic
pressure and volume. Unprotected lungs with large shunts invariably
lead to pulmonary vascular disease and severe pulmonary
hypertension (Eisenmenger physiology).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical features depend on the size of the defect and the
presence or absence of RV outflow obstruction or an increased
PVR. Small shunts are associated with loud, harsh holosystolic
murmurs in the left third and fourth interspaces along the sternum. A
systolic thrill is common. Larger shunts may create RV volume and
pressure overload. If pulmonary hypertension occurs, high-pressure
pulmonic regurgitation may result. Right heart failure may gradually
become evident late in the course, and the shunt will begin to
balance or reverse as RV and LV systolic pressures equalize with
the advent of pulmonary hypertension. Cyanosis from right-to-left
shunting may then occur.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
The ECG may be normal or may show right, left, or biventricular
hypertrophy, depending on the size of the defect and the PVR. With
large shunts, the RV, the LV the LA, and the pulmonary arteries are
enlarged, and pulmonary vascularity is increased on chest
radiographs. If an increased PVR (pulmonary hypertension)
evolves, an enlarged PA with pruning of the distal pulmonary
vascular bed is seen. In rare cases of a VSD high in the ventricular
septum, an aortic cusp may prolapse into the VSD and reduce the
VSD shunt but result in acute aortic regurgitation.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography can demonstrate the size of the overloaded
chambers and can usually define the defect anatomy. Doppler can
qualitatively assess the magnitude of shunting by noting the gradient
from LV to RV and, if some tricuspid regurgitation is present, the
RV systolic pressure can be estimated. The septal leaflet of the
tricuspid valve may be part of the VSD anatomy and the complex
appears as a ventricular septal “aneurysm.” Color flow Doppler
helps delineate the shunt severity and the presence of valvular
regurgitation. MRI and cardiac CT can often visualize the defect
and describe any other anatomic abnormalities. MRI can provide
quantitative shunt data as well. Radionuclide flow studies are rarely
used to quantify the relative size of the left-to-right shunt. Cardiac
catheterization is usually reserved for those with at least moderate
shunting to determine the PVR and the degree of pulmonary
hypertension. A PVR of > 7.0 absolute units or a PVR/systemic
vascular resistance (SVR) ratio of > 0.67 (two-thirds systemic)
usually implies inoperability. The vasoreactivity of the pulmonary
circuit may be tested at catheterization using agents such as inhaled
nitric oxide.
 Prognosis & Treatment
Patients with the typical murmur as the only abnormality have a
normal life expectancy except for the threat of infective
endocarditis. Endocarditis is more typical of smaller shunts due to
the high velocity of the jet lesion damaging the tricuspid septal leaflet
or RV free wall. Antibiotic prophylaxis is still recommended in this
situation. With large shunts, CHF may develop early in life, and
survival beyond age 40 years is unusual without intervention.
The newest guidelines for the management of patients with VSD
include the following:
 
1. Medical management (class 2b recommendation):
Pulmonary vasodilatory therapy is appropriate for adults
with a VSD and severe pulmonary hypertension. The
response to inhaled nitric oxide is used to guide which
agent would be the best option.
2 . Surgical management (class 1 recommendation):
Closure is indicated when the left-to-right shunt ratio is >
2.0 or there is clinical LV volume overload. In addition,
closure is recommended if there has been a history of
infective endocarditis.
3. Surgical management (class 2b recommendation):
Closure is reasonable if the left-to-right shunt is > 1.5 and
pulmonary pressure and PVR are less than two-thirds
systemic pressure and SVR. Closure is also reasonable if
the shunt ratio is > 1.5 and there is evidence for heart
failure.
Small shunts (pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio < 1.5) in
asymptomatic patients do not require surgery or other intervention.
The presence of RV infundibular stenosis or pulmonary valve
stenosis may protect the pulmonary circuit such that some patients
even with a large VSD may still be operable as adults.
Surgical repair of a VSD is generally a low risk procedure unless
there is significant Eisenmenger physiology. Currently, several new
percutaneous closure devices are under investigation for nonsurgical
closure of VSDs. Devices for muscular VSDs are approved and
those for membranous VSDs are being implanted with promising
results; the major complication is conduction disturbance. The
devices are also approved for closure of a VSD related to acute
myocardial infarction, although the results in this very high-risk
patient population have not been encouraging. The drugs used to
treat pulmonary hypertension secondary to VSD are similar to those
used to treat idiopathic (“primary”) pulmonary hypertension (see
below).
 When to Refer
All patients with a VSD should be referred to a cardiologist with
expertise in adult congenital disease initially to decide if long-term
follow-up is warranted.
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2; 118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
Xing Q et al. Minimally invasive perventricular device closure of
perimembranous ventricular septal defect without cardiopulmonary
bypass: multicenter experience and mid-term followup. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg. 2010 Jun;139(6):1409–15. [PMID: 20363483]
 
Yang R et al. Transcatheter closure of perimembranous ventricular
septal defects in children: safety and efficacy of symmetric and
asymmetric occluders. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2011 Jan
1;77(1):84–90. [PMID: 20928839]
 
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Five features are characteristic:
VSD.
RVH.
RV outflow obstruction from infundibular stenosis.
Overriding aorta in half (< 50% of the aorta over the
septum).
A right-sided aortic arch is seen in 25%.
 Echocardiography/Doppler may underestimate significant
pulmonic regurgitation. Be wary if the RV is enlarged.
 Arrhythmias are common and periodic Holter monitoring is
recommended.
 If the QRS width is > 180 msec, then the patient may be subject
to serious arrhythmias and sudden death.
 
 General Considerations
Patients with tetralogy of Fallot have a VSD, RV infundibular
stenosis, RVH, and a dilated aorta (in about 50% of patients it
overrides the septum). There may or may not be pulmonary valve
stenosis as well, usually due to a bicuspid pulmonary valve. The
aorta can be quite enlarged and aortic regurgitation may occur. If
more than 50% of the aorta overrides into the RV outflow tract, the
situation is not unlike a double outlet RV. Two vascular
abnormalities are common: a right-sided aortic arch (in 25%) and
anomalous left anterior descending coronary artery from the right
cusp. The latter is important in that surgical correction must avoid
cutting this vessel when repairing the RV outflow obstruction and
resulting in an anterior myocardial infarction.
Most adult patients have undergone prior surgery. If significant
RV outflow obstruction is present in infancy, a Blalock-Taussig (or
similar) shunt is often the initial surgical procedure to improve
pulmonary blood flow. This procedure enables blood to reach the
underperfused lung either by directly attaching one of the subclavian
arteries to the PA (classic Blalock shunt) or by creating a conduit
between the two (modified Blalock shunt). Other types of
systemic to pulmonary shunts no longer in use include a window
between the right PA and the aorta (Waterston-Cooley shunt) or
a window between the left PA and the descending aorta (Potts
shunt). In the adult, there may be a reduced upper extremity pulse
on the side used for the classic Blalock procedure. Total repair of
the tetralogy of Fallot generally includes a VSD patch and usually an
enlarging RV outflow tract patch, as well as a take-down of the
Blalock shunt. Often the RV outflow tract patch extends through the
pulmonary valve into the PA (transannular patch), and the patient is
left with wide-open pulmonic regurgitation. Over the years, the
volume overload from the severe pulmonary regurgitation becomes
the major hemodynamic problem seen in adults. Ventricular
arrhythmias can also originate from the edge of the patch, and tend
to increase with the size of the RV.
 Clinical Findings
Most patients are relatively asymptomatic unless right heart failure
occurs or arrhythmias become an issue. Patients can be active and
generally require no specific therapy except endocarditis
prophylaxis.
A. Symptoms and Signs
Physical examination should include checking both arms for any loss
of pulse from a prior shunt procedure in infancy. The jugular venous
pulsations (JVP) may reveal an increased a wave from poor RV
compliance or rarely a c-v wave due to tricuspid regurgitation. The
right-sided arch has no consequence. The precordium may be
active, often with a persistent pulmonary outflow murmur. P2 may
or may not be audible. A right-sided gallop may be heard. A
residual VSD or aortic regurgitation murmur maybe present. At
times, the insertion site of a prior Blalock or other shunt may create
a stenotic area in the PA and a continuous murmur occurs as a
result.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
The ECG reveals RVH and right axis deviation; in repaired
tetralogy, there is often a right bundle branch block pattern. The
chest radiograph shows a classic boot-shaped heart with
prominence of the RV and a concavity in the RV outflow tract. This
may be less impressive following repair. The aorta may be enlarged
and right-sided. Importantly, the width of the QRS should be
examined yearly. There are data that persons at greatest risk for
sudden death are those with a QRS width of > 180 msec. The
width of the QRS corresponds to the RV size, and in some patients,
the QRS width actually decreases following repair of the pulmonary
insufficiency.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography/Doppler usually establishes the diagnosis by
noting the unrestricted (large) VSD, the RV infundibular stenosis,
and the enlarged aorta. In patients who have had tetralogy of Fallot
repaired, echocardiography/Doppler also provides data regarding
the amount of pulmonic regurgitation, RV and LV function, and the
presence of aortic regurgitation.
Cardiac MRI and CT can quantitate both the pulmonary
insufficiency and the RV volumes. In addition, cardiac MRI and CT
can identify whether there is either a native pulmonary arterial
branch stenosis or a stenosis at the distal site of a prior Blalock or
other shunts such as an ASD (sometimes referred to as pentalogy of
Fallot). Cardiac catheterization is occasionally required to document
the degree of pulmonic regurgitation because noninvasive studies
depend on velocity gradients. Pulmonary angiography demonstrates
the degree of pulmonic regurgitation, and RV angiography helps
assess any postoperative outflow tract aneurysm.
 Prognosis & Treatment
A few patients with “just the right amount” of pulmonic stenosis
enter adulthood without having had surgery. However, most
patients have had surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot, including
VSD closure, resection of infundibular muscle, and insertion of an
outflow tract patch. Many have a transannular patch resulting in
pulmonic regurgitation. Patients should be monitored to ensure the
RV volume does not increase. Low-pressure pulmonic regurgitation
is difficult to diagnose except during cardiac catheterization due to
the fact that the RV diastolic pressures tend to be high and the
pulmonary arterial diastolic pressure is low. This means there is little
gradient between the PA and the RV in diastole, so that there may
be little murmur or evidence for turbulence on color flow Doppler.
If the RV begins to enlarge, it must be assumed that this is due to
pulmonic regurgitation until proven otherwise. Early surgical
pulmonary valve replacement is increasingly being favored. A
percutaneous approach may evolve for very selected patients.
If an anomalous coronary is present, then an extracardiac conduit
around it from the RV to the PA may be necessary. By 20-year
follow-up, reoperation is needed in about 10–15%, not only for
severe pulmonic regurgitation but also for residual infundibular
stenosis. Usually the pulmonary valve is replaced with a pulmonary
homograft, though a porcine bioprosthetic valve is also suitable.
Cryoablation of tissue giving rise to arrhythmias is sometimes
performed at the time of reoperation. Branch pulmonary stenosis
may be percutaneously opened by stenting. All patients require
endocarditis prophylaxis. Most adults with stable hemodynamics
can be quite active, and most women can carry a pregnancy
adequately.
Arrhythmias are not uncommon with both atrial fibrillation and
ventricular ectopy, noted especially after the age of 45. Left heart
disease appears to cause these arrhythmias more often than right
heart disease.
 When to Refer
All patients with tetralogy of Fallot should be referred to a
cardiologist with expertise in adult congenital heart disease.
Apitz C et al. Tetralogy of Fallot. Lancet. 2009 Oct
24;374(9699): 1462–71. [PMID: 19683809]
 
Bashore TM. Adult congenital heart disease: Right ventricular
outflow tract lesions. Circulation. 2007 Apr 10;115(14):1933–47.
[PMID: 17420363]
 
Khairy P et al; Alliance for Adult Research in Congenital
Cardiology (AARCC). Arrhythmia burden in adults with surgically
repaired tetralogy of Fallot: a multi-institutional study. Circulation.
2010 Aug 31;122(9):868–75. [PMID: 20713900]
 
Scherptong RW et al. Follow-up after pulmonary valve
replacement in adults with tetralogy of Fallot: association between
QRS duration and outcome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Oct
26;56:1486–92. [PMID: 20951325]
 
PATENT DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Rare in adults.
 Adults with small or moderate size patent ductus arteriosus are
usually asymptomatic, at least until middle age.
 Widened pulse pressure; loud S2.
 Continuous murmur over left pulmonary area; thrill common.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is helpful, but the lesion is best
visualized by MRi, CT, or contrast angiography.
 
 General Considerations
The embryonic ductus arteriosus allows shunting of blood from the
PA to the aorta in utero. The ductus arteriosus normally closes
immediately after birth so that pulmonary blood flows only to the
pulmonary arteries. Failure to close results in a persistent shunt
connecting the left PA and aorta, usually near the origin of the left
subclavian artery. Prior to birth, the ductus is kept patent by the
effect of circulating prostaglandins; in the neonate, a patent ductus
can often be closed by administration of a prostaglandin inhibitor
such as indomethacin. The effect of the persistent left-to-right shunt
on the pulmonary circuit is dependent on the size of the ductus. If
large enough, pulmonary hypertension (Eisenmenger physiology)
may occur. A small ductus may be well tolerated until adulthood.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
There are no symptoms unless LV failure or pulmonary
hypertension develops. The heart is of normal size or slightly
enlarged, with a hyperdynamic apical impulse. The pulse pressure is
wide, and diastolic pressure is low. A continuous rough “machinery”
murmur, accentuated in late systole at the time of S2, is heard best
in the left first and second interspaces at the left sternal border.
Thrills are common. If pulmonary hypertension is present
(Eisenmenger physiology), the shunt may reverse and the lower
body receives desaturated blood, while the upper body receives
saturated blood. Thus, the hands appear normal while the toes are
cyanotic and clubbed.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
A normal tracing or LVH is found, depending on the magnitude of
shunting. On chest radiographs, the heart is normal in size and
contour, or there may be LV and LA enlargement. The PA, aorta,
and LA are prominent because they all are in the shunt pathway.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography/Doppler can determine LV, RV, and atrial
dimensions. Color flow Doppler allows visualization of the high
velocity shunt jet into the proximal left PA. Cardiac MRI and CT
can demonstrate the abnormality and assess the size of the
pulmonary arteries. Cardiac catheterization can establish the shunt
size and direction, and define the size and anatomic features of the
ductus. It can also help determine whether pulmonary hypertension
has occurred. If percutaneous closure is feasible, catheterization
with the use of occlude devices can be therapeutic.
 Prognosis & Treatment
Large shunts cause a high mortality rate from cardiac failure early in
life. Smaller shunts are compatible with long survival, CHF being the
most common complication. Infective endocarditis or endarteritis
may rarely occur, and antibiotic prophylaxis continues to be
recommended.
Surgical ligation of the patent ductus can be accomplished with
excellent results. If the ductus has a “neck” and is of small enough
size, percutaneous approaches using either coils or occluder devices
are the preferred therapy. Newer duct occluder devices have a high
success rate at a very low risk. Patients with an Eisenmenger
physiology who have not undergone surgical ligation may benefit
from vasodilator therapy. To monitor these latter patients with shunt
reversal, serial assessment of toe oxygen saturation as a marker of
improvement in the right-to-left shunt is important.
Table 10–1 outlines the current recommendations for intervention
in adult patients with a patent ductus arteriosus.
 When to Refer
All patients with PDA should be referred to a cardiologist with
expertise in adult congenital disease.
Laughon M et al. Patent ductus arteriosus management: what are
the next steps? J Pediatr. 2010 Sep;157(3):355–7. [PMID:
20580017]
 
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2; 118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
 
Table 10–1. Recommendations for interventions in patients with
patent ductus arteriosus.1
 
Class I
1. 
Closure of a patent ductus arteriosus either
percutaneously or surgically is indicated for the
following:
1. 
Presence of left atrial or left ventricular
enlargement, pulmonary artery
hypertension, or net left-to-right shunting
(level of evidence: C)
2. 
Prior endarteritis (level of evidence: C)
2. 
Consultation with adult congenital heart disease
interventional cardiologists is recommended before
surgical closure is selected as the method of repair for
patients with a calcified patent ductus arteriosus (level
of evidence: C).
3. 
Surgical repair by a surgeon experienced in coronary
heart disease surgery is recommended when:
1. 
The patent ductus arteriosus is too large
for device closure (level of evidence: C).
2. 
Distorted ductal anatomy precludes device
closure (eg, aneurysm or endarteritis)
(level of evidence: B).
Class IIa
1. 
It is reasonable to close an asymptomatic small patent
ductus arteriosus by catheter device (level of evidence:
C).
2. 
Patent ductus arteriosus closure is reasonable for
patients with pulmonary artery hypertension with a net
left-to-right shunt (level of evidence: C).
Class III
Patent ductus arteriosus closure is not indicated for
patients with pulmonary artery hypertension and net right-
to-left shunt (level of evidence: C).
 
1Class I indicates treatment is useful and effective, IIa indicates weight of
evidence is in favor of usefulness/efficacy, class IIb indicates weight of
evidence is less well established, and class III indicates intervention is not
useful/effective and may be harmful. Type A recommendations are derived
from large-scale randomized trials, and B recommendations are derived
from smaller randomized trials or carefully conducted observational
analyses. ACC/AHA, American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association.
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
 
At one time, most cases of valvular disease in the United States
were due to rheumatic heart disease (still true in developing
countries); other causes are now much more common. In the
elderly, “degenerative” calcific aortic valvular disease is now
believed to be due to the same process that produces
atherosclerosis, and studies have suggested that about 25% of
adults over age 65 have some thickening of their aortic valve (aortic
sclerosis) while 2–3% have frank aortic stenosis. Aortic sclerosis
alone is a marker for future cardiovascular events and death. There
is also increasing information that genetic markers associated with
aortic stenosis play a role in the expression of the disease. Calcium
deposition may also occur in the mitral annulus creating enough
dysfunction of the valve that either stenosis or regurgitation (or both)
results. Mitral valve prolapse is still frequently seen and may be
associated with the hyperadrenergic syndrome in younger patients.
AV valvular regurgitation may be due to LV dysfunction (mitral
regurgitation) or RV dysfunction (tricuspid regurgitation).
The typical findings of each native lesion are described in Table
10–2. Table 10–3 outlines the use bedside maneuvers to distinguish
among the various murmurs.
Bonow RO et al. 2008 focused update incorporated into the
ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008 Sep 23;52(13):e1–142. [PMID: 18848134]
 
Maganti K et al. Valvular heart disease: diagnosis and
management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010 May;85(5):483–500.
[PMID: 20435842]
 
MITRAL STENOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exertional dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea when the stenosis becomes severe.
 Symptoms often precipitated by onset of atrial fibrillation or
pregnancy.
 Two syndromes occur; one with moderate mitral stenosis and
pulmonary edema, and one with severe mitral stenosis,
pulmonary hypertension, and low cardiac output.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 Intervention indicated for symptoms or evidence of pulmonary
hypertension. Most symptomatic patients have a valve area <1.5
cm2.
 
 
Table 10–2. Differential diagnosis of valvular heart disease.
 
A2, aortic second sound; AS, aortic stenosis; ICS, intercostal space; LA, left
atrial; MCL, midclavicular line; MR, mitral regurgitation; MVA, measured
valve area; P2, pulmonary second sound; PISA, proximal isovelocity
surface area; PMI, point of maximal impulse; S1, first heart sound; S2,
second heart sound; S4, fourth heart sound; SVC, superior vena cava; TEE,
transesophageal echocardiography; V1, chest ECG lead 1.
 
Table 10–3. Effect of various interventions on systolic murmurs.
 
↑, increased; ↓, decreased; ×, unchanged. Modified, with permission, from
Paraskos JA. Combined valvular disease. In: Valvular Heart Disease.
Dalen JE, Alpert JS (editors). Little, Brown, LWW, 2000.
 General Considerations
Patients with mitral stenosis are usually presumed to have underlying
rheumatic heart disease, though a history of rheumatic fever is
usually noted in only about one-third. Rheumatic mitral stenosis
results in thickening of the leaflets, fusion of the mitral commissures,
retraction, thickening and fusion of the chordae, and calcium
deposition in the valve. Mitral stenosis can also occur due to
congenital disease with chordal fusion or papillary muscle
malposition. The papillary muscles may be abnormally close
together, sometimes so close they merge into a single papillary
muscle (the parachute mitral valve). In these patients, the chordae
or valvular tissue (or both) may also be fused. In other patients,
mitral annular calcification may build up enough to produce a mitral
gradient, most often in the elderly or patients with end-stage renal
disease. Calcium in the mitral annulus virtually invades the mitral
leaflet from the annulus inward. Mitral valve obstruction may also
develop in patients who have had mitral valve repair with a ring that
is too small, or in patients who have had a surgical valve
replacement (prosthetic valve-patient mismatch).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A characteristic finding of rheumatic mitral stenosis is an opening
snap following A2 due to the stiff mitral valve. The interval between
the opening snap and aortic closure sound is long when the LA
pressure is low but shortens as the LA pressure rises and
approaches the aortic diastolic pressure. As mitral stenosis
worsens, there is a localized diastolic murmur low in pitch whose
duration increases with the severity of the stenosis. The heart
murmur is best heard at the apex with the patient in the left lateral
position (Table 10–2).
Two clinical syndromes occur with mitral stenosis. In mild to
moderate mitral stenosis, LA pressure and cardiac output may
be essentially normal, and the patient is either asymptomatic or
symptomatic only with extreme exertion. The measured valve area
is usually between 1.8 cm2 and 1.3 cm2. In severe mitral stenosis
(valve area < 1.0 cm2), severe pulmonary hypertension develops
due to a “secondary stenosis” of the pulmonary vasculature. In this
condition, pulmonary edema is uncommon, but symptoms of low
cardiac output and right heart failure predominate.
Paroxysmal or chronic atrial fibrillation develops in 50–80% of
patients. Any increase in the heart rate reduces diastolic time and
increases the mitral gradient. A sudden increase in heart rate may
precipitate pulmonary edema. Therefore, heart rate control is
important to maintain, with slow heart rates allowing for more
diastolic filling of the LV.
B. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography is the most valuable technique for assessing
mitral stenosis. A scoring system is used to help define which
patients are eligible for percutaneous valvuloplasty. One to four
points are assigned to each of four observed parameters, with one
being the least involvement and four the greatest: mitral leaflet
thickening, mitral leaflet mobility, submitral scarring, and
commissural calcium. Patients with a total valve score of 8 or less
respond best to balloon valvuloplasty. LA size can also be
determined by echocardiography: increased size denotes an
increased likelihood of atrial fibrillation and thrombus formation. The
effective mitral valve area can be determined by planimetering the
smallest mitral orifice or by using the continuous-wave Doppler
gradient. Some determination of the pulmonary pressure can also be
quantitated by measuring the peak RV pressure from the tricuspid
velocity jet signal.
Because echocardiography and careful symptom evaluation
provide most of the needed information, cardiac catheterization is
used primarily to detect associated valve, coronary, or myocardial
disease—usually after the decision to intervene has been made.
 Treatment & Prognosis
In most cases, there is a long asymptomatic phase, followed by
subtle limitation of activity. Pregnancy and its associated increase in
cardiac output, which results in an increased transmitral pressure
gradient, often precipitate symptoms. Toward the end of pregnancy,
the cardiac output is also maintained by an increase in heart rate,
further increasing the mitral gradient by shortening diastolic time.
Patients with moderate to severe mitral stenosis should have the
condition corrected prior to becoming pregnant if possible.
Pregnant patients who become symptomatic can undergo successful
surgery, preferably in the third trimester, although balloon
valvuloplasty is the treatment of choice if the echo score is low
enough.
The onset of atrial fibrillation often precipitates symptoms, which
usually initially improve with control of the ventricular rate or
restoration of sinus rhythm. Conversion to and subsequent
maintenance of sinus rhythm are most commonly successful when
the duration of atrial fibrillation is brief (< 6–12 months) and the LA
is not severely dilated (diameter < 4.5 cm). Once atrial fibrillation
occurs, the patient should receive warfarin anticoagulation therapy
even if sinus rhythm is restored, since atrial fibrillation often recurs
even with antiarrhythmic therapy and 20–30% of these patients will
have systemic embolization if untreated. Systemic embolization in
the presence of only mild to moderate disease is not an indication
for surgery but should be treated with warfarin anticoagulation.
Indications for intervention focus on symptoms such as an
episode of pulmonary edema, a decline in exercise capacity, or any
evidence for pulmonary hypertension (peak systolic pulmonary
pressure > 50 mm Hg). Some experts believe that the presence of
atrial fibrillation should be a consideration for an intervention. Other
groups use the findings from exercise echocardiography to help with
decision making, but the results from these studies are not
standardized.
Open mitral commissurotomy is now rarely performed and has
given way to percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty. Ten-year follow-
up data comparing surgery to balloon valvuloplasty suggest no real
difference in outcome between the two modalities. Replacement of
the valve is indicated when combined stenosis and regurgitation are
present or when the mitral valve echo score is > 8–10.
Percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty has a very low mortality rate (<
0.5%) and low morbidity rate (3–5%). Operative mortality rates
are also low: 1–3% in most institutions. Repeat valvuloplasty can be
done if the morphology of the valve is suitable. A Maze procedure
may be done at the same time to reduce recurrent atrial arrhythmias.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with mitral stenosis should be monitored with
yearly examinations and echocardiograms.
•    All patients should initially be seen by a cardiologist,
who can then decide how often the patient needs follow-up.
Bonow RO et al. 2008 focused update incorporated into the
ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008 Sep 23;52(13):e1–142. [PMID: 18848134]
 
Chandrashekhar Y et al. Mitral stenosis. Lancet. 2009 Oct 10;
374(9697):271–83. [PMID: 19747723]
 
Cubeddu RJ et al. Percutaneous techniques for mitral valve
disease. Cardiol Clin. 2010 Feb;28(1):139–53. [PMID:
19962055]
 
MITRAL REGURGITATION (Mitral Insufficiency)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 May be asymptomatic for many years (or for life) or may cause
left-sided heart failure.
 Echocardiographic findings can help decide when to operate.
 For chronic primary mitral regurgitation, surgery is indicated for
symptoms or when the LV ejection fraction is < 60% or the
echocardiographic LV end-systolic diameter is > 4.0 cm.
 In patients with mitral prolapse and severe mitral regurgitation,
earlier surgery is indicated if mitral repair can be performed.
 
 General Considerations
Mitral regurgitation places a volume load on the heart (increases
preload) but reduces afterload. The result is an enlarged LV with an
increased ejection fraction (EF). Over time, the stress of the volume
overload reduces myocardial contractile function; when this occurs,
there is a drop in EF and a rise in end-systolic volume.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In acute mitral regurgitation, the LA size is not large, and LA
pressure rises abruptly, leading to pulmonary edema if severe.
When chronic, the LA enlarges progressively and the increased
volume can be handled without a major rise in the LA pressure; the
pressure in pulmonary veins and capillaries may rise only transiently
during exertion. Exertional dyspnea and fatigue progress gradually
over many years.
Mitral regurgitation leads to chronic LA and LV enlargement and
may cause subsequent atrial fibrillation and LV dysfunction.
Clinically, mitral regurgitation is characterized by a pansystolic
murmur maximal at the apex, radiating to the axilla and occasionally
to the base; a hyperdynamic LV impulse and a brisk carotid
upstroke; and a prominent third heart sound due to the increased
volume returning to the LV in early diastole (Tables 10–2 and 10–
3).
B. Diagnostic Studies
Echocardiography is useful in demonstrating the underlying
pathologic 
process 
(rheumatic, 
prolapse, 
flail 
leaflet,
cardiomyopathy), and Doppler techniques provide qualitative and
semiquantitative estimates of the severity of mitral regurgitation.
Echocardiographic information concerning LV size and function, LA
size, PA pressure, and RV function can be invaluable in planning
treatment as well as in recognizing associated lesions. TEE may help
reveal the cause of regurgitation and is especially useful in patients
who have had mitral valve replacement, in suspected endocarditis,
and in identifying candidates for valvular repair. Echocardiographic
dimensions and measures of systolic function are critical in deciding
the timing of surgery. In the past, exercise radionuclide angiography
for measurements of exercise EF or determination of myocardial
stress–EF relationships was recommended, but this is now rarely
done. There is a growing body of evidence of the usefulness of B-
type natriuretic peptide (BNP) in the early identification of LV
dysfunction in the presence of mitral regurgitation, and it is likely that
future guidelines will use this test to help decide when to operate.
Cardiac MRI is occasionally useful, if specific myocardial causes
are being sought (such as amyloid or myocarditis) or if myocardial
viability is needed prior to deciding whether to add coronary artery
bypass grafting to mitral repair in patients with chronic ischemic
mitral regurgitation.
Cardiac catheterization provides a further assessment of
regurgitation and its hemodynamic impact along with LV function,
resting cardiac output, and PA pressure. Coronary angiography is
often indicated to determine the presence of CAD prior to valve
surgery in patients with risk factors or those older than age 45
years. In younger patients (< 50 years of age), cardiac multidetector
CT may be adequate to screen patients with valvular heart disease
for asymptomatic CAD.
 Treatment & Prognosis
A. Primary Mitral Regurgitation
LA enlargement is at times considerable in chronic mitral
regurgitation; the degree of LV enlargement usually reflects the
severity and chronicity of regurgitation. Calcification of the mitral
valve is less common than in pure mitral stenosis. Hemodynamically,
LV volume overload may ultimately lead to LV failure and reduced
cardiac output, but for many years, the LV end-diastolic pressure
and the cardiac output will be normal at rest. Nonrheumatic mitral
regurgitation may develop abruptly, such as with papillary muscle
dysfunction following myocardial infarction, valve perforation in
infective endocarditis, or ruptured chordae tendineae in mitral valve
prolapse.
Acute mitral regurgitation due to endocarditis, myocardial
infarction, and ruptured chordae tendineae often requires
emergency surgery. Some patients can be stabilized with
vasodilators or intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation, which reduce
the amount of regurgitant flow by lowering systemic vascular
resistance. Patients with chronic lesions may remain asymptomatic
for many years. Surgery is necessary when symptoms develop.
However, because progressive and irreversible deterioration of LV
function may occur prior to the onset of symptoms, early operation
is indicated even in asymptomatic patients with a reduced EF (<
60%) or marked LV dilation (end-systolic dimension > 4.0 cm on
echocardiography). In some institutions, the calculation of an
effective regurgitant orifice area by echocardiogram has proven
useful in helping decide the severity of the mitral regurgitation.
Regurgitant orifice areas > 40 mm2 are considered severe.
There is controversy regarding the role of afterload reduction in
mitral regurgitation, since the lesion inherently results in a reduction
in afterload and there are no data that chronic afterload reduction is
effective. A heightened sympathetic state has led some experts to
suggest β-blockade instead. Cardiomyopathy and mitral
regurgitation due to persistent tachycardia may also improve with
treatment of the high heart rate.
B. Myocardial Disease and Mitral Regurgitation
When mitral regurgitation is due to papillary dysfunction, it may
subside as the infarction heals or LV dilation diminishes. The cause
of the regurgitation in most situations is displacement of the papillary
muscles and an enlarged mitral annulus rather than true papillary
muscle ischemia. The fundamental problem is the lack of leaflet
coaptation during systole. In acute infarction, rupture of the papillary
muscle may occur with catastrophic results. Transient—but
sometimes severe—mitral regurgitation may occur during episodes
of myocardial ischemia and contribute to flash pulmonary edema.
Patients with dilated cardiomyopathies of any origin may have
secondary mitral regurgitation due to papillary muscle
displacement or dilation of the mitral annulus. In patients with
ischemic cardiomyopathy, ventricular reconstructive surgery to
restore the mitral apparatus anatomy and reshape the ventricle (Dor
procedure) has had limited success. If mitral valve replacement is
performed, preservation of the chordae to the native valve helps
prevent further ventricular dilation following surgery. Several groups
have reported good results with mitral valve repair in patients with
left ventricular ejection fraction (LV EF) < 30% and secondary
mitral regurgitation. Recent guidelines consider it acceptable to
attempt mitral valve repair in patients with an EF < 30% or an LV
end-systolic dimension > 5.5 cm, or both, as long as repair and
preservation of the chordate are possible. There may also be a role
for cardiac resynchronization therapy with biventricular pacemaker
insertion in reducing mitral regurgitation due to cardiomyopathy.
Currently, there are several ongoing trials of percutaneous
approaches to reducing mitral regurgitation. These approaches
include the use of a mitral clip device to create a double orifice
mitral valve, various coronary catheter devices to reduce the mitral
annular area, and devices to reduce the septal-lateral ventricular size
and consequent mitral orifice size. Some success has been noted
with the mitral clip device. In addition, vascular plugging and
occluder devices are being used in selected patients to plug
perivalvular leaks around prosthetic valves.
 When to Refer
All patients with more than mild mitral regurgitation should be
referred to a cardiologist for an evaluation. Serial examinations and
echocardiograms (usually yearly) should be obtained, and referral
made if there is any increase in the LV end-systolic dimensions, a
fall in the EF to < 60%, or symptoms.
Bonow RO et al. 2008 focused update incorporated into the
ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008 Sep 23;52(13):e1–142. [PMID: 18848134]
 
Carabello BA. The current therapy for mitral regurgitation. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2008 Jul 29;52(5):319–26. [PMID: 18652937]
 
Cubeddu RJ et al. Percutaneous techniques for mitral valve
disease. Cardiol Clin. 2010 Feb;28(1):139–53. [PMID:
19962055]
 
Di Salvo TG et al. Mitral valve surgery in advanced heart failure. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Jan 26;55(4):271–82. [PMID: 20117430]
 
Kapoor JR. Role of mitral valve surgery for secondary mitral
regurgitation in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jan
6;53(1):74. [PMID: 19118728]
 
Pizarro R et al. Prospective validation of the prognostic usefulness
of brain natriuretic peptide in asymptomatic patients with chronic
severe mitral regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Sep
15;54(12):1099–106. [PMID: 19744620]
 
MITRAL VALVE PROLAPSE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Single or multiple mid-systolic clicks often heard on auscultation.
 Murmur may be pansystolic or only late in systole.
 Often associated with skeletal changes (straight back, pectus,
scoliosis) or hyperreflexivity of joints.
 Echocardiography is confirmatory with prolapse of mitral leaflets
in systole into the lA.
 Chest pain and palpitations common symptoms in the young
adult.
 
 General Considerations
The significance of mitral valve prolapse (“floppy” or
myxomatous mitral valve) is in dispute because of the frequency
with which it is diagnosed by echocardiography even in healthy
young women (up to 10%). A hyperadrenergic syndrome has also
been described, especially in young females, that may be
responsible for some of the noncardiac symptoms observed.
Fortunately, this syndrome attenuates with age. Some patients with
mitral prolapse have findings of a systemic collagen abnormality
(Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome). In these conditions, a dilated
aortic root and aortic regurgitation may coexist.
Patients who have only a mid-systolic click usually have no
sequelae, but significant mitral regurgitation may develop,
occasionally due to rupture of chordae tendineae (flail leaflet) or
progressive annular dilation. The need for valve repair or
replacement increases with age, so that approximately 2% of
patients with clinically significant regurgitation over age 60 years will
require surgery.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Mitral valve prolapse is usually asymptomatic but may be
associated with nonspecific chest pain, dyspnea, fatigue, or
palpitations. Most patients are female, many are thin, and some
have skeletal deformities such as pectus excavatum or scoliosis. On
auscultation, there are characteristic mid-systolic clicks that may be
multiple and emanate from the chordae or redundant valve tissue. If
leaflets fail to come together properly, the clicks will be followed by
a late systolic murmur. As the mitral regurgitation worsens, the
murmur is heard more and more throughout systole. The smaller the
LV chamber, the greater the degree of prolapse, and thus
auscultatory findings are often accentuated in the standing position.
B. Diagnostic Studies
The 
diagnosis 
is 
primarily 
clinical 
and 
confirmed
echocardiographically. Mitral prolapse is often associated with
aortic root disease, and any evidence for a dilated aorta by chest
radiography should prompt either CT or MRI angiography. If
palpitations are an issue, an ambulatory monitor is often helpful to
distinguish atrial from ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
 Treatment
β-Blockers in low doses are used to treat the hyperadrenergic state
when present and are usually satisfactory for treatment of
arrhythmias. Afterload reduction has not been shown to be effective
when mitral regurgitation is present.
Mitral valve repair is strongly favored over valve replacement,
and its efficacy has led many to recommend intervention earlier and
earlier in the course of the disease process. Mitral repair may
include shortening of chordae, chordae transfers, wedge resection
of redundant valve tissue, or the insertion of a mitral annular ring to
reduce the annular size, or some combination of these techniques.
Stitching of the leaflets together to create a double orifice mitral
valve is also used at times (Alfieri procedure) and can be performed
percutaneously. Mitral repair or replacement can be achieved
through a right minithoracotomy with or without the use of a robotic
device. Endocarditis prophylaxis is no longer recommended for
most patients with mitral valve prolapse regardless of the degree of
mitral regurgitation.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients with mitral valve prolapse and audible mitral
regurgitation should be seen at least once and then
periodically by a cardiologist. If only mitral clicks are
audible, then serial echocardiography is not warranted.
•    Periodic echocardiography is warranted to assess LV
size (especially end-systolic dimensions) and EF when
mitral regurgitation is present.
Carabello BA. The current therapy for mitral regurgitation. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2008 Jul 29;52(5):319–26. [PMID: 18652937]
 
Cubeddu RJ et al. Percutaneous techniques for mitral valve
disease. Cardiol Clin. Feb;28(1):139–53. [PMID: 19962055]
 
Verma S et al. Mitral valve repair for mitral valve prolapse. N Engl
J Med. 2009 Dec 3;361(23):2261–9. [PMID: 19955526]
 
AORTIC STENOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Congenital bicuspid aortic valve, usually asymptomatic until
middle or old age.
 “Degenerative” or calcific aortic stenosis; same risk factors as
atherosclerosis.
 Symptoms likely once the peak echo gradient is > 64 mm Hg.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 Surgery indicated for symptoms.
 Surgery considered for asymptomatic patients with severe aortic
stenosis.
 Emerging role for BnP as marker of early LV myocardial failure.
 
 General Considerations
There are two common clinical scenarios in which aortic stenosis is
prevalent. The first is due to a congenitally abnormal unicuspid or
bicuspid valve, rather than tricuspid. Symptoms occur in young or
adolescent individuals if the stenosis is severe, but more often
emerge at age 50–65 years when calcification and degeneration of
the valve becomes manifest. A dilated ascending aorta, primarily
due to an intrinsic defect in the aortic media, may accompany the
bicuspid valve. Coarctation of the aorta is also seen in a number of
patients with congenital aortic stenosis. Offspring of patients with a
bicuspid valve have a much higher incidence of the disease as well.
A second group develops what has traditionally been called
degenerative or calcific aortic stenosis, which is thought to be
related to calcium deposition due to processes similar to what
occurs in atherosclerotic vascular disease. Approximately 25% of
patients over age 65 years and 35% of those over age 70 years
have echocardiographic evidence of aortic sclerosis. About 10–
20% of these will progress to hemodynamically significant aortic
stenosis over a period of 10–15 years. Certain genetic markers are
now being discovered that are associated with aortic stenosis (most
notably Notch 1), so a genetic component appears a likely
contributor, at least in some patients. Other associated genetic
markers have also been described.
Aortic stenosis has become the most common surgical valve
lesion in developed countries, and many patients are elderly. The
risk factors include hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and
smoking. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy may also
coexist with valvular aortic stenosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Slightly narrowed, thickened, or roughened valves (aortic sclerosis)
or aortic dilation may produce the typical ejection murmur of aortic
stenosis. In mild or moderate cases where the valve is still pliable,
an ejection click may precede the murmur. The characteristic
systolic ejection murmur is heard at the aortic area and is usually
transmitted to the neck and apex. In some cases, only the high-
pitched components of the murmur are heard at the apex, and the
murmur may sound like mitral regurgitation (so-called Gallaverdin
phenomenon). In severe aortic stenosis, a palpable LV heave or
thrill, a weak to absent aortic second sound, or reversed splitting of
the second sound is present (see Table 10–2). When the valve area
is < 0.8–1 cm2 (normal, 3–4 cm2), ventricular systole becomes
prolonged and the typical carotid pulse pattern of delayed upstroke
and low amplitude is present. This may be an unreliable finding,
however, in older patients with extensive arteriosclerotic vascular
disease and a stiff aorta. LVH increases progressively due to the
pressure overload, eventually resulting in elevation in ventricular
end-diastolic pressure. Cardiac output is maintained until the
stenosis is severe (with a valve area < 0.8 cm2). LV failure, angina
pectoris, or syncope may be presenting symptoms and signs of
significant aortic stenosis; importantly, all symptoms tend to occur
with exertion. In a few patients, there appears to be a mismatch
between the aortic valve gradient severity (low), the aortic valve
area (severe), the degree of the LVH (severe), and EF (normal).
These low flow aortic stenosis patients may have significant LV
afterload due to increased aortic vascular impedance as well as the
p
valvular stenosis resistance.
Symptoms of failure may be sudden in onset or may progress
gradually. Angina pectoris frequently occurs in aortic stenosis due to
underperfusion of the endocardium. Of patients with calcific aortic
stenosis and angina, 50% have significant associated CAD.
Syncope is typically exertional and a late finding. Syncope occurs
with exertion as the LV pressures rises, stimulating the LV
baroreceptors to cause peripheral vasodilation. This vasodilation
results in the need for an increase in stroke volume, which increases
the LV systolic pressure again, creating a cycle of vasodilation and
stimulation of the baroreceptors that eventually results in a drop in
BP, as the stenotic valve prevents further increase in stroke volume.
Less commonly, syncope may be due to arrhythmias (usually
ventricular tachycardia but sometimes AV block as calcific invasion
of the conduction system from the aortic valve may occur).
B. Diagnostic Studies
The clinical assessment of the severity of aortic stenosis may be
difficult, especially when there is reduced cardiac output or
significant associated aortic regurgitation. The ECG reveals LVH or
secondary repolarization changes in most patients but can be normal
in up to 10%. The chest radio-graph may show a normal or
enlarged cardiac silhouette, calcification of the aortic valve, and
dilation and calcification of the ascending aorta. The
echocardiogram provides useful data about aortic valve calcification
and opening and the severity of LV wall thickness and overall
ventricular function, while Doppler can provide an excellent estimate
of the aortic valve gradient. Valve area estimation by
echocardiography is less reliable. Cardiac catheterization mostly
provides an assessment of the hemodynamic consequence of the
aortic stenosis, and the anatomy of the coronary arteries. In younger
patients, and in patients with high aortic gradients the aortic valve
need not be crossed at catheterization. If the valve is crossed, the
valve gradient can be measured at catheterization and an estimated
valve area calculated; a valve area below 1.0 cm2 indicates
significant stenosis. Aortic regurgitation can be semiquantified by
aortic root angiography. In patients with a low EF and both low
output and a low valve gradient, it may be unclear if an increased
afterload is responsible for the low EF or if there is an associated
cardiomyopathy. To sort this out, the patient should be studied at
baseline and then during an intervention that increases cardiac
output (eg, dobutamine or nitroprusside infusion). If the valve area
increases and there is poor contractile reserve (< 20% increase in
the stroke volume), the flow-limiting problem is not the valve, but
rather the cardiomyopathy, and surgery is not warranted. If the
valve area remains unchanged at the higher outputs and there
remains contractile reserve, then the valve is considered flow limiting
and surgery is indicated. Recent data have suggested the use of
BNP may provide prognostic data in the setting of poor LV
function and aortic stenosis. A BNP > 550 pg/mL has been
associated with a poor outcome in these patients regardless of the
results of dobutamine testing. Therapy for the patients with a normal
LV EF, low output, marked LV hypertrophy, low aortic gradient
but significantly reduced AV area and increased afterload due to
associated 
significant 
aortic 
vascular 
resistance 
remains
controversial. Indeed, it is not clear how often this latter
constellation of findings coexists in individual patients.
 Prognosis & Treatment
Following the onset of heart failure, angina, or syncope, the
prognosis without surgery is poor (50% 3-year mortality rate).
Medical treatment may stabilize patients in heart failure, but surgery
is indicated for all symptomatic patients with evidence of significant
aortic stenosis. Valve replacement is usually not indicated in
asymptomatic individuals, though a class II indication is to operate
once the peak valve gradient by Doppler exceeds 64 mm Hg or the
mean exceeds 40 mm Hg. Stress testing and perhaps the use of
BNP may help identify patients who deny symptoms but are
actually compromised from a ventricular function standpoint.
The surgical mortality rate for valve replacement is low, even in
the elderly, and ranges from 2% to 5%. This low risk is due to the
dramatic hemodynamic improvement that occurs with relief of the
increased afterload. Mortality rates are substantially higher when
there is an associated ischemic cardiomyopathy. Severe coronary
lesions are usually bypassed at the same time, although there are
little data to suggest this practice affects outcome.
All patients should have normal lipid levels, usually with goal of
an LDL of ≤ 100 mg/dL, since progression of aortic stenosis
theoretically may be slowed by control of cholesterol levels. Most
studies have been negative or equivocal in this regard, but longer-
term studies in patients with early disease are still pending. Many
experts argue that for lipid lowering therapy to have any effect on
the stenotic process, it needs to be initiated at a early stage in the
disease. If patients with aortic stenosis have concomitant CAD, the
LDL goal should be ≤ 70 mg/dL. Control of systemic hypertension
is also an important adjunct, and inadequate systemic BP control is
common due to unreasonable concerns about providing too much
afterload reduction in patients with aortic stenosis.
The interventional options in patients with aortic stenosis are
variable and dependent on the patient's lifestyle and age. In the
young and adolescent patient, percutaneous valvuloplasty still has a
role. Balloon valvuloplasty is less effective and is associated with
early restenosis in the elderly, and thus is rarely used except as a
temporizing measure in calcific aortic stenosis. Data suggest aortic
balloon valvuloplasty in the elderly has an advantage only in those
with preserved LV function, and such patients are usually excellent
candidates for surgical aortic valve replacement (AVR). The Ross
procedure is generally still considered a viable option in younger
patients, and it is performed by moving the patient's own pulmonary
valve to the aortic position and replacing the pulmonary valve with a
homograft (or rarely a bioprosthetic valve). However, dilation of the
pulmonary valve autograft and consequent aortic regurgitation, plus
early stenosis of the pulmonary homograft in the pulmonary position,
has reduced the enthusiasm for this approach in most institutions.
Middle-aged adults generally can tolerate the anticoagulation
therapy necessary for the use of mechanical AVR, so most undergo
AVR with a bileaflet mechanical valve. If the aortic root is severely
dilated as well (>4.5 cm), then the valve may be housed in a
Dacron sheath (Bentall procedure) and the root replaced.
Alternatively, a human homograft root and valve replacement can
be used. In the elderly, bioprosthetic (either porcine or bovine
pericardial) valves with a life expectancy of about 10–15 years are
routinely used instead of mechanical valves to avoid need for
anticoagulation. Recent data favor the bovine pericardial valve over
the porcine aortic valve. If the aortic annulus is small, a
bioprosthetic valve with a short sheath can be sewn to the aortic
wall (the stentless AVR) rather than sewing the prosthetic annulus to
the aortic annulus. (Annulus is a relative term when speaking of the
aortic valve, since there is no true annulus.)
In patients with a bicuspid aortic valve, there is often an
associated ascending aortic aneurysm. If the maximal dimension of
the aortic root exceeds 5.0 cm, it is recommended to proceed with
root replacement regardless of the severity of the aortic valve
disease. The aortic valve may be replaced at the same time or may
be left alone (valve sparing operation).
Anticoagulation is required with the use of mechanical valves, and
the international normalized ratio (INR) should be maintained
between 2.0 and 3.0 or between 2.5 and 3.5, depending on type
and position of valve and patient risk factors. In general, mechanical
aortic valves are less subject to thrombosis than mechanical mitral
valves.
Transcutaneous aortic valve implantation is being used in Europe
and tested in the United States. The devices use either a stent with a
trileaflet bovine pericardial valve constructed in it or a stent with a
large valve from a cow's jugular vein mounted inside. Both a
retrograde approach (from the aorta) and an antegrade approach
(from the ventricles by way of a transseptal catheter across the atrial
septum) are being investigated. The PARTNER TAVI trial
randomized 358 high-risk patients who were not considered to be
candidates for surgical AVR to either the transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (using MedTronic's CORE valve™) or the medical
therapy group. Confirming historical data, the medically treated
patients had 50% mortality at 1 year, compared with a 30%
mortality in patients who underwent transcutaneous aortic valve
implantation, a highly significant improved survival. An alternative
approach using a minithoracotomy and LV puncture allows the
aortic valve to be replaced from the LV apical area without opening
the aortic root (transapical AVR)—a real advantage in some
patients with severe calcification of the ascending aorta.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients with an aortic murmur and
echocardiographic evidence for mild-to-moderate aortic
stenosis (estimated peak valve gradient > 30 mm Hg by
echocardiography/Doppler) should be referred to a
cardiologist for evaluation and to determine the frequency
of follow-up.
•    Any patients with symptoms suggestive of aortic
stenosis should be seen by a cardiologist for further testing.
•    Indications for AVR include symptoms and a mean
gradient by echocardiography/Doppler of > 40 mm Hg or
peak instantaneous gradient of > 64 mm Hg. When
symptoms do not match the aortic stenosis severity by
echocardiography/Doppler (either symptoms in those with
minor gradients or no symptoms in those with severe
gradients), then the use of serum BNP or N-terminal pro-B
type natriuretic peptide (pro-NT BNP) is useful. Serial BNP
levels may also be used to monitor patients; a progressive
rise suggests early LV dysfunction even in the patients who
deny symptoms.
Chan KL et al; ASTRONOMER Investigators. Effect of lipid
lowering with rosuvastatin on progression of aortic stenosis: results
of the aortic stenosis progression observation: measuring effects of
rosuvastatin (ASTRONOMER) trial. Circulation. 2010 Jan
19;121(2):306–14. [PMID: 20048204]
 
Coeytaux RR et al. Percutaneous heart valve replacement for
aortic stenosis: state of the evidence. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Sep
7;153(5):314–24. [PMID: 20679543]
 
Gurvitch R et al. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation: durability
of clinical and hemodynamic outcomes beyond 3 years in a large
patient cohort. Circulation. 2010 Sep 28;122(13): 1319–27.
[PMID: 20837893]
 
Helske S et al. Lipid lowering in aortic stenosis: some light at the
end of the tunnel? Circulation. 2009 May 26;119(20):2653–5.
[PMID: 19470899]
 
Leon MB et al; PARTNER Trial Investigators. Transcatheter
aortic-valve implantation for aortic stenosis in patients who cannot
undergo surgery. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 21;363(17): 1597-
607. [PMID: 20961243]
 
Webb JG et al. Transcatheter aortic valve replacement: impact on
clinical and valve related outcomes. Circulation. 2009 Jun 16;
119(23):3009–16. [PMID: 19487594]
 
AORTIC REGURGITATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually asymptomatic until middle age; presents with left-sided
failure or chest pain.
 Wide pulse pressure.
 Diastolic murmur along left sternal border.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is diagnostic.
 Afterload reduction may be beneficial if there is evidence for
systolic BP elevation.
 Surgery indicated for symptoms, EF < 55%, or LV end-systolic
dimension > 5.0 cm.
 
 General Considerations
Rheumatic aortic regurgitation has become much less common than
in the preantibiotic era, and nonrheumatic causes now predominate.
These include congenitally bicuspid valves, infective endocarditis,
and hypertension. Many patients have aortic regurgitation
secondary to aortic root diseases such as cystic medial necrosis,
Marfan syndrome, or aortic dissection. Rarely, inflammatory
diseases, such as ankylosing spondylitis or Reiter syndrome, may be
causative.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical presentation is determined by the rapidity with which
regurgitation develops. In chronic aortic regurgitation, the only sign
for many years may be a soft aortic diastolic murmur. As the
severity of the aortic regurgitation increases, diastolic BP falls, and
the LV progressively enlarges. Most patients remain asymptomatic
even at this point. LV failure is a late event and may be sudden in
onset. Exertional dyspnea and fatigue are the most frequent
symptoms, but paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and pulmonary
edema may also occur. Angina pectoris or atypical chest pain may
occasionally be present. Associated CAD and presyncope or
syncope are less common than in aortic stenosis.
Hemodynamically, because of compensatory LV dilation,
patients eject a large stroke volume, which is adequate to maintain
forward cardiac output until late in the course of the disease. LV
diastolic pressure may rise when heart failure occurs. Abnormal LV
systolic function, as manifested by reduced EF (< 55%) and
increasing end-systolic LV volume (>5.0 cm), is a sign that surgical
intervention is warranted.
The major physical findings in chronic aortic regurgitation relate
to the high stroke volume being ejected into the systemic vascular
system with rapid runoff as the regurgitation takes place (see Table
10–2). This results in a wide arterial pulse pressure. The pulse has a
rapid rise and fall (water-hammer pulse or Corrigan pulse), with an
elevated systolic and low diastolic pressure. The large stroke
volume is also responsible for characteristic findings such as
Quincke pulses (nailbed capillary pulsations), Duroziez sign (to and
fro murmur over a partially compressed peripheral artery,
commonly the femoral), and Musset sign (head bob with each
pulse). In younger patients, the increased stroke volume may
summate with the pressure wave reflected from the periphery and
create an even higher systolic pressure in the extremity compared
with the central aorta. Since the peripheral bed is much larger in the
leg than the arm, the BP in the leg may be over 40 mm Hg higher
than in the arm (Hill sign). The apical impulse is prominent, laterally
displaced, usually hyperdynamic, and may be sustained. A systolic
murmur is usually present and may be quite soft and localized; the
aortic diastolic murmur is usually high-pitched and decrescendo. A
mid or late diastolic low-pitched mitral murmur (Austin Flint
murmur) may be heard in advanced aortic regurgitation, owing to
relative obstruction of mitral inflow produced by partial closure of
the mitral valve by the rapidly rising LV diastolic pressure due to the
aortic regurgitation.
In acute aortic regurgitation (usually from aortic dissection or
infective endocarditis), LV failure is manifested primarily as
pulmonary edema and may develop rapidly; surgery is urgently
required in such cases. Patients with acute aortic regurgitation do
not have the dilated LV of chronic aortic regurgitation and the extra
volume is handled poorly. For the same reason, the diastolic
murmur is shorter and may be minimal in intensity, and the pulse
pressure may not be widened, making clinical diagnosis difficult.
The mitral valve may close prematurely even before LV systole has
been initiated (pre-closure) due to the rapid rise in the LV diastolic
pressure, and the first heart sound is thus diminished or inaudible.
Pre-closure of the mitral valve can be readily detected on
echocardiography.
B. Diagnostic Studies
The ECG usually shows moderate to severe LVH. Radiographs
show cardiomegaly with LV prominence and sometimes a dilated
aorta.
Echocardiography demonstrates the major diagnostic features,
including whether the lesion involves the proximal aortic root and
what valvular disease is present. Serial assessments of LV size and
function are critical in determining the timing for valve replacement.
Color Doppler techniques can qualitatively estimate the severity of
regurgitation, though some “mild” regurgitation due to aortic valve
closure is not uncommon and should not be over-interpreted.
Cardiac MRI and CT can estimate aortic root size, particularly
when there is concern for an ascending aneurysm. MRI can provide
a regurgitant fraction to help confirm severity. Scintigraphic studies
are infrequently used but can quantify LV function and functional
reserve during exercise. Exercise increases the heart rate and
reduces the diastolic time, resulting in less aortic regurgitation per
beat; this complicates interpretation of the exercise EF and this test
has therefore proved less helpful in deciding surgical timing than
anticipated. Cardiac catheterization may be unnecessary in younger
patients, particularly those with acute aortic regurgitation, but can
help define hemodynamics, aortic root abnormalities, and
associated CAD preoperatively in older patients. Increasing data
are emerging that serum BNP or pro-NT BNP may be an early sign
of LV dysfunction, and it is possible that these data will be added to
recommendations for surgical intervention in the future.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Aortic regurgitation that appears or worsens during or after an
episode of infective endocarditis or aortic dissection may lead to
acute severe LV failure or subacute progression over weeks or
months. The former usually presents as pulmonary edema; surgical
replacement of the valve is indicated even during active infection.
These patients may be transiently improved or stabilized by
vasodilators.
Chronic aortic regurgitation may be tolerated for many years,
but the prognosis without surgery becomes poor when symptoms
occur. Since aortic regurgitation places both a volume and afterload
increase on the LV, medications that decrease afterload can reduce
regurgitation severity. Current recommendations continue to
advocate afterload reduction in aortic regurgitation when there is
associated systolic hypertension (systolic BP > 140 mm Hg).
Afterload reduction in normotensive patients remains controversial.
While β-blocker therapy has been traditionally used in patients with
Marfan disease to slow the rate of aortic dilation by reducing the
dP/dt, ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are
preferred in these patients because of their ability to reduce aortic
stiffness. The role of β-blockers continues to be explored in aortic
regurgitation in an attempt to reduce adverse neuroendocrine
activation.
Patients with aortic regurgitation should to be monitored serially
by echocardiography. Surgery is indicated once symptoms emerge
or for any evidence of LV dysfunction. LV dysfunction in this
situation can be defined by echocardiography if the EF is < 55% or
if the LV endsystolic dimension is > 5.0 cm, even in the
asymptomatic patient. In addition, aortic root diameters of > 4.5 cm
in Marfan or > 5.0 cm in non-Marfan patients are indications for
surgery to avoid rapid expansion. Although the operative mortality
rate is higher when LV function is severely impaired, valve
replacement or repair is still likely indicated, since LV function often
improves and the long-term prognosis is thereby enhanced even in
this situation. The issues with AVR covered in the above section
concerning aortic stenosis pertain here. Currently, however, there
are no percutaneous approaches to aortic regurgitation. The choice
of prosthetic valve for AVR depends on the patient's age and
compatibility with warfarin anticoagulation.
The operative mortality rate is usually in the 3–5% range. Aortic
regurgitation due to aortic root disease requires repair or
replacement of the root. Though valve-sparing operations have
improved recently, most patients with root replacement undergo
valve replacement at the same time. Root replacement procedures
include the Ross procedure (moving the pulmonary valve to the
aortic position and replacing the pulmonary valve with a homograft
or, less commonly, bioprosthetic valve), the direct homograft for the
aortic root and valve, and the Bentall procedure (the use of a
Dacron sheath with a mechanical or bioprosthetic valve sewn in
place). Root replacement in association with valve replacement may
require reanastomosis of the coronary arteries, and thus the
procedure is more complex than valve replacement alone. The
Wheat procedure replaces the aortic root but spares the area where
the coronaries attach to avoid the necessity for their reimplantation.
Following surgery, LV size usually decreases and LV function
generally improves even when the baseline EF is depressed.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with audible aortic regurgitation should be
seen, at least initially, by a cardiologist and decision made
as to how often the patient needs follow-up.
•    Patients with a dilated aortic root should be monitored
by a cardiologist, since imaging studies other than the
chest radiograph or echocardiogram may be required to
decide surgical timing.
Brooke BS et al. Angiotensin II blockade and aortic-root dilation
in Marfan's syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jun 26;358(26):
2787–95. [PMID: 18579813]
 
Carabello BA. What is new in the 2006 ACC/AHA guidelines on
valvular heart disease? Curr Cardiol Rep. 2008 Mar;10(2):85–90.
[PMID: 18417007]
 
Gabriel RS et al. B-type natriuretic peptide and left ventricular
dysfunction on exercise echocardiography in patients with chronic
aortic regurgitation. Heart. 2008 Jul;94(7):897–902. [PMID:
17974697]
 
Sampat U et al. Effect of beta-blocker therapy on survival in
patients with severe aortic regurgitation: results from a cohort of
756 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jul 28;54(5):452–7.
[PMID: 19628121]
 
TRICUSPID STENOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Female predominance.
 History of rheumatic heart disease. Carcinoid disease more
common etiology in the United States.
 Echocardiography/Doppler is key to diagnosis.
 Mean valve gradient > 5 mm Hg by echocardiography indicates
severe tricuspid stenosis.
 
 General Considerations
Tricuspid stenosis is usually rheumatic in origin, although in the
United States, tricuspid stenosis is more commonly due to tricuspid
valve repair or replacement or to the carcinoid syndrome than to
rheumatic fever. Tricuspid regurgitation frequently accompanies the
lesion. It should be suspected when “right heart failure” appears in
the course of mitral valve disease or in the postoperative period
after tricuspid valve repair or replacement. Congenital forms of
tricuspid stenosis may also be rarely observed, as have case reports
of multiple pacemaker leads creating RV inflow obstruction at the
tricuspid valve.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Tricuspid stenosis is characterized by right heart failure with
hepatomegaly, ascites, and dependent edema. In sinus rhythm, giant
a wave is seen in the JVP, which is elevated (see Table 10–2). The
typical diastolic rumble along the lower left sternal border mimics
mitral stenosis, though the rumble increases with inspiration. In sinus
rhythm, a presystolic liver pulsation also may be found.
B. Diagnostic Studies
In the absence of atrial fibrillation, the ECG reveals RA
enlargement. The chest radiograph may show marked cardiomegaly
with a normal PA size. A dilated SVC and azygous vein may be
evident.
The normal valve area of the tricuspid valve is 10 cm2, so
significant stenosis must be present to produce a gradient.
Hemodynamically, a mean diastolic pressure gradient of > 5 mm Hg
is considered significant, although even a 2 mm Hg gradient can be
considered 
abnormal. 
This 
can 
be 
demonstrated 
by
echocardiography or cardiac catheterization.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Tricuspid stenosis may be progressive, eventually causing severe
right-sided heart failure. Initial therapy is directed at reducing the
fluid congestion, with diuretics the mainstay. When there is
considerable bowel edema, torsemide may have an advantage over
other loop diuretics, such as furosemide, because it is better
absorbed from the gut. Aldosterone inhibitors also help, particularly
if there is liver engorgement or ascites. Neither surgical nor
percutaneous valvuloplasty is particularly effective for relief of
tricuspid stenosis, as residual tricuspid regurgitation is common.
Tricuspid valve replacement is clearly the preferred surgical
approach. Mechanical tricuspid valve replacement is rarely done
because the low flow predisposes to thrombosis and because the
mechanical valve cannot be crossed should the need arise for right
heart catheterization or pacemaker implantation. Therefore,
bioprosthetic valves are almost always used. Often tricuspid valve
replacement is done in conjunction with mitral valve replacement for
mitral stenosis.
Hong SN. Carcinoid heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 May
4;55(18):1996. [PMID: 20430272]
 
Yeter E et al. Tricuspid balloon valvuloplasty to treat tricuspid
stenosis. J Heart Valve Dis. 2010 Jan;19(1):159–60. [PMID:
20329507]
 
TRICUSPID REGURGITATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Frequently occurs in patients with pulmonary or cardiac disease
with pressure or volume overload on the right ventricle.
 Systolic c-v wave in jugular venous pulsations.
 Holosystolic murmur along left sternal border, which increases
with inspiration.
 Echocardiography useful in determining cause (low- or high-
pressure tricuspid regurgitation).
 
 General Considerations
Tricuspid valvular incompetence often occurs whenever there is RV
dilation from any cause. As tricuspid regurgitation increases, the RV
size increases further, and this in turn worsens the severity of the
tricuspid regurgitation. The causes of tricuspid regurgitation thus
relate to anatomic issues with either the valve itself or to the RV
geometry. In most cases, the cause is the RV and not primary
tricuspid valve disease. An enlarged, dilated RV may be present if
there is pulmonary hypertension for any reason, in severe pulmonic
regurgitation, or in cardiomyopathy. The RV may be injured from
myocardial infarction or may be inherently dilated due to infiltrative
diseases (RV dysplasia or sarcoidosis). RV dilation is often
secondary to left heart failure. Inherent abnormalities of the tricuspid
valve include Ebstein anomaly (displacement of the septal and
posterior, but never the anterior, leaflets into the RV), tricuspid
valve prolapse, carcinoid plaque formation, collagen disease
inflammation, valvular tumors, tricuspid endocarditis, or RV
pacemaker catheter injury.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms and signs of tricuspid regurgitation are identical to
those resulting from RV failure due to any cause. As a generality,
the diagnosis can be made by careful inspection of the JVP (see
Table 10–2). The JVP waveform should decline during ventricular
systole (the x descent). The timing of this decline can be observed
by palpating the opposite carotid artery. As tricuspid regurgitation
worsens, more and more of this valley in the JVP is filled with the
regurgitant wave until all of the x descent is obliterated and a
positive systolic waveform will be noted in the JVP. An associated
tricuspid regurgitation murmur may or may not be audible and can
be distinguished from mitral regurgitation by the left parasternal
location and increase with inspiration. An S3 may accompany the
murmur and is related to the high flow returning from the RA.
Cyanosis may be present if the increased RA pressure stretches the
atrial septum and opens a PFO or there is a true ASD (eg, in about
50% of patients with Ebstein anomaly).
B. Diagnostic Studies
The ECG is usually nonspecific, though atrial fibrillation is not
uncommon. The chest radiograph may reveal evidence for an
enlarged RA or dilated azygous vein and pleural effusion. The
echocardiogram helps assess severity of tricuspid regurgitation, RV
systolic pressure, and RV size and function. A paradoxically moving
interventricular septum may be present due to the volume overload.
Catheterization confirms the presence of the regurgitant wave in the
RA and elevated RA pressures. If the PA or RV systolic pressure is
< 40 mm Hg, primary valvular tricuspid regurgitation should be
suspected.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Mild tricuspid regurgitation is common and generally can be well
managed with diuretics. Minor tricuspid regurgitation is well
tolerated. When present, bowel edema may reduce the
effectiveness of oral furosemide, and intravenous diuretics should
initially be used. Torsemide is better absorbed in this situation when
oral diuretics are added. Aldosterone antagonists have a role as
well, particularly if ascites is present. At times, the efficacy of loop
diuretics can be enhanced by adding a thiazide diuretic.
Aquapheresis has also been proven helpful to reduce the edema in
marked right heart failure.
Definitive treatment usually requires elimination of the cause of
the tricuspid regurgitation. If the problem is left heart disease, then
treatment of the left heart issues may lower pulmonary pressures,
reduce RV size, and resolve the tricuspid regurgitation. Treatment
for primary and secondary causes of pulmonary hypertension will
generally reduce the tricuspid regurgitation. If surgery is
contemplated for other reasons, especially mitral valve disease, then
tricuspid annuloplasty is generally performed at the same time with a
valvular ring sewn in place. It is a class I recommendation that
tricuspid annuloplasty be performed when tricuspid regurgitation is
present and mitral valve replacement or repair is being performed
for mitral regurgitation. Annuloplasty without insertion of a
prosthetic ring (DeVega annuloplasty) may also be effective in
reducing the tricuspid annular dilation. The valve leaflet itself can
occasionally be repaired in tricuspid valve endocarditis. In years
past, in patients with tricuspid regurgitation due to endocarditis from
substance abuse, the tricuspid valve has been temporarily removed
to aid in cure of the endocarditis, though it must eventually be
replaced (usually by 3–6 months); this practice is much less
common now. If there is an inherent defect in the tricuspid valve
apparatus that cannot be repaired, then replacement of the tricuspid
valve is warranted. Almost always, a bioprosthetic valve, and not a
mechanical valve, is used. Anticoagulation is not required for
bioprosthetic valves unless there is associated atrial fibrillation.
 When to Refer
 
•    Anyone with moderate or severe tricuspid regurgitation
should be seen at least once by a cardiologist to determine
whether further studies are needed to elucidate cause and
whether any other intervention is needed.
•    Severe tricuspid regurgitation requires regular follow-up
by a cardiologist.
Bonow RO et al. 2008 focused update incorporated into the
ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008 Sep 23;52(13):e1–142. [PMID: 18848134]
 
Roshanali F et al. Echocardiographic approach to the decision-
making process for tricuspid valve repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2010 Jun;139(6):1483–7. [PMID: 19909984]
 
Shah PM et al. Tricuspid valve disease. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2008
Feb;33(2):47–84. [PMID: 18222317]
 
PULMONIC REGURGITATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most cases are due to pulmonary hypertension.
 Echocardiogram is definitive in high-pressure but may be less
definitive in low-pressure pulmonic regurgitation.
 Low-pressure pulmonic regurgitation is well tolerated.
 
 General Considerations
Pulmonary valve regurgitation can be divided into high-pressure
causes (due to pulmonary hypertension) and low-pressure causes
(usually due to a dilated pulmonary annulus, to a congenitally
abnormal (bicuspid or dysplastic) pulmonary valve, or to plaque
from carcinoid disease). It may also follow surgical repair, eg,
frequently occurring after repair of tetralogy of Fallot with a
transannular patch. Because the RV tolerates a volume load better
than a pressure load, it tends to tolerate low pressure pulmonic
regurgitation for long periods of time without dysfunction.
 Clinical Findings
On examination, a hyperdynamic RV can usually be palpated. If the
PA is enlarged, it may be palpated along the left sternal border. P 2
will be palpable in pulmonary hyper-tension and both systolic and
diastolic thrills are occasionally noted. On auscultation, the second
heart sound may be widely split due to prolonged RV systole.
Systolic clicks may be noted as well as a right-sided gallop. In high-
pressure pulmonic regurgitation, the pulmonary diastolic (Graham
Steell) murmur is readily audible. It is often due to a dilated
pulmonary annulus. The murmur increases with inspiration and
diminishes with the Valsalva maneuver. In low-pressure pulmonic
regurgitation, the PA diastolic pressure may be only a few mm Hg
higher than the RV diastolic pressure, and there is little diastolic
gradient 
to 
produce 
a 
murmur 
or 
characteristic
echocardiography/Doppler findings. At times, only contrast
angiography or MRI of the main PA will show the free flowing
pulmonic regurgitation in low-pressure pulmonic regurgitation. This
situation is common in following repair of tetralogy of Fallot where
despite little murmur there may be free flowing pulmonic
regurgitation. This can be suspected by noting an enlarging right
ventricle.
The ECG is generally of little value, although right bundle branch
is common and there may be ECG criteria for RVH. The chest
radiograph may show only the enlarged RV and PA.
Echocardiography may demonstrate evidence of RV volume
overload (paradoxic septal motion and an enlarged RV), and
Doppler can determine peak systolic RV pressure and reveal any
associated tricuspid regurgitation. The interventricular septum may
appear flattened if there is pulmonary hypertension. The size of the
main PA can be determined and color flow Doppler can
demonstrate the pulmonic regurgitation, particularly in the high-
pressure situation. Cardiac MRI and CT can be useful for assessing
the size of the PA, for imaging the jet lesion, for excluding other
causes of pulmonary hypertension (eg, thromboembolic disease,
peripheral PA stenosis), and for evaluating RV function. MRI
provides a regurgitant fraction to help quantitate the degree of
pulmonic regurgitation. Cardiac catheterization is confirmatory.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Pulmonic regurgitation rarely needs specific therapy other than
treatment of the primary cause. In low-pressure pulmonic
regurgitation due to surgical patch repair of tetralogy of Fallot,
pulmonary valve replacement may be indicated if RV enlargement
or dysfunction is present. In tetralogy of Fallot, the QRS will widen
as RV function declines and the ECG is helpful here (a QRS > 180
msec suggests a higher risk for sudden death). In carcinoid heart
disease, pulmonary valve replacement with a porcine bioprosthesis
may be undertaken, though the plaque from this disorder eventually
covers the prosthetic valve and this tends to limit the lifespan of
these valves. In high-pressure pulmonic regurgitation, treatment to
control the cause of the pulmonary hypertension is key. Low-
pressure pulmonic regurgitation is well tolerated over many years;
exercise and pregnancy are not interdicted. High-pressure pulmonic
regurgitation is poorly tolerated and is a serious condition that needs
a thorough evaluation for cause and therapy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with pulmonic regurgitation that results in RV
enlargement should be referred to a cardiologist
regardless of the estimated pulmonary pressures.
McElhinney DB et al. Short- and medium-term outcomes after
transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement in the expanded
multicenter US Melody valve trial. Circulation. 2010 Aug 3;
122(5):507–16. [PMID: 20644013]
 
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2; 118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
CHOICE & MANAGEMENT OF PROSTHETIC VALVES
Less invasive surgical procedures for valve replacement have
improved over the past few decades. There are now mini-incisional
approaches to aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valve replacement and
repair. Percutaneous valvuloplasty has replaced surgical
commissurotomy for mitral stenosis in most cases. However,
percutaneous aortic valvuloplasty is moderately effective only in
children and adolescents and has a very limited role in adults.
Neither surgical nor percutaneous tricuspid valvuloplasty is very
effective.
Repair of the mitral valve is successful in appropriate patients and
has lowered the threshold for intervention in mitral regurgitation.
Some experts recommend that all mitral prolapse patients with
mitral regurgitation undergo mitral valve repair even when other
indications are not present. When tricuspid regurgitation is present
and mitral valve repair or replacement is planned, tricuspid repair is
now a class I recommendation. Aortic valve sparing procedures are
also improving and may obviate the need for AVR, especially in
patients undergoing root replacement. Early experience, though,
with aortic valve repair remains mixed. Direct valvular repair and
removal of vegetations are also viable options in some patients with
endocarditis.
The choice of prosthetic valve depends on a variety of
considerations, such as assessing the expected survival of the
patient versus the durability of the valve and the safety of warfarin
for the patient. Bioprosthetic valves usually have a life expectancy of
10–15 years, but less in young patients, those on dialysis, or those
with hypercalcemia. High lipid levels may accelerate the
degenerative process as much as in native heart valves. The lifespan
of bovine pericardial valves is somewhat longer than porcine valves,
and these are becoming the favorite bioprostheses. Bioprosthetic
valves, homografts, and the Ross procedure (replacement of the
aortic valve with the patient's own pulmonary valve, then
replacement of the removed pulmonary valve with a homograft) do
not require anticoagulation with warfarin, though current guidelines
suggest warfarin be used for 3 months after valve implantation to
allow for endothelial growth over the sewing ring. This latter
recommendation is controversial. Mechanical valves have a much
longer lifespan, but all require use of warfarin (and frequently aspirin
as an adjunct, especially in the mitral position). The long-term risk
of warfarin depends on patient compliance and whether there is
coexisting disease that may predispose to bleeding.
Mechanical mitral valve prostheses pose a greater risk for
thrombosis than mechanical aortic valves. For that reason, the INR
should be kept between 2.5 and 3.5 for mechanical mitral
prosthetic valves but can be kept between 2.0 and 2.5 for
mechanical aortic prosthetic valves. Entericcoated aspirin (81 mg
once daily) is given to patients with both types of mechanical valves
but appears to be more important for mitral valve prostheses and
for both types of valves when other risk factors are present, such as
atrial fibrillation, a reduced EF, a hypercoagulable state, associated
CAD, peripheral vascular disease, or a history of CVA.
Warfarin causes fetal skeletal abnormalities in about 2% of
women who become pregnant while taking warfarin, so every effort
is made to defer valve replacement in women until after childbearing
age. However, if a woman with a mechanical valve becomes
pregnant while taking warfarin, the risk of stopping warfarin may be
higher for the mother than the risk of continuing warfarin for the
fetus. The risk of warfarin to the fetal skeleton is greatest during the
first trimester, so if pregnancy is planned in a woman with a
mechanical valve, unfractionated heparin is often used temporarily
during the first trimester. After the first trimester, warfarin use is safe
again until 2 weeks before planned delivery, when the patient should
be switched back to unfractionated heparin. Low-molecular-weight
heparin has not been shown to be effective and should not be
substituted for unfractionated heparin in the pregnant patient with a
mechanical heart valve.
When patients with mechanical valves must undergo non-cardiac
surgery, the risk of thrombosis from stopping warfarin versus the
risk of excessive bleeding from continuing warfarin must be
weighed. In general, for bileaflet aortic mechanical valves, warfarin
can be stopped 5 days ahead of the surgical procedure and
resumed the night of the procedure with no preprocedural
“bridging”. After the procedure, unfractionated heparin or low-
molecular-weight heparin can be used until the INR is 2.0. In
patients with a bileaflet mitral valve, warfarin may be stopped 5
days ahead of time and bridging with either unfractionated heparin
or low-molecular-weight heparin is often used preoperatively if the
INR falls below 2.0. The last dose of low-molecular-weight heparin
should be half the therapeutic dose and be given 24 hours before
any procedure. If unfractionated heparin is used, it should be
stopped 4 hours before the procedure. As with AVR, warfarin is
generally started within 24 hours after surgery, but heparin should
not be started for 48–72 hours or until hemostasis is secured.
Heparin therapy should be continued until the INR is > 2.0.
There is great interest in the use of direct antithrombin inhibitors,
such as dabigatran, in place of warfarin. Ongoing trials are
addressing whether these agents provide safe and effective
anticoagulation in patients with mechanical prosthetic valves. In
addition, paravalvular leaks around prosthetic valves may now be
amenable to percutaneous plugging devices that allow for the
avoidance of reoperation.
El-Hamamsy I et al. Long-term outcomes after autograft versus
homograft aortic root replacement in adults with aortic valve
disease: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Aug 14;
376(9740):524–31. [PMID: 20684981]
 
Hagler DJ et al. Assessment of percutaneous catheter treatment of
paravalvular prosthetic regurgitation. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging.
2010 Jan;3(1):88–91. [PMID: 20129537]
 
Hirsh J et al; American College of Chest Physicians. Executive
summary: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based
Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008 Jun;133(6
Suppl):71S–109S. [PMID: 18574259]
 
Rahimtoola SH. Choice of prosthetic heart valve in adults: an
update. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Jun a;55(22):2413–26. [PMID:
20510209]
 
Stone PH. Current selection of optimal prosthetic aortic valve
replacement in middle-aged patients: still dealer's choice. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2009 Nov 10;54(20):1869–71. [PMID: 19892238]
 
CORONARY HEART DISEASE
(ATHEROSCLEROTIC CAD,
ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE)
 
Coronary heart disease, or atherosclerotic CAD, is the number one
killer in the United States and worldwide. Every minute, an
American dies of coronary heart disease. About 37% of people
who experience an acute coronary event, either angina or
myocardial infarction, will die of it in the same year. Death rates of
coronary heart disease have declined every year since 1968, with
about half of the decline from 1980 to 2000 due to treatments and
half due to improved risk factors. Coronary heart disease is still
responsible for approximately one of five deaths and over 600,000
deaths per year in the United States. Coronary heart disease afflicts
nearly 16 million Americans and the prevalence rises steadily with
age; thus, the aging of the US population promises to increase the
overall burden of coronary heart disease.
 Risk Factors for CAD
Most patients with coronary heart disease have some identifiable
risk factor. These include a positive family history (the younger the
onset in a first-degree relative, the greater the risk), male gender,
blood lipid abnormalities, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, physical
inactivity, abdominal obesity, and cigarette smoking, psychosocial
factors, consumption of too few fruits and vegetables and too much
alcohol. Smoking remains the number one preventable cause of
cardiovascular disease worldwide. Although smoking rates have
declined in the United States in recent decades, 19% of women and
23% of men smoke. According to the World Health Organization,
1 year after quitting, the risk of coronary heart disease decreases by
50%. Various interventions have been shown to increase the
likelihood of successful smoking cessation (see Chapter 1).
Hypercholesterolemia and other lipid abnormalities provide an
important modifiable risk factor for coronary heart disease. Risk
increases progressively with higher levels of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) cholesterol and declines with higher levels of high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Composite risk scores, such as the
Framingham score (see Table 28–2), provide estimates of 10-year
probability of development of coronary heart disease that can guide
primary prevention strategies.
The metabolic syndrome is defined as a constellation of three or
more of the following: abdominal obesity, triglycerides ≥ 150
mg/dL, HDL cholesterol < 40 mg/dL for men and < 50 mg/dL for
women, fasting glucose ≥ 110 mg/dL, and hypertension. This
syndrome is increasing in prevalence at an alarming rate. Related to
the metabolic syndrome, the epidemic of obesity in the United
States is likewise a major factor contributing to coronary heart
disease risk. Data from National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) show that the prevalence of obesity (body
mass index [BMI] ≥ 30 kg/m2) continues to increase at about 2%
per year, up to 33% of the adult population in the 2003–2004
survey. Particularly alarming is the rapidly increasing incidence of
obesity in adolescents in the United States, such that for children
aged 12–19 years, prevalence of obesity increased from 5% (in
1976–1980) to 17%. Increasing physical activity is an important
goal to help combat obesity and its consequences. Although the
AHA continues to promote a diet based largely on low saturated
fat, more information is needed on the health consequences of all
diets, especially given the lack of protection from a low-fat diet in
the largest randomized study ever done, the Women's Health
Initiative trial. Low carbohydrate diets, even when high in saturated
fat, may improve the cholesterol profile in overweight men and are
as effective at achieving weight loss. Fish, rich in omega-3 fatty
acids, may help protect against vascular disease, and it is
recommended that it be eaten three times a week by patients at
risk.
Markers of inflammation are strong risk factors for CAD. High
sensitivity (hs) CRP is the best-characterized inflammatory marker,
but others include interleukin-6, CD-40 ligand, myelopyroxidase,
and placental growth factor. Although hsCRP levels > 10 mcg/mL
are often found in systemic inflammation, levels < 1, 1–3, and > 3
mcg/mL, respectively, identify patients at low, intermediate, and
high risk for future cardiovascular events. The prognostic value of
CRP levels is independent and additive to lipid levels. Use of CRP
may be helpful in determining which patients at intermediate risk
according to the Framingham 10-year risk of coronary heart
disease calculation (score of 10–20%) are at high enough risk to
warrant more intensive primary prevention, including use of statins
to lower LDL cholesterol. HsCRP ≥ 2 mg/L identifies older people
without vascular disease and with normal cholesterol who benefit
from statins. HsCRP levels are often elevated in patients who have
other conditions associated with accelerated atherosclerosis, such
as diabetes, the metabolic syndrome, and obesity. In patients
presenting with acute coronary syndromes, the hsCRP elevation
identifies a group that is at high risk for early recurrent events.
 Myocardial Hibernation & Stunning
Areas of myocardium that are persistently underperfused but still
viable may develop sustained contractile dysfunction. This
phenomenon, which is termed “myocardial hibernation,” appears to
represent an adaptive response that maybe associated with
depressed LV function. It is important to recognize this
phenomenon, since this form of dysfunction is reversible following
coronary revascularization. Hibernating myocardium can be
identified by radionuclide testing, positron emission tomography
(PET), contrast-enhanced MRI, or its retained response to
inotropic stimulation with dobutamine. A related phenomenon,
termed “myocardial stunning,” is the occurrence of persistent
contractile dysfunction following prolonged or repetitive episodes of
myocardial ischemia. Clinically, myocardial stunning is often seen
after reperfusion of acute myocardial infarction.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Overweight and
Obesity. http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/obesity
 
Gardner CD et al. Comparison of the Atkins, Zone, Ornish, and
LEARN diets for change in weight and related risk factors among
overweight premenopausal women: the A TO Z Weight Loss
Study: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2007 Mar 7;297(9):969–77.
[PMID: 17341711]
 
Hall SL et al. Secondary prevention of coronary artery disease.
Am Fam Physician. 2010 Feb 1;81(3):289–96. [PMID:
20112887]
 
Howard BV et al. Low-fat dietary pattern and risk of
cardiovascular disease: the Women's Health Initiative Randomized
Dietary Modification Trial. JAMA. 2006 Feb 8;295(6):655–66.
[PMID: 16467234]
 
Yusuf S et al; INTERHEART Study Investigators. Effect of
potentially modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial
infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART study): case-control
study. Lancet. 2004 Sep 11–17;364(9438):937–52. [PMID:
15364185]
 
CHRONIC STABLE ANGINA PECTORIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Precordial chest pain, usually precipitated by stress or exertion,
relieved rapidly by rest or nitrates.
 ECG or scintigraphic evidence of ischemia during pain or stress
testing.
 Angiographic demonstration of significant obstruction of major
coronary vessels.
 
 General Considerations
Angina pectoris is usually due to atherosclerotic heart disease.
Coronary vasospasm may occur at the site of a lesion or, less
frequently, in apparently normal vessels. Other unusual causes of
coronary artery obstruction such as congenital anomalies, emboli,
arteritis, or dissection may cause ischemia or infarction. Angina may
also occur in the absence of coronary artery obstruction as a result
of severe myocardial hypertrophy, severe aortic stenosis or
regurgitation, or in response to increased metabolic demands, as in
hyperthyroidism, marked anemia, or paroxysmal tachycardias with
rapid ventricular rates. Rarely, angina occurs with angiographically
normal coronary arteries and without other identifiable causes. This
presentation has been labeled syndrome X and is most likely due
to inadequate flow reserve in the resistance vessels
(microvasculature). Syndrome X remains difficult to diagnose.
Although treatment is often not very successful in relieving
symptoms, the prognosis of syndrome X is good.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
The diagnosis of angina pectoris depends principally upon the
history, which should specifically include the following information:
circumstances that precipitate and relieve angina, characteristics of
the discomfort, location and radiation, duration of attacks, and
effect of nitroglycerin.
1. Circumstances that precipitate and relieve angina—Angina
occurs most commonly during activity and is relieved by resting.
Patients may prefer to remain upright rather than lie down, as
increased preload in recumbency increases myocardial work. The
amount of activity required to produce angina may be relatively
consistent under comparable physical and emotional circumstances
or may vary from day to day. The threshold for angina is usually less
after meals, during excitement, or on exposure to cold. It is often
lower in the morning or after strong emotion; the latter can provoke
attacks in the absence of exertion. In addition, discomfort may
occur during sexual activity, at rest, or at night as a result of
coronary spasm.
2. Characteristics of the discomfort—Patients often do not refer
to angina as “pain” but as a sensation of tightness, squeezing,
burning, pressing, choking, aching, bursting, “gas,” indigestion, or an
ill-characterized discomfort. It is often characterized by clenching a
fist over the mid chest. The distress of angina is rarely sharply
localized and is not spasmodic.
3. Location and radiation—The distribution of the distress may
vary widely in different patients but is usually the same for each
patient unless unstable angina or myocardial infarction supervenes.
In most cases, the discomfort is felt behind or slightly to the left of
the mid sternum. When it begins farther to the left or, uncommonly,
on the right, it characteristically moves centrally substernally.
Although angina may radiate to any dermatome from C8 to T4, it
radiates most often to the left shoulder and upper arm, frequently
moving down the inner volar aspect of the arm to the elbow,
forearm, wrist, or fourth and fifth fingers. It may also radiate to the
right shoulder or arm, the lower jaw, the neck, or even the back.
4. Duration of attacks—Angina is generally of short duration and
subsides completely without residual discomfort. If the attack is
precipitated by exertion and the patient promptly stops to rest, it
usually lasts < 3 minutes. Attacks following a heavy meal or brought
on by anger often last 15–20 minutes. Attacks lasting more than 30
minutes are unusual and suggest the development of unstable angina,
myocardial infarction, or an alternative diagnosis.
5. Effect of nitroglycerin—The diagnosis of angina pectoris is
strongly supported if sublingual nitroglycerin promptly and invariably
shortens an attack and if prophylactic nitrates permit greater
exertion or prevent angina entirely.
B. Signs
Examination during angina frequently reveals a significant elevation
in systolic and diastolic BP, although hypotension may also occur,
and may reflect more severe ischemia or inferior ischemia
(especially with bradycardia) due to a Bezold–Jarisch reflex.
Occasionally, a gallop rhythm and an apical systolic murmur due to
transient mitral regurgitation from papillary muscle dysfunction are
present during pain only. Supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmias
may be present, either as the precipitating factor or as a result of
ischemia.
It is important to detect signs of diseases that may contribute to
or accompany atherosclerotic heart disease, eg, diabetes mellitus
(retinopathy or neuropathy), xanthelasma, tendinous xanthomas,
hypertension, thyrotoxicosis, myxedema, or peripheral vascular
disease. 
Aortic 
stenosis 
or 
regurgitation, 
hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, and mitral valve prolapse should be sought, since
they may produce angina or other forms of chest pain.
C. Laboratory Findings
Other than standard laboratory tests to evaluate for acute coronary
syndrome (troponin and CK-MB), factors contributing to ischemia
(such as anemia), and to screen for risk factors that may increase
the probability of true coronary heart disease (such as
hyperlipidemia), blood tests are not helpful to diagnose chronic
angina.
D. ECG
The resting ECG is often normal in patients with angina. In the
remainder, abnormalities include old myocardial infarction,
nonspecific ST–T changes, and changes of LVH. During anginal
episodes, as well as during asymptomatic ischemia, the
characteristic ECG change is horizontal or downsloping ST-
segment depression that reverses after the ischemia disappears. T
wave flattening or inversion may also occur. Less frequently,
transient ST-segment elevation is observed; this finding suggests
severe (transmural) ischemia from coronary occlusion, and it can
occur with coronary spasm.
E. Pretest Probability
The history as detailed above, the physical examination findings, and
laboratory and ECG findings are used to develop a pretest
probability of CAD as the cause of the clinical symptoms. Other
important factors to include in calculating the pretest probability of
CAD are patient age, gender, and clinical symptoms. Patients with
low to intermediate pretest probability for CAD should undergo
noninvasive stress testing whereas patients with high pretest
probability are generally referred for cardiac catheterization. Of
note, a recent large review of diagnostic cardiac catheterization
findings in patients without known CAD undergoing invasive
angiography, found that 38% had significant obstruction in one or
more coronary arteries. These findings have highlighted the
importance of careful pretest probability assessment.
F. Exercise ECG
Exercise testing is the most commonly used noninvasive procedure
for evaluating for inducible ischemia in the patient with angina.
Exercise testing is often combined with imaging studies (nuclear,
echocardiography, or MRI [see below]), but in low-risk patients
without baseline ST segment abnormalities or in whom anatomic
localization is not necessary, the exercise ECG remains the
recommended initial procedure because of considerations of cost
and convenience.
Exercise testing can be done on a motorized treadmill or with a
bicycle ergometer. A variety of exercise protocols are utilized, the
most common being the Bruce protocol, which increases the
treadmill speed and elevation every 3 minutes until limited by
symptoms. At least two ECG leads should be monitored
continuously.
1. Precautions and risks—The risk of exercise testing is about
one infarction or death per 1000 tests, but individuals who have
pain at rest or minimal activity are at higher risk and should not be
tested. Many of the traditional exclusions, such as recent myocardial
infarction or CHF, are no longer used if the patient is stable and
ambulatory, but symptomatic aortic stenosis remains a
contraindication.
2. Indications—Exercise testing is used (1) to confirm the
diagnosis of angina; (2) to determine the severity of limitation of
activity due to angina; (3) to assess prognosis in patients with
known coronary disease, including those recovering from
myocardial infarction, by detecting groups at high or low risk; (4) to
evaluate responses to therapy; and (5) less successfully, to screen
asymptomatic populations for silent coronary disease. The latter
application is controversial. Because false-positive tests often
exceed true positives, leading to much patient anxiety and self-
imposed or mandated disability, exercise testing of asymptomatic
individuals should be done only for those whose occupations place
them or others at special risk (eg, airline pilots), and older
individuals commencing strenuous activity.
3. Interpretation—The usual ECG criterion for a positive test is 1
mm (0.1 mV) horizontal or downsloping ST-segment depression
(beyond baseline) measured 80 milliseconds after the J point. By
this criterion, 60–80% of patients with anatomically significant
coronary disease will have a positive test, but 10–30% of those
without significant disease will also be positive. False positives are
uncommon when a 2-mm depression is present. Additional
information is inferred from the time of onset and duration of the
ECG changes, their magnitude and configuration, BP and heart rate
changes, the duration of exercise, and the presence of associated
symptoms. In general, patients exhibiting more severe ST-segment
depression (>2 mm) at low workloads (< 6 minutes on the Bruce
protocol) or heart rates (< 70% of age-predicted maximum)—
especially when the duration of exercise and rise in BP are limited
or when hypotension occurs during the test—have more severe
disease and a poorer prognosis. Depending on symptom status,
age, and other factors, such patients should be referred for
coronary arteriography and possible revascularization. On the other
hand, less impressive positive tests in asymptomatic patients are
often “false positives.” Therefore, exercise testing results that do not
conform to the clinical picture should be confirmed by stress
imaging.
G. Myocardial Stress Imaging
Myocardial stress imaging (scintigraphy, echocardiography, or
MRI) is indicated (1) when the resting ECG makes an exercise
ECG difficult to interpret (eg, left bundle branch block, baseline
ST–T changes, low voltage); (2) for confirmation of the results of
the exercise ECG when they are contrary to the clinical impression
(eg, a positive test in an asymptomatic patient); (3) to localize the
region of ischemia; (4) to distinguish ischemic from infarcted
myocardium; (5) to assess the completeness of vascularization
following bypass surgery or coronary angioplasty; or (6) as a
prognostic indicator in patients with known coronary disease.
1. Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy—This test provides
images in which radionuclide uptake is proportionate to blood flow
at the time of injection. Thallium-201, technetium-99m sestamibi,
and tetrafosmin are most frequently used. If the radiotracer is
injected during exercise or dipyridamole- or adenosine-induced
coronary vasodilation, scintigraphic defects indicate a zone of
hypoperfusion that may represent either ischemia or scar. If the
myocardium is viable, as relative blood flow equalizes over time or
during a scintigram performed under resting conditions, these
defects tend to “fill in” or reverse, indicating reversible ischemia.
Defects observed when the radiotracer is injected at rest or still
present 3–4 hours after an injection during exercise or
pharmacologic vasodilation (intravenous adenosine or dipyridamole)
usually indicate myocardial infarction (old or recent) but may be
present with severe ischemia. Occasionally, other conditions,
including infiltrative diseases (sarcoidosis, amyloidosis), left bundle
branch block, and dilated cardiomyopathy, may produce resting or
persistent perfusion defects.
Stress imaging is positive in about 75–90% of patients with
anatomically significant coronary disease and in 20–30% of those
without it. False-positive radionuclide tests may occur as a result of
diaphragmatic attenuation or, in women, attenuation through breast
tissue. Tomographic imaging (single-photon emission computed
tomography, SPECT) can reduce the severity of artifacts. Gated
imaging allows for analysis of ventricular size, EF, and regional wall
motion.
2. Radionuclide angiography—This procedure images the LV
and measures its EF and wall motion. In coronary disease, resting
abnormalities usually represent infarction, and those that occur only
with exercise usually indicate stress-induced ischemia. Exercise
radionuclide angiography has approximately the same sensitivity as
thallium-201 scintigraphy, but it is less specific in older individuals
and those with other forms of heart disease. The indications are
similar to those for thallium-201 scintigraphy.
3. Stress echocardiography—Echocardiograms performed
during supine exercise or immediately following upright exercise
may demonstrate exercise-induced segmental wall motion
abnormalities as an indicator of ischemia. This technique requires
considerable expertise; however, in experienced laboratories, the
test accuracy is comparable to that obtained with scintigraphy—
though a higher proportion of tests is technically inadequate. While
exercise is the preferred stress because of other information
derived, pharmacologic stress with high-dose dobutamine (20–40
mcg/kg/min) can be used as an alternative to exercise.
Echocardiography contrast agents allow for perfusion imaging and
may improve the diagnostic accuracy of this form of testing,
although these are not commonly used.
H. Other Imaging
1. Positron emission tomography—PET scanning uses positron-
emitting agents to demonstrate either perfusion or metabolism of
myocardium. PET scanning can accurately distinguish transiently
dysfunctional (“stunned”) myocardium from scar by showing
persistent glycolytic metabolism with the tracer fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) in regions with reduced blood flow. The newer SPECT
camera can provide acceptable images without the more expensive
PET technology.
2. CT and MRI scanning—CT scanning can image the heart
and, with contrast medium and multislice technology, the coronary
arteries, with increasing resolution. Coronary artery images can be
obtained by 64- and higher slice technology, and, if the images are
normal, this technology has high sensitivity for excluding significant
CAD.
Thus, multislice CT angiography may be useful in evaluating
patients with low likelihood of significant CAD who would
otherwise have undergone coronary angiography. CT angiography
may also be useful for evaluating chest pain and suspected acute
coronary syndrome. However, the role of CT angiography in
routine practice is yet to be established, since it currently requires
both radiation exposure and contrast load. It should also be noted
that radionuclide SPECT imaging also has similar radiation
exposure.
Electron beam CT (EBCT) can quantify coronary artery
calcification, which is highly correlated with atheromatous plaque
and has high sensitivity, but low specificity, for obstructive coronary
disease. Thus, although this test can stratify patients into lower and
higher risk groups, the appropriate management of individual
patients with asymptomatic coronary artery calcification—beyond
aggressive risk factors modification—is unclear. According to the
American Heart Association, persons who are at low risk (< 10%
10-year risk) or at high risk (>20% 10-year risk) do not benefit
from coronary calcium assessment (class III, level of evidence: B)
(see Tables 28–2 and 28–3). However, in clinically selected,
intermediate-risk patients, it may be reasonable to determine the
atherosclerosis burden using EBCT in order to refine clinical risk
prediction and to select patients for more aggressive target values
for lipid-lowering therapies (class IIb, level of evidence: B).
Cardiac MRI provides high-resolution images of the heart and
great vessels without radiation exposure or use of iodinated contrast
media. Gadolinium, the contrast agent used for cardiac MRI, has
been associated with a rare but fatal complication in patients with
severe renal dysfunction, called necrotizing systemic fibrosis.
Cardiac MRI provides excellent assessment of pericardial disease,
neo-plastic disease of the heart, myocardial thickness, chamber
size, and many congenital heart defects. It is an excellent
noninvasive test for nonemergently evaluating dissection of the
aorta. Rapid acquisition sequences are a useful alternative when the
echocardiogram is suboptimal. Perfusion imaging can be done with
gadolinium first pass perfusion using dobutamine or adenosine to
produce pharmacologic stress. Advances have been made in
imaging the proximal coronary arteries, but this application remains
investigational. Perhaps the most clinically used indication of cardiac
MRI is for identification of myocardial fibrosis, either from
myocardial infarction or infiltration. This allows high resolution
imaging of myocardial viability.
I. Ambulatory ECG Monitoring
Ambulatory ECG recorders can monitor for ischemic ST-segment
depression. In patients with CAD, these episodes usually signify
ischemia, even when asymptomatic (“silent”). In many patients,
silent episodes are more frequent than symptomatic ones. In most
cases, they occur in patients with other evidence of ischemia, so the
role of ambulatory monitoring is limited.
J. Coronary Angiography
Selective coronary arteriography is the definitive diagnostic
procedure for CAD. It can be performed with low mortality (about
0.1%) and morbidity (1–5%), but the cost is high, and with
currently available noninvasive techniques it is usually not indicated
solely for diagnosis.
Coronary arteriography should be performed in the following
circumstances if percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty or
bypass surgery is a consideration:
 
1. Limiting stable angina despite an adequate medical
regimen.
2. Clinical presentation (unstable angina, postinfarction
angina, etc) or noninvasive testing suggests high-risk
disease (see Indications for Revascularization).
3. Concomitant aortic valve disease and angina pectoris,
to determine whether the angina is due to accompanying
coronary disease.
4. Asymptomatic older patients undergoing valve surgery
so that concomitant bypass may be done if the anatomy is
propitious.
5. Recurrence of symptoms after coronary revascularization
to determine whether bypass grafts or native vessels are
occluded.
6. Cardiac failure where a surgically correctable lesion,
such as LV aneurysm, mitral regurgitation, or reversible
ischemic dysfunction, is suspected.
7. Survivors of sudden death or symptomatic or life-
threatening arrhythmias when CAD may be a correctable
cause.
8. Chest pain of uncertain cause or cardiomyopathy of
unknown cause.
A narrowing > 50% of the luminal diameter is considered
hemodynamically (and clinically) significant, although most lesions
producing ischemia are associated with narrowing in excess of
70%. In those with strongly positive exercise ECGs or scintigraphic
studies, three-vessel or left main disease may be present in 75–95%
depending on the criteria used. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)
can be positioned within the artery and image beneath the
endothelial surface. This technique is useful when the angiogram is
equivocal as well as for assessing the results of angioplasty or
stenting. In addition, IVUS is the invasive diagnostic method of
choice for ostial left main lesions and coronary dissections.
Fractional flow reserve is an important invasive method for
evaluation of equivocal coronary stenosis. In this method, a
pressure wire is used to measure the relative change in pressure
across a coronary lesion after the administration of adenosine (usual
dosing is 140 mcg/kg/min). Recent studies have demonstrated that
revascularization based on abnormal fractional flow reserve
improves clinical outcomes compared to revascularization of all
angiographically stenotic lesions.
LV angiography is usually performed at the same time as
coronary arteriography. Global and regional LV function are
visualized, as well as mitral regurgitation if present. LV function is a
major determinant of prognosis in coronary heart disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
When atypical features are present—such as prolonged duration
(hours or days) or darting, knifelike pains at the apex or over the
precordium—ischemia is less likely.
Anterior chest wall syndrome is characterized by sharply
localized tenderness of intercostal muscles. Inflammation of the
chondrocostal junctions, which may be warm, swollen, and red,
may result in diffuse chest pain that is also reproduced by local
pressure (Tietze syndrome). Intercostal neuritis (due to herpes
zoster, diabetes mellitus, for example) also mimics angina.
Cervical or thoracic spine disease involving the dorsal roots
produces sudden sharp, severe chest pain suggesting angina in
location and “radiation” but related to specific movements of the
neck or spine, recumbency, and straining or lifting. Pain due to
cervical or thoracic disk disease involves the outer or dorsal aspect
of the arm and the thumb and index fingers rather than the ring and
little fingers.
Reflux esophagitis, peptic ulcer, chronic cholecystitis, esophageal
spasm, and functional gastrointestinal disease may produce pain
suggestive of angina pectoris. The picture may be especially
confusing because ischemic pain may also be associated with upper
gastrointestinal symptoms, and esophageal motility disorders may
be improved by nitrates and calcium channel blockers. Assessment
of esophageal motility may be helpful.
Degenerative and inflammatory lesions of the left shoulder and
thoracic outlet syndromes may cause chest pain due to nerve
irritation or muscular compression; the symptoms are usually
precipitated by movement of the arm and shoulder and are
associated with paresthesias.
Pneumonia, 
pulmonary 
embolism, 
and 
spontaneous
pneumothorax may cause chest pain as well as dyspnea. Dissection
of the thoracic aorta can cause severe chest pain that is commonly
felt in the back; it is sudden in onset, reaches maximum intensity
immediately, and may be associated with changes in pulses. Other
cardiac disorders such as mitral valve prolapse, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, myocarditis, pericarditis, aortic valve disease, or
RVH may cause atypical chest pain or even myocardial ischemia.
 Treatment
Sublingual nitroglycerin is the drug of choice for acute management;
it acts in about 1–2 minutes. Nitrates decrease arteriolar and venous
tone, reduce preload and afterload, and lower the oxygen demand
of the heart. As soon as the attack begins, one fresh tablet is placed
under the tongue. This may be repeated at 3- to 5-minute intervals,
but current recommendations are that if pain is not relieved or
improving after 5 minutes, that the patient call 9-1-1. The dosage
(0.3, 0.4, or 0.6 mg) and the number of tablets to be used before
seeking further medical attention must be individualized.
Nitroglycerin buccal spray is also available as a metered (0.4 mg)
delivery system. It has the advantage of being more convenient for
patients who have difficulty handling the pills and of being more
stable. Nitroglycerin can also be used prophylactically before
activities likely to precipitate angina. Pain not responding to three
tablets or lasting more than 20 minutes may represent evolving
infarction, and the patient should be instructed to seek immediate
medical attention.
 Prevention of Further Attacks
A. Aggravating Factors
Angina may be aggravated by hypertension, LV failure, arrhythmia
(usually tachycardias), strenuous activity, cold temperatures, and
emotional states. These factors should be identified and treated
when possible.
B. Nitroglycerin
Nitroglycerin, 0.3–0.6 mg sublingually or 0.4–0.8 mg translingually
by spray, should be taken 5 minutes before any activity likely to
precipitate angina. Sublingual isosorbide dinitrate (2.5–10 mg) is
only slightly longer-acting than sublingual nitroglycerin.
C. Long-Acting Nitrates
Longer-acting nitrate preparations include isosorbide dinitrate, 10–
40 mg orally three times daily; isosorbide mononitrate, 10–40 mg
orally twice daily or 60–120 mg once daily in a sustained-release
preparation; oral sustained-release nitroglycerin preparations, 6.25–
12.5 mg two to four times daily; nitroglycerin ointment, 6.25–25 mg
applied two to four times daily; and transdermal nitroglycerin
patches that deliver nitroglycerin at a predetermined rate (usually 5–
20 mg/24 h). The main limitation to long-term nitrate therapy is
tolerance, which can be limited by using a regimen that includes a
minimum 8- to 10-hour period per day without nitrates. Isosorbide
dinitrate can be given three times daily, with the last dose after
dinner, or longer-acting isosorbide mononitrate once daily.
Transdermal nitrate preparations should be removed overnight in
most patients.
Nitrate therapy is often limited by headache. Other side effects
include nausea, light-headedness, and hypotension.
D. β-Blockers
β-Blockers are the only antianginal agents that have been
demonstrated to prolong life in patients with coronary disease
(post-myocardial infarction). They are at least as effective at
relieving angina as alternative agents in studies employing exercise
testing, ambulatory monitoring, and symptom assessment. β-
Blockers should be considered for first-line therapy in most patients
with chronic angina.
β-Blockers with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, such as
pindolol, are less desirable because they may exacerbate angina in
some individuals and have not been effective in secondary
prevention trials. The pharmacology and side effects of the β-
blockers are discussed in Chapter 11 (see Table 11–7). The
dosages of all these drugs when given for angina are similar. The
major contraindications are severe bronchospastic disease,
bradyarrhythmias, and decompensated heart failure.
E. Calcium Channel Blocking Agents
Unlike the β-blockers, calcium channel blockers have not been
shown to reduce mortality postinfarction and in some cases have
increased ischemia and mortality rates. This appears to be the case
with some dihydropyridines and with diltiazem and verapamil in
patients with clinical heart failure or moderate to severe LV
dysfunction. Meta-analyses have suggested that short-acting
nifedipine in moderate to high doses causes an increase in mortality.
It is uncertain whether these findings are relevant to longer-acting
dihydropyridines. Nevertheless, considering the uncertainties and
the lack of demonstrated favorable effect on outcomes, calcium
channel blockers should be considered third-line anti-ischemic
drugs in the postinfarction patient. Similarly, with the exception of
amlodipine, which in the PRAISE trial proved safe in patients with
heart failure, these agents should be avoided in patients with CHF
or low EFs.
The pharmacologic effects and side effects of the calcium channel
blockers are discussed in Chapter 11 and summarized in Table 11–
9. Diltiazem and verapamil are preferable because they produce
less reflex tachycardia and because the former, at least, may cause
fewer side effects. Nifedipine, nicardipine, and amlodipine are also
approved agents for angina. Isradipine, felodipine, and nisoldipine
are not approved for angina but probably are as effective as the
other dihydropyridines.
F. Ranolazine
Ranolazine is the first new antianginal drug to be approved by the
FDA in many years, and it is approved as first-line use for chronic
angina. It decreases the late sodium current and thereby decreases
intracellular calcium overload. Ranolazine has no effect on heart rate
and BP, and it has been shown in clinical trials to prolong exercise
duration and time to angina, both as monotherapy and when
administered with conventional antianginal therapy. It is safe to use
with erectile dysfunction drugs. The usual dose is 500 mg orally
twice a day. Because it can cause QT prolongation, it is
contraindicated in patients with existing QT prolongation; in patients
taking QT prolonging drugs, such as class I or III antiarrhythmics
(eg, quinidine, dofetilide, sotalol); and in those taking potent and
moderate CYP450 3A inhibitors. Of interest, in spite of the QT
prolongation, there is a significantly lower rate of ventricular
arrhythmias with its use following acute coronary syndromes, shown
in the MERLIN trial. It also decreases occurrence of atrial
fibrillation and results in a small decrease in HgbA1C. It is
contraindicated in patients with significant liver and kidney disease.
Ranolazine is not to be used for treatment of acute anginal episodes.
G. Alternative and Combination Therapies
Patients who do not respond to one class of antianginal medication
often respond to another. It may, therefore, be worthwhile to use an
alternative agent before progressing to combinations. If the patient
remains symptomatic, a β-blocker and a long-acting nitrate or a β-
blocker and a calcium channel blocker (other than verapamil, where
the risk of AV block or heart failure is higher) are the most
appropriate combinations. A few patients will have a further
response to a regimen including all three agents.
H. Platelet-Inhibiting Agents
Several studies have demonstrated the benefit of antiplatelet drugs
for patients with stable and unstable vascular disease. Therefore,
unless contraindicated, aspirin (81–325 mg daily) should be
prescribed for all patients with angina. Clopidogrel, 75 mg daily,
reduces vascular events in patients with stable vascular disease (as
an alternative to aspirin) and in patients with acute coronary
syndromes (in addition to aspirin). Thus, it is also a good alternative
in aspirin-intolerant patients. Clopidogrel may rarely induce
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
I. Risk Reduction
Patients with coronary disease should undergo aggressive risk
factor modification. This approach, with a particular focus on statin
treatment, treating hypertension, stopping smoking, and exercise
and weight control (especially for patients with metabolic syndrome
or at risk for diabetes), may markedly improve outcome. For
patients with diabetes and cardiovascular disease, there is
uncertainty about the optimal target blood sugar control. The
ADVANCE trial suggested some benefit for tight blood sugar
control with target Hgb A1C ≤6.5%. The ACCORD trial found that
routine aggressive targeting for blood sugar control to Hgb A1C to <
6.0% in patients with diabetes and coronary disease was associated
with increased mortality. Therefore, tight blood sugar control should
be avoided particularly in patients with history of severe
hypoglycemia, long-standing diabetes, and advanced vascular
disease. Aggressive BP control (target systolic BP < 120 mm Hg)
in the ACCORD trial was not associated with reduction in coronary
heart disease events, although stroke was reduced.
J. Revascularization
1. Indications—There is general agreement that otherwise healthy
patients in the following groups should undergo revascularization:
(1) Patients with unacceptable symptoms despite medical therapy to
its tolerable limits. (2) Patients with left main coronary artery
stenosis > 50% with or without symptoms. (3) Patients with three-
vessel disease with LV dysfunction (EF < 50% or previous trans-
mural infarction). (4) Patients with unstable angina who after
symptom control by medical therapy continue to exhibit ischemia on
exercise testing or monitoring. (5) Post-myocardial infarction
patients with continuing angina or severe ischemia on noninvasive
testing. The use of revascularization for patients with acute coronary
syndromes and acute ST elevation myocardial infarction is
discussed below.
In addition, many cardiologists have believed that patients with
less severe symptoms should be revascularized if they have two-
vessel disease associated with underlying LV dysfunction,
anatomically critical lesions (>90% proximal stenoses, especially of
the proximal left anterior descending artery), or physiologic
evidence of severe ischemia (early positive exercise tests, large
exercise-induced thallium scintigraphic defects, or frequent episodes
of ischemia on ambulatory monitoring). Two sources of data have
tempered some of the enthusiasm for coronary intervention for
stable angina. Drug-eluting stents, widely used because of their
benefits in preventing restenosis, have been associated with higher
rates of late stent thrombosis. Moreover, data from the COURAGE
trial have shown that for patients with chronic angina and disease
suitable for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), PCI offers
no mortality benefit beyond excellent medical therapy, and relatively
moderate long-term symptomatic improvement. The ACC/AHA
have recently developed criteria for appropriateness of coronary
revascularization that highlight these conclusions.
2. Type of procedure
A. CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING—Coronary artery
bypass grafting (CABG) can be accomplished with a very low
mortality rate (1–3%) in otherwise healthy patients with preserved
cardiac function. However, the mortality rate of this procedure rises
to 4–8% in older individuals and in patients who have had a prior
CABG.
Grafts using one or both internal mammary arteries (usually to the
left anterior descending artery or its branches) provide the best
long-term results in terms of patency and flow. Segments of the
saphenous vein (or, less optimally, other veins) or the radial artery
interposed between the aorta and the coronary arteries distal to the
obstructions are also used. One to five distal anastomoses are
commonly performed.
Minimally invasive surgical techniques utilize different approaches
to the heart than standard sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass.
The surgical approach may involve a limited sternotomy, lateral
thoracotomy (MIDCAB), or thoracoscopy (port-access). These
techniques allow earlier postoperative mobilization and discharge.
They are more technically demanding, usually not suitable for more
than two grafts, and do not have established durability. Bypass
surgery can be performed both on circulatory support (on pump)
and without direct circulatory support (off-pump). Recent
randomized trial data have not shown a benefit with off-pump
bypass surgery.
The operative mortality rate is increased in patients with poor LV
function (LV EF < 35%) or those requiring additional procedures
(valve replacement or ventricular aneurysmectomy). Patients over
70 years of age, patients undergoing repeat procedures, or those
with important noncardiac disease (especially chronic kidney
disease and diabetes) or poor general health also have higher
operative mortality and morbidity rates, and full recovery is slow.
Thus, CABG should be reserved for more severely symptomatic
patients in this group. Early (1–6 months) graft patency rates
average 85–90% (higher for internal mammary grafts), and
subsequent graft closure rates are about 4% annually. Early graft
failure is common in vessels with poor distal flow, while late closure
is more frequent in patients who continue smoking and those with
untreated hyperlipidemia. Antiplatelet therapy with aspirin improves
graft patency rates. Smoking cessation and vigorous treatment of
blood lipid abnormalities (particularly with statins) are necessary.
While the most important principle is to use proven doses of statins
shown to improve outcomes in large trials, many advocate a goal
for LDL cholesterol of 70–100 mg/dL and for HDL cholesterol of
≥ 45 mg/dL. Repeat revascularization (see below) may be
necessitated because of recurrent symptoms due to progressive
native vessel disease and graft occlusions. Reoperation is technically
demanding and less often fully successful than the initial operation.
B. PERCUTANEOUS 
CORONARY 
INTERVENTION 
INCLUDING
STENTING—PCI, including balloon angioplasty and coronary
stenting, can effectively open stenotic coronary arteries. Coronary
stenting, with either bare metal stents or drug-eluting stents, has
substantially reduced restenosis. Stenting can also be used
selectively for left main coronary stenosis, particularly when CABG
is contraindicated.
PCI is possible but often less successful in bypass graft stenoses.
Experienced operators are able to successfully dilate > 90% of
lesions attempted. The major early complication is intimal dissection
with vessel occlusion, although this is rare with coronary stenting.
The use of intravenous platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
(abciximab, eptifibatide, tirofiban) has substantially reduced the rate
of periprocedural myocardial infarction, and placement of
intracoronary stents has markedly improved initial and long-term
angiographic results, especially with complex and long lesions. After
percutaneous coronary intervention, all patients should have CK-
MB and troponin measured, and a new rise of greater than three
times the upper limit of normal constitutes a significant
periprocedural myocardial infarction. Acute thrombosis after stent
placement can largely be prevented by aggressive antithrombotic
therapy (long-term aspirin, 81–325 mg, plus clopidogrel, 300–600
mg loading dose followed by 75 mg daily, for between 30 days and
1 year, and with acute use of platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitors).
A major limitation with PCI has been restenosis, which occurs
in the first 6 months in < 10% of vessels treated with drug-eluting
stents, 15–30% of vessels treated with bare metal stents, and 30–
40% of vessels without stenting. Factors associated with higher
restenosis rates include diabetes, small luminal diameter, longer and
more complex lesions, and lesions at coronary ostia or in the left
anterior descending coronary artery. Drug-eluting stents that elute
antiproliferative agents such as sirolimus, everolimus, zotarolimus, or
paclitaxel have substantially reduced restenosis. In-stent restenosis
is often treated with restenting with drug-eluting stents, and rarely
with brachytherapy. The nearly 2 million PCIs performed
worldwide per year far exceeds the number of CABG operations,
but the rationale for many of the procedures performed in patients
with stable angina should be for angina symptom reduction. The
COURAGE trial has confirmed earlier studies in showing that even
for patients with moderate anginal symptoms and positive stress
tests, PCI provides no benefit over medical therapy with respect to
death or with respect to death or myocardial infarction. PCI was
more effective at relieving angina, although most patients in the
medical group had improvement in symptoms. Thus, in patients with
mild or moderate stable symptoms, aggressive lipid-lowering and
antianginal therapy may be a preferable initial strategy, reserving
PCI for patients with significant and refractory symptoms.
Several studies of PCI, including with drug-eluting stents, versus
CABG in patients with multivessel disease have been reported. The
largest such trial, SYNTAX, recently reported similar findings to
prior studies. The consistent finding has been comparable mortality
and infarction rates over follow-up periods of 1–3 years but a high
rate (approximately 40%) of repeat procedures following PCI.
Stroke rates are higher with CABG. As a result, the choice of
revascularization procedure may depend on details of coronary
anatomy and is often a matter of patient preference. However, it
should be noted that < 20% of patients with multivessel disease
meet the entry criteria for the clinical trials, so these results cannot
be generalized to all multivessel disease patients. Outcomes with
percutaneous revascularization in diabetics have generally been
inferior to those with CABG. However, most of these trials
preceded the widespread use of stenting.
K. Mechanical Extracorporeal Counterpulsation
Extracorporeal counterpulsation (ECP) entails repetitive inflation of
a high-pressure chamber surrounding the lower half of the body
during the diastolic phase of the cardiac cycle for daily 1-hour
sessions over a period of 7 weeks. Randomized trials have shown
that ECP reduces angina, improves exercise tolerance, and can
reduce symptoms of heart failure.
L. Neuromodulation
Spinal cord stimulation can be used to relieve chronic refractory
angina. Spinal cord stimulators are subcutaneously implantable via a
minimally invasive procedure under local anesthesia.
 Prognosis
The prognosis of angina pectoris has improved with development of
therapies aimed at secondary prevention. Mortality rates vary
depending on the number of vessels diseased, the severity of
obstruction, the status of LV function, and the presence of complex
arrhythmias. Mortality rates are progressively higher in patients with
one-, two-, and three-vessel disease and those with left main
coronary artery obstruction (ranging from 1% per year to 25% per
year). The outlook in individual patients is unpredictable, and nearly
half of the deaths are sudden. Therefore, risk stratification is often
attempted. Patients with accelerating symptoms have a poorer
outlook. Among stable patients, those whose exercise tolerance is
severely limited by ischemia (< 6 minutes on the Bruce treadmill
protocol) and those with extensive ischemia by exercise ECG or
scintigraphy have more severe anatomic disease and a poorer
prognosis. The Duke Treadmill Score, based on a standard Bruce
protocol exercise treadmill test, provides an estimate of risk of
death at 1 year. The score uses time on the treadmill, amount of
ST-segment depression, and presence of angina (Table 10–4).
 
Table 10–4. Duke treadmill score: Calculation and interpretation.
 
 Trial Results
Several randomized trials have shown that over follow-up periods
of several years, the mortality and infarction rates with percutaneous
revascularization and CABG are generally comparable. Exceptions
are patients with left main or three-vessel disease with reduced
ventricular function, and perhaps diabetic patients, who have had
better outcomes with CABG. The increasing popularity of PCI and
stenting primarily reflects the lower cost and shorter hospitalization,
the perception that CABG is best done only once and can be
reserved for later, and the preference of patients for less invasive
treatment. These arguments make PCI the procedure of choice for
revascularization of single-vessel disease. The situation is less clear
with multivessel disease. It should also be noted that the excellent
outcome of patients treated medically has made it difficult to show
an advantage with either revascularization approach except in
patients who remain symptom limited or have left main lesions or
three-vessel disease and LV dysfunction. The issue of late stent
thrombosis may shift the balance toward bare metal stents,
especially for patients who cannot tolerate or take long-term
clopidogrel.
 When to Refer
All patients with new or worsening symptoms believed to represent
angina or a positive stress test for myocardial ischemia (or both)
should be referred to a cardiologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with elevated cardiac biomarkers, ischemic
ECG findings, or hemodynamic instability.
•    Patients with new or worsened symptoms possibly
thought to be ischemic but who lack high-risk features can
be observed with serial ECGs and biomarkers, and
discharged if stress testing shows low-risk findings.
ACCORD Study Group; Cushman WC et al. Effects of intensive
blood-pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med.
2010 Apr 29;362(17):1575–85. [PMID: 20228401]
 
Agarwal M et al. Nonacute coronary syndrome anginal chest pain.
Med Clin North Am. 2010 Mar;94(2):201–16. [PMID:
20380951]
 
American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes–2010. Diabetes Care. 2010 Jan;33(Suppl 1):S11–61.
[PMID: 20042772]
 
Boden WE et al; COURAGE Trial Research Group. Optimal
medical therapy with or without PCI for stable coronary disease.
N Engl J Med. 2007 Apr 12;356(15):1503–16. [PMID:
17387127]
 
Budoff MJ et al. Assessment of coronary artery disease by cardiac
computed tomography: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association Committee on Cardiovascular Imaging and
Intervention, Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and
Intervention, and Committee on Cardiac Imaging, Council on
Clinical Cardiology. Circulation. 2006 Oct 17;114(16):1761–91.
[PMID: 17015792]
 
Cassar A et al. Chronic coronary artery disease: diagnosis and
management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Dec;84(12):1130–46.
[PMID: 19955250]
 
Gibbons RJ et al. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline update for the
management of patients with chronic stable angina—summary
article: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines (Committee
on the Management of Patients With Chronic Stable Angina). J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Jan 1;41(1):159–68. [PMID: 12570960]
 
Goldstein J et al. A randomized controlled trial of multi-slice
coronary computed tomography for evaluation of acute chest pain.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Feb 27;49(8):863–71. [PMID:
17320744]
 
Grines CL et al. Prevention of premature discontinuation of dual
antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery stents: a
science advisory from the American Heart Association, American
College of Cardiology, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions, American College of Surgeons, and American
Dental Association, with representation from the American College
of Physicians. Circulation. 2007 Feb 13;115(6):813–8. [PMID:
17224480]
 
King SB 3rd et al. 2007 Focused Update of the
ACC/AHA/SCAI 2005 Guideline Update for Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines: 2007 Writing Group to Review New Evidence and
Update the ACC/AHA/SCAI 2005 Guideline Update for
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, Writing on Behalf of the
2005 Writing Committee. Circulation. 2008;117:261–95. [PMID:
18079354]
 
Morrow DA et al. Effects of ranolazine on recurrent
cardiovascular events in patients with non-ST-elevation acute
coronary syndromes: the MERLIN-TIMI 36 randomized trial.
JAMA. 2007 Apr 25;297(16):1775–83. [PMID: 17456819]
 
Patel MR et al. ACCF/SCAI/STS/AATS/AHA/ASNC 2009
Appropriateness Criteria for Coronary Revascularization: a report
by the American College of Cardiology Foundation
Appropriateness Criteria Task Force, Society for Cardiovascular
Angio graphy and Interventions, Society of Thoracic Surgeons,
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart
Association, and the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology
Endorsed by the American Society of Echocardiography, the
Heart Failure Society of America, and the Society of
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009
Feb 10;53(6):530–53. [PMID: 19195618]
 
Patel MR et al. Low diagnostic yield of elective coronary
angiography. N Engl J Med. 2010 Mar 11;362(10):886–95.
[PMID: 20220183]
 
Raff GL et al. Coronary angiography by computed tomography:
coronary imaging evolves. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 May
8;49(18):1830–3. [PMID: 17481441]
 
Riddle MC. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in the
management of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Action
to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) trial.
Circulation. 2010 Aug 24;122(8):844–6. [PMID: 20733112]
 
Skyler JS et al. Intensive glycemic control and the prevention of
cardiovascular events: implications of the ACCORD, ADVANCE,
and VA Diabetes Trials: a position statement of the American
Diabetes Association and a Scientific Statement of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart
Association. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jan 20; 53(3):298–304.
[PMID: 19147051]
 
Tonino PA et al; FAME Study Investigators. Fractional flow
reserve versus angiography for guiding percutaneous coronary
intervention. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jan 15;360(3):213–24. [PMID:
19144937]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Cardiac stress testing.
JAMA. 2008 Oct 15;300(15):1836. [PMID: 18854548]
 
Toutouzas K et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention in chronic
stable angina. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Jun;339(6):568–72. [PMID:
20375692]
 
CORONARY VASOSPASM & ANGINA WITH NORMAL
CORONARY ARTERIOGRAMS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Precordial chest pain, often occurring at rest during stress or
without known precipitant, relieved rapidly by nitrates.
 ECG evidence of ischemia during pain, sometime with ST-
segment elevation, including by Holter monitor.
 Angiographic demonstration of no significant obstruction of major
coronary vessels.
 Angiographic demonstration of coronary spasm that responds to
intra-coronary nitroglycerin or calcium channel blockers.
 
 General Considerations
Although most symptoms of myocardial ischemia result from fixed
stenosis of the coronary arteries or intraplaque hemorrhage or
thrombosis at the site of lesions, some ischemic events may be
precipitated or exacerbated by coronary vasoconstriction.
Spasm of the large coronary arteries with resulting decreased
coronary blood flow may occur spontaneously or may be induced
by exposure to cold, emotional stress, or vasoconstricting
medications, such as ergot derivative drugs. Spasm may occur both
in normal and in stenosed coronary arteries. Even myocardial
infarction may occur as a result of spasm in the absence of visible
obstructive coronary heart disease, although most instances of such
coronary spasm occur in the presence of coronary stenosis.
Cocaine can induce myocardial ischemia and infarction by
causing coronary artery vasoconstriction or by increasing
myocardial energy requirements. It also may contribute to
accelerated atherosclerosis and thrombosis. The ischemia in
Prinzmetal (variant) angina usually results from coronary
vasoconstriction. It tends to involve the right coronary artery and
there may be no fixed stenoses. Myocardial ischemia may also
occur in patients with normal coronary arteries as a result of disease
of the coronary microcirculation or abnormal vascular reactivity.
This has been termed “syndrome X.”
 Clinical Findings
Ischemia may be silent or result in angina pectoris.
Prinzmetal (variant) angina is a clinical syndrome in which
chest pain occurs without the usual precipitating factors and is
associated with ST-segment elevation rather than depression. It
often affects women under 50 years of age. It characteristically
occurs in the early morning, awakening patients from sleep, and is
apt to be associated with arrhythmias or conduction defects. It may
be diagnosed by challenge with ergonovine (a vasoconstrictor),
although the results of such provocation are not specific and it
entails risk.
 Treatment
Patients with chest pain associated with ST-segment elevation
should undergo coronary arteriography to determine whether fixed
stenotic lesions are present. If they are, aggressive medical therapy
or revascularization is indicated, since this may represent an
unstable phase of the disease. If significant lesions are not seen and
spasm is suspected, avoidance of precipitants such as cigarette
smoking and cocaine is the top priority. Episodes of coronary
spasm generally respond well to nitrates, and both nitrates and
calcium channel blockers (including long-acting nifedipine, diltiazem,
or amlopidine) are effective prophylactically. By allowing
unopposed α1-mediated vasoconstriction, β-blockers have
exacerbated coronary vasospasm, but they may have a role in
management of patients in whom spasm is associated with fixed
stenoses.
 When to Refer
All patients with persistent symptoms of chest pain that may
represent spasm should be referred to a cardiologist.
Agarwal M et al. Nonacute coronary syndrome anginal chest pain.
Med Clin North Am. 2010 Mar;94(2):201–16. [PMID:
20380951]
 
Al Suwaidi J et al. Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and current
management strategies for chest pain in patients with normal
findings on angiography. Mayo Clin Proc. 2001 Aug;76(8): 813–
22. [PMID: 11499821]
 
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES WITHOUT ST
SEGMENT ELEVATION
 General Considerations
Acute coronary syndromes comprise the spectrum of unstable
cardiac ischemia from unstable angina to acute myocardial
infarction. Acute coronary syndromes are classified based on the
presenting ECG as either “ST segment elevation” (STEMI) or
“non-ST segment elevation.” This allows for immediate classification
and guides determination of whether patients should be considered
for acute reperfusion therapy. The evolution of cardiac biomarkers
then allows determination of whether myocardial infarction has
occurred. The universal definition of myocardial infarction in a rise
of cardiac biomarkers with at least one value above the 99th
percentile of the upper reference limit together with evidence of
myocardial ischemia with at least one of the following: symptoms of
ischemia, ECG changes of new ischemia, new Q waves, or imaging
evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new wall motion
abnormality.
Acute coronary syndromes represent a dynamic state in which
patients frequently shift from one category to another, as new ST
elevation can develop after presentation and cardiac biomarkers
can become abnormal with recurrent ischemic episodes.
Chest pain is one of the most frequent reasons for emergency
department visits. Algorithms have been developed to aid in
determining the likelihood that a patient has an acute coronary
syndrome, and for those patients who do have an acute coronary
syndrome, the risk of ischemic events and death.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with acute coronary syndromes generally have symptoms
and signs of myocardial ischemia either at rest or with minimal
exertion. These symptoms and signs are similar to chronic angina
symptoms described above, consisting of substernal chest pain or
discomfort that may radiate to the jaw, left shoulder or arm.
Dyspnea, nausea, diaphoresis or syncope may either accompany
the chest discomfort or may be the only symptom of acute coronary
syndrome. About one-third of patients with myocardial infarction
have no chest pain per se—these patients tend to be older, female,
have diabetes, and be at higher risk for subsequent mortality.
Patients with acute coronary syndromes have signs of heart failure in
about 10% of cases, and this is also associated with higher risk of
death.
Many hospitals have developed chest pain observation units
to provide a systematic approach toward serial risk stratification to
improve the triage process. In many cases, those who have not
experienced new chest pain and have insignificant ECG changes
and no cardiac biomarker elevation undergo treadmill exercise tests
or imaging procedures to exclude ischemia at the end of an 8- to
24-hour period and are discharged directly from the emergency
department if these tests are negative.
B. Laboratory Findings
Depending on the time from symptom onset to presentation, initial
laboratory findings may be normal. The markers of cardiac myocyte
necrosis, myoglobin, CK, CK-MB, and troponin I and T may all be
used to identify acute myocardial infarction. These markers have a
well-described pattern of release over time in patients with
myocardial infarction. In patients with STEMI, these initial markers
are often within normal limits as the patient is being rushed to
immediate reperfusion. In patients without ST-segment elevation, it
is the presence of abnormal CK-MB or troponin values that are
associated with myocyte necrosis and the diagnosis of myocardial
infarction. Serum creatine is an important determinant of risk, and
estimated creatine clearance is important to guide dosing of certain
antithrombotics, including eptifibatide and enoxaparin.
C. ECG
Many patients with acute coronary syndromes will exhibit ECG
changes during pain—either ST-segment elevation, ST-segment
depression, or T wave flattening or inversion. Dynamic ST segment
shift is the most specific for acute coronary syndrome. Patients may
exhibit signs of LV dysfunction during pain and for a time thereafter.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Treatment of acute coronary syndromes without ST elevation
should be multifaceted. Patients who are at medium or high risk
should be hospitalized, maintained at bed rest or at very limited
activity for the first 24 hours, monitored, and given supplemental
oxygen. Sedation with a benzodiazepine agent may help if anxiety is
present.
B. Specific Measures
Table 10–5 provides a summary of the ACC/AHA Guideline
recommendations for selected medical treatments.
C. Anticoagulation and Antiplatelet Therapy
Patients should receive a combination of antiplatelet and
anticoagulant 
agents. Aspirin, 81–325 mg daily, and an
anticoagulant (unfractionated heparin, enoxaparin, fondaparinux, or
bivalirudin) should be commenced on presentation. The large
CURRENT trial comparing 81 mg versus 325 mg of aspirin (in
addition to clopidogrel) for the first month following diagnosis of
ACS found little difference in thrombotic events or in major
bleeding. Thus, either dose is reasonable, at least for the first month.
Several trials have shown that low-molecular-weight heparin
(enoxaparin 1 mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 hours) is somewhat
more effective than unfractionated heparin in preventing recurrent
ischemic events in the setting of acute coronary syndromes.
However, the SYNERGY trial showed that unfractionated heparin
and enoxaparin had similar rates of death or (re)infarction in the
setting of frequent early coronary intervention. Fondaparinux, a
specific factor Xa inhibitor given in a dose of 2.5 mg subcutaneously
once a day, was found in the OASIS-5 trial to be equally effective
as enoxaparin among 20,000 patients at preventing early death,
myocardial infarction, and refractory ischemia, and resulted in a
50% reduction in major bleeding. This reduction in major bleeding
translated into a significant reduction in mortality (and in death
and/or myocardial infarction) at 30 days. While catheter-related
thrombosis was more common during coronary intervention
procedures with fondaparinux, the FUTURA trial found that it can
be controlled by adding unfractionated heparin (in a dose of 85
units/kg without glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and 60 units/kg with
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors) during the procedure. Guidelines
recommend fondaparinux, describing it as especially favorable for
patients who are initially treated medically and who are at high risk
for bleeding, such as the elderly.
 
Table 10–5. Summary of the current ACC/AHA guideline
recommendations for medical management of acute coronary
syndromes (ACS) and acute myocardial infarction (AMI).1
 
1Class I indicates treatment is useful and effective, IIa indicates weight of
evidence is in favor of usefulness/efficacy, class IIb indicates weight of
evidence is less well established, and class III indicates intervention is not
useful/effective and may be harmful. Type A recommendations are derived
from large-scale randomized trials, and B recommendations are derived
from smaller randomized trials or carefully conducted observational
analyses. ACC/AHA = American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association.
2In STEMI patients with a prior history of stroke and transient ischemic
attack for whom primary PCI is planned, prasugrel is not recommended as
part of a dual-antiplatelet therapy regimen. (Class III, Level of Evidence: C).
3Unfractionated heparin, enoxaparin, or fondaparinux have established
efficacy and should be used (IC) for a minimum of 48 hours and preferably
for the duration of the hospitalization, up to 8 days. Enoxaparin or
fondaparinux are preferred if therapy is given for more than 48 hours
because of risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (IA). Because of risk
of catheter thrombosis, fondaparinux should not be used as the sole
anticoagulant to support PCI.
4With primary PCI, with or without prior heparin bolus.
5For patients with hypertension and no heart failure, low output state,
increased risk of shock, or other contraindications to β-blockers.
6For patients with persistent hypertension despite treatment, diabetes
mellitus, congestive heart failure, or any left ventricular dysfunction.
7IA for patients with congestive heart failure or ejection fraction < 0.40, IIa
for others, in absence of hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 100 mm
Hg); angiotensin receptor blocker (valsartan or candesartan) for patients
with ACE inhibitor intolerance.
8For patients with a low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level > 70 mg/dL.
. STEMI, ST elevation myocardial infarction.
The ACUITY trial showed that the direct thrombin inhibitor
bivalirudin appears to be a reasonable alternative to heparin
(unfractionated heparin or enoxaparin) plus a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
antagonist for many patients with acute coronary syndromes who
are undergoing early coronary intervention. Bivalirudin (without
routine glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor) is associated with
substantially less bleeding than heparin plus glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitor.
The Clopidogrel in Unstable Angina to Prevent Recurrent Events
(CURE) trial demonstrated a 20% reduction in the composite end
point of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, and stroke with
the addition of clopidogrel (300 mg loading dose, 75 mg/d for 9–12
months) in patients with non–ST-segment elevation acute coronary
syndromes. When treated with clopidogrel, the optimal aspirin dose
appears to be 81 mg/d (versus 160 mg/d or 325 mg/d) based on
similar thrombotic event rates and lower rates of bleeding, although
the ACC/AHA guidelines call for 162–325 mg/d for 1 month after
bare metal stents and 3–6 months for drug-eluting stents.
ACC/AHA guidelines call for either clopidogrel or glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa inhibitor “up-front” prior to coronary angiography as a class
IA recommendation. The European Society of Cardiology
guidelines provide a stronger recommendation for clopidogrel up-
front, as a class IA recommendation for all patients. The large
CURRENT trial showed that “double-dose” clopidogrel (600 mg
initial oral loading dose, followed by 150 mg orally daily) for 7 days
reduced stent thrombosis with a modest increase in major (but not
fatal) bleeding, and therefore is an option for patients with ACS
undergoing PCI.
Prasugrel is a thienopyridine that is both more potent and has a
faster onset of action than clopidogrel. The TRITON trial compared
prasugrel with clopidogrel in patients with STEMI or non-ST
elevation MI in whom PCI was planned; prasugrel resulted in a
19% relative reduction in death from cardiovascular causes,
myocardial infarction, or stroke, at the expense of a small increase
in serious bleeding (including fatal bleeding). Stent thrombosis was
reduced in half. Because patients with prior stroke or transient
ischemic attack had higher risk of intracranial hemorrhage, prasugrel
is contraindicated in such patients. Bleeding was also higher in
patients with low body weight (< 60 kg) and older age (≥75 years),
and caution should be used in these populations. For patients with
STEMI treated with PCI, prasugrel appears to be especially
effective without a substantial increase in bleeding.
Small molecule inhibitors of the platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
receptor are useful adjuncts in high-risk patients (usually defined by
fluctuating ST-segment depression or positive biomarkers) with
acute coronary syndromes, particularly when they are undergoing
PCI. Tirofiban, 0.4 mcg/kg/min for 30 minutes, followed by 0.1
mcg/kg/min, and eptifibatide, 180 mcg/kg bolus followed by a
continuous infusion of 2 mcg/kg/min, have both been shown to be
effective. Downward dose adjustments (1 mcg/kg/min) are required
in patients with reduced kidney function. For example, if the
estimated creatinine clearance is below 50 mL/min, the eptifibatide
infusion should be cut in half to 1 mcg/kg/min. The ISAR-REACT 2
trial showed that for patients undergoing PCI with high-risk acute
coronary syndrome, especially with elevated troponin, intravenous
abciximab (added to clopidogrel 600 mg loading dose) reduces
ischemic events by about 25%. The EARLY-ACS trial in over
10,000 patients with high-risk ACS found no benefit from
eptifibatide started on admission compared with eptifibatide
treatment at the time of invasive coronary angiography, and higher
rates of bleeding.
Fibrinolytic therapy should be avoided in patients without ST-
segment elevation since they generally have a patent culprit artery,
and since the risk of such therapy appears to outweigh the benefit.
D. Nitroglycerin
Nitrates are first-line therapy for patients with acute coronary
syndromes presenting with chest pain. Nonparenteral therapy with
sublingual or oral agents or nitroglycerin ointment is usually
sufficient. If pain persists or recurs, intravenous nitroglycerin should
be started. The usual initial dosage is 10 mcg/min. The dosage
should be titrated upward by 10–20 mcg/min (to a maximum of 200
mcg/min) until angina disappears or mean arterial pressure drops by
10%. Careful—usually continuous—BP monitoring is required
when intravenous nitroglycerin is used. Avoid hypotension (systolic
BP < 100 mm Hg). Tolerance to continuous nitrate infusion is
common.
E. β-Blockers
β-Blockers are an important part of the initial treatment of unstable
angina unless otherwise contraindicated. The pharmacology of these
agents is discussed in Chapter 11 and summarized in Table 11–7.
Use of agents with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity should be
avoided in this setting. Oral medication is adequate in most patients,
but intravenous treatment with metoprolol, given as three 5-mg
doses 5 minutes apart as tolerated and in the absence of heart
failure, achieves a more rapid effect. Oral therapy should be titrated
upward as BP permits.
F. Calcium Channel Blockers
Calcium channel blockers have not been shown to favorably affect
outcome in unstable angina, and they should be used primarily as
third-line therapy in patients with continuing symptoms on nitrates
and β-blockers or those who are not candidates for these drugs. In
the presence of nitrates and without accompanying β-blockers,
diltiazem or verapamil is preferred, since nifedipine and the other
dihydropyridines are more likely to cause reflex tachycardia or
hypotension. The initial dosage should be low, but upward titration
should proceed steadily (see Table 11–9).
G. Statins
The PROVE-IT trial provides evidence for starting a statin in the
days immediately following an acute coronary syndrome. In this
trial, more intensive therapy with atorvastatin 80 mg a day,
regardless of total or LDL cholesterol level, improved outcome
compared to pravastatin 40 mg a day, with the curves of death or
major cardiovascular event separating as early as 3 months after
starting therapy.
 Indications for Coronary Angiography
For patients with acute coronary syndrome, including non–ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction, risk stratification is
important for determining intensity of care. Several therapies,
including glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists, low-molecular-
weight heparin, and early invasive catheterization, have been shown
to have the greatest benefit in higher-risk patients with acute
coronary syndrome. As outlined in the ACC/AHA guidelines,
patients with any high-risk feature (Table 10–6) generally warrant
an early invasive strategy with catheterization and revascularization.
For patients without these high-risk features, either an invasive or
noninvasive approach, using exercise (or pharmacologic stress for
patients unable to exercise) stress testing to identify patients who
have residual ischemia and/or high risk, can be used. Moreover,
based on the ICTUS trial, a strategy based on selective coronary
angiography and revascularization for instability or inducible
ischemia, or both, even for patients with positive troponin, is
acceptable (ACC/AHA class IIB recommendation).
Another smaller trial (ABOARD) found no advantage of
immediate catheterization.
Two risk-stratification tools are available that can be used at the
bedside, the TIMI Risk Score and the GRACE Risk Score. The
TIMI Risk Score includes nine variables: age ≥65, three or more
cardiac risk factors, prior coronary stenosis ≥ 50%, ST-segment
deviation, two anginal events in prior 24 hours, acetylsalicylic acid in
prior 7 days, and elevated cardiac markers. The GRACE risk
score, which applies to patients with or without ST elevation,
includes Killip class, BP, ST-segment deviation, cardiac arrest at
presentation, serum creatinine, elevated creatine kinase (CK)-MB
or troponin, and heart rate. The TIMI Risk Score is available for
PDA download at http://www.timi.org, and the GRACE risk score
at http://www.outcomes-umassmed.org/GRACE/acs_risk.cfm.
 
Table 10–6. Indications for catheterization and percutaneous
coronary intervention.1
 
Acute coronary syndromes (unstable angina and non-ST
elevation MI)
Class
I
Early invasive strategy for any of the following high-
risk indicators:
 
Recurrent angina/ischemia at rest or with low-level
activity
 
     Elevated troponin
 
     ST-segment depression
 
     Recurrent ischemia with evidence of CHF
 
     High-risk stress test result
 
     EF < 40%
 
     Hemodynamic instability
 
     Sustained ventricular tachycardia
 
     PCI within 6 months
 
     Prior CABG
 
In the absence of these findings, either an early
conservative or early invasive strategy
Class
IIa
Early invasive strategy for patients with repeated
presentations for ACS despite therapy
Class
III
Extensive comorbidities in patients in whom
benefits of revascularization are not likely to
outweigh the risks
 
Acute chest pain with low likelihood of ACS
Acute MI after fibrinolytic therapy (2009 ACC/AHA AMI
Guideline Update)
Class
I
Recurrent ischemia (spontaneous or provoked)
 
Recurrent MI
 
Cardiogenic shock or hemodynamic instability
Class
IIa
Reasonable to transfer high-risk patients treated
with fibrinolytic therapy at a non-PCI center as soon
as possible to a PCI facility for early diagnostic
angiography and revascularization. (Level of
evidence: B)
Class
IIb
Consider transfer of non-high risk patients treated
with fibrinolytic therapy at a non-PCI center to a PCI
facility, especially if ischemic symptoms persist
and failure to reperfuse is suspected.
1Class I indicates treatment is useful and effective, IIa indicates weight of
evidence is in favor of usefulness/efficacy, class IIb indicates weight of
evidence is less well established, and class III indicates intervention is not
useful/effective and may be harmful. Level of evidence A recommendations
are derived from large-scale randomized trials, and B recommendations
are derived from smaller randomized trials or carefully conducted
observational analyses.
ACC/AHA, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association;
ACS, acute coronary syndrome; AMI, acute myocardial infarction; CABG,
coronary artery bypass grafting; CHF, congestive heart failure; EF, ejection
fraction; LV EF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial infarction;
PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.
 When to Refer
All patients with acute myocardial infarction should be referred to a
cardiologist.
Anderson JL et al. ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for the
management of patients with unstable angina/non ST-elevation
myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines for
the Management of Patients With Unstable Angina/Non ST-
Elevation Myocardial Infarction): developed in collaboration with
the American College of Emergency Physicians, the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and the Society of
Thoracic Surgeons: endorsed by the American Association of
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation and the Society for
Academic Emergency Medicine. Circulation. 2007 Aug
14;116(7):e148–304. [PMID: 17679616]
 
Boersma E et al. Platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in acute
coronary syndromes: a meta-analysis of all major randomised
clinical trials. Lancet. 2002 Jan 19;359(9302):189–98. [PMID:
11812552]
 
FUTURA/OASIS-8 Trial Group; Steg PG et al. Low-dose vs
standard-dose unfractionated heparin for percutaneous coronary
intervention in acute coronary syndromes treated with
fondaparinux: the FUTURA/OASIS-8 randomized trial. JAMA.
2010 Sep 22;304(12):1339–49. [PMID: 20805623]
 
Granger CB et al; Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events
Investigators. Predictors of hospital mortality in the global registry
of acute coronary events. Arch Intern Med. 2003 Oct
27;163(19):2345–53. [PMID: 14581255]
 
Greenhalgh J et al. Drug-eluting stents versus bare metal stents for
angina or acute coronary syndromes. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2010 May 12;5:CD004587. [PMID: 20464732]
 
Hirsch A et al; Invasive versus Conservative Treatment in Unstable
coronary Syndromes (ICTUS) investigators. Long-term outcome
after an early invasive versus selective invasive treatment strategy in
patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome and
elevated cardiac troponin T (the ICTUS trial): a follow-up study.
Lancet. 2007 Mar 10;369(9564): 827–35. [PMID: 17350451]
 
Hoenig MR et al. Early invasive versus conservative strategies for
unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction in the
stent era. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Mar
17;(3):CD004815. [PMID: 20238333]
 
Mehta SR et al; TIMACS Investigators. Early versus delayed
invasive intervention in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med.
2009 May 21;360(21):2165–75. [PMID: 19458363]
 
Task Force for Diagnosis and Treatment of Non-ST-Segment
Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes of European Society of
Cardiology; Bassand JP et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes.
Eur Heart J. 2007 Jul;28(13):1598–660. [PMID: 17569677]
 
Thygesen K et al; Joint ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF Task Force for
the Redefinition of Myocardial Infarction. Universal definition of
myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 2007 Oct;28(20):2525–38.
[PMID: 17951287]
 
Wiviott SD et al; TITRON-TIMI 38 Investigators. Prasugrel
versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N
Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 15;357(20):2001–15. [PMID: 17982182]
 
Yusuf S et al. Effects of clopidogrel in addition to aspirin in patients
with acute coronary syndromes without ST-segment elevation. N
Engl J Med. 2001 Aug 16;345(7):494–502. [PMID: 11519503]
 
Yusuf S et al; Fifth Organization to Assess Strategies in Acute
Ischemic Syndromes Investigators. Comparison of fondaparinux
and enoxaparin in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2006
Apr 6;354(14):1464–76. [PMID: 16537663]
 
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION WITH ST
SEGMENT ELEVATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden but not instantaneous development of prolonged (>30
minutes) anterior chest discomfort (sometimes felt as “gas” or
pressure).
 Sometimes painless, masquerading as acute CHf, syncope,
stroke, or shock.
 ECG: ST-segment elevation or left bundle branch block.
 Immediate reperfusion treatment is warranted.
 Primary PCi within 90 minutes of first medical contact is the goal
and is superior to thrombolysis.
 Thrombolysis within 30 minutes of hospital presentation and 6–
12 hours of onset of symptoms reduces mortality.
 
 General Considerations
STEMI results, in most cases, from an occlusive coronary thrombus
at the site of a preexisting (though not necessarily severe)
atherosclerotic plaque. More rarely, infarction may result from
prolonged vasospasm, inadequate myocardial blood flow (eg,
hypotension), or excessive metabolic demand. Very rarely,
myocardial infarction may be caused by embolic occlusion,
vasculitis, aortic root or coronary artery dissection, or aortitis.
Cocaine is a cause of infarction, which should be considered in
young individuals without risk factors. A condition that may mimic
STEMI is stress cardiomyopathy (also referred to as Tako-Tsubo
or stress cardiomyopathy, or apical ballooning syndrome) (see
below).
ST elevation connotes an acute coronary occlusion and thus
warrants immediate reperfusion therapy.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
1. Premonitory pain—There is usually a worsening in the pattern
of angina preceding the onset of symptoms of myocardial infarction;
classically the onset of angina occurs with minimal exertion or at
rest.
2. Pain of infarction—Unlike anginal episodes, most infarctions
occur at rest, and more commonly in the early morning. The pain is
similar to angina in location and radiation but it may be more severe,
and it builds up rapidly or in waves to maximum intensity over a few
minutes or longer. Nitroglycerin has little effect; even opioids may
not relieve the pain.
3. Associated symptoms—Patients may break out in a cold
sweat, feel weak and apprehensive, and move about, seeking a
position of comfort. They prefer not to lie quietly. Light-
headedness, syncope, dyspnea, orthopnea, cough, wheezing,
nausea and vomiting, or abdominal bloating may be present singly
or in any combination.
4. Painless infarction—One-third of patients with acute
myocardial infarction present without chest pain, and these patients
tend to be undertreated and have poor outcomes. Older patients,
women, and patients with diabetes mellitus are more likely to
present without classic chest pain. As many as 25% of infarctions
are detected on routine ECG without any recallable acute episode.
5. Sudden death and early arrhythmias—Of all deaths from
myocardial infarction, about 50% occur before the patients arrive at
the hospital, with death presumably caused by ventricular fibrillation.
B. Signs
1. General—Patients may appear anxious and sometimes are
sweating profusely. The heart rate may range from marked
bradycardia (most commonly in inferior infarction) to tachycardia,
low cardiac output, or arrhythmia. The BP may be high, especially
in former hypertensive patients, or low in patients with shock.
Respiratory distress usually indicates heart failure. Fever, usually
low grade, may appear after 12 hours and persist for several days.
2. Chest—The Killip classification is the standard way to classify
heart failure in patients with acute myocardial infarction and has
powerful prognostic value. Killip Class I is absence of rales and S3,
Class II is rales that do not clear with coughing over one-third or
less of the lung fields or presence of an S3, Class III is rales that do
not clear with coughing over more than one-third of the lung fields,
and Class IV is cardiogenic shock (rales, hypotension, and signs of
hypoperfusion).
3. Heart—The cardiac examination may be unimpressive or very
abnormal. Jugular venous distention reflects RA hypertension, and a
Kussmaul sign (failure of decrease of jugular venous pressure with
inspiration) is suggestive of RV infarction. Soft heart sounds may
indicate LV dysfunction. Atrial gallops (S4) are the rule, whereas
ventricular gallops (S3) are less common and indicate significant LV
dysfunction. Mitral regurgitation murmurs are not uncommon and
may indicate papillary muscle dysfunction or, rarely, rupture.
Pericardial friction rubs are uncommon in the first 24 hours but may
appear later.
4. Extremities—Edema is usually not present. Cyanosis and cold
temperature indicate low output. The peripheral pulses should be
noted, since later shock or emboli may alter the examination.
C. Laboratory Findings
Cardiac-specific markers of myocardial damage include quantitative
determinations of CK-MB, troponin I, and troponin T. Normal cut-
off levels for troponins depend on the assay used and reference
ranges for the laboratory performing the test. Troponins are more
sensitive and specific than CK-MB. Each of these tests may
become positive as early as 4–6 hours after the onset of a
myocardial infarction and should be abnormal by 8–12 hours.
Circulating levels of troponins may remain elevated for 5–7 days or
longer and therefore are generally not useful for evaluating
suspected early reinfarction. Elevated CK-MB generally normalizes
within 24 hours, thus being more helpful for evaluation of
reinfarction.
D. ECG
The extent of the ECG abnormalities, especially the sum of the total
amount of ST-segment deviation, is a good indicator of extent of
acute infarction and risk of subsequent adverse events. The classic
evolution of changes is from peaked (“hyperacute”) T waves, to
ST-segment elevation, to Q wave development, to T wave
inversion. This may occur over a few hours to several days. The
evolution of new Q waves (>30 milliseconds in duration and 25%
of the R wave amplitude) is diagnostic, but Q waves do not occur in
30–50% of acute infarctions (non-Q wave infarctions). Left bundle
branch block, especially when new (or not known to be old), in a
patient with symptoms of an acute myocardial infarction, is
considered to be a “STEMI equivalent”; reperfusion therapy is
indicated for the affected patient. Concordant ST elevation (ie, ST
elevation in leads with an overall positive QRS complex) with left
bundle branch block is a specific finding indicating STEMI.
E. Chest Radiography
The chest radiograph may demonstrate signs of CHF, but these
changes often lag behind the clinical findings. Signs of aortic
dissection, including mediastinal widening, should be sought as a
possible alternative diagnosis.
F. Echocardiography
Echocardiography provides convenient bedside assessment of LV
global and regional function. This can help with the diagnosis and
management of infarction; echocardiography has been used
successfully to make judgments about admission and management
of patients with suspected infarction, including in patients with ST-
segment elevation or left bundle branch block of uncertain
significance, since normal wall motion makes an infarction unlikely.
Doppler echocardiography is generally the most convenient
procedure for diagnosing postinfarction mitral regurgitation or VSD.
G. Other Noninvasive Studies
Diagnosis of myocardial infarction and extent of myocardial
infarction can be assessed by various imaging studies in addition to
echocardiography. MRI with gadolinium contrast enhancement is
now the most sensitive test to detect and quantitate extent of
infarction, with the ability to detect as little as 2 g of myocardial
infarction. Technetium-99m pyrophosphate scintigraphy, when
injected at least 18 hours postinfarction, complexes with calcium in
necrotic myocardium to provide a “hot spot” image of the infarction.
This test is insensitive to small infarctions, and false-positive studies
occur, so its use is limited to patients in whom the diagnosis by
ECG and enzymes is not possible—principally those who present
several days after the event or have intraoperative infarctions.
Scintigraphy with thallium-201 or technetium-based perfusion
tracers will demonstrate “cold spots” in regions of diminished
perfusion, which usually represent infarction when the radiotracer is
administered at rest, but abnormalities do not distinguish recent from
old damage.
H. Hemodynamic Measurements
These can be helpful in managing the patient with suspected
cardiogenic shock. Use of PA catheters, however, has generally not
been associated with better outcomes and should be limited to
patients with severe hemodynamic compromise (Table 10–7).
Ricciardi MJ et al. Visualization of discrete microinfarction after
percutaneous coronary intervention associated with mild creatine
kinase-MB elevation. Circulation. 2001 Jun 12;103(23): 2780–3.
[PMID: 11401931]
 
Thygesen K et al; Joint ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF Task Force for
the Redefinition of Myocardial Infarction. Universal definition of
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2007 Nov 27;116(22): 2634–
53. [PMID: 17951284]
 
 Treatment
Table 10–5 provides a summary of the ACC/AHA Guideline
recommendations for selected medical treatments.
A. Aspirin, Clopidogrel, and Prasugrel
All patients with definite or suspected myocardial infarction should
receive aspirin at a dose of 162 mg or 325 mg at once regardless of
whether thrombolytic therapy is being considered or the patient has
been taking aspirin. Chewable aspirin provides more rapid blood
levels. Patients with a definite aspirin allergy should be treated with
clopidogrel; a 600 mg (or 300 mg) loading dose will result in faster
onset of action than the 75 mg maintenance dose.
Clopidogrel, in combination with aspirin, has also been shown to
provide important benefits in patients with acute ST elevation
myocardial infarction. In the CLARITY trial, a loading dose of 300
mg of clopidogrel given with thrombolytic therapy, followed by 75
mg a day, led to substantial improvement in coronary patency on
catheterization 3.5 days following thrombolysis. Moreover, there
was no increase in serious bleeding in this population of patients up
to 75 years of age. The COMMIT/CCS-2 trial randomized over
45,000 patients in China with acute myocardial infarction to
clopidogrel 75 mg a day or placebo, and found a small but
statistically significant reduction in early death, myocardial
reinfarction, and stroke, with no excess in major bleeding. Thus,
guidelines now call for clopidogrel to be added to aspirin to all
patients with STEMI, regardless of whether or not reperfusion is
given, and continued for at least 14 days, and generally for 1 year.
For patients who have received thrombolytic therapy but will
undergo angiography in the first day or two, the early benefits of
clopidogrel need to be weighed against the necessary delay in
bypass surgery for approximately 5 days for those patients found to
require surgical revascularization.
Compared with standard dose clopidogrel, “double dose”
clopidogrel (600 mg oral loading dose followed by 150 mg orally
daily) for 1 week reduces stent thrombosis at the cost of a modest
increase in bleeding. In the TRITON study, prasugrel was shown to
be of greater benefit than clopidogrel in reducing thrombotic events
in the subgroup of patients with STEMI, including a 50% reduction
in stent thrombosis.
B. Reperfusion Therapy
The current recommendation is to treat patients with STEMI who
seek medical attention within 12 hours of the onset of symptoms
with reperfusion therapy, either primary PCI or thrombolytic
therapy. Patients without ST-segment elevation (previously labeled
“non-Q wave” infarctions) do not benefit, and may derive harm,
from thrombolysis.
1. Primary percutaneous coronary intervention—Immediate
coronary angiography and primary PCI (including stenting) of the
infarct-related artery have been shown to be superior to
thrombolysis when done by experienced operators in high-volume
centers with rapid time from first medical contact to intervention
(“door-to-balloon”). US and European guidelines call for first
medical contact or “door-to-balloon” times of < 90 minutes.
Several trials have shown that if efficient transfer systems are in
place, transfer of patients with acute myocardial infarction from
hospitals without primary PCI capability to hospitals with primary
PCI capability can improve outcome compared with thrombolytic
therapy at the presenting hospital, although this requires
sophisticated systems to ensure rapid identification, transfer, and
PCI. Primary PCI is the approach of choice in patients with
absolute and many relative contraindications to thrombolytic
therapy. The results of this approach in specialized centers are
excellent, exceeding those obtainable by thrombolytic therapy even
in good candidates, but this experience may not be generalizable to
centers and operators with less experience or expertise. Stenting—
generally in conjunction with either bivalirudin or the platelet
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonist abciximab—is standard for patients
with acute myocardial infarction. Since the rate of late stent
thrombosis with drug-eluting stents is not well defined following
stenting in the primary PCI setting, bare metal stents are most
commonly used. In the subgroup of patients with cardiogenic shock,
early catheterization and percutaneous or surgical revascularization
are the preferred management and has been shown to reduce
mortality. Because an acute interventional approach carries a lower
risk of hemorrhagic complications including intracranial hemorrhage,
it may also be the preferred strategy in many older patients (see
Tables 10–5 and 10–6 for factors to consider in choosing
thrombolytic therapy or primary PCI).
 
Table 10–7. Hemodynamic subsets in acute myocardial infarction.
 
CI, cardiac index (L/min/m2); SWI, stroke work index (g-m/m2, calculated
as [mean arterial pressure – PCWP] · stroke volume index · 0.0136);
PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (in mm Hg; pulmonary artery
diastolic pressure may be used instead); IABC, intraaortic balloon
counterpulsation.
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and specifically abciximab, have
been shown to reduce major thrombotic events, and possibly
mortality, when added to heparin for patients undergoing primary
PCI. The HORIZONS trial showed that compared with
unfractionated heparin plus abciximab, bivalirudin (with provisional
use of “bail-out” IIb/IIIa inhibitors) results in similar rates of
thrombotic events and 40% less bleeding. This appeared to be
accompanied by lower mortality at 30 days and 1 year, providing
further support for the safety and efficacy of bivalirudin in this
setting.
In part because patients in the United States who are transferred
for primary PCI tend to have long delays from first hospital arrival
to balloon inflation, there has been interest in developing “facilitated”
PCI whereby a combination of medications (full or reduced dose
fibrinolytic agents with or without glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors) is
given followed by immediate PCI. However, recent trials (and
overviews of completed trials) have shown either no benefit or harm
with this approach. Thus, patients should be treated either with
fibrinolytic agents (and immediate rescue PCI for reperfusion
failure) or with primary PCI, if it can be done promptly as outlined
in the ACC/AHA and European guidelines. Timely access to most
appropriate reperfusion, including primary PCI, can be expanded
with development of regional systems of care, including emergency
medical systems and networks of hospitals. The American Heart
Association has a program called Mission: Lifeline to support
systems 
development 
(see
http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=3050213).
2. Thrombolytic therapy
A. BENEFIT—Thrombolytic therapy reduces mortality and limits
infarct size in patients with acute myocardial infarction associated
with ST-segment elevation (defined as ≥ 0.1 mV in two inferior or
lateral leads or two contiguous precordial leads), or with left bundle
branch block (not known to be old). The greatest benefit occurs if
treatment is initiated within the first 3 hours, when up to a 50%
reduction in mortality rate can be achieved. The magnitude of
benefit declines rapidly thereafter, but a 10% relative mortality
reduction can be achieved up to 12 hours after the onset of chest
pain. The survival benefit is greatest in patients with large—usually
anterior—infarctions.
B. CONTRAINDICATIONS—Major bleeding complications occur in
0.5–5% of patients, the most serious of which is intracranial
hemorrhage. The major risk factors for intracranial bleeding are
older age (>65 years), hypertension at presentation (especially over
180/110 mm Hg), low body weight (< 70 kg), and the use of clot-
specific thrombolytic agents (alteplase, reteplase, tenecteplase).
Although patients over age 75 years have a much higher mortality
rate with acute myocardial infarction and therefore may derive
greater benefit, the risk of severe bleeding is also higher, particularly
among patients with risk factors for intracranial hemorrhage, such as
severe hypertension or recent stroke. Patients presenting more than
12 hours after the onset of chest pain may also derive a small
benefit, particularly if pain and ST-segment elevation persist, but
rarely does this benefit outweigh the attendant risk.
Contraindications to thrombolytic therapy include previous
hemorrhagic stroke, other strokes or cerebrovascular events within
1 year, known intracranial neoplasm, recent head trauma (including
minor trauma), active internal bleeding (excluding menstruation), or
suspected aortic dissection. Relative contraindications are BP >
180/110 mm Hg at presentation, other intracerebral pathology not
listed above as a contraindication, known bleeding diathesis, trauma
(including minor head trauma) within 2–4 weeks, major surgery
within 3 weeks, prolonged (>10 minutes) or traumatic
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, recent (within 2–4 weeks) internal
bleeding, noncompressible vascular punctures, active diabetic
retinopathy, pregnancy, active peptic ulcer disease, a history of
severe hypertension, current use of anticoagulants (INR > 2.0–3.0),
and (for streptokinase) prior allergic reaction or exposure to
streptokinase or anistreplase within 2 years.
C. THROMBOLYTIC AGENTS—The following thrombolytic agents
are available for acute myocardial infarction and are characterized in
Table 10–8.
Alteplase (recombinant tissue plasminogen activator; t-PA) is a
naturally occurring plasminogen activator that is modestly fibrin
specific, resulting in about a 50% reduction in circulating fibrinogen.
In the first GUSTO trial, which compared a 90-minute dosing of t-
PA (with unfractionated heparin) with streptokinase, the 30-day
mortality rate with t-PA was one absolute percentage point lower
(one additional life saved per 100 patients treated), though there
was also a small increase in the rate of intracranial hemorrhage. An
angiographic substudy confirmed a higher 90-minute patency rate
and a higher rate of normal (TIMI grade 3) flow in patients.
 
Table 10–8. Thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed.
Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. AWP may not
accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide contractual
variations exist among institutions.
PTT, partial thromboplastin time.
Reteplase is a recombinant deletion mutant of t-PA that is
slightly less fibrin specific. In comparative trials, it appears to have
efficacy similar to that of alteplase, but it has a longer duration of
action and can be administered as two boluses 30 minutes apart.
Tenecteplase (TNK-t-PA) is a genetically engineered
substitution mutant of native t-PA that has reduced plasma
clearance, increased fibrin sensitivity, and increased resistance to
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1. It can be given as a single weight-
adjusted bolus. In a large comparative trial, this agent was
equivalent to t-PA with regard to efficacy and resulted in
significantly less noncerebral bleeding.
Streptokinase is commonly used elsewhere in the world, but
not commonly used in the United States since it is somewhat less
effective at opening occluded arteries and less effective at reducing
mortality. It is non-fibrin-specific, causes depletion of circulating
fibrinogen, and has a tendency to induce hypotension, particularly if
infused rapidly. This can be managed by slowing or interrupting the
infusion and administering fluids. There is controversy as to whether
adjunctive heparin is beneficial in patients given streptokinase, unlike
its administration with the more clot-specific agents. Allergic
reactions, including anaphylaxis, occur in 1–2% of patients, and this
agent should generally not be administered to patients with prior
exposure.
(1) Selection of a thrombolytic agent—In the United States,
most patients are treated with alteplase, reteplase, or tenecteplase.
The differences in efficacy between them are small compared with
the potential benefit of treating a greater proportion of appropriate
candidates in a more prompt manner. The principal objective should
be to administer a thrombolytic agent within 30 minutes of
presentation—or even during transport. The ability to administer
tenecteplase as a single bolus is an attractive feature that may
facilitate earlier treatment. The combination of a reduced-dose
thrombolytic given with a platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonist
has been investigated in several trials, with no evidence of reduction
in mortality but a modest increase in bleeding complications.
(2) Postthrombolytic management—After completion of the
thrombolytic infusion, aspirin (81–325 mg/d) and heparin should be
continued. The 2008 ACC/AHA guidelines recommend continued
anticoagulation for the duration of the hospital stay (or up to 8 days)
with some anticoagulant, with advantages favoring either enoxaparin
or fondaparinux.
(a) Unfractionated heparin—Anticoagulation with intravenous
heparin (initial dose of 60 units/kg bolus to a maximum of 4000
units, followed by an infusion of 12 units/kg/min to a maximum of
1000 units, then adjusted to maintain an activated partial
thromboplastin time [aPTT] of 50–75 seconds beginning with an
aPTT drawn 3 hours after thrombolytic) is continued for at least 48
hours after alteplase, reteplase, or tenecteplase, and with
continuation of some anticoagulant until revascularization (if
performed) or until hospital discharge (or day 8).
(b) Low-molecular-weight heparin—In the EXTRACT trial,
enoxaparin significantly reduced death and myocardial infarction at
day 30 (compared with unfractionated heparin), at the expense of a
modest increase in bleeding. In patients younger than age 75,
enoxaparin was given as a 30 mg intravenous bolus and 1 mg/kg
every 12 hours; in patients age 75 years and older, it was given with
no bolus and 0.75 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours. This
appeared to attenuate the risk of intracranial hemorrhage in the
elderly that had been seen with full dose enoxaparin. Another
antithrombotic option is fondaparinux, given at a dose of 2.5 mg
subcutaneously once a day. In the OASIS-6 trial, it resulted in
significant reductions in death and reinfarction when compared with
control (unfractionated heparin when indicated, otherwise placebo).
Similar to the findings of the OASIS-5 trial, fondaparinux tended to
result in less bleeding, despite its longer duration compared with
heparin and despite its comparison to placebo in about half of the
enrolled patients. There was no benefit of fondaparinux among
patients undergoing primary PCI, and fondaparinux is not
recommended as a sole anticoagulant during PCI due to risk of
catheter thrombosis.
For all patients with acute myocardial infarction treated with
intensive antithrombotic therapy, prophylactic treatment with proton
pump inhibitors or antacids and an H2-blocker is advisable,
although certain proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole and
esomeprazole, decrease the effect of clopidogrel.
3. Assessment of myocardial reperfusion, recurrent ischemic
pain, reinfarction—Myocardial reperfusion can be recognized
clinically by the early cessation of pain and the resolution of ST-
segment elevation. Although at least 50% resolution of ST-segment
elevation by 90 minutes may occur without coronary reperfusion,
ST resolution is a strong predictor of better outcome. Even with
anticoagulation, 10–20% of reperfused vessels will reocclude during
hospitalization, although reocclusion and reinfarction appear to be
reduced following intervention. Reinfarction, indicated by
recurrence of pain and ST-segment elevation, can be treated by
readministration of a thrombolytic agent or immediate angiography
and PCI.
C. General Measures
Cardiac care unit monitoring should be instituted as soon as
possible. Patients without complications can be transferred to a
telemetry unit after 24 hours. Activity should initially be limited to
bed rest but can be advanced within 24 hours. Progressive
ambulation should be started after 24–72 hours if tolerated. For
patients without complications, discharge by day 4 appears to be
appropriate. Low-flow oxygen therapy (2–4 L/min) should be given
if oxygen saturation is reduced.
D. Analgesia
An initial attempt should be made to relieve pain with sublingual
nitroglycerin. However, if no response occurs after two or three
tablets, intravenous opioids provide the most rapid and effective
analgesia and may also reduce pulmonary congestion. Morphine
sulfate, 4–8 mg, or meperidine, 50–75 mg, should be given.
Subsequent small doses can be given every 15 minutes until pain
abates.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, other than aspirin, should
be avoided during hospitalization for STEMI due to increased risk
of mortality, myocardial rupture, hypertension, heart failure, and
kidney injury with their use.
E. β-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
Although trials have shown modest short-term benefit from β-
blockers given immediately after acute myocardial infarction, it has
not been clear that intravenous β-blockers provide an advantage
over simply beginning an oral β-blocker, which should be started
during the first 24 hours if there are no contraindications. The
Chinese COMMIT/CCS-2 trial involving 45,000 patients found no
overall benefit to intravenous followed by oral metoprolol; the
aggressive dosing (three 5 mg intravenous boluses followed by 200
mg/d orally) appeared to prevent reinfarction at the cost of
increasing shock, with overall harm in patients presenting with heart
failure. Thus, early β-blockade should be avoided in patients with
any degree of heart failure, evidence of low output state, increased
risk of cardiogenic shock, or other relative contraindications to β-
blockade. The CAPRICORN trial showed the benefits of
carvedilol (beginning at 6.25 mg twice a day, titrated to 25 mg
twice a day) following the acute phase of large myocardial infarction
with contemporary care.
F. Nitrates
Nitroglycerin is the agent of choice for continued or recurrent
ischemic pain and is useful in lowering BP or relieving pulmonary
congestion. However, routine nitrate administration is not
recommended, since no improvement in outcome has been
observed in the ISIS-4 or GISSI-3 trials, in which a total of over
70,000 patients were randomized to nitrate treatment or placebo.
Nitrates should be avoided in patients who received
phosphodiesterase inhibitors (sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil) in
the prior 24 hours.
G. ACE Inhibitors
A series of trials (SAVE, AIRE, SMILE, TRACE, GISSI-III, and
ISIS-4) have shown both short- and long-term improvement in
survival with ACE inhibitor therapy. The benefits are greatest in
patients with EF ≤ 40%, large infarctions, or clinical evidence of
heart failure. Because substantial amounts of the survival benefit
occur on the first day, ACE inhibitor treatment should be
commenced early in patients without hypotension, especially
patients with large or anterior myocardial infarction. Given the
benefits of ACE-inhibitors for patients with vascular disease, it is
reasonable to use ACE-inhibitors for all patients following STEMI
who do not have contraindications.
H. Angiotensin Receptor Blockers
Although there has been inconsistency in the effects of different
ARBs on mortality for patients post-myocardial infarction with heart
failure and/or LV dysfunction, the VALIANT trial showed that
valsartan 160 mg twice a day is equivalent to captopril in reducing
mortality. Thus, valsartan should be used for all patients with ACE
inhibitor intolerance, and is a reasonable, albeit more expensive,
alternative to captopril. The combination of captopril and valsartan
(at reduced dose) was no better than either agent alone and resulted
in more side effects.
I. Aldosterone Antagonists
The RALES trial showed that spironolactone can reduce the
mortality rate of patients with advanced heart failure, and the
EPHESUS trial showed a 15% relative risk reduction in mortality
with eplerenone for patients post-myocardial infarction with LV
dysfunction and either heart failure or diabetes. Kidney dysfunction
or hyperkalemia are contraindications, and patients must be
monitored carefully for development of hyperkalemia.
J. Antiarrhythmic Prophylaxis
The incidence of ventricular fibrillation in hospitalized patients is
approximately 5%, with 80% of episodes occurring in the first 12–
24 hours. Prophylactic lidocaine infusions (1–2 mg/min) prevent
most episodes, but this therapy has not reduced the mortality rate
and it increases the risk of asystole, so this approach is no longer
recommended except in patients with sustained ventricular
tachycardia.
K. Calcium Channel Blockers
There are no studies to support the routine use of calcium channel
blockers in most patients with acute myocardial infarction—and
indeed, they have the potential to exacerbate ischemia and cause
death from reflex tachycardia or myocardial depression. Long-
acting calcium channel blockers should generally be reserved for
management of hypertension or ischemia as second- or third-line
drugs after β-blockers and nitrates.
L. Long-Term Antithrombotic Therapy
Discharge on aspirin, 81–325 mg/d, since it is highly effective,
inexpensive, and well tolerated, is a key quality indicator of
myocardial infarction care. In the WARIS-II trial, long-term
anticoagulation with warfarin post-myocardial infarction was
associated with a reduction in the composite of death, reinfarction,
and stroke. However, whether the results of this trial are
transferable to the United States where anticoagulation services may
be less organized and effective than in Norwegian hospitals is
unknown. In the CURE trial, clopidogrel, 75 mg/d, (in addition to
aspirin) for 3–12 months for non-ST elevation acute coronary
syndromes resulted in a similar 20% relative risk reduction in
cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, and stroke, and
continuing clopidogrel for 1 year for patients with STEMI is
reasonable, regardless of whether they underwent reperfusion
therapy. The TRITON trial showed that prasugrel was more
beneficial than clopidogrel in reducing ischemic events in patients
undergoing PCI, but it resulted in more bleeding.
Patients who have received a coronary stent and who require
warfarin anticoagulation present a particular challenge, since “triple
therapy” with aspirin, clopidogrel, and warfarin has a high risk of
bleeding. Triple therapy should be (1) limited to patients with a clear
indication for warfarin (such as CHADS2 score of 2 or more), (2)
used for the shortest period of time (such as 1 month after
placement of bare metal stent; drug-eluting stents that would require
longer clopidogrel duration should be avoided), (3) used with low-
dose aspirin and with strategies to reduce risk of bleeding (eg,
proton pump inhibitors for patients with history of gastrointestinal
bleeding).
M. Coronary Angiography
For patients who do not reperfuse based on lack of at least 50%
resolution of ST elevation, rescue angioplasty should be performed
and has been shown to reduce the composite of death, reinfarction,
stroke, or severe heart failure. According to the evidence in the
European Guidelines and the updated recommendations of the
AHA/ACC for high-risk patients, patients treated with coronary
angiography and PCI 3–24 hours after fibrinolytic therapy showed
improved outcomes. Patients with recurrent ischemic pain prior to
discharge should undergo catheterization and, if indicated,
revascularization. Asymptomatic, clinically stable patients should
undergo predischarge stress testing to determine whether residual
jeopardized myocardium is present. This can be accomplished by
submaximal exercise or pharmacologic stress scintigraphy. Those
with significantly positive tests or a low threshold for symptomatic
ischemia should undergo angiography and revascularization where
feasible. PCI of a totally occluded infarct-related artery > 24 hours
after STEMI should generally not be performed in asymptomatic
patients with one or two vessel disease without evidence of severe
ischemia.
 When to Refer
All patients with acute myocardial infarction should be referred to a
cardiologist.
Antman EM et al; ExTRACT-TIMI 25 Investigators. Enoxaparin
versus unfractionated heparin with fibrinolysis for ST-elevation
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2006 Apr 6;354(14):1477–
88. [PMID: 16537665]
 
Chen SF et al. Use of drug-eluting versus bare-metal stents in ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction. J Invasive Cardiol. 2009
Nov;21(11):E206–12. [PMID: 19901420]
 
Fox KA et al; FIR Collaboration. Long-term outcome of a routine
versus selective invasive strategy in patients with non-ST-segment
elevation acute coronary syndrome a meta-analysis of individual
patient data. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Jun 1;55(22): 2435–45.
[PMID: 20359842]
 
Hansen ML et al. Risk of bleeding with single, dual, or triple
therapy with warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel in patients with atrial
fibrillation. Arch Intern Med. 2010 Sep 13;170(16): 1433-41.
[PMID: 20837828]
 
Hochman JS et al; Occluded Artery Trial Investigators. Coronary
intervention for persistent occlusion after myocardial infarction. N
Engl J Med. 2006 Dec 7;355(23):2395–407. [PMID: 17105759]
 
Keeley EC et al. Comparison of primary and facilitated
percutaneous coronary interventions for ST-elevation myocardial
infarction: quantitative review of randomised trials. Lancet. 2006
Feb 18;367(9510):579–88. [PMID: 16488801]
 
Keeley EC et al. Primary coronary intervention for acute
myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2004 Feb 11;291(6):736–9.
[PMID: 14871919]
 
Kumar A et al. Acute coronary syndromes: diagnosis and
management, part II. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Nov;84(11):1021–
36. [PMID: 19880693]
 
Kushner FG et al. 2009 Focused Updates: ACC/AHA Guidelines
for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial
Infarction (updating the 2004 Guideline and 2007 Focused
Update) and ACC/AHA/SCAI Guidelines on Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention (updating the 2005 Guideline and 2007
Focused Update): a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Circulation. 2009 Dec 1;120(22):2271–306. Erratum
in: Circulation. 2010 Mar 30;121(12):e257. Dosage error in article
text. [PMID: 19923169]
 
Mehta S et al. Adjunct therapy in STEMI intervention. Cardiol
Clin. 2010 Feb;28(1):107–25. [PMID: 19962053]
 
Pfeffer MA et al. Valsartan, captopril, or both in myocardial
infarction complicated by heart failure, left ventricular dysfunction,
or both. N Engl J Med. 2003 Nov 13;349(20):1893–906.
[PMID: 14610160]
 
Stone GW et al; HORIZONS-AMI Trial Investigators. Bivalirudin
during primary PCI in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med.
2008 May 22;358(21):2218–30. [PMID: 18499566]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Myocardial infarction.
JAMA. 2008 Jan 30;299(4):476. [PMID: 18230786]
 
Wijns W et al. Guidelines on myocardial revascularization: The
Task Force on Myocardial Revascularization of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Association for
Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J. 2010 Oct;
31(20):2501–55. [PMID: 20802248]
 
Yusuf S et al; OASIS-6 Trial Group: Effects of fondaparinux on
mortality and reinfarction in patients with acute ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction: the OASIS-6 randomized trial.
JAMA. 2006 Apr 5;295(13):1519–30. [PMID: 16537725]
 
 Complications
A variety of complications can occur after myocardial infarction
even when treatment is initiated promptly.
A. Postinfarction Ischemia
In clinical trials of thrombolysis, recurrent ischemia occurred in
about one-third of patients, was more common following non–ST
elevation myocardial infarction than after STEMI, and had
important short- and long-term prognostic implications. Vigorous
medical therapy should be instituted, including nitrates and β-
blockers as well as aspirin 81–325 mg/d, anticoagulant therapy
(unfractionated heparin, enoxaparin, or fondaparinux) and
clopidogrel. Most patients with postinfarction angina—and all who
are refractory to medical therapy—should undergo early
catheterization and revascularization by PCI or CABG.
B. Arrhythmias
Abnormalities of rhythm and conduction are common.
1. Sinus bradycardia—This is most common in inferior infarctions
or may be precipitated by medications. Observation or withdrawal
of the offending agent is usually sufficient. If accompanied by signs
of low cardiac output, atropine, 0.5–1 mg intravenously, is usually
effective. Temporary pacing is rarely required.
2. Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias—Sinus tachycardia is
common and may reflect either increased adrenergic stimulation or
hemodynamic compromise due to hypovolemia or pump failure. In
the latter, β-blockade is contraindicated. Supraventricular
premature beats are common and may be premonitory for atrial
fibrillation. Electrolyte abnormalities and hypoxia should be
corrected and causative agents (especially aminophylline) stopped.
Atrial fibrillation should be rapidly controlled or converted to sinus
rhythm. Intravenous β-blockers such as metoprolol (2.5–5 mg/h) or
short-acting esmolol (50–200 mcg/kg/min) are the agents of choice
if cardiac function is adequate. Intravenous diltiazem (5–15 mg/h)
may be used if β-blockers are contraindicated or ineffective.
Digoxin (0.5 mg as initial dose, then 0.25 mg every 90–120 minutes
[up to 1–1.25 mg] for a loading dose, followed by 0.25 mg daily if
kidney function is normal) is preferable if heart failure is present with
atrial fibrillation, but the onset of action is delayed. Electrical
cardioversion (commencing with 100 J) may be necessary if atrial
fibrillation is complicated by hypotension, heart failure, or ischemia,
but the arrhythmia often recurs. Amiodarone (150 mg intravenous
bolus and then 15–30 mg/h intravenously, or rapid oral loading with
400 mg three times daily) may be helpful to restore or maintain sinus
rhythm.
3. Ventricular arrhythmias—Ventricular arrhythmias are most
common in the first few hours after infarction. Ventricular premature
beats may be premonitory for ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation
but generally should not be treated in the absence of frequent
nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (usually more than six
consecutive beats). Lidocaine is recommended as a prophylactic
measure. Toxicity (tremor, anxiety, confusion, seizures) is common,
especially in older patients and those with hypotension, heart failure,
or liver disease.
Sustained ventricular tachycardia should be treated with a 1
mg/kg bolus of lidocaine if the patient is stable or by electrical
cardioversion (100–200 J) if not. If the arrhythmia cannot be
suppressed with lidocaine, procainamide (100 mg boluses over 1–2
minutes every 5 minutes to a cumulative dose of 750–1000 mg) or
intravenous amiodarone (150 mg over 10 minutes, which may be
repeated as needed, followed by 360 mg over 6 hours and then
540 mg over 18 hours) should be initiated, followed by an infusion
of 20–80 mg/kg/min. Ventricular fibrillation is treated electrically
(300–400 J). Unresponsive ventricular fibrillation should be treated
with additional amiodarone and repeat cardioversion while
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is administered.
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm is a regular, wide-complex
rhythm at a rate of 70–100/min. It may occur with or without
reperfusion and should not be treated with antiarrhythmics, which
could cause asystole.
4. Conduction disturbances—All degrees of AV block may
occur in the course of acute myocardial infarction. Block at the level
of the AV node is more common than infranodal block and occurs
in approximately 20% of inferior myocardial infarctions. First-
degree block is the most common and requires no treatment.
Second-degree block is usually of the Mobitz type I form
(Wenckebach), is often transient, and requires treatment only if
associated with a heart rate slow enough to cause symptoms.
Complete AV block occurs in up to 5% of acute inferior infarctions,
usually is preceded by Mobitz I second-degree block, and generally
resolves spontaneously, though it may persist for hours to several
weeks. The escape rhythm originates in the distal AV node or AV
junction and hence has a narrow QRS complex and is reliable,
albeit often slow (30–50 beats/min). Treatment is often necessary
because of resulting hypotension and low cardiac output.
Intravenous atropine (1 mg) usually restores AV conduction
temporarily, but if the escape complex is wide or if repeated
atropine treatments are needed, temporary ventricular pacing is
indicated. The prognosis for these patients is only slightly worse
than for patients in whom AV block did not develop.
In anterior infarctions, the site of block is distal, below the AV
node, and usually a result of extensive damage of the His Purkinje
system and bundle branches. New first-degree block (prolongation
of the PR interval) is unusual in anterior infarction; Mobitz type II
AV block or complete heart block may be preceded by
intraventricular conduction defects or may occur abruptly. The
escape rhythm, if present, is an unreliable wide-complex
idioventricular rhythm. Urgent ventricular pacing is mandatory, but
even with successful pacing, morbidity and mortality are high
because of the extensive myocardial damage. New conduction
abnormalities such as right or left bundle branch block or fascicular
blocks may presage progression, often sudden, to second- or third-
degree AV block. Temporary ventricular pacing is recommended
for new-onset alternating bilateral bundle branch block, bifascicular
block, or bundle branch block with worsening first-degree AV
block. Patients with anterior infarction who progress to second- or
third-degree block even transiently should be considered for
insertion of a prophylactic permanent ventricular pacemaker before
discharge.
C. Myocardial Dysfunction
The severity of cardiac dysfunction is proportionate to the extent of
myocardial necrosis but is exacerbated by preexisting dysfunction
and ongoing ischemia. Persons with hypotension not responsive to
fluid resuscitation or refractory heart failure or cardiogenic shock
should be considered for urgent echocardiography to assess left and
right ventricular function and for mechanical complications, right
heart catheterization, and continuous measurements of arterial
pressure. These measurements permit the accurate assessment of
volume status and may facilitate decisions about volume
resuscitation, selective use of pressors and inotropes, and
mechanical support. Table 10–7 categorizes patients based on
these hemodynamic findings.
1. Acute LV failure—Dyspnea, diffuse rales, and arterial
hypoxemia usually indicate LV failure. General measures include
supplemental oxygen to increase arterial saturation to above 95%
and elevation of the trunk. Diuretics are usually the initial therapy
unless RV infarction is present. Intravenous furosemide (10–40 mg)
or bumetanide (0.5–1 mg) is preferred because of the reliably rapid
onset and short duration of action of these drugs. Higher dosages
can be given if an inadequate response occurs. Morphine sulfate (4
mg intravenously followed by increments of 2 mg) is valuable in
acute pulmonary edema.
Diuretics are usually effective; however, because most patients
with acute infarction are not volume overloaded, the hemodynamic
response may be limited and may be associated with hypotension.
Vasodilators will reduce PCWP and improve cardiac output by a
combination of venodilation (increasing venous capacitance) and
arteriolar dilation (reducing afterload and LV wall stress). In mild
heart failure, sublingual isosorbide dinitrate (2.5–10 mg every 2
hours) or nitroglycerin ointment (6.25–25 mg every 4 hours) may
be adequate to lower PCWP. In more severe failure, especially if
cardiac output is reduced and BP is normal or high, sodium
nitroprusside may be the preferred agent. It should be initiated only
with arterial pressure monitoring; the initial dosage should be low
(0.25 mcg/kg/min) to avoid excessive hypotension, but the dosage
can be increased by increments of 0.5 mcg/kg/min every 5–10
minutes up to 5–10 mcg/kg/min until the desired hemodynamic
response is obtained. Excessive hypotension (mean BP < 65–75
mm Hg) or tachycardia (>10/min increase) should be avoided.
Intravenous nitroglycerin (starting at 10 mcg/min) also may be
effective but may lower PCWP with less hypotension. Oral or
transdermal vasodilator therapy with nitrates or ACE inhibitors is
often necessary after the initial 24–48 hours (see below).
Inotropic agents should be avoided if possible, because they
often increase heart rate and myocardial oxygen requirements and
worsen clinical outcomes. Dobutamine has the best hemodynamic
profile, increasing cardiac output and modestly lowering PCWP,
usually without excessive tachycardia, hypotension, or arrhythmias.
The initial dosage is 2.5 mcg/kg/min, and it may be increased by
similar increments up to 15–20 mcg/kg/min at intervals of 5–10
minutes. Dopamine is more useful in the presence of hypotension
(see below), since it produces peripheral vasoconstriction, but it has
a less beneficial effect on PCWP. Digoxin has not been helpful in
acute infarction except to control the ventricular response in atrial
fibrillation, but it may be beneficial if chronic heart failure persists.
2. Hypotension and shock—Patients with hypotension (systolic
BP < 90 mm Hg, individualized depending on prior BP) and signs
of diminished perfusion (low urinary output, confusion, cold
extremities) that does not respond to fluid resuscitation should be
presumed to have cardiogenic shock and should be considered for
urgent catheterization and revascularization, intra-aortic balloon
pump (IABP) support, and hemodynamic monitoring with a PA
catheter. Up to 20% will have findings indicative of intravascular
hypovolemia (due to diaphoresis, vomiting, decreased venous tone,
medications—such as diuretics, nitrates, morphine, β-blockers,
calcium channel blockers, and thrombolytic agents—and lack of
oral intake). These should be treated with successive boluses of
100 mL of normal saline until PCWP reaches 15–18 mm Hg to
determine whether cardiac output and BP respond. Pericardial
tamponade due to hemorrhagic pericarditis (especially after
thrombolytic therapy or cardiopulmonary resuscitation) or
ventricular rupture should be considered and excluded by
echocardiography if clinically indicated. RV infarction, characterized
by a normal PCWP but elevated RA pressure, can produce
hypotension. This is discussed below.
Most patients with cardiogenic shock will have moderate to
severe LV systolic dysfunction, with a mean EF of 30% in the
SHOCK trial. If hypotension is only modest (systolic pressure > 90
mm Hg) and the PCWP is elevated, diuretics and an initial trial of
nitroprusside (see above for dosing) are indicated. If the BP falls,
inotropic support will need to be added or substituted. Such
patients should generally also be treated with IABP
counterpulsation, which can both reduce myocardial energy
requirements (systolic unloading) and improve diastolic coronary
blood flow.
Dopamine is generally considered to be the most appropriate
pressor for cardiogenic hypotension. It should be initiated at a rate
of 2–4 mcg/kg/min and increased at 5-minute intervals to the
appropriate hemodynamic end point. At low dosages (< 5
mcg/kg/min), it improves renal blood flow; at intermediate dosages
(2.5–10 mcg/kg/min), it stimulates myocardial contractility; at higher
dosages (>8 mcg/kg/min), it is a potent α1-adrenergic agonist. In
general, BP and cardiac index rise, but PCWP does not fall.
Dopamine may be combined with nitroprusside or dobutamine (see
above for dosing), or the latter may be used in its place if
hypotension is not severe. Norepinephrine (0.1–0.5 mcg/kg/min) is
generally reserved for failure of other vasopressors, since
epinephrine produces less vasoconstriction and does not increase
coronary perfusion pressure (aortic diastolic pressure), but it does
tend to worsen the balance between myocardial oxygen delivery
and utilization.
Patients with cardiogenic shock not due to hypovolemia have a
poor prognosis, with 30-day mortality rates of 40–80%. If they do
not respond rapidly, IABP should be instituted to both reduce
myocardial energy requirements (systolic unloading) and improve
diastolic coronary blood flow. Surgically implanted (or
percutaneous) ventricular assist devices may be used in refractory
cases. Emergent cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography
followed by percutaneous or surgical revascularization offer the best
chance of survival.
D. RV Infarction
RV infarction is present in one-third of patients with inferior wall
infarction but is clinically significant in < 50% of these. It presents as
hypotension with relatively preserved LV function and should be
considered whenever patients with inferior infarction exhibit low BP,
raised venous pressure, and clear lungs. Hypotension is often
exacerbated by medications that decrease intravascular volume or
produce venodilation, such as diuretics, nitrates, and narcotics. RA
pressure and jugular venous pulsations are high, while PCWP is
normal or low and the lungs are clear. The diagnosis is suggested by
ST-segment elevation in right-sided anterior chest leads, particularly
RV4. The diagnosis can be confirmed by echocardiography or
hemodynamic measurements. Treatment consists of fluid loading to
improve LV filling, and inotropic agents if necessary.
E. Mechanical Defects
Partial or complete rupture of a papillary muscle or of the
interventricular septum occurs in < 1% of acute myocardial
infarctions and carries a poor prognosis. These complications occur
in both anterior and inferior infarctions, usually 3–7 days after the
acute event. They are detected by the appearance of a new systolic
murmur and clinical deterioration, often with pulmonary edema. The
two lesions are distinguished by the location of the murmur (apical
versus 
parasternal) 
and 
by 
Doppler 
echocardiography.
Hemodynamic monitoring is essential for appropriate management
and demonstrates an increase in oxygen saturation between the RA
and PA in VSD and, often, a large v wave with mitral regurgitation.
Treatment by nitroprusside and, preferably, IABC reduces the
regurgitation or shunt, but surgical correction is mandatory. In
patients remaining hemodynamically unstable or requiring continuous
parenteral pharmacologic treatment or counterpulsation, early
surgery is recommended, though mortality rates are high (15% to
nearly 100%, depending on residual ventricular function and clinical
status). Patients who are stabilized medically can have delayed
surgery with lower risks (10–25%), although this may be due to the
death of sicker patients, some of whom may have been saved by
earlier surgery.
F. Myocardial Rupture
Complete rupture of the LV free wall occurs in < 1% of patients
and usually results in immediate death. It occurs 2–7 days
postinfarction, usually involves the anterior wall, and is more
frequent in older women. Incomplete or gradual rupture may be
sealed off by the pericardium, creating a pseudoaneurysm. This
may be recognized by echocardiography, radionuclide angiography,
or LV angiography, often as an incidental finding. It demonstrates a
narrow-neck connection to the LV. Early surgical repair is
indicated, since delayed rupture is common.
G. LV Aneurysm
An LV aneurysm, a sharply delineated area of scar that bulges
paradoxically during systole, develops in 10–20% of patients
surviving an acute infarction. This usually follows anterior Q wave
infarctions. Aneurysms are recognized by persistent ST-segment
elevation (beyond 4–8 weeks), and a wide neck from the LV can
be demonstrated by echocardiography, scintigraphy, or contrast
angiography. They rarely rupture but may be associated with arterial
emboli, ventricular arrhythmias, and CHF. Surgical resection may
be performed for these indications if other measures fail. The best
results (mortality rates of 10–20%) are obtained when the residual
myocardium contracts well and when significant coronary lesions
supplying adjacent regions are bypassed.
H. Pericarditis
The pericardium is involved in approximately 50% of infarctions,
but pericarditis is often not clinically significant. Twenty percent of
patients with Q wave infarctions will have an audible friction rub if
examined repetitively. Pericardial pain occurs in approximately the
same proportion after 2–7 days and is recognized by its variation
with respiration and position (improved by sitting). Often, no
treatment is required, but aspirin (650 mg every 4–6 hours) will
usually relieve the pain. Indomethacin and corticosteroids can cause
impaired infarct healing and predispose to myocardial rupture, and
therefore should generally be avoided in the early post-myocardial
infarction period. Likewise, anticoagulation should be used
cautiously, since hemorrhagic pericarditis may result.
One week to 12 weeks after infarction, Dressler syndrome
(post-myocardial infarction syndrome) occurs in < 5% of patients.
This is an autoimmune phenomenon and presents as pericarditis
with associated fever, leukocytosis and, occasionally, pericardial or
pleural effusion. It may recur over months. Treatment is the same as
for other forms of pericarditis. A short course of nonsteroidal agents
or corticosteroids may help relieve symptoms.
I. Mural Thrombus
Mural thrombi are common in large anterior infarctions but not in
infarctions at other locations. Arterial emboli occur in approximately
2% of patients with known infarction, usually within 6 weeks.
Anticoagulation with heparin followed by short-term (3-month)
warfarin therapy prevents most emboli and should be considered in
all patients with large anterior infarctions. Mural thrombi can be
detected by echocardiography or cardiac MRI, but these
procedures should not be relied upon for determining the need for
anticoagulation.
Hochman JS et al. Early revascularization in acute myocardial
infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. SHOCK
Investigators. Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded
Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock. N Engl J Med. 1999 Aug 26;
341(9):625–34. [PMID: 10460813]
 
Pfisterer M. Right ventricular involvement in myocardial infarction
and cardiogenic shock. Lancet. 2003 Aug 2;362(9381): 392–4.
[PMID: 12907014]
 
Rathore SS et al. Acute myocardial infarction complicated by heart
block in the elderly: prevalence and outcomes. Am Heart J. 2001
Jan;141(1):47–54. [PMID: 11136486]
 
 Postinfarction Management
After the first 24 hours, the focus of patient management is to
prevent recurrent ischemia, improve infarct healing and prevent
remodeling, and prevent recurrent vascular events. Patients with
hemodynamic compromise, who are at high risk for death, need
careful monitoring and management of volume status.
A. Risk Stratification
Risk stratification is important for management of STEMI. GRACE
and TIMI risk scores can be helpful tools. The TIMI Risk Score is
available for PDA download at http://www.timi.org, and the
GRACE 
risk 
score 
at http://www.outcomes-
umassmed.org/GRACE/acs_risk.cfm. Patients with recurrent
ischemia (spontaneous or provoked), hemodynamic instability,
impaired LV function, heart failure, or serious ventricular
arrhythmias should undergo cardiac catheterization (Table 10–6).
ACE inhibitor (or ARB) therapy is indicated in patients with clinical
heart failure or LV EF ≤ 40%. Aldosterone blockade is indicated
for patients with an LV EF ≤40% and either heart failure or
diabetes mellitus.
For patients not undergoing cardiac catheterization, submaximal
exercise (or pharmacologic stress testing for patients unable to
exercise) before discharge or a maximal test after 3–6 weeks (the
latter being more sensitive for ischemia) helps patients and clinicians
plan the return to normal activity. Imaging in conjunction with stress
testing adds additional sensitivity for ischemia and provides
localizing information. Both exercise and pharmacologic stress
imaging have successfully predicted subsequent outcome. One of
these tests should be used prior to discharge in patients who have
received thrombolytic therapy as a means of selecting appropriate
candidates for coronary angiography.
B. Secondary Prevention
Postinfarction management should begin with identification and
modification of risk factors. Treatment of hyper-lipidemia and
smoking cessation both prevent recurrent infarction and death.
Statin therapy should be started before the patient is discharged
from the hospital to reduce recurrent atherothrombotic events. BP
control and cardiac rehabilitation or exercise are also
recommended.
β-Blockers improve survival rates, primarily by reducing the
incidence of sudden death in high-risk subsets of patients, though
their value may be less in patients without complications with small
infarctions and normal exercise tests. While a variety of β-blockers
have been shown to be beneficial, for patients with LV dysfunction
managed with contemporary treatment, carvedilol titrated to 25 mg
twice a day has been shown to reduce mortality. β-Blockers with
intrinsic sympathomimetic activity have not proved beneficial in
postinfarction patients.
Antiplatelet agents are beneficial; aspirin (81–325 mg daily) is
recommended, and adding clopidogrel (75 mg daily) has been
shown to provide additional benefit short term after STEMI and for
up to 1 year after non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes.
Prasugrel provides further reduction in thrombotic outcomes
compared with clopidogrel, at the cost of more bleeding. Warfarin
anticoagulation for 3 months reduces the incidence of arterial emboli
after large anterior infarctions, and according to the results of at
least one study it improves long-term prognosis, but these studies
were before routine use of aspirin and clopidogrel. An advantage to
combining low-dose aspirin and warfarin has not been
demonstrated, except perhaps in patients with atrial fibrillation.
Calcium channel blockers have not been shown to improve
prognoses overall and should not be prescribed purely for
secondary prevention. Antiarrhythmic therapy other than with β-
blockers has not been shown to be effective except in patients with
symptomatic arrhythmias. Amiodarone has been studied in several
trials of postinfarct patients with either LV dysfunction or frequent
ventricular ectopy. Although survival was not improved,
amiodarone was not harmful—unlike other agents in this setting.
Therefore, it is the agent of choice for individuals with symptomatic
postinfarction supraventricular arrhythmias. While implantable
defibrillators improve survival for patients with postinfarction LV
dysfunction and heart failure, the DINAMIT trial found no benefit to
implantable defibrillators implanted in the 40 days following acute
myocardial infarction.
Cardiac rehabilitation programs and exercise training can be of
considerable psychological benefit and appear to improve
prognosis.
C. ACE Inhibitors and ARBs in Patients with LV Dysfunction
Patients who sustain substantial myocardial damage often
experience subsequent progressive LV dilation and dysfunction,
leading to clinical heart failure and reduced long-term survival. In
patients with EFs < 40%, long-term ACE inhibitor (or ARB)
therapy prevents LV dilation and the onset of heart failure and
prolongs survival. The HOPE trial, as well as an overview of trials
of ACE-inhibitors for secondary prevention, also demonstrated a
reduction of approximately 20% in mortality rates and the
occurrence of nonfatal myocardial infarction and stroke with
ramipril treatment of patients with vascular disease and without
confirmed LV systolic dysfunction. Therefore, ACE inhibitor
therapy should be strongly considered in this broader group of
patients—and especially in diabetics and patients with even mild
systolic hypertension, in whom the greatest benefit was observed.
D. Revascularization
Postinfarction patients not treated with primary PCI who appear
likely to benefit from early revascularization if the anatomy is
appropriate are (1) those who have undergone thrombolytic therapy
and have high-risk features (including systolic BP of < 100 mm Hg,
heart rate of > 100 bpm, Killip class II or III, ST segment
depression of 2 mm or more in the anterior leads); (2) patients with
LV dysfunction (EF < 30–40%); (3) patients with non–ST elevation
MI and high-risk features; and (4) patients with markedly positive
exercise tests and multivessel disease. The value of revascularization
in the following groups is less clear: (1) patients without high-risk
features treated with thrombolytic agents, with little evidence of
reperfusion or residual ischemia; and (2) patients with preserved LV
function who have mild ischemia and are not symptom limited. In
general, patients without high-risk features who survive infarctions
without complications, have preserved LV function (EF > 50%),
and have no exercise-induced ischemia have an excellent prognosis
and do not require invasive evaluation.
Ades PA. Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of
coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2001 Sep
20;345(12):892–902. [PMID: 11565523]
 
Dagenais GR et al. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors in
stable vascular disease without left ventricular systolic dysfunction
or heart failure: a combined analysis of three trials. Lancet. 2006
Aug 12;368(9535):581–8. [PMID: 16905022]
 
Dargie HJ et al. Effect of carvedilol on outcome after myocardial
infarction in patients with left ventricular dysfunction: the
CAPRICORN randomized trial. Lancet. 2001 May 5;357 (9266):
1385–90. [PMID: 11356434]
 
Kushner FG et al. 2009 Focused Updates: ACC/AHA Guidelines
for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial
Infarction (updating the 2004 Guideline and 2007 Focused
Update) and ACC/AHA/SCAI Guidelines on Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention (updating the 2005 Guideline and 2007
Focused Update): a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Circulation. 2009 Dec 1;120(22):2271–306. Erratum
in: Circulation. 2010 Mar 30;121(12):e257. Dosage error in article
text. [PMID: 19923169]
 
DISORDERS OF RATE &
RHYTHM
 
Abnormalities of cardiac rhythm and conduction can be
symptomatic (syncope, near syncope, dizziness, fatigue, or
palpitations), or asymptomatic. In addition, they can be lethal
(sudden cardiac death) or dangerous to the extent that they reduce
cardiac output, so that perfusion of the brain and myocardium is
impaired. Stable supraventricular tachycardia is generally well
tolerated in patients without underlying heart disease but may lead
to myocardial ischemia or CHF in patients with coronary disease,
valvular abnormalities, and systolic or diastolic myocardial
dysfunction. Ventricular tachycardia, if prolonged (lasting more than
10–30 seconds), often results in hemodynamic compromise and
may deteriorate into ventricular fibrillation.
Whether slow heart rates produce symptoms at rest or with
exertion depends on whether cerebral and peripheral perfusion can
be maintained, which is generally a function of whether the patient is
upright or supine and whether LV function is adequate to maintain
stroke volume. If the heart rate abruptly slows, as with the onset of
complete heart block or sinus arrest, syncope or convulsions (or
both) may result.
Arrhythmias are detected either because they produce symptoms
or because they are detected during the course of monitoring.
Arrhythmias causing sudden death, syncope, or near syncope
require further evaluation and treatment unless they are related to
conditions that are unlikely to recur (eg, electrolyte abnormalities or
acute myocardial infarction). In contrast, there is controversy over
when and how to evaluate and treat rhythm disturbances that are
not symptomatic but are possible markers for more serious
abnormalities (eg, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia). This
uncertainty reflects two issues: (1) the difficulty of reliably stratifying
patients into high-risk and low-risk groups; and (2) the lack of
treatments that are both effective and safe. Thus, screening patients
for these so-called “premonitory” abnormalities is often not
productive.
A number of procedures are used to evaluate patients with
symptoms who are believed to be at risk for life-threatening
arrhythmias, including in-hospital and ambulatory ECG monitoring,
event recorders (instruments that can be used for prolonged periods
to record or transmit rhythm tracings when infrequent episodes
occur), exercise testing, catheter-based electrophysiologic studies
(to assess sinus node function, AV conduction, and inducibility of
arrhythmias), and tests of autonomic nervous system function (tilt-
table testing).
Treatment of arrhythmias varies and can include modalities such
as antiarrhythmic drugs (see Table 10–9) and more invasive
techniques such as catheter ablation.
 Antiarrhythmic Drugs (Table 10–9)
Antiarrhythmic drugs are frequently used to treat arrhythmias, but
have variable efficacy and produce frequent side effects. They are
often divided into classes based on their electropharmacologic
actions and many of these drugs have multiple actions. The most
frequently used classification scheme is the Vaughan-Williams
classification, which consists of four classes.
Class I agents block membrane sodium channels. Three
subclasses are further defined by the effect of the agents on the
Purkinje fiber action potential. Class Ia drugs (ie, quinidine,
procainamide, disopyramide) slow the rate of rise of the action
potential (Vmax) and prolong its duration, thus slowing conduction
and increasing refractoriness (moderate depression of phase 0
upstroke of the action potential). Class Ib agents (ie, lidocaine,
mexiletine, phenytoin) shorten action potential duration; they do not
affect conduction or refractoriness (minimal depression of phase 0
upstroke of the action potential). Class Ic agents (ie, flecainide,
propafenone) prolong Vmax and slow repolarization, thus slowing
conduction and prolonging refractoriness, but more so than class Ia
drugs (maximal depression of phase 0 upstroke of the action
potential).
Class II agents are the β-blockers, which decrease automaticity,
prolong AV conduction, and prolong refractoriness.
Class III agents (ie, amiodarone, dronedarone, sotalol,
dofetilide, ibutilide) block potassium channels and prolong
repolarization, widening the QRS and prolonging the QT interval.
They decrease automaticity and conduction and prolong
refractoriness. Dronedarone has been shown to reduce
cardiovascular hospitalizations when used in certain patients with
atrial fibrillation.
Class IV agents are the calcium channel blockers, which
decrease automaticity and AV conduction.
There are some antiarrhythmic agents that do not fall into one of
these categories. The most frequently used are digoxin and
adenosine. Digoxin inhibits the Na+, K+-ATPase pump. Digoxin
prolongs AV nodal conduction and the AV nodal refractory period,
but it shortens the action potential and decreases the refractoriness
of the ventricular myocardium and Purkinje fibers. Adenosine can
block AV nodal conduction and shortens atrial refractoriness.
Although the in vitro electrophysiologic effects of most of these
agents have been defined, their use remains largely empiric. All can
exacerbate arrhythmias (proarrhythmic effect), and many depress
LV function.
The risk of antiarrhythmic agents has been highlighted by many
studies, most notably the Coronary Arrhythmia Suppression Trial
(CAST), in which two class Ic agents (flecainide, encainide) and a
class Ia agent (moricizine) increased mortality rates in patients with
asymptomatic ventricular ectopy after myocardial infarction. A
similar result has been reported in the Mortality in the Survival With
Oral D-sotalol (SWORD) study with d-sotalol, a class III agent
without the β-blocking activity of the currently marketed formulation
d,l-sotalol. Therefore, these agents (and perhaps any antiarrhythmic
drug) should not be used except for life-threatening ventricular
arrhythmias and symptomatic supraventricular tachyarrhythmias and
patients receiving these agents should be monitored regularly.
The use of antiarrhythmic agents for specific arrhythmias is
discussed below.
Cordina J et al. Pharmacological cardioversion for atrial fibrillation
and flutter. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Apr 18;(2):
CD003713. [PMID: 15846675]
 
Hohnloser SH et al; ATHENA Investigators. Effect of drone-
darone on cardiovascular events in atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med.
2009 Feb 12;360(7):668–78. [PMID: 19213680]
 
Kowey PR et al. Classification and pharmacology of
antiarrhythmic drugs. Am Heart J. 2000 Jul;140(1):12–20.
[PMID: 10874257]
 
Li EC et al. Drug-induced QT-interval prolongation: considerations
for clinicians. Pharmacotherapy. 2010 Jul;30(7):684–701. [PMID:
20575633]
 
Shu J et al. Pharmacotherapy of cardiac arrhythmias–basic science
for clinicians. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009 Nov;
32(11):1454–65. [PMID: 19744278]
 
Torp-Pedersen C et al. Antiarrhythmic drugs: safety first. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2010 April 13;55(15):1569–76. [PMID: 20378074]
 
 
Catheter 
Ablation 
for 
Cardiac
Arrhythmias
Catheter ablation has become first-line therapy for the treatment of
many arrhythmias. This growing trend reflects the increasing ability
to localize the origin or conduction circuit of many arrhythmias and
safely deliver lesions to eliminate the arrhythmia focus. Catheter
ablation has become the primary modality of therapy for many
symptomatic supraventricular arrhythmias, including AV nodal
reentrant tachycardia, reentrant tachycardias involving accessory
pathways, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, and atrial flutter. Catheter
ablation of atrial fibrillation is more complex and usually involves
complete electrical isolation of the pulmonary veins (which are often
the sites of initiation of atrial fibrillation) or placing linear lesions
within the atria to prevent propagation throughout the atrial
chamber. This technique is considered a reasonable second-line
therapy for certain patients with symptomatic atrial fibrillation.
Catheter ablation of ventricular arrhythmias has proved more
difficult, but experienced centers have had reasonable success with
all types of ventricular tachycardias including: bundle-branch
reentry, tachycardia originating in the ventricular outflow tract,
tachycardias originating in the left side of the interventricular septum
(also called fascicular ventricular tachycardia), and even ventricular
tachycardias occurring in patients with CAD and dilated
cardiomyopathy.
 
Table 10–9. Antiarrhythmic drugs.
 
AV, atrioventricular; CHF, congestive heart failure; CNS, central nervous
system; ↑ Dig, elevation of serum digoxin level; GI, gastrointestinal
(nausea, vomiting, diarrhea); ↓LVF, reduced left ventricular function; NAPA,
N-acetylprocainamide; NYHA, New York Heart Association; SLE, systemic
lupus erythematosus; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Catheter ablation has also been successfully performed for the
treatment of ventricular fibrillation when an inciting premature
ventricular contraction can be identified.
There is also increasing data to suggest effectiveness of ablation
of many these arrhythmias from the epicardial surface of the heart
via a subxiphoid approach.
These procedures are generally reasonably safe, with an overall
major complication rate ranging from 2% to 8%. There is a low
incidence of perforation of the myocardial wall that results in
pericardial tamponade and sufficient damage to the AV node to
require permanent cardiac pacing in < 5% of patients. In addition,
some procedures involve transseptal or retrograde LV
catheterization, with the attendant potential complications of aortic
perforation, damage to the heart valves, damage to a coronary
artery, or systemic emboli. A potentially fatal complication during
the ablation of atrial fibrillation is the development of an atrio-
esophageal fistula resulting from ablation lesions placed on the
posterior wall of the LA just overlying the esophagus, but this is
extremely rare.
Aliot EM et al. EHRA/HRS Expert Consensus on Catheter
Ablation of Ventricular Arrhythmias: developed in a partnership
with the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), a
Registered Branch of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC),
and the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS); in collaboration with the
American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart
Association (AHA). Heart Rhythm. 2009 Jun;6(6):886–933.
[PMID: 19467519]
 
Calkins H. Further insight into the technique and outcomes of
“curative” catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm
Electrophysiol. 2008 Oct;1(4):238–9. [PMID: 19808415]
 
Calkins H et al. HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert consensus statement
on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation:
recommendations for personnel, policy, procedures and follow-up.
A report of the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) Task Force on
Catheter and Surgical Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation developed in
partnership with the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)
and the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society (ECAS); in
collaboration with the American College of Cardiology (ACC),
American Heart Association (AHA) and the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons (STS). Endorsed and approved by the governing bodies
of the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart
Association, the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society, the
European Heart Rhythm Association, the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons, and the Heart Rhythm Society. Heart Rhythm. 2007
Jun;4(6):818–61. [PMID: 17556213]
 
Hunter RJ et al. Long-term outcome after catheter ablation for
atrial fibrillation: safety, efficacy and impact on prognosis. Heart.
2010 Aug;96(16):1259–63. [PMID: 20659943]
 
Parmet S et al. JAMA patient page. Atrial fibrillation. JAMA.
2007 Dec 19;298(23):2820. [PMID: 18165677]
 
Spector P et al. Meta-analysis of ablation of atrial flutter and
supraventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Sep 1;104(5):
671–7. [PMID: 19699343]
 
Wilber DJ et al; ThermoCool AF Trial Investigators. Comparison
of antiarrhythmic drug therapy and radiofrequency catheter
ablation in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2010 Jan 27;303(4):333–40. [PMID:
20103757]
 
SINUS ARRHYTHMIA, BRADYCARDIA, &
TACHYCARDIA
Sinus arrhythmia is a cyclic increase in normal heart rate with
inspiration and decrease with expiration. It results from reflex
changes in vagal influence on the normal pacemaker and disappears
with breath holding or increase of heart rate. It has no clinical
significance. It is common in both the young and the elderly.
Sinus bradycardia is a heart rate slower than 60 beats/min due
to increased vagal influence on the normal pacemaker or organic
disease of the sinus node. The rate usually increases during exercise
or administration of atropine. In healthy individuals, and especially in
patients who are in excellent physical condition, sinus bradycardia
to rates of 50 beats/min or even lower is a normal finding.
However, severe sinus bradycardia (< 45 beats/min) may be an
indication of sinus node pathology (see below), especially in elderly
patients and individuals with heart disease. It may cause weakness,
confusion, or syncope if cerebral perfusion is impaired. Atrial,
junctional and ventricular ectopic rhythms are more apt to occur
with slow sinus rates. Pacing may be required if symptoms correlate
with the bradycardia.
Sinus tachycardia is defined as a heart rate faster than 100
beats/min that is caused by rapid impulse formation from the
sinoatrial node; it occurs with fever, exercise, emotion, pain,
anemia, heart failure, shock, thyrotoxicosis, or in response to many
drugs. Alcohol and alcohol withdrawal are common causes of sinus
tachycardia and other supraventricular arrhythmias. The onset and
termination are usually gradual, in contrast to paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia due to reentry. The rate infrequently
exceeds 160 beats/min but may reach 180 beats/min in young
persons. The rhythm is generally regular, but serial 1-minute counts
of the heart rate indicate that it varies five or more beats per minute
with changes in position, with breath holding, or with sedation. In
rare instances, individuals have persistent or episodic
“inappropriate” sinus tachycardia that may be very symptomatic or
may lead to LV contractile dysfunction. Pharmacologic agents, such
as β-blockers and in some cases flecainide, or catheter-based
radiofrequency modification of the sinus node have shown to have
varying success in treating this problem.
 When to Refer
Patients with symptoms related to bradycardia or tachycardia when
reversible etiologies have been excluded.
 When to Admit
Patients with bradycardia and recent or recurrent syncope.
Still AM et al. Prevalence, characteristics and natural course of
inappropriate sinus tachycardia. Europace. 2005 Mar;7(2): 104–
12. [PMID: 15763524]
 
Yusuf S et al. Deciphering the sinus tachycardias. Clin Cardiol.
2005 Jun;28(6):267–76. [PMID: 16028460]
 
ATRIAL PREMATURE BEATS (Atrial Extrasystoles)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually asymptomatic.
 Isolated interruption in regular rhythm.
 Can be harbingers of future development of atrial fibrillation.
 P-wave morphology on ECG usually differs from sinus P-wave
morphology.
 
Atrial premature beats occur when an ectopic focus in the atria fires
before the next sinus node impulse or a reentry circuit is established.
The contour of the P wave usually differs from the patient's normal
complex, unless the ectopic focus is near the sinus node. Such
premature beats occur frequently in normal hearts. Acceleration of
the heart rate by any means usually abolishes most premature beats.
Early atrial premature beats may cause aberrant QRS complexes
(wide and bizarre) or may not be conducted to the ventricles
because the AV node or ventricles are still refractory.
Differentiation of Aberrantly Conducted Supraventricular Beats from
Ventricular Beats
This distinction can be very difficult in patients with a wide QRS
complex; it is important because of the differing prognostic and
therapeutic implications of each type. Findings favoring a ventricular
origin include (1) AV dissociation; (2) a QRS duration exceeding
0.14 second; (3) capture or fusion beats (infrequent); (4) left axis
deviation with right bundle branch block morphology; (5)
monophasic (R) or biphasic (qR, QR, or RS) complexes in V1; and
(6) a qR or QS complex in V6. Supraventricular origin is favored by
(1) a triphasic QRS complex, especially with initial negativity in
leads I and V6; (2) ventricular rates exceeding 170 beats/min; (3)
QRS duration longer than 0.12 second but not longer than 0.14
second; and (4) the presence of preexcitation syndrome.
The relationship of the P waves to the tachycardia complex is
helpful. A 1:1 relationship usually means a supraventricular origin,
except in the case of ventricular tachycardia with retrograde P
waves.
PAROXYSMAL SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Frequently associated with palpitations.
 Abrupt onset/offset.
 Rapid, regular rhythm.
 Most commonly seen in young adults.
 Rarely causes syncope.
 Usually have a narrow QRS complex on ECG.
 Often responsive to vagal maneuvers, AV nodal blockers, or
adenosine.
 
 General Considerations
This is the most common paroxysmal tachycardia and often occurs
in patients without structural heart disease. The most common
mechanism for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia is reentry,
which may be initiated or terminated by a fortuitously timed atrial or
ventricular premature beat. The reentrant circuit most commonly
involves dual pathways (a slow and a fast pathway) within the AV
node. This is referred to as AV nodal reentrant tachycardia
(AVNRT). Less commonly, reentry is due to an accessory pathway
between the atria and ventricles, referred to as AV reentrant
tachycardia (AVRT). Approximately one-third of patients with
supraventricular tachycardia have accessory pathways to the
ventricles. The pathophysiology and management of arrhythmias
due to accessory pathways differ in important ways and are
discussed separately below.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients may be asymptomatic except for awareness of rapid heart
action, but some experience mild chest pain or shortness of breath,
especially when episodes are prolonged, even in the absence of
associated cardiac abnormalities. Episodes begin and end abruptly
and may last a few seconds to several hours or longer.
B. ECG
The heart rate may be 140–240 beats/min (usually 160–220
beats/min) and is regular (despite exercise or change in position).
The P wave usually differs in contour from sinus beats and is often
buried in the QRS complex.
 Treatment
In the absence of structural heart disease, serious effects are rare,
and most attacks break spontaneously. Particular effort should be
made to terminate the attack quickly if cardiac failure, syncope, or
anginal pain develops or if there is underlying cardiac or
(particularly) coronary disease. Because reentry is the most
common mechanism for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia,
effective therapy requires that conduction be interrupted at some
point in the reentry circuit and the vast majority of these circuits
involve the AV node.
A. Mechanical Measures
A variety of maneuvers have been used to interrupt attacks, and
patients may learn to perform these themselves. These maneuvers
result in an acute increase in vagal tone and include the Valsalva
maneuver, stretching the arms and body, lowering the head between
the knees, coughing, splashing cold water on the face, and breath
holding. Carotid sinus massage is often performed by physicians but
should be avoided if the patient has carotid bruits or a history of
transient cerebral ischemic attacks. Firm but gentle pressure and
massage are applied first over the right carotid sinus for 10–20
seconds and, if unsuccessful, then over the left carotid sinus.
Pressure should not be exerted on both sides at the same
time! Continuous ECG or auscultatory monitoring of the heart rate
is essential so that pressure can be relieved as soon as the rhythm is
broken or if excessive bradycardia occurs. Carotid sinus pressure
will interrupt up to half of the attacks, especially if the patient has
received a digitalis glycoside or other agent (such as adenosine or a
calcium channel blocker) that delays AV conduction. These
maneuvers stimulate a vagal outpouring, delay AV conduction, and
block the reentry mechanism at the level of the AV node,
terminating the arrhythmia.
B. Drug Therapy
If mechanical measures fail, two rapidly acting intravenous agents
will terminate more than 90% of episodes. Intravenous adenosine
has a very brief duration of action and minimal negative inotropic
activity (Table 10–9). Initially, a 6 mg bolus is administered. If no
response is observed after 1–2 minutes, a 12 mg bolus should be
given, followed by another 12 mg bolus if necessary. Because the
half-life of adenosine is < 10 seconds, the drug must be given
rapidly (in 1–2 seconds from a peripheral intravenous line); use half
the dose if given through a central line. Adenosine causes block of
electrical conduction through the AV node. Adenosine is very well
tolerated, but nearly 20% of patients will experience transient
flushing, and some patients experience severe chest discomfort.
Caution must be taken when adenosine is given to elderly patients
because the resulting pause can be prolonged. Adenosine must also
be used with caution in patients with reactive airways disease
because it can promote bronchospasm.
Calcium channel blockers also rapidly induce AV block and
break many episodes of reentrant supraventricular tachycardia.
These agents should be used with caution in patients with heart
failure due to their negative inotropic effects. Intravenous verapamil
may be given as a 2.5 mg bolus, followed by additional doses of
2.5–5 mg every 1–3 minutes up to a total of 20 mg if BP and
rhythm are stable. If the rhythm recurs, further doses can be given.
Oral vera-pamil, 80–120 mg every 4–6 hours, can be used as well
in stable patients who are tolerating the rhythm without difficulty, but
avoid it if there is any concern that the arrhythmia may be ventricular
in origin. Intravenous diltiazem (0.25 mg/kg over 2 minutes,
followed by a second bolus of 0.35 mg/kg if necessary and then an
infusion of 5–15 mg/h) may cause less hypotension and myocardial
depression.
Esmolol, a very short-acting β-blocker, may also be effective; the
initial dose is 500 mcg/kg intravenously over 1 minute followed by
an infusion of 25–200 mcg/min. Metoprolol is also effective and can
be given in 5 mg boluses every 5 minutes and repeated up to two
times. If the tachycardia is believed to be mediated by an accessory
pathway, intravenous procainamide may terminate the tachycardia
by prolonging refractoriness in the accessory pathway; however,
because it facilitates AV conduction and an initial increase in rate
may occur, it is usually not given until after a calcium channel
blocker or a β-blocker has been administered. Although
intravenous amiodarone is safe, it is usually not required and often
ineffective for treatment of these arrhythmias.
C. Cardioversion
If the patient is hemodynamically unstable or if adenosine, β-
blockers, and verapamil are contraindicated or ineffective,
synchronized electrical cardioversion (beginning at 100 J) is almost
universally successful. If digitalis toxicity is present or strongly
suspected, as in the case of paroxysmal tachycardia with block,
electrical cardioversion should be avoided.
 Prevention
A. Catheter Ablation
Because of concerns about the safety and the intolerability of
antiarrhythmic medications, radiofrequency ablation is the preferred
approach to patients with recurrent symptomatic reentrant
supraventricular tachycardia, whether it is due to dual pathways
within the AV node or to accessory pathways.
B. Drugs
AV nodal blocking agents are the drugs of choice as first-line
medical therapy (Table 10–9). β-Blockers or non-dihydropyridine
calcium channel blockers, such as diltiazem and verapamil, are
typically used first. Patients who do not respond to agents that
increase refractoriness of the AV node may be treated with
antiarrhythmics. The class Ic agents (flecainide, propafenone) can
be used in patients without underlying structural heart disease. In
patients with evidence of structural heart disease, class III agents,
such as sotalol or amiodarone, are probably a better choice
because of the lower incidence of ventricular proarrhythmia during
long-term therapy.
Blomstrom-Lundqvist C et al; European Society of Cardiology
Committee, NASPE-Heart Rhythm Society. ACC/AHA/ESC
guidelines for the management of patients with supraventricular
arrhythmias—executive summary. A report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association task force on
practice guidelines and the European Society of Cardiology
committee for practice guidelines (writing committee to develop
guidelines for the management of patients with supraventricular
arrhythmias) developed in collaboration with NASPE-Heart
Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Oct 15;42(8):1493–
531. [PMID: 14563598]
 
Colucci RA et al. Common types of supraventricular tachycardia:
diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician. 2010 Oct
15;82(8):942–52. [PMID: 20949888]
 
Marill KA et al. Adenosine for wide-complex tachycardia: efficacy
and safety. Crit Care Med. 2009 Sep;37(9):2512–8. [PMID:
19623049]
 
Rosso R et al. Focal atrial tachycardia. Heart. 2010
Feb;96(3):181–5. [PMID: 19443472]
 
Tabatabaei N et al. Supravalvular arrhythmia: identifying and
ablating the substrate. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2009
Jun;2(3):316-26. [PMID: 19808482]
 
SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIAS DUE TO
ACCESSORY AV PATHWAYS (Preexcitation Syndromes)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Frequently associated with palpitations.
 Can be associated with syncope.
 Rapid, regular rhythm.
 May have narrow or wide QRS complex on ECG.
 Often have preexcitation (delta wave) on baseline ECG.
 
 General Considerations
Accessory pathways or bypass tracts between the atria and the
ventricle bypass the compact AV node and can predispose to
reentrant arrhythmias, such as AVRT and atrial fibrillation. These
may be wholly or partly within the node (eg, Mahaim fibers),
yielding a short PR interval and normal QRS morphology (Lown-
Ganong-Levine syndrome). More commonly, they make direct
connections between the atria and ventricle through Kent bundles
(Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome). This often produces a short
PR interval with a delta wave (preexcitation) at the onset of the
wide, slurred QRS complex owing to early ventricular
depolarization of the region adjacent to the pathway. Although the
morphology and polarity of the delta wave can suggest the location
of the pathway, mapping by intracardiac recordings is required for
precise anatomic localization.
Accessory pathways occur in 0.1–0.3% of the population and
facilitate reentrant arrhythmias owing to the disparity in refractory
periods of the AV node and accessory pathway. Whether the
tachycardia is associated with a narrow or wide QRS complex is
frequently determined by whether antegrade conduction is through
the node (narrow) or the bypass tract (wide). Some bypass tracts
only conduct in a retrograde direction. In these cases, the bypass
tract is termed “concealed.” Orthodromic reentrant tachycardia is a
reentrant rhythm that conducts antegrade down the AV node and
retrograde up the accessory pathway, resulting in a narrow QRS
complex unless an underlying bundle branch block or
interventricular conduction delay is present. Antidromic reentrant
tachycardia conducts antegrade down the accessory pathway and
retrograde through the AV node, resulting in a wide QRS complex.
Accessory pathways are often less refractory than specialized
conduction tissue and thus tachycardias involving accessory
pathways have the potential to be more rapid. Up to 30% of
patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome will develop atrial
fibrillation or flutter with antegrade conduction down the accessory
pathway and a rapid ventricular response. If this conduction is very
rapid, it can potentially degenerate to ventricular fibrillation.
 Treatment
Some patients have a delta wave found incidentally on ECG. In the
absence of palpitations, light-headedness, or syncope, these
patients do not require specific therapy. They should be advised to
report the onset of any of these symptoms. Occasionally, these
patients are referred for exercise tread-mill testing to determine if
preexcitation is lost at rapid rates. Patients found incidentally to
have delta waves who have jobs that could potentially put others at
risk (ie, pilot, bus driver, etc) may need to undergo
electrophysiologic testing with possible catheter ablation to ensure
that they are not at an increased risk for syncope or sudden death.
A. Catheter Ablation
As with AVNRT, radiofrequency ablation has become the
procedure of choice in patients with accessory pathways and
recurrent symptoms. Patients with preexcitation syndromes who
have episodes of atrial fibrillation or flutter should be tested by
induction of atrial fibrillation in the electrophysiologic laboratory,
noting duration of the RR cycle length; if it is < 220 ms, a short
refractory period is present. These individuals are at highest risk for
sudden death, and prophylactic ablation is indicated. Success rates
for ablation of accessory pathways with radiofrequency catheters
exceed 90% in appropriate patients.
B. Pharmacologic Therapy
Narrow-complex reentry rhythms involving a bypass tract can be
managed as discussed for AVNRT. Atrial fibrillation and flutter with
a concomitant antegrade conducting bypass tract must be managed
differently, since agents such as digoxin, calcium channel blockers,
and even β-blockers may decrease the refractoriness of the
accessory pathway or increase that of the AV node, often leading
to faster ventricular rates. Therefore, these agents should be
avoided. The class Ia, class Ic, and class III antiarrhythmic agents
will increase the refractoriness of the bypass tract and are the drugs
of choice for wide-complex tachycardias involving accessory
pathways. If hemodynamic compromise is present, electrical
cardioversion is warranted.
Long-term therapy often involves a combination of agents that
increase refractoriness in the bypass tract (class Ia or Ic agents) and
in the AV node (verapamil and β-blockers), provided that atrial
fibrillation or flutter with short RR cycle lengths is not present (see
above). The class III agents sotalol and amiodarone are effective in
refractory cases. Patients who are difficult to manage should
undergo electrophysiologic evaluation.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with an incidental finding of preexcitation and a
high-risk job.
•    Patients with recurrent symptoms or episodes despite
treatment with AV nodal blocking agents.
•    Patients with preexcitation and a history of atrial
fibrillation.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
and syncope.
•    Patients with a history of syncope and preexcitation
identified on an ECG.
Brembilla-Perrot B. When and how to assess an asymptomatic
ventricular pre-excitation syndrome? Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2008
Jun;101(6):407–11. [PMID: 18809154]
 
Cantú F et al; EHRA Scientific Initiatives Committee. Sudden
cardiac death stratification in asymptomatic ventricular
preexcitation. Europace. 2009 Nov;11(11):1536–7. [PMID:
19880412]
 
Mark DG et al. Preexcitation syndromes: diagnostic consideration
in the ED. Am J Emerg Med. 2009 Sep;27(7):878–88. [PMID:
19683122]
 
Santinelli V et al. The natural history of asymptomatic ventricular
pre-excitation a long-term prospective follow-up study of 184
asymptomatic children. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jan 20;
53(3):275–80. [PMID: 19147045]
 
Schwieler JH et al. Reentry in an accessory atrioventricular
pathway as a trigger for atrial fibrillation initiation in manifest Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome: a matter of reflection? Heart Rhythm.
2008 Sep;5(9):1238–47. [PMID: 18774096]
 
Tischenko A et al. When should we recommend catheter ablation
for patients with the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome? Curr Opin
Cardiol. 2008 Jan;23(1):32–7. [PMID: 18281825]
 
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Irregular heart rhythm.
 Usually tachycardic.
 Often associated with palpitations (acute onset) or fatigue
(chronic).
 ECG shows erratic atrial activity with irregular ventricular
response.
 High incidence and prevalence in the elderly population.
 
 General Considerations
Atrial fibrillation is the most common chronic arrhythmia, with an
incidence and prevalence that rise with age, so that it affects
approximately 10% of individuals over age 80 years. It occurs in
rheumatic and other forms of valvular heart disease, dilated
cardiomyopathy, ASD, hypertension, and coronary heart disease as
well as in patients with no apparent cardiac disease; it may be the
initial presenting sign in thyrotoxicosis, and this condition should be
excluded with the initial episode. The heart rate may range from
quite slow to extremely rapid, but is uniformly irregular unless
underlying complete heart block and a permanent ventricular
pacemaker is in place. The surface ECG typically demonstrates
erratic, disorganized atrial activity between discrete QRS
complexes occurring in an irregular pattern. The atrial activity may
be very fine and difficult to detect on the ECG, or quite course and
often mistaken for atrial flutter. Atrial fibrillation often appears
paroxysmally before becoming the established rhythm. Pericarditis,
chest trauma, thoracic or cardiac surgery, thyroid disorders,
obstructive sleep apnea, or pulmonary disease (as well as
medications such as theophylline and β-adrenergic agonists) may
cause attacks in patients with normal hearts. Acute alcohol excess
and alcohol withdrawal—and, in predisposed individuals, even
consumption of small amounts of alcohol—may precipitate atrial
fibrillation. This latter presentation, which is often termed “holiday
heart,” is usually transient and self-limited. Short-term rate control
usually suffices as treatment. Perhaps the most serious consequence
of atrial fibrillation is the propensity for thrombus formation due to
stasis in the atria (particularly the left atrial appendage) and
consequent embolization, most devastatingly to the cerebral
circulation. Overall, the rate of stroke is approximately 5 events per
100 patient-years of follow-up. However, patients with significant
obstructive valvular disease, chronic heart failure or LV dysfunction,
diabetes, hypertension, or age over 75 years and those with a
history of prior embolic events are at substantially higher risk (up to
nearly 20 events per 100 patient-years in patients with multiple risk
factors) (Table 10–10).
 
Table 10–10. CHADS2 Risk Score for assessing risk of stroke
and for selecting antithrombotic therapy for patients with atrial
fibrillation.
 
1Validation performed in a population of Medicare beneficiaries age 65 to
95 years who were not prescribed warfarin at hospital discharge.
Reproduced, with permission, from Gage BF et al. Validation of clinical
classification schemes for predicting stroke: results from the National
Registry of Atrial Fibrillation. JAMA. 2001;285(22):2864–70.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Atrial fibrillation itself is rarely life-threatening; however, it can have
serious consequences if the ventricular rate is sufficiently rapid to
precipitate hypotension, myocardial ischemia, or tachycardia-
induced myocardial dysfunction. Moreover, particularly in patients
with risk factors, atrial fibrillation is a major preventable cause of
stroke. Although many patients—particularly older or inactive
individuals—have relatively few symptoms if the rate is controlled,
some patients are aware of the irregular rhythm and may find it as
very uncomfortable. Most patients will complain of fatigue whether
they experience other symptoms or not. The heart rate may range
from quite slow to extremely rapid, but is uniformly irregular unless
underlying complete heart block and a permanent ventricular
pacemaker is in place. Atrial fibrillation is the only common
arrhythmia in which the ventricular rate is rapid and the rhythm very
irregular. Because of the varying stroke volumes resulting from
varying periods of diastolic filling, not all ventricular beats produce a
palpable peripheral pulse. The difference between the apical rate
and the pulse rate is the “pulse deficit”; this deficit is greater when
the ventricular rate is high.
B. ECG
The surface ECG typically demonstrates erratic, disorganized atrial
activity between discrete QRS complexes occurring in an irregular
pattern. The atrial activity may be very fine and difficult to detect on
the ECG, or quite course and often mistaken for atrial flutter.
 Treatment
A. Newly Diagnosed Atrial Fibrillation
1. Initial management
A. HEMODYNAMICALLY STABLE PATIENT —If, as is often the case
—particularly in older individuals—the patient has no symptoms,
hemodynamic instability, or evidence of important precipitating
conditions (such as silent myocardial infarction or ischemia,
decompensated 
heart 
failure, 
pulmonary 
embolism, 
or
hemodynamically significant valvular disease), hospitalization is
usually not necessary. In most of these cases, atrial fibrillation is an
unrecognized chronic or paroxysmal condition and should be
managed accordingly (see below). For new onset atrial fibrillation,
thyroid function tests and assessment for occult valvular or
myocardial disease should be performed.
B. HEMODYNAMICALLY UNSTABLE PATIENT —If the patient is
hemodynamically unstable—usually as a result of a rapid ventricular
rate or associated cardiac or noncardiac conditions—hospitalization
and immediate treatment of atrial fibrillation are required. Urgent
cardioversion is usually indicated in patients with shock or severe
hypotension, pulmonary edema, or ongoing myocardial infarction or
ischemia. There is a potential risk of thromboembolism in patients
undergoing cardioversion who have not received anticoagulation
therapy if atrial fibrillation has been present for > 48 hours;
however, in hemodynamically unstable patients the need for
immediate rate control outweighs that risk. Electrical cardioversion
is usually preferred in unstable patients. An initial shock with 100–
200 J is administered in synchrony with the R wave. If sinus rhythm
is not restored, an additional attempt with 360 J is indicated. If this
fails, cardioversion may be successful after loading with intravenous
ibutilide (1 mg over 10 minutes, repeated in 10 minutes if
necessary).
In more stable patients or those at particularly high risk for
embolism (ie, underlying mitral stenosis, a history of prior embolism,
or severe heart failure), a strategy of rate control and
anticoagulation is appropriate. This is also true when the conditions
that precipitated atrial fibrillation are likely to persist (such as
following cardiac or noncardiac surgery, with respiratory failure, or
with pericarditis). Rate control and anticoagulation is also
appropriate even when the conditions causing the atrial fibrillation
might resolve spontaneously over a period of hours to days (such as
alcohol-induced atrial fibrillation, electrolyte or fluid imbalance–
related atrial fibrillation, atrial fibrillation due to exposure to
excessive theophylline or sympathomimetic agents, or that due to
some of the other conditions cited above). The choice of agent is
guided by the hemodynamic status of the patient, associated
conditions, and the urgency of achieving rate control. Although both
hypotension and heart failure may improve when the ventricular rate
is slowed, calcium channel blockers and β-blockers may themselves
precipitate hemodynamic deterioration. Digoxin is less risky, but
even when used aggressively (0.5 mg intravenously over 30
minutes, followed by increments of 0.25 mg every 1–2 hours to a
total dose of 1–1.5 mg over 24 hours in patients not previously
receiving this agent), rate control is rather slow and may be
inadequate, particularly in patients with sympathetic activation. In
the setting of myocardial infarction or ischemia, β-blockers are the
preferred agent. The most frequently used agents are either
metoprolol (administered as a 5 mg intravenous bolus, repeated
twice at intervals of 5 minutes and then given as needed by repeat
boluses or orally at total daily doses of 50–400 mg) or, in very
unstable patients, esmolol (0.5 mg/kg intravenously, repeated if
necessary, followed by a titrated infusion of 0.05–0.2 mg/kg/min). If
β-blockers are contraindicated, calcium channel blockers are
immediately effective. Diltiazem (20 mg bolus, repeated after 15
minutes if necessary, followed by a maintenance infusion of 5–15
mg/h) is the preferred calcium blocker if hypotension or LV
dysfunction is present. Otherwise, verapamil (5–10 mg
intravenously over 2–3 minutes, repeated after 30 minutes if
necessary) may be used. Amiodarone, even when administered
intravenously, has a relatively slow onset but is often a useful
adjunct when rate control with the previously cited agents is
incomplete or contraindicated or when cardioversion is planned in
the near future. However, amiodarone should not be used in this
setting if long-term therapy is planned with other antiarrhythmic
agents.
If rate control proves unsuccessful or early cardioversion is
considered necessary and the duration of atrial fibrillation exceeds
2–3 days or is unknown, a strategy of transesophageal
echocardiography-guided cardioversion should be considered. By
this approach, the presence of atrial thrombus is excluded and
electrical cardioversion can be attempted while the patient remains
under sedation. If thrombus is present, the cardioversion is delayed
until after a 4-week period of therapeutic anticoagulation. In any
case, because atrial contractile activity may not recover for several
weeks after restoration of sinus rhythm in patients who have been in
atrial fibrillation for more than several days, cardioversion is usually
followed by anticoagulation for at least 1 month unless it is
contraindicated.
2. Subsequent management—Up to two-thirds of patients
experiencing a first episode of atrial fibrillation will spontaneously
revert to sinus rhythm within 24 hours. If atrial fibrillation persists or
has been present for more than a week, spontaneous conversion is
unlikely. In most cases early cardioversion is not required, so
management consists of rate control and anticoagulation whether or
not the patient has been admitted to hospital. Rate control is usually
relatively easy to achieve with β-blockers, rate-slowing calcium
blockers and, occasionally, digoxin, used as single agents or more
often in combination. Following the RACE II trial that failed to
show benefit from strict rate control (resting heart rate < 80 bpm
and exercise heart rate < 120 bpm), published guidelines no longer
recommend strict rate control (to < 110 bpm) for patients without
symptoms or LV dysfunction. In older patients, who often have
diminished AV nodal function and relatively limited activity, modest
rate control can often be achieved with a single agent. Most
younger or more active individuals require a combination of two
agents. Choice of the initial medication is best based on the
presence of accompanying conditions: Hypertensive patients should
be given β-blockers or calcium blockers; coronary patients should
usually receive a β-blocker; and patients with heart failure should be
given a β-blocker with consideration of adding digoxin. Adequacy
of rate control should be evaluated by recording the apical pulse
rate both at rest and with an appropriate level of activity (such as
after brisk walking around the corridor or climbing stairs).
A. ANTICOAGULATION—For patients with atrial fibrillation, even
when it is paroxysmal or occurs rarely, anticoagulation with warfarin
to an INR target of 2.0–3.0 should be established and maintained
indefinitely for patients with no contraindication to anticoagulation
and at least one risk factor for stroke (Table 10–10). Unfortunately,
studies show that only about half of patients with atrial fibrillation
and an indication for warfarin are receiving it, and even when they
do, they are out of the target INR range nearly half the time.
Cardioversion, if planned, should be performed after at least 3–4
weeks of anticoagulation at a therapeutic level. Anticoagulation
clinics with systematic management of warfarin dosing and
adjustment have been shown to result in better maintenance of
target anticoagulation. While there was hope that clopidogrel and
aspirin might be reasonable alternatives for warfarin for some
patients, the ACTIVE-W trial was stopped early because of
substantially lower rates of stroke with warfarin compared with the
combination of clopidogrel and aspirin. For patients unable to take
warfarin, clopidogrel plus aspirin (versus aspirin alone) was shown
to reduce stroke risk by 28% in the ACTIVE-A trial, although with
an increased risk of bleeding. Recently, dabigatran, an oral direct
thrombin inhibitor, was compared with warfarin (in the RELY trial)
for prevention of stroke and systemic embolism for patients with
atrial fibrillation and at least one additional risk factor for stroke.
The lower dabigatran dose (110 mg orally twice daily) was
noninferior to warfarin in stroke prevention and caused significantly
less bleeding, and a second higher (150 mg orally twice daily) dose,
which has been approved by the FDA, resulted in significantly
fewer strokes with similar bleeding rates. Both doses of dabigatran
caused substantially less intracerebral hemorrhage than warfarin.
While patients with kidney disease (estimated glomerular filtration
rate < 30 mL/min) were excluded because dabigatran is 80%
renally metabolized and there was a tendency for more myocardial
infarctions. Dabigatran is a very attractive alternative to warfarin for
many patients because it eliminates the need for INR monitoring.
Patients may be converted from warfarin to dabigatran by stopping
the warfarin and beginning dabigatran once the INR is ≤2.0.
Exceptions to the need for anticoagulation is the patient with
“lone atrial fibrillation” (eg, no evidence of associated heart disease,
hypertension, atherosclerotic vascular disease, or diabetes mellitus)
who is under age 65 years or the patient with a low-risk profile (see
Table 10–10). Such patients should be treated with aspirin 81–325
mg daily or no antithrombotic therapy.
B. RATE CONTROL OR ELECTIVE CARDIOVERSION—Two large
randomized controlled trials (the 4060-patient Atrial Fibrillation
Follow-up Investigation of Rhythm Management, or AFFIRM trial;
and the Rate Control Versus Electrical Cardioversion for Persistent
Atrial Fibrillation, or RACE trial) compared strategies of rate
control and rhythm control. In both, a strategy of rate control and
long-term anticoagulation was associated with no higher rates of
death or stroke—both, if anything, favored rate control—and only a
modestly increased risk of hemorrhagic events than a strategy of
restoring sinus rhythm and maintaining it with antiarrhythmic drug
therapy. Of note is that exercise tolerance and quality of life were
not significantly better in the rhythm control group. Nonetheless, the
decision as to whether to attempt to restore sinus rhythm following
the initial episode remains controversial. Elective cardioversion
following an appropriate period of anticoagulation is generally
recommended for the initial episode in patients in whom atrial
fibrillation is thought to be of recent onset and when there is an
identifiable precipitating factor. Similarly, cardioversion is
appropriate in patients who remain symptomatic from the rhythm
despite aggressive efforts to achieve rate control. However, it
should be noted that even in patients for whom this is the initial
episode of atrial fibrillation, the recurrence rate is sufficiently high
that longer-term anticoagulation is generally appropriate until
persistence of sinus rhythm can be confirmed for at least 6 months.
In cases in which elective cardioversion is required, it may be
accomplished 
electrically 
(as 
described 
above) 
or
pharmacologically. Intravenous ibutilide may be used as described
above in a setting in which the patient can undergo continuous ECG
monitoring for at least 3 hours following administration. In patients in
whom a decision has been made to continue antiarrhythmic therapy
to maintain sinus rhythm (see next paragraph), cardioversion can be
attempted with an agent that is being considered for long-term use.
For instance, after therapeutic anticoagulation has been established,
amiodarone can be initiated on an outpatient basis (400 mg twice
daily for 2 weeks, followed by 200 mg twice daily for at least 2–4
weeks and then a maintenance dose of 200 mg daily). Because
amiodarone increases the prothrombin time in patients taking
warfarin and increases digoxin levels, careful monitoring of
anticoagulation and drug levels is required.
Other agents that may be used for both cardioversion and
maintenance therapy include dofetilide, propafenone, flecainide, and
sotalol. Dofetilide (500 mcg twice daily orally) must be initiated in
hospital due to the potential risk of torsades de pointes and the
downward dose adjustment is required for patients with renal
impairment. Propafenone (150–300 mg orally every 8 hours)
should be avoided in patients with structural heart disease.
Flecainide (50–150 mg twice daily orally) should be used in
conjunction with an AV nodal blocking drug if there is a history of
atrial flutter and should be avoided in patients with structural heart
disease. Sotalol (80–160 mg orally twice daily) must be initiated in
the hospital in patients with structural heart disease due to a risk of
torsades de pointes; it is not very effective for converting atrial
fibrillation but can be used to maintain sinus rhythm following
cardioversion.
Unfortunately, sinus rhythm will persist in only 25% of patients
who have had a sustained (lasting more than several days) or
recurrent episode of atrial fibrillation. However, if the patient is
treated long-term with an antiar-rhythmic agent, sinus rhythm will
persist in approximately 50%. The most commonly used
medications are amiodarone, dronedarone, sotalol, propafenone,
flecainide, and dofetilide, but the latter four agents are associated
with a clear risk of proarrhythmia; dronedarone has less efficacy
than amiodarone, and amiodarone frequently causes other adverse
effects. Therefore, it may be prudent to determine whether atrial
fibrillation recurs during a period of 6 months without antiarrhythmic
drugs during which anticoagulation is maintained. If it does recur,
the decision as to whether to restore sinus rhythm and initiate long-
term antiarrhythmic therapy can be based on how well the patient
tolerates atrial fibrillation. In such a patient, long-term
anticoagulation is probably indicated in any case, because of the
high rate of recurrence and the likely occurrence of asymptomatic
paroxysmal episodes.
B. Paroxysmal and Refractory Atrial Fibrillation
1. Recurrent paroxysmal atrial fibrillation—It is now well
established that patients with recurrent paroxysmal atrial fibrillation
are at similar stroke risk as those who are in atrial fibrillation
chronically. Although these episodes may be apparent to the
patient, many are not recognized and may be totally asymptomatic.
Thus, ambulatory ECG monitoring or event recorders are indicated
in those in whom paroxysmal atrial fibrillation is suspected.
Antiarrhythmic agents are usually not successful in preventing all
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation episodes. However, dofetilide has been
shown to be as effective as amiodarone in maintaining sinus rhythm
in certain patients and does not have as many untoward long-term
effects. Long-term anticoagulation should be considered for all
patients except in those who are under 65 years of age and have no
additional stroke risk factors (see above).
2. Refractory atrial fibrillation—Because of trial results
indicating that important adverse clinical outcomes (death, stroke,
hemorrhage, heart failure) are no more common with rate control
than rhythm control, atrial fibrillation should generally be considered
refractory if it causes persistent symptoms or limits activity. This is
much more likely in younger individuals and those who are very
active or engage in strenuous exercise. Even in such individuals,
two-drug or three-drug combinations of a β-blocker, rate-slowing
calcium blocker, and digoxin usually can prevent excessive
ventricular rates, though in some cases they are associated with
excessive bradycardia during sedentary periods.
If no drug works, radiofrequency AV node ablation and
permanent pacing ensure rate control and may facilitate a more
physiologic rate response to activity, but this is used only as a last
resort. The current practice for drug-refractory, symptomatic atrial
fibrillation is catheter ablation of foci in and around the pulmonary
veins that initiate atrial fibrillation, following which sinus rhythm may
be restored or maintained. This therapy is a reasonable second-line
therapy for individuals with symptomatic atrial fibrillation that is
refractory to pharmacologic therapy. Ablation is successful about
70% of the time but more than one procedure is often required. The
procedure is routinely performed in the electrophysiology laboratory
using a catheter-based approach and can also be performed via a
subxiphoid approach thorascopically, via thoracotomy, or via
median sternotomy in the operating room by experienced surgeons.
 When to Refer
 
•    Symptomatic atrial fibrillation with or without rate control.
•    Asymptomatic atrial fibrillation with poor rate control
despite AV nodal blockers.
 When to Admit
 
•    Atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response resulting
in hemodynamic compromise.
•    Atrial fibrillation resulting in acute heart failure.
Calkins H et al. HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert consensus statement
on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation:
recommendations for personnel, policy, procedures and follow-up.
A report of the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) Task Force on
Catheter and Surgical Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation developed in
partnership with the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)
and the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society (ECAS); in
collaboration with the American College of Cardiology (ACC),
American Heart Association (AHA) and the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons (STS). Endorsed and approved by the governing bodies
of the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart
Association, the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society, the
European Heart Rhythm Association, the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons, and the Heart Rhythm Society. Heart Rhythm. 2007
Jun;4(6):818–61. [PMID: 17556213]
 
Connolly SJ et al. Effect of clopidogrel added to aspirin in patients
with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009 May 14;360(20):2066–
78. [PMID: 19336502]
 
Dagres N et al. Mortality after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation
compared with antiarrhythmic drug therapy. A meta-analysis of
randomized trials. Am Heart J. 2009 Jul;158(1): 15–20. [PMID:
19540387]
 
Dobrev D et al. New antiarrhythmic drugs for treatment of atrial
fibrillation. Lancet. 2010 Apr 3;375(9721):1212–23. [PMID:
20334907]
 
Joglar JA et al. Electrical cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. Cardiol
Clin. 2004 Feb;22(1):101–11. [PMID: 14994851]
 
Kozlowski D et al. Lone atrial fibrillation: what do we know?
Heart. 2010 Apr;96(7):498–503. [PMID: 19713203]
 
Lip GY et al. Refining clinical risk stratification for predicting
stroke and thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation using a novel risk
factor-based approach: the Euro Heart Survey on Atrial
Fibrillation. Chest. 2010 Feb;137(2):263–72. [PMID: 19762550]
 
McKeown PP et al; American College of Chest Physicians.
Executive summary: American College of Chest Physicians
guidelines for the prevention and management of postoperative
atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery. Chest. 2005 Aug;128(2
Suppl):1S–5S. [PMID: 16167657]
 
Nilsson KR Jr et al. Atrial fibrillation management strategies and
early mortality after myocardial infarction: results from the
Valsartan in Acute Myocardial Infarction (VALIANT) Trial.
Heart. 2010 Jun;96(11):838-42. [PMID: 20406769]
 
Parmet S et al. JAMA patient page. Atrial fibrillation. JAMA.
2007 Dec 19;298(23):2820. [PMID: 18165677]
 
Stevenson WG et al. Management of atrial fibrillation in patients
with heart failure. Heart Rhythm. 2007 Mar;4(3 Suppl):S28–30.
[PMID: 17336880]
 
Terasawa T et al. Systematic review: comparative effectiveness of
radiofrequency catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern
Med. 2009 Aug 4;151(3):191–202. [PMID: 19581635]
 
Themistoclakis S et al. The risk of thromboembolism and need for
oral anticoagulation after successful atrial fibrillation ablation. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2010 Feb 23;55(8):735–43. [PMID: 20170810]
 
Van Gelder IC et al; RACE II Investigators. Lenient versus strict
rate control in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2010
Apr 15;362(15):1363–73. [PMID: 20231232]
 
Vassallo P et al. Prescribing amiodarone: an evidence-based
review of clinical indications. JAMA. 2007 Sep 19;298(11):
1312–22. [PMID: 17878423]
 
Wallentin L et al; RE-LY investigators. Efficacy and safety of
dabigatran compared with warfarin at different levels of
international normalised ratio control for stroke prevention in atrial
fibrillation: an analysis of the RE-LY trial. Lancet. 2010 Sep
18;376(9745):975–83. [PMID: 20801496]
 
Wann LS et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update on the
management of patients with atrial fibrillation (updating the 2006
guideline): a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Circulation. 2011 Jan 4;123(1): 104–23. [PMID:
21173346]
 
Wilber DJ et al; ThermoCool AF Trial Investigators. Comparison
of antiarrhythmic drug therapy and radiofrequency catheter
ablation in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2010 Jan 27;303(4):333–40. [PMID:
20103757]
 
Yamada T et al. Evidence-based approach to ablating atrial
fibrillation. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2007 Sep;9(5):366–70. [PMID:
17877931]
 
ATRIAL FLUTTER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Regular heart rhythm.
 Usually tachycardic (100–150 beats/min).
 Often associated with palpitations (acute onset) or fatigue
(chronic).
 ECG shows “sawtooth” pattern of atrial activity in leads II, III,
and AVF.
 Often seen in conjunction with structural heart disease or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
 
Atrial flutter is less common than fibrillation. It occurs most often in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) but
may be seen also in those with rheumatic or coronary heart disease,
CHF, ASD, or surgically repaired congenital heart disease. The
reentrant circuit generates atrial rates of 250–350 beats/min, usually
with transmission of every second, third, or fourth impulse through
the AV node to the ventricles. The ECG typically demonstrates a
“sawtooth” pattern of atrial activity in the inferior leads (II, III, and
AVF).
 Treatment
Ventricular rate control is accomplished using the same agents
used in atrial fibrillation, but it is much more difficult with atrial flutter
than with atrial fibrillation. Conversion of atrial flutter to sinus rhythm
with class I antiarrhythmic agents is also difficult to achieve, and
administration of these drugs has been associated with slowing of
the atrial flutter rate to the point at which 1:1 AV conduction can
occur at rates in excess of 200 beats/min, with subsequent
hemodynamic collapse. The intravenous class III antiarrhythmic
agent ibutilide has been significantly more successful in converting
atrial flutter. About 50–70% of patients return to sinus rhythm within
60–90 minutes following the infusion of 1–2 mg of this agent.
Electrical cardioversion is also very effective for atrial flutter, with
approximately 90% of patients converting following synchronized
shocks of as little as 25–50 J.
The persistence of atrial contractile function in this arrhythmia
provides some protection against thrombus formation, though the
risk of systemic embolization remains increased. Precardioversion
anticoagulation is not necessary for atrial flutter of < 48 hours
duration except in the setting of mitral valve disease. However,
anticoagulation is necessary in chronic atrial flutter, given that the
stroke risk is the same as with chronic atrial fibrillation, perhaps
because transient periods of atrial fibrillation are common in these
patients.
Chronic atrial flutter is often a difficult management problem,
as rate control is difficult. If pharmacologic therapy is chosen,
amiodarone and dofetilide are the antiarrhythmics of choice.
Dofetilide is often given in conjunction with an AV nodal blocker
(other than verapamil). Atrial flutter can follow a typical or atypical
reentry circuit around the atrium. The anatomy of the typical circuit
has been well defined and allows for catheter ablation within the
atrium to interrupt the circuit and eliminate atrial flutter. Catheter
ablation is a highly successful treatment that has become the
preferred approach for recurrent typical atrial flutter.
 When to Refer
 
•    Symptomatic atrial flutter with or without rate control.
•    Asymptomatic atrial flutter with poor rate control despite
AV nodal blockers.
 When to Admit
 
•    Atrial flutter with 1:1 conduction resulting in
hemodynamic compromise.
•    Atrial flutter resulting in acute heart failure.
Da Costa A et al. Results from the Loire-Ardèche-Drôme-
IsèrePuy-de-Dôme (LADIP) trial on atrial flutter, a multicentric
prospective randomized study comparing amiodarone and
radiofrequency ablation after the first episode of symptomatic atrial
flutter. Circulation. 2006 Oct 17;114(16):1676–81. [PMID:
17030680]
 
Ghali WA et al. Atrial flutter and the risk of thromboembolism: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2005 Feb;
118(2):101–7. [PMID: 15694889]
 
Rodgers M et al. Curative catheter ablation in atrial fibrillation and
typical atrial flutter: systematic review and economic evaluation.
Health Technol Assess. 2008 Nov;12(34):iii-iv, xi-xiii, 1-198.
[PMID: 19036232]
 
Spector P et al. Meta-analysis of ablation of atrial flutter and
supraventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Sep 1;104(5):
671–7. [PMID: 19699343]
 
MULTIFOCAL ATRIAL TACHYCARDIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 ECG reveals three or more distinct P-wave morphologies.
 Often associated with palpitations.
 Associated with severe COPD.
 Treatment of the underlying lung disease is the most effective
therapy.
 
This is a rhythm characterized by varying P wave morphology (by
definition, three or more foci) and markedly irregular PP intervals.
The rate is usually between 100 and 140 beats/min, and AV block
is unusual. Most patients have concomitant severe COPD.
Treatment of the underlying condition is the most effective
approach; verapamil, 240–480 mg daily in divided doses, is also of
value in some patients, but this particular arrhythmia is very difficult
to manage.
Spodick DH. Multifocal atrial arrhythmia. Am J Geriatr Cardiol.
2005 May–Jun;14(3):162. [PMID: 15886545]
 
AV JUNCTIONAL RHYTHM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Regular heart rhythm.
 Can have wide or narrow QRS complex.
 Often seen in digitalis toxicity.
 
The atrial-nodal junction or the nodal-His bundle junction may
assume pacemaker activity for the heart, usually at a rate of 40–60
beats/min. This may occur in patients with myocarditis, CAD, and
digitalis toxicity as well as in individuals with normal hearts. The rate
responds normally to exercise, and the diagnosis is often an
incidental finding on ECG monitoring, but it can be suspected if the
jugular venous pulse shows cannon a waves. Junctional rhythm is
often an escape rhythm because of depressed sinus node function
with sinoatrial block or delayed conduction in the AV node.
Nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia results from increased
automaticity of the junctional tissues in digitalis toxicity or ischemia
and is associated with a narrow QRS complex and a rate usually <
120–130 beats/min. It is usually considered benign when it occurs
in acute myocardial infarction, but the ischemia that induces it may
also cause ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.
VENTRICULAR PREMATURE BEATS (Ventricular
Extrasystoles)
Ventricular premature beats, also called premature ventricular
contractions (PVCs), are typically isolated beats originating from
ventricular tissue. Sudden death occurs more frequently
(presumably as a result of ventricular fibrillation) when ventricular
premature beats occur in the presence of organic heart disease but
not in individuals with no known cardiac disease.
 Clinical Findings
The patient may or may not sense the irregular beat, usually as a
skipped beat. Exercise generally abolishes premature beats in
normal hearts, and the rhythm becomes regular. Ventricular
premature beats are characterized by wide QRS complexes that
differ in morphology from the patient's normal beats. They are
usually not preceded by a P wave, although retrograde
ventriculoatrial conduction may occur. Unless the latter is present,
there is a fully compensatory pause (ie, without change in the PP
interval). Bigeminy and trigeminy are arrhythmias in which every
second or third beat is premature; these patterns confirm a reentry
mechanism for the ectopic beat. Ambulatory ECG monitoring or
monitoring during graded exercise may reveal more frequent and
complex ventricular premature beats than occur in a single routine
ECG. An increased frequency of ventricular premature beats during
exercise is associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular mortality,
though there is no evidence that specific therapy has a role.
 Treatment
If no associated cardiac disease is present and if the ectopic beats
are asymptomatic, no therapy is indicated. If they are frequent,
electrolyte abnormalities (especially hypokalemia or hyperkalemia
and hypomagnesemia), hyperthyroidism, and occult heart disease
should be excluded. Pharmacologic treatment is indicated only for
patients who are symptomatic. Because of concerns about
worsening arrhythmia and sudden death with most antiarrhythmic
agents, β-blockers are the agents of first choice. If the underlying
condition is mitral pro-lapse, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, LVH,
or coronary disease—or if the QT interval is prolonged—β-blocker
therapy is appropriate. The class I and III agents (see Table 10–9)
are all effective in reducing ventricular premature beats but often
cause side effects and may exacerbate serious arrhythmias in 5–
20% of patients. Therefore, every attempt should be made to avoid
using class I or III antiarrhythmic agents in patients without
symptoms. Catheter ablation is now a well-established therapy for
symptomatic individuals who do not respond to antiar-rhythmic
drugs or for those patients whose burden of ectopic beats has
resulted in a tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
Conti CR. Ventricular arrhythmias: a general cardiologist's
assessment of therapies in 2005. Clin Cardiol. 2005 Jul;28(7):
314–6. [PMID: 16075822]
 
Morshedi-Meibodi A et al. Clinical correlates and prognostic
significance of exercise-induced ventricular premature beats in the
community: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2004 May
25;109(20):2417–22. [PMID: 15148273]
 
O'Neill JO et al. Severe frequent ventricular ectopy after exercise
as a predictor of death in patients with heart failure. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2004 Aug 18;44(4):820–6. [PMID: 15312865]
 
Shiraishi H et al. Losartan decreased premature ventricular
contractions in patients with hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2009
Apr;23(4):289–91. [PMID: 18843280]
 
Wijnmaalen AP et al. Beneficial effects of catheter ablation on left
ventricular and right ventricular function in patients with frequent
premature ventricular contractions and preserved ejection fraction.
Heart. 2010 Aug;96(16):1275–80. [PMID: 20659945]
 
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fast, wide complex rhythm.
 Often associated with structural heart disease.
 Frequently associated with syncope.
 If associated with structural heart disease, the implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator is the recommended therapy.
 
 General Considerations
Ventricular tachycardia is defined as three or more consecutive
ventricular premature beats. The usual rate is 160–240 beats/min
and is moderately regular but less so than atrial tachycardia. The
usual mechanism is reentry, but abnormally triggered rhythms occur.
Ventricular tachycardia is a frequent complication of acute
myocardial infarction and dilated cardiomyopathy but may occur in
chronic coronary disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mitral
valve prolapse, myocarditis, and in most other forms of myocardial
disease. However, ventricular tachycardia can also occur in patients
with structurally normal hearts. Torsades de pointes, a form of
ventricular tachycardia in which QRS morphology twists around the
baseline, may occur spontaneously in the setting of hypokalemia or
hypomagnesemia or after any drug or condition that prolongs the
QT interval. In nonacute settings, most patients with ventricular
tachycardia have known or easily detectable cardiac disease, and
the finding of ventricular tachycardia is an unfavorable prognostic
sign.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients may be asymptomatic or experience syncope or milder
symptoms of impaired cerebral perfusion.
B. Laboratory Findings
Ventricular tachycardia can occur in the setting of hypokalemia and
hypomagnesemia.
C. Differentiation of Aberrantly Conducted Supraventricular Beats from
Ventricular Beats
Ventricular tachycardia is either nonsustained (three or more
consecutive beats lasting < 30 seconds and terminating
spontaneously) or sustained. The distinction from aberrant
conduction of supraventricular tachycardia may be difficult in
patients with a wide QRS complex; it is important because of the
differing prognostic and therapeutic implications of each type.
Findings favoring a ventricular origin include (1) AV dissociation;
(2) a QRS duration exceeding 0.14 second; (3) capture or fusion
beats (infrequent); (4) left axis deviation with right bundle branch
block morphology; (5) monophasic (R) or biphasic (qR, QR, or
RS) complexes in V1; and (6) a qR or QS complex in V6.
Supraventricular origin is favored by (1) a triphasic QRS complex,
especially if there was initial negativity in leads I and V6; (2)
ventricular rates exceeding 170 beats/min; (3) QRS duration longer
than 0.12 second but not longer than 0.14 second; and (4) the
presence of preexcitation syndrome.
The relationship of the P waves to the tachycardia complex is
helpful. A 1:1 relationship usually means a supraventricular origin,
except in the case of ventricular tachycardia with retrograde P
waves.
 Treatment
A. Acute Ventricular Tachycardia
The treatment of acute ventricular tachycardia is determined by the
degree of hemodynamic compromise and the duration of the
arrhythmia. The management of ventricular tachycardia in acute
myocardial infarction has been discussed. In other patients, if
ventricular tachycardia causes hypotension, heart failure, or
myocardial ischemia, synchronized DC cardioversion with 100–360
J should be performed immediately. If the patient is tolerating the
rhythm, amiodarone 150 mg as a slow intravenous bolus over 10
minutes, followed by a slow infusion of 1 mg/min for 6 hours and
then a maintenance infusion of 0.5 mg/min for an additional 18–42
hours can be used. Lidocaine, 1 mg/kg as an intravenous bolus
injection, can also be used. If the ventricular tachycardia recurs,
supplemental amiodarone infusions of 150 mg over 10 minutes can
be given. If the patient is stable, intravenous procainamide, 20
mg/min intravenously (up to 1000 mg), followed by an infusion of
20–80 mcg/kg/min could also be tried. Empiric magnesium
replacement (1–2 g intravenously) may help. Ventricular
tachycardia can also be terminated by ventricular overdrive pacing,
and this approach is useful when the rhythm is recurrent.
B. Chronic Recurrent Ventricular Tachycardia
1. 
Sustained 
ventricular 
tachycardia—Patients 
with
symptomatic or sustained ventricular tachycardia in the absence of a
reversible precipitating cause (acute myocardial infarction or
ischemia, electrolyte imbalance, drug toxicity, etc) are at high risk
for recurrence. In those with significant LV dysfunction, subsequent
sudden death is common. Several trials, including the
Antiarrhythmics Versus Implantable Defibrillator (AVID) and the
Canadian Implantable Defibrillator trials, strongly suggest that these
patients 
should 
be 
managed 
with 
implantable
cardioverterdefibrillators (ICDs). In those with preserved LV
function, the mortality rate is lower and the etiology is often different
than in those with depressed ventricular function. Treatment with
amiodarone, optimally in combination with a β-blocker, may be
adequate. Sotalol may be an alternative, though there is less
supporting evidence. However, many times if ventricular
tachycardia occurs in a patient with preserved ventricular function, it
is either an outflow tract tachycardia or a fascicular ventricular
tachycardia, and these arrhythmias will often respond to AV nodal
blockers and can be effectively treated with catheter ablation. The
role of electro-physiologic studies in this group is less clear than was
previously thought, but they may help identify patients who are
candidates for radiofrequency ablation of a ventricular tachycardia
focus. This is particularly the case for arrhythmias that originate in
the ventricular outflow tract (often appearing as left bundle branch
block with inferior axis on the surface ECG), the left posterior
fascicle (right bundle branch block, superior axis morphology), or
sustained bundle branch reentry. Catheter ablation can be used as a
palliative therapy for those patients with recurrent tachycardia who
receive ICD shocks despite antiarrhythmic therapy.
2. Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT)—NSVT is
defined as runs of three or more ventricular beats lasting < 30
seconds and terminating spontaneously. These may be symptomatic
(usually experienced as light-headedness) or asymptomatic. In
individuals without heart disease, NSVT is not clearly associated
with a poor prognosis. However, in patients with structural heart
disease, particularly when they have reduced LV EF, there is an
increased risk of subsequent symptomatic ventricular tachycardia or
sudden death. β-Blockers reduce these risks in patients who have
coronary disease with significant LV systolic dysfunction (EFs <
35–40%), but if sustained ventricular tachycardia has been induced
during electrophysiologic testing, an implantable defibrillator may be
indicated. In patients with chronic heart failure and reduced EFs—
whether due to coronary disease or primary cardiomyopathy and
regardless of the presence of asymptomatic ventricular arrhythmias
—β-blockers reduce the incidence of sudden death by 40–50%
and should be routine therapy (see section on Heart Failure).
Although there are no definitive data with amiodarone in this
group, trends from a number of studies suggest that it may be
beneficial. Other antiarrhythmic agents should generally be avoided
because their proarrhythmic risk appears to outweigh any benefit,
even in patients with inducible arrhythmias that are successfully
suppressed in the electrophysiology laboratory.
 When to Admit
Any sustained ventricular tachycardia.
Das MK et al. Antiarrhythmic and nonantiarrhythmic drugs for
sudden cardiac death prevention. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2010
May;55(5):438–49. [PMID: 20509177]
 
Ermis C et al. Comparison of ventricular arrhythmia frequency in
patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy versus nonischemic
cardiomyopathy treated with implantable cardioverter
defibrillators. Am J Cardiol. 2005 Jul 15;96(2):233–8. [PMID:
16018849]
 
Katritsis DG et al. Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia: where do
we stand? Eur Heart J. 2004 Jul;25(13):1093–9. [PMID:
15231366]
 
Kuck KH et al; VTACH study group. Catheter ablation of stable
ventricular tachycardia before defibrillator implantation in patients
with coronary heart disease (VTACH): a multicentre randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Jan 2;375(9708): 31–40. [PMID:
20109864]
 
Mehta RH et al. Incidence of and outcomes associated with
ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation in patients undergoing primary
percutaneous coronary intervention. JAMA. 2009 May
6;301(17):1779–89. [PMID: 19417195]
 
Pride YB et al. Relation between myocardial infarct size and
ventricular tachyarrhythmia among patients with preserved left
ventricular ejection fraction following fibrinolytic therapy for ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Aug
15;104(4):475–9. [PMID: 19660597]
 
Scirica BM et al. Relationship between nonsustained ventricular
tachycardia after non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome and
sudden cardiac death: observations from the metabolic efficiency
with ranolazine for less ischemia in non-ST-elevation acute
coronary syndrome-thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 36
(MERLIN-TIMI 36) randomized controlled trial. Circulation.
2010 Aug 3;122(5):455–62. [PMID: 20644019]
 
Shimizu W. Arrhythmias originating from the right ventricular
outflow tract: how to distinguish “malignant” from “benign”? Heart
Rhythm. 2009 Oct;6(10):1507–11. [PMID: 19695964]
 
Srivathsan K et al. Ventricular tachycardia and ventricular
fibrillation. Exp Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2009 Jul;7(7):801–9.
[PMID: 19589116]
 
Stevenson WG. Ventricular scars and ventricular tachycardia.
Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc. 2009;120:403–12. [PMID:
19768192]
 
VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION & DEATH
Sudden cardiac death is defined as unexpected nontraumatic death
in clinically well or stable patients who die within 1 hour after onset
of symptoms. The causative rhythm in most cases is ventricular
fibrillation, which is usually preceded by ventricular tachycardia
except in the setting of acute ischemia or infarction. Complete heart
block and sinus node arrest may also cause sudden death. A
disproportionate number of sudden deaths occur in the early
morning hours. Over 75% of victims of sudden cardiac death have
severe CAD. Many have old myocardial infarctions. Sudden death
may be the initial manifestation of coronary disease in up to 20% of
patients and accounts for approximately 50% of deaths from
coronary disease. Other conditions that predispose to sudden death
include severe LVH, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, congestive
cardiomyopathy, aortic stenosis, pulmonic stenosis, primary
pulmonary hypertension, cyanotic congenital heart disease, atrial
myxoma, mitral valve prolapse, hypoxia, electrolyte abnormalities,
prolonged QT interval syndrome, the Brugada syndrome and
conduction system disease.
 Treatment
Unless ventricular fibrillation occurred shortly after myocardial
infarction, is associated with ischemia, or is seen with an unusual
correctable process (such as an electrolyte abnormality, drug
toxicity, or aortic stenosis), surviving patients require evaluation and
intervention since recurrences are frequent. Coronary arteriography
should be performed to exclude coronary disease as the underlying
cause, since revascularization may prevent recurrence. When
ventricular fibrillation occurs in the initial 24 hours after infarction,
long-term management is no different from that of other patients
with acute infarction. Conduction disturbances should be managed
as described in the next section. The current consensus is that if
myocardial infarction or ischemia, bradyarrhythmias and conduction
disturbances or other identifiable and correctable precipitating
causes of ventricular fibrillation are not found to be the cause of the
sudden death episode, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator is
the treatment of choice. In addition, evidence from the MADIT II
study and Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Trial (SCD-
HeFT) suggest that patients with severe LV dysfunction—whether
due to an ischemic cause such as a remote myocardial infarction or
a nonischemic cause of advanced heart failure—have a reduced risk
of death with the prophylactic implantation of an implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator. 
However, 
the 
DINAMIT 
study
demonstrated that implanting prophylactic ICDs in patients early
after myocardial infarction is associated with a trend toward worse
outcomes.
Bardy GH et al. An entirely subcutaneous implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 1;363(1):36–
44. [PMID: 20463331]
 
Brodine WN et al; MADIT-II Research Group. Effects of beta-
blockers on implantable cardioverter defibrillator therapy and
survival in the patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy (from the
Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial-II). Am J
Cardiol. 2005 Sep 1;96(5):691–5. [PMID: 16125497]
 
Hohnloser SH et al; DINAMIT Investigators. Prophylactic use of
an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator after acute myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med. 2004 Dec 9;351(24): 2481–8. [PMID:
15590950]
 
Kadish A et al; Defibrillators in Non-Ischemic Cardiomyopathy
Treatment Evaluation (DEFINITE) Investigators. Prophylactic
defibrillator implantation in patients with nonischemic dilated
cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med. 2004 May 20;350(21): 2151–8.
[PMID: 15152060]
 
Knecht S et al. Long-term follow-up of idiopathic ventricular
fibrillation ablation: a multicenter study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009
Aug 4;54(6):522–8. [PMID: 19643313]
 
Olasveengen TM et al. Intravenous drug administration during out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2009 Nov
25;302(20):2222–9. [PMID: 19934423]
 
Rea TD et al. CPR with chest compression alone or with rescue
breathing. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 29;363(5):423–33. [PMID:
20818863]
 
Sasson C et al. Predictors of survival from out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Circulation. 2010
Jan 1;3(1):63–81. [PMID: 20123673]
 
Svensson L et al. Compression-only CPR or standard CPR in out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 29;
363(5):434–42. [PMID: 20818864]
 
ACCELERATED IDIOVENTRICULAR RHYTHM
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm is a regular wide complex rhythm
with a rate of 60–120 beats/min, usually with a gradual onset.
Because the rate is often similar to the sinus rate, fusion beats and
alternating rhythms are common. Two mechanisms have been
invoked: (1) an escape rhythm due to suppression of higher
pacemakers resulting from sinoatrial and AV block or from
depressed sinus node function; and (2) slow ventricular tachycardia
due to increased automaticity or, less frequently, reentry. It occurs
commonly in acute infarction and following reperfusion after
thrombolytic drugs. The incidence of associated ventricular
fibrillation is much less than that of ventricular tachycardia with a
rapid rate, and treatment is not indicated unless there is
hemodynamic compromise or more serious arrhythmias. This
rhythm also is common in digitalis toxicity.
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm must be distinguished from the
idioventricular or junctional rhythm with rates < 40–45 beats/min
that occurs in the presence of complete AV block. AV dissociation
—where ventricular rate exceeds sinus—but not AV block occurs
in most cases of accelerated idioventricular rhythm.
LONG QT SYNDROME
Congenital long QT syndrome is an uncommon disease that is
characterized by recurrent syncope, a long QT interval (usually 0.5–
0.7 second), documented ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden
death. It may occur in the presence (Jervell-Lange-Nielsen
syndrome) or absence (Romano-Ward syndrome) of congenital
deafness. Inheritance may be autosomal recessive or autosomal
dominant (Romano-Ward). Specific genetic mutations affecting
membrane potassium and sodium channels have been identified and
help delineate the mechanisms of susceptibility to arrhythmia.
Because this is a primary electrical disorder, usually with no
evidence of structural heart disease or LV dysfunction, the long-
term prognosis is excellent if arrhythmia is controlled. Long-term
treatment with β-blockers or permanent pacing has been shown to
be effective. ICD implantation is recommended for patients in
whom recurrent syncope, sustained ventricular arrhythmias, or
sudden cardiac death occurs despite drug therapy. The ICD should
be considered as primary therapy in certain patients, such as those
in whom aborted sudden cardiac death is the initial presentation of
the long-QT syndrome, when there is a strong family history of
sudden cardiac death, or when compliance or intolerance to drugs
is a concern.
Acquired long QT interval secondary to use of antiar-rhythmic
agents, antidepressant drugs, or certain antibiotics; electrolyte
abnormalities; myocardial ischemia; or significant bradycardia may
result in ventricular tachycardia (particularly torsades de pointes, ie,
twisting about the baseline into varying QRS morphology). Notably,
many drugs that are in some settings effective for the treatment of
ventricular arrhythmias prolong the QT interval. Prudence dictates
that drug therapy that prolongs the QT interval beyond 500 ms or
15% longer than the baseline QT be discontinued.
The management of torsades de pointes differs from that of other
forms of ventricular tachycardia. Class I, Ic, or III antiarrhythmics,
which prolong the QT interval, should be avoided—or withdrawn
immediately if being used. Intravenous β-blockers may be effective,
especially in the congenital form; intravenous magnesium should be
given acutely. An effective approach is temporary ventricular or
atrial pacing, which can both break and prevent the rhythm.
Goldenberg I et al. Sudden cardiac death without structural heart
disease: update on the long QT and Brugada syndromes. Curr
Cardiol Rep. 2005 Sep;7(5):349–56. [PMID: 16105490]
 
Kaufman ES. Mechanisms and clinical management of inherited
channelopathies: long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome,
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and short
QT syndrome. Heart Rhythm. 2009 Aug;6(8 Suppl):S51–5.
[PMID: 19631908]
 
Monnig G et al. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy in
patients with congenital long-QT syndrome: a long-term follow-up.
Heart Rhythm. 2005 May;2(5):497–504. [PMID: 15840474]
 
Priori SG et al. Association of long QT syndrome loci and cardiac
events among patients treated with beta-blockers. JAMA. 2004
Sep 15;292(11):1341–4. [PMID: 15367556]
 
Roden DM. Clinical practice. Long-QT syndrome. N Engl J Med.
2008 Jan 10;358(2):169–76. [PMID: 18184962]
 
Sherrid MV et al. Risks and challenges of implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators in young adults. Prog Cardiovasc Dis.
2008 Nov–Dec;51(3):237–63. [PMID: 19026858]
 
SICK SINUS SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most patients are asymptomatic.
 More common in elderly population.
 May have recurrent supraventricular arrhythmia and
bradyarrhythmia.
 Frequently seen in patients with concomitant atrial fibrillation.
 Often chronotropically incompetent.
 May be caused by drug therapy.
 
 General Considerations
This imprecise diagnosis is applied to patients with sinus arrest,
sinoatrial exit block (recognized by a pause equal to a multiple of
the underlying PP interval or progressive shortening of the PP
interval prior to a pause), or persistent sinus bradycardia. These
rhythms are often caused or exacerbated by drug therapy (digitalis,
calcium channel blockers, β-blockers, sympatholytic agents,
antiarrhythmics), and agents that may be responsible should be
withdrawn prior to making the diagnosis. Another presentation is of
recurrent supraventricular tachycardias (paroxysmal reentry
tachycardias, atrial flutter, and atrial fibrillation), associated with
bradyarrhythmias (“tachy-brady syndrome”). The long pauses that
often follow the termination of tachycardia cause the associated
symptoms.
Sick sinus syndrome occurs most commonly in elderly patients.
The pathologic changes are usually nonspecific, characterized by
patchy fibrosis of the sinus node and cardiac conduction system.
Sick sinus syndrome may be caused by other conditions, including
sarcoidosis, 
amyloidosis, 
Chagas 
disease, 
and 
various
cardiomyopathies. Coronary disease is an uncommon cause.
 Clinical Findings
Most patients with ECG evidence of sick sinus syndrome are
asymptomatic, but rare individuals may experience syncope,
dizziness, confusion, palpitations, heart failure, or angina. Because
these symptoms are either nonspecific or are due to other causes, it
is essential that they be demonstrated to coincide temporally with
arrhythmias. This may require prolonged ambulatory monitoring or
the use of an event recorder.
 Treatment
Most symptomatic patients will require permanent pacing (see AV
block, below). Dual-chamber pacing is preferred because
ventricular pacing is associated with a higher incidence of
subsequent atrial fibrillation, and subsequent AV block occurs at a
rate of 2% per year. In addition, resultant “pacemaker syndrome”
can result from loss of AV synchrony. Treatment of associated
tachyarrhythmias is often difficult without first instituting pacing,
since digoxin and other antiarrhythmic agents may exacerbate the
bradycardia. Unfortunately, symptomatic relief following pacing has
not been consistent, largely because of inadequate documentation of
the etiologic role of bradyarrhythmias in producing the symptom.
Furthermore, many of these patients may have associated
ventricular arrhythmias that may require treatment; however,
carefully selected patients may become asymptomatic with
permanent pacing alone.
Dobrzynski H et al. New insights into pacemaker activity:
propromoting understanding of sick sinus syndrome. Circulation.
2007 Apr 10;115(14):1921–32. [PMID: 17420362]
 
Dretzke J et al. Dual chamber versus single chamber ventricular
pacemakers for sick sinus syndrome and atrioventricular block.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(2):CD003710. [PMID:
15106214]
 
Sweeney MO et al; Search AV Extension and Managed
Ventricular Pacing for Promoting Atrioventricular Conduction
(SAVE PACe) Trial. Minimizing ventricular pacing to reduce atrial
fibrillation in sinus node disease. N Engl J Med. 2007 Sep
6;357(10):1000–8. [PMID: 17804844]
 
AV BLOCK
AV block is categorized as first-degree (PR interval > 0.21 second
with all atrial impulses conducted), second-degree (intermittent
blocked beats), or third-degree (complete heart block, in which no
supraventricular impulses are conducted to the ventricles).
Second-degree block is subclassified. In Mobitz type I
(Wenckebach) AV block, the AV conduction time (PR interval)
progressively lengthens, with the RR interval shortening, before the
blocked beat; this phenomenon is almost always due to abnormal
conduction within the AV node. In Mobitz type II AV block,
there are intermittently nonconducted atrial beats not preceded by
lengthening AV conduction. It is usually due to block within the His
bundle system. The classification as Mobitz type I or Mobitz type II
is only partially reliable because patients may appear to have both
types on the surface ECG, and the site of origin of the 2:1 AV
block cannot be predicted from the ECG. The width of the QRS
complexes assists in determining whether the block is nodal or
infranodal. When they are narrow, the block is usually nodal; when
they are wide, the block is usually infranodal. Electrophysiologic
studies may be necessary for accurate localization. Management of
AV block in acute myocardial infarction has already been
discussed. This section deals with patients in the nonischemic
setting.
First-degree and Mobitz type I block may occur in normal
individuals with heightened vagal tone. They may also occur as a
drug effect (especially digitalis, calcium channel blockers, β-
blockers, or other sympatholytic agents), often superimposed on
organic disease. These disturbances also occur transiently or
chronically due to ischemia, infarction, inflammatory processes
(including Lyme disease), fibrosis, calcification, or infiltration. The
prognosis is usually good, since reliable alternative pacemakers
arise from the AV junction below the level of block if higher
degrees of block occur.
Mobitz type II block is almost always due to organic disease
involving the infranodal conduction system. In the event of
progression to complete heart block, alternative pacemakers are
not reliable. Thus, prophylactic ventricular pacing is required.
Complete (third-degree) heart block is a more advanced form
of block often due to a lesion distal to the His bundle and
associated with bilateral bundle branch block. The QRS is wide and
the ventricular rate is slower, usually < 50 beats/min. Transmission
of atrial impulses through the AV node is completely blocked, and a
ventricular pacemaker maintains a slow, regular ventricular rate,
usually < 45 beats/min. Exercise does not increase the rate. The first
heart sound varies in intensity; wide pulse pressure, a changing
systolic BP level, and cannon venous pulsations in the neck are also
present. Patients may be asymptomatic or may complain of
weakness or dyspnea if the rate is < 35 beats/min; symptoms may
occur at higher rates if the left ventricle cannot increase its stroke
output. During periods of transition from partial to complete heart
block, some patients have ventricular asystole that lasts several
seconds to minutes. Syncope occurs abruptly.
Patients with episodic or chronic infranodal complete heart block
require permanent pacing, and temporary pacing is indicated if
implantation of a permanent pacemaker is delayed.
 Treatment
The indications for permanent pacing have been discussed:
symptomatic bradyarrhythmias, asymptomatic Mobitz II AV block,
or complete heart block. The versatility of pacemaker generator
units has increased markedly, and dual-chamber multiple
programmable units are being implanted with increasing frequency.
A standardized nomenclature for pacemaker generators is used,
usually consisting of four letters. The first letter refers to the
chamber that is stimulated (A = atrium, V = ventricle, D = dual, for
both). The second letter refers to the chamber in which sensing
occurs (also A, V, or D). The third letter refers to the sensory mode
(I = inhibition by a sensed impulse, T = triggering by a sensed
impulse, D = dual modes of response). The fourth letter refers to
the programmability or rate modulation capacity (usually P for
programming for two functions, M for programming more than two,
and R for rate modulation).
A pacemaker that senses and paces in both chambers is the most
physiologic approach to pacing patients who remain in sinus rhythm.
AV synchrony is particularly important in patients in whom atrial
contraction produces a substantial increment in stroke volume and
in those in whom sensing the atrial rate to provide rate-responsive
ventricular pacing is useful. Dual-chamber pacing is most useful for
individuals with LV systolic or-perhaps more importantly—diastolic
dysfunction and for physically active individuals. In patients with
single-chamber pacemakers, the lack of an atrial kick may lead to
the so-called pacemaker syndrome, in which the patient
experiences signs of low cardiac output while upright.
Pulse generators are also available that can increase their rate in
response to motion or respiratory rate when the atrial rate is not an
indication of the optimal heart rate. These are most useful in active
individuals. Follow-up after pacemaker implantation, usually by
telephonic monitoring, is essential. All pulse generators and lead
systems have an early failure rate that is now below 1% and an
expected battery life varying from 4 years to 10 years.
Epstein AE et al. ACC/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines for Device-
Based Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: executive
summary. Heart Rhythm. 2008 Jun;5(6):934–55. [PMID:
18534377]
 
Toff WD et al; United Kingdom Pacing and Cardiovascular Events
Trial Investigators. Single-chamber versus dual-chamber pacing for
high-grade atrioventricular block. N Engl J Med. 2005 Jul
14;353(2):145–55. [PMID: 16014884]
 
AV DISSOCIATION
When a ventricular pacemaker is firing at a rate faster than or close
to the sinus rate (accelerated idioventricular rhythm, ventricular
premature beats, or ventricular tachycardia), atrial impulses arriving
at the AV node when it is refractory may not be conducted. This
phenomenon is AV dissociation but does not necessarily indicate
AV block. No treatment is required aside from management of the
causative arrhythmia.
INTRAVENTRICULAR CONDUCTION DEFECTS
Intraventricular conduction defects, including bundle branch block,
are common in individuals with otherwise normal hearts and in many
disease processes, including ischemic heart disease, inflammatory
disease, infiltrative disease, cardiomyopathy, and postcardiotomy.
Below the AV node and bundle of His, the conduction system
trifurcates into a right bundle and anterior and posterior fascicles of
the left bundle. Conduction block in each of these fascicles can be
recognized on the surface ECG. Although such conduction
abnormalities are often seen in normal hearts, they are more
commonly due to organic heart disease—either an isolated process
of fibrosis and calcification or more generalized myocardial disease.
Bifascicular block is present when two of these—right bundle, left
anterior, and left posterior fascicle—are involved. Trifascicular
block is defined as right bundle branch block with alternating left
hemiblock, alternating right and left bundle branch block, or
bifascicular block with documented prolonged infranodal
conduction (long His-ventricular interval).
The prognosis of intraventricular block is generally that of the
underlying myocardial process. Patients with no apparent heart
disease have an overall survival rate similar to that of matched
controls. However, left bundle branch block—but not right—is
associated with a higher risk of development of overt cardiac
disease and cardiac mortality. Even in bifascicular block, the
incidence of occult complete heart block or progression to it is low,
and pacing is not usually warranted. In patients with symptoms (eg,
syncope) consistent with heart block and intraventricular block,
pacing should be reserved for those with documented concomitant
complete heart block on monitoring or those with a very prolonged
HV interval (>90 ms) with no other cause for symptoms. Even in
the latter group, prophylactic pacing has not improved the prognosis
significantly, probably because of the high incidence of ventricular
arrhythmias in the same population.
Elizari MV et al. Hemiblocks revisited. Circulation. 2007 Mar
6;115(9):1154–63. [PMID: 17339573]
 
Francia P et al. Left bundle-branch block—pathophysiology,
prognosis, and clinical management. Clin Cardiol. 2007
Oct;30(3):100–5. [PMID: 17385703]
 
SYNCOPE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Transient loss of consciousness and postural tone from
vasodepressor or cardiogenic causes.
 Prompt recovery without resuscitative measures.
 Common clinical problem.
 Accounts for 3% of all visits to the emergency department.
 
 General Considerations
Syncope is a symptom defined as a transient, self-limited loss of
consciousness, usually leading to a fall. Thirty percent of the adult
population will experience at least one episode of syncope. It
accounts for approximately 3% of emergency department visits.
Syncope may be neurocardiogenic in origin, mediated by excessive
vagal stimulation, or an imbalance between sympathetic and
parasympathetic autonomic activity. With assumption of upright
posture, there is venous pooling in the lower limbs. However,
instead of the normal response, which consists of an increase in
heart rate and vasoconstriction, a sympathetically mediated increase
in myocardial contractility activates mechanoreceptors that trigger
reflex bradycardia and vasodilation. A specific cause of syncope is
identified in about 50% of cases during the initial evaluation. The
prognosis is relatively favorable except when accompanying cardiac
disease is present. In many patients with recurrent syncope or near
syncope, arrhythmias are not the cause. This is particularly true
when the patient has no evidence of associated heart disease by
history, examination, standard ECG, or noninvasive testing.
Vasodepressor syncope may be due to excessive vagal tone or
impaired reflex control of the peripheral circulation. The most
frequent type of vasodepressor syncope is vasovagal hypotension
or the “common faint,” which is often initiated by a stressful, painful,
or claustrophobic experience, especially in young women.
Enhanced vagal tone with resulting hypotension is the cause of
syncope in carotid sinus hypersensitivity and postmicturition
syncope; vagal-induced sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, and AV
block are common accompaniments and may themselves be the
cause of syncope.
Orthostatic (postural) hypotension is another common cause
of vasodepressor syncope, especially in the elderly; in diabetics or
other patients with autonomic neuropathy; in patients with blood
loss or hypovolemia; and in patients taking vasodilators, diuretics,
and adrenergic-blocking drugs. In addition, a syndrome of chronic
idiopathic orthostatic hypotension exists primarily in older men. In
most of these conditions, the normal vasoconstrictive response to
assuming upright posture, which compensates for the abrupt
decrease in venous return, is impaired.
Cardiogenic syncope can occur on a mechanical or arrhythmic
basis. There is usually no prodrome; thus, injury secondary to falling
is common. Mechanical problems that can cause syncope include
aortic stenosis (where syncope may occur from autonomic reflex
abnormalities or ventricular tachycardia), pulmonary stenosis,
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, congenital lesions
associated with pulmonary hypertension or right-to-left shunting,
and LA myxoma obstructing the mitral valve. Episodes are
commonly exertional or postexertional. More commonly, cardiac
syncope is due to disorders of automaticity (sick sinus syndrome),
conduction disorders (AV block), or tachyarrhythmias (especially
ventricular tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia with rapid
ventricular rate).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Syncope is characteristically abrupt in onset, often resulting in injury,
transient (lasting for seconds to a few minutes), and followed by
prompt recovery of full consciousness.
Vasodepressor premonitory symptoms, such as nausea,
diaphoresis, tachycardia, and pallor, are usual in the “common
faint.” Episodes can be aborted by lying down or removing the
inciting stimulus. In orthostatic (postural) hypotension, a greater
than normal decline (20 mm Hg) in BP immediately upon arising
from the supine to the standing position is observed, with or without
tachycardia depending on the status of autonomic (baroreceptor)
function.
B. Diagnostic Tests
The evaluation for syncope depends on findings from the history
and physical examination (especially orthostatic BP evaluation,
examination of carotid and other arteries, and cardiac examination).
1. ECG—The resting ECG may reveal arrhythmias, evidence of
accessory pathways, prolonged QT interval, and other signs of
heart disease (such as infarction or hypertrophy). If the history is
consistent with syncope, ambulatory ECG monitoring is essential.
This may need to be repeated several times, since yields increase
with longer periods of monitoring, at least up to 3 days. Event
recorder and transtelephone ECG monitoring may be helpful in
patients with intermittent presyncopal episodes. Caution is required
before attributing a patient's symptom to rhythm or conduction
abnormalities observed during monitoring without concomitant
symptoms. In many cases, the symptoms are due to a different
arrhythmia or to noncardiac causes. For instance, dizziness or
syncope in older patients may be unrelated to concomitantly
observed bradycardia, sinus node abnormalities, and ventricular
ectopy.
2. Autonomic testing—Orthostatic hypotension from autonomic
function can be diagnosed with more certainty by observing BP and
heart rate responses to Valsalva maneuver and by tilt testing.
Carotid sinus massage in patients who do not have carotid
bruits or a history of cerebral vascular disease can precipitate sinus
node arrest or AV block in patients with carotid sinus
hypersensitivity. Head-up tilt-table testing can identify patients
whose syncope may be on a vasovagal basis. In older patients,
vasoconstrictor abnormalities and autonomic insufficiency are
perhaps the most common causes of syncope. Thus, tilt testing
should be done before proceeding to invasive studies unless clinical
and ambulatory ECG evaluation suggests a cardiac abnormality.
Although different testing protocols are used, passive tilting to at
least 70 degrees for 10–40 minutes—in conjunction with
isoproterenol infusion or sublingual nitroglycerin, if necessary—is
typical. Syncope due to bradycardia, hypotension, or both will
occur in approximately one-third of patients with recurrent syncope.
Some studies have suggested that, at least with some of the more
extreme protocols, false-positive responses may occur.
3. Electrophysiologic studies—Electrophysiologic studies to
assess sinus node function and AV conduction and to induce
supraventricular or ventricular tachycardia are indicated in patients
with recurrent episodes, nondiagnostic ambulatory ECGs, and
negative autonomic testing if vasomotor syncope is a consideration.
Electrophysiologic studies reveal an arrhythmic cause in 20–50% of
patients, depending on the study criteria, and are most often
diagnostic when the patient has had multiple episodes and has
identifiable cardiac abnormalities.
4. Exercise testing—When the symptoms are associated with
exertion or stress, exercise testing may be helpful.
 Treatment
Treatment consists largely of counseling patients to avoid
predisposing situations. Paradoxically, β-blockers have been used
in patients with altered autonomic function uncovered by head-up
tilt testing but they have provided only minimal benefit. If
symptomatic bradyarrhythmias or supraventricular tachyarrhythmias
are detected, therapy can usually be initiated without additional
diagnostic studies. Permanent pacing has little benefit except in
patients with documented severe pauses and bradycardiac
responses.
Volume expanders, such as fludrocortisone, or vasoconstrictors,
such as midodrine, have also been tried but with minimal benefit.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have shown some benefit in
select patients.
See Recommendations for Resumption of Driving, below.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with syncope and concomitant structural heart
disease or when a primary cardiac etiology is suspected.
•    Patients with recent or recurrent syncope are often
monitored in the hospital.
•    Those with less ominous symptoms may be monitored
as outpatients.
Chen LY et al. Management of syncope in adults: an update.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2008 Nov;83(11):1280–93. [PMID: 18990328]
 
Del Rosso A et al. Clinical predictors of cardiac syncope at initial
evaluation in patients referred urgently to a general hospital: the
EGSYS score. Heart. 2008 Dec;94(12):1620–6. [PMID:
18519550]
 
Grubb BP. Neurocardiogenic syncope. N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar
10;352(10):1004–10. [PMID: 15758011]
 
Kessler C et al. The emergency department approach to syncope:
evidence-based guidelines and prediction rules. Emerg Med Clin
North Am. 2010 Aug;28(3):487–500. [PMID: 20709240]
 
Moya A et al; International Study on Syncope of Uncertain
Etiology 2 (ISSUE 2) Group. Reproducibility of
electrocardiographic findings in patients with suspected reflex
neurally-mediated syncope. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Dec
1;102(11):1518–23. [PMID: 19026307]
 
Ouyang H et al. Diagnosis and evaluation of syncope in the
emergency department. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2010
Aug;28(3):471–85. [PMID: 20709239]
 
Sheldon R. Tilt testing for syncope: a reappraisal. Curr Opin
Cardiol. 2005 Jan;20(1):38–41. [PMID: 15596958]
 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RESUMPTION OF
DRIVING
An important management problem in patients who have
experienced syncope, symptomatic ventricular tachycardia, or
aborted sudden death is to provide recommendations concerning
automobile driving. According to a survey published in 1991, only
eight states had specific laws dealing with this issue, whereas 42 had
laws restricting driving in patients with seizure disorders. Patients
with syncope or aborted sudden death thought to have been due to
temporary factors (acute myocardial infarction, bradyarrhythmias
subsequently treated with permanent pacing, drug effect, electrolyte
imbalance) should be strongly advised after recovery not to drive
for at least 1 month. Other patients with symptomatic ventricular
tachycardia or aborted sudden death, whether treated
pharmacologically, with antitachycardia devices, or with ablation
therapy, should not drive for at least 6 months. Longer restrictions
are warranted in these patients if spontaneous arrhythmias persist.
The physician should comply with local regulations and consult local
authorities concerning individual cases.
Baessler C et al; DAVID Investigators. Time to resumption of
driving after implantation of an automatic defibrillator (from the
Dual chamber and VVI Implantable Defibrillator [DAVID] trial).
Am J Cardiol. 2005 Mar 1;95(5):665–6. [PMID: 15721116]
 
CONGESTIVE HEART
FAILURE
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 LV failure: Exertional dyspnea, cough, fatigue, orthopnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, cardiac enlargement, rales, gallop
rhythm, and pulmonary venous congestion.
 RV failure: Elevated venous pressure, hepatomegaly,
dependent edema; usually due to lV failure.
 Assessment of lV function is a crucial part of diagnosis and
management.
 
 General Considerations
Heart failure is a common syndrome that is increasing in incidence
and prevalence. Approximately 5 million patients in the United
States have heart failure, and there are nearly 500,000 new cases
each year. It is primarily a disease of aging, with over 75% of
existing and new cases occurring in individuals over 65 years of age.
The prevalence of heart failure rises from < 1% in individuals below
60 years to nearly 10% in those over 80 years of age.
Heart failure may be right sided or left sided (or both). Patients
with left heart failure have symptoms of low cardiac output and
elevated pulmonary venous pressure; dyspnea is the predominant
feature. Signs of fluid retention predominate in right heart failure.
Most patients exhibit symptoms or signs of both right- and left-
sided failure, and LV dysfunction is the primary cause of RV failure.
Although this section primarily concerns cardiac failure due to
systolic LV dysfunction, approximately half of patients with heart
failure have preserved systolic dysfunction, in large part due to
diastolic dysfunction, experience many of the same symptoms and
may be difficult to distinguish clinically.
Elevated diastolic pressures are transmitted to the pulmonary and
systemic venous systems, resulting in dyspnea and edema. The most
y
y
,
g
y p
frequent cause of diastolic cardiac dysfunction is LVH, commonly
resulting from hypertension, but conditions such as hypertrophic or
restrictive cardiomyopathy, diabetes, and pericardial disease can
produce the same clinical picture. In developed countries, CAD
with resulting myocardial infarction and loss of functioning
myocardium (ischemic cardiomyopathy) is the most common cause
of systolic heart failure. Systemic hypertension remains an important
cause of CHF and, even more commonly in the United States, an
exacerbating factor in patients with cardiac dysfunction due to other
causes such as CAD. Several processes may present with dilated
or congestive cardiomyopathy, which is characterized by LV or
biventricular dilation and generalized systolic dysfunction. These are
discussed elsewhere in this chapter, but the most common are
alcoholic cardiomyopathy, viral myocarditis (including infections by
HIV), and dilated cardiomyopathies with no obvious underlying
cause (idiopathic cardiomyopathy). Rare causes of dilated
cardiomyopathy include infiltrative diseases (hemochromatosis,
sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, etc), other infectious agents, metabolic
disorders, cardiotoxins, and drug toxicity. Valvular heart diseases—
particularly degenerative aortic stenosis and chronic aortic or mitral
regurgitation—are not infrequent causes of heart failure.
Heart failure is often preventable by early detection of patients at
risk and early intervention. The importance of these approaches is
emphasized by guidelines that have incorporated a classification of
heart failure that includes four stages. Stage A includes patients at
risk for developing heart failure (such as patients with hypertension
or CAD without current or previous symptoms or identifiable
structural abnormalities of the myocardium). In the majority of these
patients, development of heart failure can be prevented with
interventions such as the aggressive treatment of hypertension,
modification of coronary risk factors, and reduction of excessive
alcohol intake (Figure 10–1). Stage B includes patients who have
structural heart disease but no current or previously recognized
symptoms of heart failure. Examples include patients with previous
myocardial infarction, other causes of reduced systolic function,
LVH, or asymptomatic valvular disease. Both ACE inhibitors and
β-blockers prevent heart failure in the first two of these conditions,
and more aggressive treatment of hypertension and early surgical
intervention are effective in the latter two. Stages C and D include
patients with clinical heart failure and the relatively small group of
patients that has become refractory to the usual therapies,
respectively. These are discussed below.
Figure 10–1. Stages in the evolution of heart failure and
recommended therapy by stage. ACE, angiotensin-converting
enzyme; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers. (Reproduced, with
permission, from Hunt SA et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines
Update for the evaluation and management of chronic heart failure
in the adult: A report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines [Writing Committee to Update the 2001 Guidelines for
the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure]. ACC/AHA
2005 Guidelines Update for the diagnosis and management of
chronic heart failure in the adult. ©2005, American Heart
Association.)
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
The most common symptom of patients with heart failure is
shortness of breath, chiefly exertional dyspnea at first and then
progressing to orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and rest
dyspnea. A more subtle and often overlooked symptom of heart
failure is a chronic nonproductive cough, which is often worse in the
recumbent position. Nocturia due to excretion of fluid retained
during the day and increased renal perfusion in the recumbent
position is a common nonspecific symptom of heart failure. Patients
also complain of fatigue and exercise intolerance. These symptoms
correlate poorly with the degree of cardiac dysfunction. Patients
with right heart failure have predominate signs of fluid retention,
with the patient exhibiting edema, hepatic congestion and, on
occasion, loss of appetite and nausea due to edema of the gut or
impaired gastrointestinal perfusion and ascites. Surprisingly, some
individuals with severe LV dysfunction will display few signs of left
heart failure and appear to have isolated right heart failure. Indeed,
they may be clinically indistinguishable from patients with cor
pulmonale, who have right heart failure secondary to pulmonary
disease.
Patients with acute heart failure from myocardial infarction,
myocarditis, and acute valvular regurgitation due to endocarditis or
other conditions usually present with pulmonary edema. Patients
with episodic symptoms may be having LV dysfunction due to
intermittent ischemia. Patients may also present with acute
exacerbations of chronic, stable heart failure. Exacerbations are
usually caused by alterations in therapy (or patient noncompliance),
excessive salt and fluid intake, arrhythmias, excessive activity,
pulmonary emboli, intercurrent infection, or progression of the
underlying disease.
Patients with heart failure are often categorized by the NYHA
classification as class I (asymptomatic), class II (symptomatic with
moderate activity), class III (symptomatic with mild activity), or
class IV (symptomatic at rest). However, this classification has
limitations in that patient reports are highly subjective and in that
symptoms vary from day to day.
B. Signs
Many patients with heart failure, including some with severe
symptoms, appear comfortable at rest. Others will be dyspneic
during conversation or minor activity, and those with long-standing
severe heart failure may appear cachectic or cyanotic. The vital
signs may be normal, but tachycardia, hypotension, and reduced
pulse pressure may be present. Patients often show signs of
increased sympathetic nervous system activity, including cold
extremities and diaphoresis. Important peripheral signs of heart
failure can be detected by examination of the neck, the lungs, the
abdomen, and the extremities. RA pressure may be estimated
through the height of the pulsations in the jugular venous system. In
addition to the height of the venous pressure, abnormal pulsations
such as regurgitant v waves should be sought. Examination of the
carotid pulse may allow estimation of pulse pressure as well as
detection of aortic stenosis. Thyroid examination may reveal occult
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, which are readily treatable
causes of heart failure. Crackles at the lung bases reflect
transudation of fluid into the alveoli. Pleural effusions may cause
bibasilar dullness to percussion. Expiratory wheezing and rhonchi
may be signs of heart failure. Patients with severe right heart failure
may have hepatic enlargement—tender or nontender—due to
passive congestion. Systolic pulsations may be felt in tricuspid
regurgitation. Sustained moderate pressure on the liver may increase
jugular venous pressure (a positive hepatojugular reflux is an
increase of > 1 cm). Ascites may also be present. Peripheral pitting
edema is a common sign in patients with right heart failure and may
extend into the thighs and abdominal wall.
Cardinal cardiac examination signs are a parasternal lift,
indicating pulmonary hypertension; an enlarged and sustained LV
impulse, indicating LV dilation and hypertrophy; a diminished first
heart sound, suggesting impaired contractility; and an S3 gallop
originating in the LV and sometimes the RV. An S 4 is usually
present in diastolic heart failure. Murmurs should be sought to
exclude primary valvular disease; secondary mitral regurgitation and
tricuspid regurgitation murmurs are common in patients with dilated
ventricles. In chronic heart failure, many of the expected signs of
heart failure may be absent despite markedly abnormal cardiac
function and hemodynamic measurements.
C. Laboratory Findings
A blood count may reveal anemia and a high red-cell distribution
width (RDW), both of which are associated with poor prognosis in
chronic heart failure through poorly understood mechanisms. Renal
function tests can determine whether cardiac failure is associated
with prerenal azotemia. Chronic kidney disease is another poor
prognostic factor in heart failure and may limit certain treatment
options. Serum electrolytes may disclose hypokalemia, which
increases the risk of arrhythmias; hyperkalemia, which may limit the
use of inhibitors of the renin–angiotensin system; or hyponatremia,
an indicator of marked activation of the renin–angiotensin system
and a poor prognostic sign. Thyroid function should be assessed to
detect occult thyrotoxicosis or myxedema and iron studies test
should be checked to test for hemochromatosis. In unexplained
cases, appropriate biopsies may lead to a diagnosis of amyloidosis.
Myocardial biopsy may exclude specific causes of dilated
cardiomyopathy but rarely reveals specific reversible diagnoses.
Serum BNP is a powerful prognostic marker that adds to clinical
assessment in differentiating dyspnea due to heart failure from
noncardiac causes. Two markers—BNP and N-terminal pro-BNP
—provide similar diagnostic and prognostic information. BNP is
expressed primarily in the ventricles and is elevated when ventricular
filling pressures are high. It is quite sensitive in patients with
symptomatic heart failure—whether due to systolic or to diastolic
dysfunction—but less specific in older patients, women, and
patients with COPD. Studies have shown that BNP can help in
emergency department triage in diagnosis of acute decompensated
heart failure and BNP may be helpful in guiding intensity of diuretic
and other therapies for monitoring and management of chronic heart
failure.
D. ECG and Chest Radiography
ECG may indicate an underlying or secondary arrhythmia,
myocardial infarction, or nonspecific changes that often include low
voltage, intraventricular conduction defects, LVH, and nonspecific
repolarization changes. Chest radio-graphs provide information
about the size and shape of the cardiac silhouette. Cardiomegaly is
an important finding and is a poor prognostic sign. Evidence of
pulmonary venous hypertension includes relative dilation of the
upper lobe veins, perivascular edema (haziness of vessel outlines),
interstitial edema, and alveolar fluid. In acute heart failure, these
findings correlate moderately well with pulmonary venous pressure.
However, patients with chronic heart failure may show relatively
normal pulmonary vasculature despite markedly elevated pressures.
Pleural effusions are common and tend to be bilateral or right sided.
E. Additional Studies
Many studies have indicated that the clinical diagnosis of systolic
myocardial dysfunction is often inaccurate. The primary confounding
conditions are diastolic dysfunction of the heart with decreased
relaxation and filling of the LV (particularly in hypertension and in
hypertrophic states) and pulmonary disease. Because patients with
heart failure usually have significant resting ECG abnormalities,
stress imaging procedures such as perfusion scintigraphy or
dobutamine echocardiography are often indicated.
The most useful test is the echocardiogram. This will reveal the
size and function of both ventricles and of the atria. It will also allow
detection of pericardial effusion, valvular abnormalities, intracardiac
shunts, and segmental wall motion abnormalities suggestive of old
myocardial infarction as opposed to more generalized forms of
dilated cardiomyopathy.
Radionuclide angiography measures LV EF and permits analysis
of regional wall motion. This test is especially useful when
echocardiography is technically suboptimal, such as in patients with
severe pulmonary disease. When myocardial ischemia is suspected
as a cause of LV dysfunction, stress testing should be performed.
F. Cardiac Catheterization
In most patients with heart failure, clinical examination and
noninvasive tests can determine LV size and function and valve
function well enough to confirm the diagnosis. Left heart
catheterization may be helpful to define the presence and extent of
CAD, although CT angiography may also be appropriate, especially
when the likelihood of coronary disease is low. Evaluation for
coronary disease is particularly important when LV dysfunction may
be partially reversible by revascularization. The combination of
angina or noninvasive evidence of significant myocardial ischemia
with symptomatic heart failure is often an indication for coronary
angiography if the patient is a potential candidate for
revascularization. Right heart catheterization may be useful to select
and monitor therapy in patients refractory to standard therapy.
Drazner MH et al. Prognostic importance of elevated jugular
venous pressure and a third heart sound in patients with heart
failure. N Engl J Med. 2001 Aug 23;345(8):574–81. [PMID:
11529211]
Jourdain P et al. Plasma brain natriuretic peptide-guided therapy to
improve outcome in heart failure: the STARS-BNP Multicenter
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Apr 24;49(16): 1733–9. [PMID:
17448376]
 
Maisel AS et al. Rapid measurement of B-type natriuretic peptide
in the emergency diagnosis of heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002
Jul 18;347(3):161–7. [PMID: 12124404]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Heart failure. JAMA. 2009
May 13;301(18):1950. [PMID: 19436025]
 
 Treatment
Although diuretics are often useful in patients with right heart
failure, the other therapies discussed in this section (digitalis,
vasodilators, inotropic agents) may be inappropriate.
A. Correction of Reversible Causes
The major reversible causes of chronic heart failure include valvular
lesions, 
myocardial 
ischemia, 
uncontrolled 
hyper-tension,
arrhythmias (especially persistent tachycardias), alcohol- or drug-
induced myocardial depression, intracardiac shunts, and high-output
states. Calcium channel blockers (specifically verapamil or
diltiazem), antiarrhythmic drugs, thiazolidinediones, and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents may be important contributors to
worsening heart failure. Some metabolic and infiltrative
cardiomyopathies may be partially reversible, or their progression
may be slowed; these include hemochromatosis, sarcoidosis, and
amyloidosis. Reversible causes of diastolic dysfunction include
pericardial disease and LVH due to hypertension. Once possible
reversible components are being addressed, the measures outlined
below are appropriate.
B. Pharmacologic
See also the following section on Acute Heart Failure & Pulmonary
Edema.
1. Diuretic therapy—Diuretics are the most effective means of
providing symptomatic relief to patients with moderate to severe
CHF. Few patients with symptoms or signs of fluid retention can be
optimally managed without a diuretic. However, excessive diuresis
can lead to electrolyte imbalance and neurohormonal activation. A
combination of a diuretic and an ACE inhibitor should be the
initial treatment in most symptomatic patients.
When fluid retention is mild, thiazide diuretics or a similar type of
agent (hydrochlorothiazide, 25–100 mg; metolazone, 2.5–5 mg;
chlorthalidone, 25–50 mg; etc) may be sufficient. Thiazide or
related diuretics often provide better control of hypertension than
short-acting loop agents. The thiazides are generally ineffective
when the glomerular filtration rate falls below 30–40 mL/min, a not
infrequent occurrence in patients with severe heart failure.
Metolazone maintains its efficacy down to a glomerular filtration rate
of approximately 20–30 mL/min. Adverse reactions include
hypokalemia and intravascular volume depletion with resulting
prerenal azotemia, skin rashes, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia,
hyperglycemia, hyperuricemia, and hepatic dysfunction.
Patients with more severe heart failure should be treated with one
of the loop diuretics. These include furosemide (20–320 mg daily),
bumetanide (1–8 mg daily), and torsemide (20–200 mg daily).
These agents have a rapid onset and a relatively short duration of
action. In patients with preserved kidney function, two or more
doses are preferable to a single larger dose. In acute situations or
when gastrointestinal absorption is in doubt, they should be given
intravenously. They are active even in severe kidney disease, but
larger doses (up to 500 mg of furosemide or equivalent) may be
required. The major adverse reactions include intravascular volume
depletion, prerenal azotemia, and hypotension. Hypokalemia,
particularly with accompanying digitalis therapy, is a major problem.
Less common side effects include skin rashes, gastrointestinal
distress, and ototoxicity (the latter more common with ethacrynic
acid and possibly less common with bumetanide).
The potassium-sparing agents spironolactone, triamterene, and
amiloride are often useful in combination with the loop diuretics and
thiazides. Triamterene and amiloride act on the distal tubule to
reduce potassium secretion. Their diuretic potency is only mild and
not adequate for most patients with heart failure, but they may
minimize the hypokalemia induced by more potent agents. Side
effects include hyperkalemia, gastrointestinal symptoms, and kidney
dysfunction. Spironolactone and eplerenone are specific inhibitors
of aldosterone, which is often increased in CHF and has important
effects beyond potassium retention (see below). Their onsets of
action are slower than the other potassium-sparing agents, and
spironolactone's side effects include gynecomastia. Combinations of
potassium supplements or ACE inhibitors and potassium-sparing
drugs can produce hyperkalemia but have been used with success
in patients with persistent hypokalemia.
Patients with refractory edema may respond to combinations of a
loop diuretic and thiazide-like agents. Metolazone, because of its
maintained activity with chronic kidney disease, is the most useful
agent for such a combination. Extreme caution must be observed
with this approach, since massive diuresis and electrolyte
imbalances often occur; 2.5 mg of metolazone should be added to
the previous dosage of loop diuretic. In many cases this is necessary
only once or twice a week, but dosages up to 10 mg daily have
been used in some patients.
2. Inhibitors of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
—Inhibition of renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system with ACE
inhibitors should be considered part of the initial therapy of this
syndrome based on their life-saving benefits.
A. ACE INHIBITORS—Many ACE inhibitors are available, and at
least seven have been shown to be effective for the treatment of
heart failure or the related indication of postinfarction LV
dysfunction (see Table 11–8). ACE inhibitors reduce mortality by
approximately 20% in patients with symptomatic heart failure and
have been shown also to prevent hospitalizations, increase exercise
tolerance, and reduce symptoms in these patients. As a result, ACE
inhibitors should be part of first-line treatment of patients with
symptomatic LV systolic dysfunction (EF < 40%), usually in
combination with a diuretic. They are also indicated for the
management of patients with reduced EFs without symptoms
because they prevent the progression to clinical heart failure.
Because ACE inhibitors may induce significant hypotension,
particularly following the initial doses, they must be started with
caution. Hypotension is most prominent in patients with already low
BPs (systolic pressure < 100 mm Hg), hypovolemia, prerenal
azotemia (especially if it is diuretic induced), and hyponatremia (an
indicator of activation of the renin–angiotensin system). These
patients should generally be started at low dosages (captopril 6.25
mg three times daily, enalapril 2.5 mg daily, or the equivalent), but
other patients may be started at twice these dosages. Within several
days (for those with the markers of higher risk) or at most 2 weeks,
patients should be questioned about symptoms of hypotension, and
both kidney function and K+ levels should be monitored.
ACE inhibitors should be titrated to the dosages proved effective
in clinical trials (captopril 50 mg three times daily, enalapril 10 mg
twice daily, lisinopril 20 mg daily, or the equivalent) over a period of
1–3 months. Most patients will tolerate these doses. Asymptomatic
hypotension is not a contraindication to up-titrating or continuing
ACE inhibitors. Some patients exhibit increases in serum creatinine
or K+, but they do not require discontinuation if the levels stabilize
—even at values as high as 3 mg/dL and 5.5 mEq/L, respectively.
Kidney dysfunction is more frequent in diabetics, older patients, and
those with low systolic pressures, and these groups should be
monitored more closely. The most common side effects of ACE
inhibitors in heart failure patients are dizziness (often not related to
the level of BP) and cough, though the latter is often due as much to
heart failure or intercurrent pulmonary conditions as to the ACE
inhibitor.
B. ANGIOTENSIN II RECEPTOR BLOCKERS—Another approach to
inhibiting the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system is the use of
specific ARBs (see Table 11–8), which will block or decrease most
of the effects of the system. In addition, because there are
alternative pathways of angiotensin II production in many tissues,
the receptor blockers may provide more complete system
blockade.
However, these agents do not share the effects of ACE inhibitors
on other potentially important pathways that produce increases in
bradykinin, prostaglandins, and nitric oxide in the heart, blood
vessels, and other tissues. The Valsartan in Heart Failure Trial (Val-
HeFT) examined the efficacy of adding valsartan (titrated to a dose
of 160 mg twice a day) to ACE inhibitor therapy. While the
addition of valsartan did not reduce mortality, the composite of
death or hospitalization for heart failure was significantly reduced.
The CHARM trial randomized 7601 patients with chronic heart
failure with or without LV systolic dysfunction and with or without
background ACE inhibitor therapy to candesartan (titrated to 32
mg a day) or placebo. Among patients with an LV EF of < 40%,
there was an 18% reduction in cardiovascular death or heart failure
hospitalization and a statistically significant 12% reduction in all-
cause mortality. The benefits were similar among patients on ACE
inhibitors, including among patients on full-dose ACE inhibitors.
Thus, ARBs, specifically candesartan or valsartan, provide
important benefits as an alternative to, and in addition to, ACE
inhibitors in chronic heart failure with reduced LV EF. A large trial
of patients with chronic heart failure and preserved LV EF found no
benefit from the ARB irbesartan.
C. SPIRONOLACTONE AND EPLERENONE—There is evidence that
aldosterone mediates some of the major effects of renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system activation, such as myocardial
remodeling and fibrosis, as well as sodium retention and potassium
loss at the distal tubules. Thus, spironolactone should be considered
as a neurohormonal antagonist rather than narrowly as a potassium-
sparing diuretic. The RALES trial compared spironolactone 25 mg
daily with placebo in patients with advanced heart failure (current or
recent class IV) already receiving ACE inhibitors and diuretics and
showed a 29% reduction in mortality as well as similar decreases in
other clinical end points. Hyperkalemia was uncommon in this
severe heart failure clinical trial population, which was maintained on
high doses of diuretic, but hyperkalemia with spironolactone
appears to be common in general practice. Potassium levels should
be monitored closely during initiation of spironolactone (after 1 and
4 weeks of therapy), particularly for patients with even mild degrees
of kidney injury, and in patients receiving ACE inhibitors. Neither
the efficacy nor the safety of spironolactone has been established in
the large majority of patients with mild or moderate heart failure
who are taking low doses of diuretics, though this agent may be
considered in patients who require potassium supplementation. The
EMPHASIS-HF trial established that eplerenone 25–50 mg orally
daily, for patients with NYHA class II heart failure and LV EF <
30%, is effective at preventing cardiovascular death and heart
failure hospitalization.
3. β-Blockers—β-Blockers are part of the foundation of care of
chronic heart failure based on their life-saving benefits. The
mechanism of this benefit remains unclear, but it is likely that chronic
elevations of catecholamines and sympathetic nervous system
activity cause progressive myocardial damage, leading to worsening
LV function and dilation. The primary evidence for this hypothesis is
that over a period of 3–6 months, β-blockers produce consistent
substantial rises in EF (averaging 10% absolute increase) and
reductions in LV size and mass.
Clinical trial results have been reported in nearly 14,000 patients
(ranging from asymptomatic post-myocardial infarction LV
dysfunction to severe heart failure with LV EFs < 35–40%)
receiving ACE inhibitors and diuretics randomized to β-blockers or
placebo. Carvedilol, a nonselective β1- and β2-receptor blocker
with additional weak α-blocking activity, was the first β-blocker
approved for heart failure in the United States after showing a
reduction in death and hospitalizations in four smaller studies with a
total of nearly 1100 patients. Subsequently, trials with two β1-
selective agents, bisoprolol (CIBIS II, with 2647 patients) and
sustained-release metoprolol succinate (MERIT, with nearly 4000
patients), showed 35% reductions in mortality as well as fewer
hospitalizations. A trial using carvedilol in 2200 patients with severe
(NYHA class III/IV) heart failure was terminated ahead of schedule
because of a 35% reduction in mortality. The SENIORS trial of
2135 patients found that nebivolol was effective in elderly patients
(70 years and older) with chronic heart failure, although the
evidence of degree of benefit was not as strong as with the three
proven β-blockers carvedilol, metoprolol succinate, or bisoprolol.
In these trials, there were reductions in sudden deaths and deaths
from worsening heart failure, and benefits were seen in patients with
underlying 
coronary 
disease 
and 
those 
with 
primary
cardiomyopathies. In all these studies, the β-blockers were
generally well tolerated, with similar numbers of withdrawals in the
active and placebo groups. This has led to a strong
recommendation that stable patients (defined as having no recent
deterioration or evidence of volume overload) with mild, moderate,
and even severe heart failure should be treated with a β-blocker
unless there is a noncardiac contraindication. In the COPERNICUS
trial, carvedilol was both well tolerated and highly effective in
reducing both mortality and heart failure hospitalizations in a group
of patients with severe (NYHA class III or IV) symptoms, but care
was taken to ensure that they were free of fluid retention at the time
of initiation. In this study, one death was prevented for every 13
patients treated for 1 year—as dramatic an effect as has been seen
with a pharmacologic therapy in the history of cardiovascular
medicine. One trial comparing carvedilol and (short-acting)
metoprolol tartrate (COMET) found significant reductions in all-
cause mortality and cardiovascular mortality with carve-dilol. Thus,
patients with chronic heart failure should be treated with extended-
release metoprolol, bisoprolol, or carvedilol, but not short-acting
metoprolol.
Because even apparently stable patients may deteriorate when β-
blockers are initiated, initiation must be done gradually and with
great care. Carvedilol is initiated at a dosage of 3.125 mg twice
daily and may be increased to 6.25, 12.5, and 25 mg twice daily at
intervals of approximately 2 weeks. The protocols for sustained-
release metoprolol use were started at 12.5 or 25 mg daily and
doubled at intervals of 2 weeks to a target dose of 200 mg daily
(using the Toprol XL sustained-release preparation). Bisoprolol
was administered at a dosage of 1.25, 2.5, 3.75, 5, 7.5, and 10 mg
daily, with increments at 1- to 4-week intervals. More gradual up-
titration is often more convenient and may be better tolerated.
Patients should be instructed to monitor their weights at home as
an indicator of fluid retention and to report any increase or change
in symptoms immediately. Before each dose increase, the patient
should be seen and examined to ensure that there has not been fluid
retention or worsening of symptoms. If heart failure worsens, this
can usually be managed by increasing diuretic doses and delaying
further increases in β-blocker doses, though downward adjustments
or discontinuation is sometimes required. Carvedilol, because of its
α-blocking activity, may cause dizziness or hypotension. This can
usually be managed by reducing the doses of other vasodilators and
by slowing the pace of dose increases.
4. Digitalis glycosides—Although the digitalis glycosides were
once the mainstay of treatment of CHF, their use in patients who
are in sinus rhythm has declined because they lack the benefits of
the neurohormonal antagonists on prognosis and because safety
concerns persist. However, their efficacy in reducing the symptoms
of heart failure has been established in at least four multicenter trials
that have demonstrated that digoxin withdrawal is associated with
worsening symptoms and signs of heart failure, more frequent
hospitalizations for decompensation, and reduced exercise
tolerance. This was also seen in the 6800-patient Digitalis
Investigators Group (DIG) trial, though that study found no benefit
(or harm) with regard to survival. A reduction in deaths due to
progressive heart failure was balanced by an increase in deaths due
to ischemic and arrhythmic events. Based on these results, digoxin
should be used for patients who remain symptomatic when taking
diuretics and ACE inhibitors as well as for patients with heart failure
who are in atrial fibrillation and require rate control.
Digoxin, the only widely used digitalis preparation, has a half-life
of 24–36 hours and is eliminated almost entirely by the kidneys. The
oral maintenance dose may range from 0.125 mg three times
weekly to 0.5 mg daily. It is lower in patients with kidney
dysfunction, in older patients, and in those with smaller lean body
mass. Although a loading dose of 0.75–1.25 mg (depending
primarily on lean body size) over 24–48 hours may be given if an
early effect is desired, in most patients with chronic heart failure it is
sufficient to begin with the expected maintenance dose (usually
0.125–0.25 mg daily). Amiodarone, quinidine, propafenone, and
verapamil are among the drugs that may increase digoxin levels up
to 100%. It is prudent to measure a blood level after 7–14 days
(and at least 6 hours after the last dose was administered). Most of
the positive inotropic effect is apparent with serum digoxin levels
between 0.7 ng/mL and 1.2 ng/mL, and levels above this range may
be associated with a higher risk of arrhythmias and lower survival
rates, though clinically evident toxicity is rare with levels below 1.8
ng/mL. Once an appropriate maintenance dose is established,
subsequent levels are usually not indicated unless there is a change
in kidney function or medications that affects digoxin levels or a
significant deterioration in cardiac status that may be associated with
reduced clearance. Digoxin may induce ventricular arrhythmias,
especially when hypokalemia or myocardial ischemia is present.
Digoxin toxicity has become less frequent as there has been a
better appreciation of its pharmacology, but the therapeutic-to-toxic
ratio is quite narrow. Symptoms of digitalis toxicity include anorexia,
nausea, headache, blurring or yellowing of vision, and disorientation.
Cardiac toxicity may take the form of AV conduction or sinus node
depression; junctional, atrial, or ventricular premature beats or
tachycardias; or ventricular fibrillation. Potassium administration
(following serum potassium measurement, since severe toxicity may
be associated with hyperkalemia) is usually indicated for the
tachyarrhythmias even when levels are in the normal range, but may
worsen conduction disturbances. Lidocaine or phenytoin may be
useful for ventricular arrhythmias, as is overdrive pacing, but
quinidine, amiodarone, and propafenone should be avoided
because they will increase digoxin levels. Electrical cardioversion
should be avoided if possible, as it may cause intractable ventricular
fibrillation or cardiac standstill. Pacing is indicated for third-degree
AV block (complete heart block) and symptomatic or severe block
(heart rate < 40 beats/min) if they persist after treatment with
atropine. Digoxin immune fab (ovine) is available for life-threatening
toxicity or large overdoses, but it should be remembered that its
half-life is shorter than that of digoxin and so repeat administration
may be required.
5. Vasodilators—Because most patients with moderate to severe
heart failure have both elevated preload and reduced cardiac
output, the maximum benefit of vasodilator therapy can be achieved
by an agent or combination of agents with both actions. Many
patients with heart failure have mitral or tricuspid regurgitation;
agents that reduce resistance to ventricular outflow tend to redirect
regurgitant flow in a forward direction.
Although vasodilators that are also neurohumoral antagonists—
specifically, the ACE inhibitors—improve prognosis, such a benefit
is less clear with the direct-acting vasodilators. The combination of
hydralazine and isosor-bide dinitrate has improved survival, but to a
lesser extent than ACE inhibitors. The A-HeFT trial studied
hydralazine (75 mg) and isosorbide dinitrate (40 mg) three times a
day in 1050 African Americans with NYHA class III or IV chronic
heart failure, most of whom were treated with ACE inhibitors and
β-blockers. The primary endpoint was a clinical composite. The
trial was stopped early because of a significant 43% reduction in all-
cause mortality with hydralazine and nitrates, although the relatively
small sample size limits the confidence in the results. Whether the
benefits of this approach are limited to African Americans, who may
have a less active renin–angiotensin system is not known, but it is
appropriate to use this combination in addition to other effective
therapies in African Americans with severe heart failure.
See section on Acute Myocardial Infarction earlier in this chapter
for a discussion on the intravenous vasodilating drugs and their
dosages.
A. NITRATES—Intravenous vasodilators (sodium nitroprusside or
nitroglycerin) are used primarily for acute or severely
decompensated chronic heart failure, especially when accompanied
by hypertension or myocardial ischemia. If neither of the latter is
present, therapy is best initiated and adjusted based on
hemodynamic measurements. The starting dosage for nitroglycerin is
generally about 10 mcg/min, which is titrated upward by 10–20
mcg/min (to a maximum of 200 mcg/min) until mean arterial
pressure drops by 10%. Hypotension (BP < 100 mm Hg systolic)
should be avoided. For sodium nitroprusside, the starting dosage is
0.3–0.5 mcg/kg/min with upward titration to a maximum dose of 10
mcg/kg/min.
Isosorbide dinitrate, 20–80 mg orally three times daily, has
proved effective in several small studies. Nitroglycerin ointment,
12.5–50 mg (1–4 inches) every 6–8 hours, appears to be equally
effective although somewhat inconvenient for long-term therapy.
The nitrates are moderately effective in relieving shortness of breath,
especially in patients with mild to moderate symptoms, but less
successful—probably because they have little effect on cardiac
output—in advanced heart failure. Nitrate therapy is generally well
tolerated, but headaches and hypotension may limit the dose of all
agents. The development of tolerance to long-term nitrate therapy
occurs. This is minimized by intermittent therapy, especially if a daily
8- to 12-hour nitrate-free interval is used, but probably develops to
some extent in most patients receiving these agents. Transdermal
nitroglycerin patches have no sustained effect in patients with heart
failure and should not be used for this indication.
B. NESIRITIDE—This agent, a recombinant form of human brain
natriuretic peptide, is a potent vasodilator that reduces ventricular
filling pressures and improves cardiac output. Its hemodynamic
effects resemble those of intravenous nitroglycerin with a more
predictable dose–response curve and a longer duration of action. In
clinical studies, nesiritide (administered as 2 mcg/kg by intravenous
bolus injection followed by an infusion of 0.01 mcg/kg/min, which
may be up-titrated if needed) produced a rapid improvement in
both dyspnea and hemodynamics. The primary adverse effect is
hypotension, which may be symptomatic and sustained. The
ASCEND trial randomized nearly 7000 patients with acute
decompensated heart failure to receive either nesiritide or placebo;
results showed a reduction in dyspnea, worsening in renal function,
and no effect on death or heart failure rehospitalization. Because
most patients with acute heart failure respond well to conventional
therapy, the role of nesiritide may be primarily in patients who
continue to be symptomatic after initial treatment with diuretics and
nitrates.
C. HYDRALAZINE—Oral hydralazine is a potent arteriolar dilator
and markedly increases cardiac output in patients with CHF.
However, as a single agent, it has not been shown to improve
symptoms or exercise tolerance during long-term treatment. The
combination of nitrates and oral hydralazine produces greater
hemodynamic effects.
Hydralazine therapy is frequently limited by side effects.
Approximately 30% of patients are unable to tolerate the relatively
high doses required to produce hemodynamic improvement in heart
failure (200–400 mg daily in divided doses). The major side effect
is gastrointestinal distress, but headaches, tachycardia, and
hypotension are relatively common. ARBs have largely supplanted
the use of the hydralazine–isosorbide dinitrate combination in ACE-
intolerant patients.
6. Combination of medical therapies—Optimal management of
chronic heart failure involves using combinations of proven life-
saving therapies. In addition to ACE-inhibitors and β-blockers,
patients who remain symptomatic should be considered for
additional therapy, in the form of ARBs (best proven in class II–III
heart failure), spironolactone (best proven in current or recent class
IV heart failure), or hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate (with
evidence of benefit in African Americans).
7. Positive inotropic agents—The digitalis derivatives are the only
available oral inotropic agents in the United States (see above). A
number of other oral positive ino-tropic agents have been
investigated for the long-term treatment of heart failure, but all have
increased mortality without convincing evidence of improvement in
symptoms. Intravenous agents, such as the β1-agonist dobutamine
and the phosphodiesterase inhibitor milrinone, are sometimes used
on a long-term or intermittent basis. The limited available data
suggest that continuous therapy is also likely to increase mortality;
intermittent ino-tropic therapy has never been evaluated in
controlled trials, and its use is largely based on anecdotal
experience. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of 950 patients
evaluating intravenous milrinone in patients admitted for
decompensated heart failure who had no definite indications for
inotropic therapy showed no benefit in terms of survival, decreasing
length of admission, or preventing readmission—and significantly
increased rates of sustained hypotension and atrial fibrillation. Thus,
the role of positive inotropic agents appears to be limited to patients
with symptoms and signs of low cardiac output (primarily
hypoperfusion and deteriorating kidney function) and those who do
not respond to intravenous diuretics. In some cases, dobutamine or
milrinone may help maintain patients who are awaiting cardiac
transplantation.
8. Calcium channel blockers—First-generation calcium channel
blockers may accelerate the progression of CHF. However, two
trials with amlodipine in patients with severe heart failure showed
that this agent was safe, though not superior to placebo. These
agents should be avoided unless they need to be utilized to treat
associated hypertension or angina, and for these indications
amlodipine is the drug of choice.
9. Anticoagulation—Patients with LV failure and reduced EFs are
at somewhat increased risk for developing intracardiac thrombi and
systemic arterial emboli. However, this risk appears to be primarily
in patients who are in atrial fibrillation or who have large recent
anterior myocardial infarction, who should generally be
anticoagulated with warfarin for 3 months following the MI. Other
patients with heart failure have embolic rates of approximately two
per 100 patient-years of follow-up, which approximates the rate of
major bleeding, and routine anticoagulation does not appear
warranted except in patients with prior embolic events or mobile
LV thrombi.
10. Antiarrhythmic therapy—Patients with moderate to severe
heart failure have a high incidence of both symptomatic and
asymptomatic arrhythmias. Although < 10% of patients have
syncope or presyncope resulting from ventricular tachycardia,
ambulatory monitoring reveals that up to 70% of patients have
asymptomatic episodes of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia.
These arrhythmias indicate a poor prognosis independent of the
severity of LV dysfunction, but many of the deaths are probably not
arrhythmia related. β-Blockers, because of their marked favorable
effect on prognosis in general and on the incidence of sudden death
specifically, should be initiated in these as well as all other patients
with heart failure. Empiric antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone
did not improve outcome in the SCD-HeFT trial, and most other
agents are contraindicated because of their proarrhythmic effects in
this population and their adverse effect on cardiac function.
11. Statin therapy—Even though vascular disease is present in
many patients with chronic heart failure, the role of statins has not
been well defined in the heart failure population. Two trials—the
CORONA and the GISSI-HF trials—have failed to show benefits
of statins in the chronic heart failure population.
C. Nonpharmacologic Treatment
1. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators—Randomized clinical
trials have extended the indications for ICDs beyond patients with
symptomatic or asymptomatic arrhythmias to the broad population
of patients with chronic heart failure and LV systolic dysfunction
after established medical therapy. In the second Multicenter
Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial (MADIT II), 1232
patients with prior myocardial infarction and an EF < 30% were
randomized to an ICD or a control group. Mortality was 31%
lower in the ICD group, which translated into nine lives saved for
each 100 patients who received a device and were monitored for 3
years. The Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Trial (SCD-
HeFT) reinforced and extended these results, showing a 23%
relative (7.2% absolute) reduction in mortality over 5 years with a
simple single-lead ICD in a population of patients with symptomatic
chronic heart failure and an EF of ≤ 35%. Patients with class II
symptoms appeared to have even larger benefits than patients with
class III symptoms. These patients were well-managed with
contemporary heart failure treatments, including β-blockers. Based
on these results, the United States Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services has provided reimbursement coverage to include
patients with chronic heart failure and ischemic or nonischemic
cardiomyopathy with an EF ≤ 35%.
2. Biventricular pacing (resynchronization)—Many patients
with heart failure due to systolic dysfunction have abnormal
intraventricular conduction that results in dyssynchronous and hence
inefficient contractions. Several studies have evaluated the efficacy
of “multisite” pacing, using leads that stimulate the RV from the apex
and the LV from the lateral wall via the coronary sinus. Patients with
wide QRS complexes (generally ≥ 120 milliseconds), reduced EFs,
and moderate to severe symptoms have been evaluated. Results
from trials with up to 2 years of follow-up have shown an increase
in EF, improvement in symptoms and exercise tolerance, and
reduction in death and hospitalization. The COMPANION trial
included 1520 patients with NYHA class III or IV heart failure, EF
of ≤ 35%, and QRS duration ≥ 120 milliseconds. In addition to
optimal medical therapy, resynchronization therapy with
biventricular pacing with or without implantable defibrillator
capability reduced death and hospitalization from any cause by
about 20%. The CARE-HF trial randomized 813 similar patients,
who also required mechanical evidence of dyssynchrony if QRS
duration was 120–149 milliseconds, to resynchronization therapy.
Over a mean follow-up of 29 months, death or hospitalization for
cardiac cause was reduced by 37% and mortality was reduced by
36%. Thus, resynchronization therapy is indicated for patients with
moderate to severe heart failure, EF ≤ 35%, and prolonged QRS
duration. A recent trial (MADIT-CRT) showed reduced heart
failure events (but not mortality) with cardiac resynchronization
therapy among patients with mild heart failure symptoms, LV EF ≤
30%, and QRS ≥ 130 msec.
3. Case management, diet, and exercise training—Thirty to 50
percent of CHF patients who are hospitalized will be readmitted
within 3–6 months. Strategies to prevent clinical deterioration, such
as case management, home monitoring of weight and clinical status,
and patient adjustment of diuretics, can prevent rehospitalizations
and should be part of the treatment regimen of advanced heart
failure. Involvement of a multidisciplinary team (rather than a single
physician) and in-person (rather than telephonic) communication
appear to be important features of successful programs.
Patients should routinely practice moderate salt restriction (2–2.5
g sodium or 5–6 g salt per day). More severe sodium restriction is
usually difficult to achieve and unnecessary because of the
availability of potent diuretic agents.
Exercise training improves activity tolerance in significant part by
reversing the peripheral abnormalities associated with heart failure
and deconditioning. In severe heart failure, restriction of activity may
facilitate temporary recompensation. A large trial (HF ACTION,
2331 patients) showed no significant benefit (nor harm) from a
structured exercise training program on death or hospitalization.
Thus, in stable patients, a prudent increase in activity or a regular
exercise regimen can be encouraged. Indeed, a gradual exercise
program is associated with diminished symptoms and substantial
increases in exercise capacity.
4. Coronary revascularization—Since underlying CAD is the
cause of heart failure in the majority of patients, coronary
revascularization may both improve symptoms and prevent
progression. However, trials have not been performed in patients
with symptomatic heart failure. Nonetheless, noninvasive testing for
ischemic but viable myocardium is an appropriate first step in
patients with known coronary disease but no current clinical
evidence of ischemia. Patients with angina who are candidates for
surgery should be evaluated for revascularization, usually by
coronary angiography. In general, bypass surgery is preferable to
PTCA in the setting of heart failure because it provides more
complete revascularization.
5. Cardiac transplantation—Because of the poor prognosis of
patients with advanced heart failure, cardiac transplantation has
become widely used. Many centers now have 1-year survival rates
exceeding 80–90%, and 5-year survival rates above 70%.
Infections, hypertension and kidney dysfunction caused by
cyclosporine, rapidly progressive coronary atherosclerosis, and
immunosuppressant-related cancers have been the major
complications. The high cost and limited number of donor organs
require careful patient selection early in the course.
6. Other surgical treatment options—Several surgical
procedures for severe heart failure have received considerable
publicity. Cardiomyoplasty is a procedure in which the latissimus
dorsi muscle is wrapped around the heart and stimulated to contract
synchronously with it. In ventricular reduction surgery, a large part
of the anterolateral wall is resected to make the heart function more
efficiently. Both approaches are too risky in end-stage patients and
have not been shown to improve prognosis or symptoms in
controlled studies, and for these reasons they have largely been
dropped. Externally powered and implantable ventricular assist
devices can be used in patients who require ventricular support
either to allow the heart to recover or as a bridge to transplantation.
The latest generation devices are small enough to allow patients
unrestricted mobility and even discharge from the hospital.
However, complications are frequent, including bleeding,
thromboembolism, and infection, and the cost is very high,
exceeding $200,000 in the initial 1–3 months.
Although 1-year survival was improved in the REMATCH
randomized trial, all 129 patients died by 26 months.
7. Palliative care—Despite the technologic advances of recent
years, including cardiac resynchronization, implantable defibrillators,
LV assist devices, and totally implantable artificial hearts, it should
be remembered that many patients with chronic heart failure are
elderly and have multiple comorbidities. Many of them will not
experience meaningful improvements in survival with aggressive
therapy, and the goal of management should be symptomatic
improvement and palliation (see Chapter 5).
 Prognosis
Once manifest, heart failure carries a poor prognosis. Even with
modern treatment, the 5-year mortality is approximately 50%.
Mortality rates vary from < 5% per year in those with no or few
symptoms to > 30% per year in those with severe and refractory
symptoms. These figures emphasize the critical importance of early
detection and intervention. Higher mortality is related to older age,
lower LV EF, more severe symptoms, chronic kidney disease, and
diabetes. The prognosis of heart failure has improved in the past
two decades, probably at least in part because of the more
widespread use of ACE inhibitors and β-blockers, which markedly
improve survival.
 When to Refer
Patients with new symptoms of heart failure not explained by an
obvious cause should be referred to a cardiologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with unexplained new or worsened symptoms,
or positive cardiac biomarkers.
•    Patients with hypoxia, fluid overload, or pulmonary
edema not readily resolved in outpatient setting.
Bardy GH; Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Trial (SCD-
HeFT) Investigators. Amiodarone or an implantable
cardioverterdefibrillator for congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med.
2005 Jan 20;352(3):225–37. [PMID: 15659722]
 
Cleland JG et al. The effect of cardiac resynchronization on
morbidity and mortality in heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2005 Apr
14;352(15):1539–49. [PMID: 15753115]
 
Davies EJ et al. Exercise based rehabilitation for heart failure.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Apr 14;4:CD003331.
[PMID: 20393935]
 
Deedwania PC et al. Atrial fibrillation in heart failure: a
comprehensive review. Am J Med. 2010 Mar;123(3):198–204.
[PMID: 20193823]
 
Ezekowitz JA et al. Standardizing care for acute decompensated
heart failure in a large megatrial: the approach for the Acute
Studies of Clinical Effectiveness of Nesiritide in Subjects with
Decompensated Heart Failure (ASCEND-HF). Am Heart J. 2009
Feb;157(2):219–28. [PMID: 19185628]
 
Gissi-HF Investigators; Tavazzi L et al. Effect of rosuvastatin in
patients with chronic heart failure (the GISSI-HF trial): a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2008
Oct 4;372(9645):1231–9. [PMID: 18757089]
 
Goldberg LR. Heart failure. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Jun 1;
152(11):ITC61–15. [PMID: 20513825]
 
Howlett JG et al. The 2010 Canadian Cardiovascular Society
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of heart failure
update: Heart failure in ethnic minority populations, heart failure
and pregnancy, disease management, and quality
improvement/assurance programs. Can J Cardiol. 2010 Apr;
26(4):185–202. [PMID: 20386768]
 
Hunt SA et al. 2009 focused update incorporated into the
ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of
Heart Failure in Adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines: developed in collaboration with the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Circulation. 2009 Apr 14;119(14):e391-479. [PMID: 19324966]
 
Moss AJ et al. Cardiac-resynchronization therapy for the
prevention of heart-failure events. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct 1;
361(14):1329–38. [PMID: 19723701]
 
Ramani GV et al. Chronic heart failure: contemporary diagnosis
and management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010 Feb;85(2):180–95.
[PMID: 20118395]
 
Salukhe TV et al. Is there benefit in implanting defibrillators in
patients with severe heart failure? Heart. 2010 Apr;96(8): 599–
603. [PMID: 20357388]
 
Steinhart B et al. Improving the diagnosis of acute heart failure
using a validated prediction model. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Oct
13;54(16):1515-21. [PMID: 19815122]
 
Swedberg K et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
chronic heart failure: executive summary (update 2005): The Task
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Heart Failure of
the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2005
Jun;26(11):1115–40. [PMID: 15901669]
 
Zannad F et al; EMPHASIS-HF Study Group. Eplerenone in
patients with systolic heart failure and mild symptoms. N Engl J
Med. 2011 Jan 6;364(1):11–21. [PMID: 21073363]
 
ACUTE HEART FAILURE & PULMONARY EDEMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute onset or worsening of dyspnea at rest.
 Tachycardia, diaphoresis, cyanosis.
 Pulmonary rales, rhonchi; expiratory wheezing.
 Radiograph shows interstitial and alveolar edema with or without
cardiomegaly.
 Arterial hypoxemia.
 
 General Considerations
Typical causes of acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema include acute
myocardial infarction or severe ischemia, exacerbation of chronic
heart failure, acute volume overload of the LV (valvular
regurgitation), and mitral stenosis. By far the most common
presentation in developed countries is one of acute or subacute
deterioration of chronic heart failure, precipitated by discontinuation
of medications, excessive salt intake, myocardial ischemia,
tachyarrhythmias (especially rapid atrial fibrillation), or intercurrent
infection. Often in the latter group, there is preceding volume
overload with worsening edema and progressive shortness of breath
for which earlier intervention can usually avoid the need for hospital
admission.
 Clinical Findings
Acute pulmonary edema presents with a characteristic clinical
picture of severe dyspnea, the production of pink, frothy sputum,
and diaphoresis and cyanosis. Rales are present in all lung fields, as
are generalized wheezing and rhonchi. Pulmonary edema may
appear acutely or sub-acutely in the setting of chronic heart failure
or may be the first manifestation of cardiac disease, usually acute
myocardial infarction, which may be painful or silent. Less severe
decompensations usually present with dyspnea at rest and rales and
other evidence of fluid retention but without severe hypoxia.
Noncardiac causes of pulmonary edema include intravenous
opioids, increased intracerebral pressure, high altitude, sepsis,
several medications, inhaled toxins, transfusion reactions, shock,
and disseminated intravascular coagulation. These are distinguished
from cardiogenic pulmonary edema by the clinical setting, the
history, and the physical examination. Conversely, in most patients
with cardiogenic pulmonary edema, an underlying cardiac
abnormality can usually be detected clinically or by the ECG, chest
radiograph, or echocardiogram.
The chest radiograph reveals signs of pulmonary vascular
redistribution, blurriness of vascular outlines, increased interstitial
markings, and, characteristically, the butterfly pattern of distribution
of alveolar edema. The heart may be enlarged or normal in size
depending on whether heart failure was previously present.
Assessment of cardiac function by echocardiography is important,
since a substantial proportion of patients has normal EFs with
elevated atrial pressures due to diastolic dysfunction. In cardiogenic
pulmonary edema, the PCWP is invariably elevated, usually over 25
mm Hg. In noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, the wedge pressure
may be normal or even low.
 Treatment
In full-blown pulmonary edema, the patient should be placed in a
sitting position with legs dangling over the side of the bed; this
facilitates respiration and reduces venous return. Oxygen is
delivered by mask to obtain an arterial Po2 > 60 mm Hg.
Noninvasive pressure support ventilation may improve oxygenation
and prevent severe CO2 retention while pharmacologic
interventions take effect. However, if respiratory distress remains
severe, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation may be
necessary.
Morphine is highly effective in pulmonary edema and may be
helpful in less severe decompensations when the patient is
uncomfortable. The initial dosage is 2–8 mg intravenously
(subcutaneous administration is effective in milder cases) and may
be repeated after 2–4 hours. Morphine increases venous
capacitance, lowering LA pressure, and relieves anxiety, which can
reduce the efficiency of ventilation. However, morphine may lead to
CO2 retention by reducing the ventilatory drive. It should be
avoided in patients with opioid-induced pulmonary edema, who
may improve with opioid-antagonists, and in those with neurogenic
pulmonary edema.
Intravenous diuretic therapy (furosemide, 40 mg, or bumetanide,
1 mg—or higher doses if the patient has been receiving long-term
diuretic therapy) is usually indicated even if the patient has not
exhibited prior fluid retention. These agents produce venodilation
prior to the onset of diuresis.
Nitrate therapy accelerates clinical improvement by reducing
both BP and LV filling pressures. Sublingual nitroglycerin or
isosorbide dinitrate, topical nitroglycerin, or intravenous nitrates will
ameliorate dyspnea rapidly prior to the onset of diuresis, and these
agents are particularly valuable in patients with accompanying
hypertension. Intravenous nesiritide (recombinant BNP), when
given as a bolus followed by an infusion, improves dyspnea more
rapidly than intravenous nitroglycerin, though this may reflect the
cautious way in which nitroglycerin is uptitrated by many
practitioners. This agent, as well as nitrates, may precipitate
hypotension, especially since these agents are used in combination
with multiple drugs that lower BP. In patients with low-output states
—particularly when hypotension is present—positive inotropic
agents are indicated. These approaches to treatment have been
discussed previously.
Bronchospasm may occur in response to pulmonary edema and
may itself exacerbate hypoxemia and dyspnea. Treatment with
inhaled β-adrenergic agonists or intravenous aminophylline may be
helpful, but both may also provoke tachycardia and supraventricular
arrhythmias.
In most cases, pulmonary edema responds rapidly to therapy.
When the patient has improved, the cause or precipitating factor
should be ascertained. In patients without prior heart failure,
evaluation should include echocardiography and in many cases
cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography. Patients with
acute decompensation of chronic heart failure should be treated to
achieve a euvolemic state and have their medical regimen optimized.
Generally, an oral diuretic and an ACE inhibitor should be initiated,
with efficacy and tolerability confirmed prior to discharge. In
selected patients, early but careful initiation of β-blockers in low
doses should be considered.
Di Marco F et al. Risk factors for treatment failure in patients with
severe acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. Anaesth Intensive
Care. 2008 May;36(3):351-9. [PMID: 18564795]
 
Gauthier N et al. New therapies in acute decompensated heart
failure. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2008 Mar;23(2):134-40. [PMID:
18303526]
 
Gray AJ et al; 3CPO Study Investigators. A multicentre
randomised controlled trial of the use of continuous positive airway
pressure and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation in the early
treatment of patients presenting to the emergency department with
severe acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema: the 3CPO trial.
Health Technol Assess. 2009 Jul; 13(33):1-106. [PMID:
19615296]]
 
Johnson JM. Management of acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema:
a literature review. Adv Emerg Nurs J. 2009 JanMar;31(1):36-43.
[PMID: 20118852]
 
O'Connor CM et al. Causes of death and rehospitalization in
patients hospitalized with worsening heart failure and reduced left
ventricular ejection fraction: results from Efficacy of Vasopressin
Antagonism in Heart Failure Outcome Study with Tolvaptan
(EVEREST) program. Am Heart J. 2010 May; 159(5):841–
49.e1. [PMID: 20435194]
 
Rimoldi SF et al. Flash pulmonary edema. Prog Cardiovasc Dis.
2009 Nov-Dec;52(3):249-59. [PMID: 19917337]
 
Summers RL et al. Pathophysiology of acute decompensated heart
failure. Heart Fail Clin. 2009 Jan;5(1):9-17. [PMID: 19026381]
 
Tribouilloy C et al. In-hospital mortality and prognostic factors in
patients admitted for new-onset heart failure with preserved or
reduced ejection fraction: a prospective observational study. Arch
Cardiovasc Dis. 2008 Apr;101(4):226-34. [PMID: 18654097]
 
Weng CL et al. Meta-analysis: noninvasive ventilation in acute
cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Ann Intern Med. 2010 May
4;152(9):590–600. [PMID: 20439577]
 
West RL et al. A review of dyspnea in acute heart failure
syndromes. Am Heart J. 2010 Aug;160(2):209-14. [PMID:
20691823]
 
MYOCARDITIS & THE
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
 
INFECTIOUS MYOCARDITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often follows an upper respiratory infection.
 May present with chest pain (pleuritic or nonspecific) or signs of
heart failure.
 Echocardiogram documents cardiomegaly and contractile
dysfunction.
 Myocardial biopsy, though not sensitive, may reveal a
characteristic inflammatory pattern. MRi may now have a role in
diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Cardiac dysfunction due to primary myocarditis is presumed to be
caused by either an acute viral infection or a postviral immune
response. Secondary myocarditis is the result of inflammation
caused by nonviral pathogens, drugs, chemicals, physical agents, or
inflammatory diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus. The
list of infectious causes of myocarditis is extensive and includes
viruses with DNA and RNA cores. The coxsackie virus is the
predominant agent, but many others have been implicated.
Rickettsial myocarditis occurs with scrub typhus, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, and Q fever. Diphtheritic myocarditis is caused by
the exotoxin and is often manifested by conduction abnormalities as
well as heart failure.
Chagas disease, caused by the insect-borne protozoan
Trypanosoma cruzi, is a common form of myocarditis in Central
and South America; the major clinical manifestations appear after a
latent period of more than a decade. At this stage, patients present
with cardiomyopathy, conduction disturbances, and sudden death.
Associated gastrointestinal involvement (megaesophagus and
megacolon) is the rule. Toxoplasmosis causes myocarditis that is
usually asymptomatic but can lead to heart failure. Among parasitic
infections, trichinosis is the most common cause of cardiac
involvement. HIV virus can cause myocarditis, though the
prevalence of this complication is not well known and it appears
related to the level of viral load and CD4 count. In addition, other
infectious causes of myocarditis are more common in patients with
AIDS. A list of infectious causes of myocarditis is shown in Table
10–11.
Giant cell myocarditis is a rare idiopathic disorder characterized
by giant cell and lymphocyte infiltration of the heart muscle. Patients
usually die of ventricular arrhythmias or heart failure but occasionally
respond to immunosuppressive therapy or early transplantation.
 
Table 10–11. Major causes of infectious myocarditis.
 
Viral
Adenovirus, arbovirus (dengue fever, yellow fever),
arenavirus (Lassa fever), coxsackie virus,
cytomegalovirus, echovirus, encephalomyocarditis virus,
Epstein–Barr virus, hepatitis B, herpesvirus, HIV-1,
influenza virus, mumps virus, poliomyelitis virus, rabies,
respiratory syncytial virus, rubella and rubeola virus,
vaccinia virus, varicella virus, variola virus
 
Bacterial
Brucellosis, clostridia, diphtheria, Francisella (tularemia),
gonococcus, Haemophilus, Legionella, meningococcus,
Mycobacterium, Mycoplasma, Pneumococcus,
psittacosis, Salmonella, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
Whipple disease
 
Fungal
Actinomyces, Aspergillus, Blastomyces, Candida,
Cryptococcus, Histoplasma, Nocardia, Sporothrix
 
Rickettsial
   Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q fever, scrub typhus,
typhus
Spirochetal
   Borrelia (Lyme disease and relapsing fever),
Leptospira, syphilis
Helminthic
   Cysticercus, Echinococcus, Schistosoma, Toxocara
(visceral larva migrans), Trichinella
Protozoal
   Entamoeba, Leishmania, Tryponosoma (Chagas
disease), toxoplasmosis
Modified, with permission, from Pisani B et al. Inflammatory myocardial
disease and cardiomyopathies. Am J Med. 1997 May; 102(5):459–69.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients may present several days to a few weeks after the onset of
an acute febrile illness or a respiratory infection or with heart failure
without antecedent symptoms. The onset of heart failure may be
gradual or may be abrupt and fulminant. Emboli may occur. Pleural-
pericardial chest pain is common. Examination reveals tachycardia,
gallop rhythm, and other evidence of heart failure or conduction
defect. Many acute infections are subclinical, though they may
present later as idiopathic cardiomyopathy or with ventricular
arrhythmias. At times, the presentation may mimic an acute
myocardial infarction with ST changes, positive cardiac markers,
and regional wall motion abnormalities despite normal coronaries.
Microaneurysms may also occur and may be associated with
serious ventricular arrhythmias. Patients may present in a variety of
ways with fulminant, subacute, or chronic myocarditis.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
ECG may show sinus tachycardia, other arrhythmias, non-specific
repolarization 
changes, 
and 
intraventricular 
conduction
abnormalities. Ventricular ectopy may be the initial and only clinical
finding. Chest radiograph is nonspecific, but cardiomegaly is
frequent, though not universal. Evidence for pulmonary venous
hypertension is common and frank pulmonary edema may be
present.
C. Diagnostic Studies
There is no specific laboratory study that is consistently present,
though the white blood cell count is usually elevated and the
sedimentation rate and CRP may be increased. Troponin I levels
are elevated in about one-third of patients, but CK-MB is elevated
in only 10%. Echocardiography provides the most convenient way
of evaluating cardiac function and can exclude many other
processes. Gallium-67 scintigraphy may reveal increased cardiac
uptake in acute or subacute myocarditis, but it is not very sensitive.
MRI with gadolinium enhancement reveals spotty areas of injury
throughout the myocardium. Paired serum viral titers and serologic
tests for other agents may indicate the cause.
D. Endomyocardial Biopsy
Pathologic examinations may reveal a lymphocytic inflammatory
response with necrosis, but the patchy distribution of abnormalities
makes this relatively insensitive. By biopsy, the diagnosis of
myocarditis has been established by the 1986 “Dallas” criteria. The
diagnosis is dependent on describing the severity of an inflammatory
infiltrate with necrosis and degeneration of adjacent myocytes.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Patients with fulminant myocarditis may present with acute
cardiogenic shock. Their ventricles are usually not dilated, but
thickened (possibly due to myoedema). There is a high death rate,
but if the patients recover, they are usually left with no residual
cardiomyopathy. Patients who present with subacute disease have a
dilated cardiomyopathy and generally make an incomplete
recovery. Those who present with chronic disease tend to have only
mild dilation of the LV and eventually present with a more restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
Specific antimicrobial therapy is indicated when an infecting agent
is identified. All patients should receive standard heart failure
therapy and have arrhythmias suppressed. Exercise should be
limited during the recovery phase. Some believe digoxin should be
avoided. Immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids and
intravenous immunoglobulins has been used in the hopes of
improving the outcome when the process is acute (< 6 months) and
if the biopsy suggests ongoing inflammation. However, controlled
trials have not suggested a benefit, so the value of routine
myocardial biopsies in patients presenting with an acute myocarditic
picture is uncertain; immunosuppressive therapy without histologic
confirmation is clearly unwise, and there are few data to support its
use. Patients with fulminant myocarditis require aggressive short-
term support including an IABP or an LV assist device. If severe
pulmonary infiltrates accompany the fulminant myocarditis,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support may be
temporarily required. Ongoing studies are addressing whether
patients with giant cell myocarditis may be responsive to
immunosuppressive agents, as a special case. Overall, if
improvement does not occur, many patients may be eventual
candidates for cardiac transplantation or long-term use of the newer
LV assist devices.
 When to Refer
Patients in whom myocarditis is suspected should be seen by a
cardiologist at a tertiary care center where facilities are available for
diagnosis and therapies available should a fulminant course ensue.
The facility should have ventricular support devices and
transplantation options available.
Blauwet LA et al. Myocarditis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010 Jan–
Feb;52(4):274–88. [PMID: 20109598]
 
Friedrich MG et al; International Consensus Group on
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance in Myocarditis.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in myocarditis: A JACC White
Paper. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Apr 28;53(17):1475–87. [PMID:
19389557]
 
Gupta S et al. Fulminant myocarditis. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc
Med. 2008 Nov;5(11):693–706. [PMID: 18797433]
 
Kindermann I et al. Predictors of outcome in patients with
suspected myocarditis. Circulation. 2008 Aug 5;118(6):639–48.
[PMID: 18645053]
 
Schultz JC et al. Diagnosis and treatment of viral myocarditis.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Nov;84(11):1001–9. [PMID: 19880690]
 
DRUG-INDUCED & TOXIC MYOCARDITIS
A variety of medications, illicit drugs, and toxic substances can
produce acute or chronic myocardial injury; the clinical presentation
varies widely. Doxorubicin and other cytotoxic agents, emetine, and
catecholamines (especially with pheochromocytoma) can produce a
pathologic picture of inflammation and necrosis together with clinical
heart failure and arrhythmias; toxicity of the first two is dose related.
The phenothiazines, lithium, chloroquine, disopyramide, antimony-
containing compounds, and arsenicals can also cause ECG changes,
arrhythmias, or heart failure. Hypersensitivity reactions to
sulfonamides, penicillins, and aminosalicylic acid as well as other
drugs can result in cardiac dysfunction. Radiation can cause an
acute inflammatory reaction as well as a chronic fibrosis of heart
muscle, usually in conjunction with pericarditis.
The incidence of cocaine cardiotoxicity has increased markedly.
Cocaine can cause coronary artery spasm, myocardial infarction,
arrhythmias, and myocarditis. Because many of these processes are
believed to be mediated by cocaine's inhibitory effect on
norepinephrine reuptake by sympathetic nerves, β-blockers have
been used therapeutically. In documented coronary spasm, calcium
channel blockers and nitrates may be effective. Usual therapy for
CHF or conduction system disease is warranted when symptoms
occur.
 When to Refer
Many patients with myocardial injury from toxic agents can be
monitored safely if ventricular function remains relatively preserved
(EF > 40%) and no CHF occurs.
Once CHF becomes evident or significant conduction system
disease becomes manifest, the patient should be evaluated and
monitored by a cardiologist in case myocardial dysfunction worsens
and further intervention becomes warranted.
Khakoo AY et al. Therapy Insight: management of cardiovascular
disease in patients with cancer and cardiac complications of cancer
therapy. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2008 Nov;5(11):655–67. [PMID:
18797437]
 
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms and signs of heart failure.
 Echocardiogram confirms lV dilation, thinning, and global
dysfunction.
 Severity of RV dysfunction critical in long-term prognosis.
 
 General Considerations
The cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of entities
primarily affecting the myocardium and not associated with other
major causes of cardiac disease, ie, ischemic heart disease,
hypertension, pericardial disease, valvular disease, or congenital
defects. More recently, two additional entities have been added to
the list: a transient cardiomyopathy due to high catecholamine
discharge (Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy, see below) and an
embryologic defect resulting in massive trabeculation in the LV
(ventricular noncompaction). Although some have specific causes,
many cases are idiopathic. The classification of cardiomyopathies is
based on features of presentation and pathophysiology (Table 10–
12).
Dilated cardiomyopathies cause about 25% of all cases of CHF.
It usually presents with symptoms and signs of CHF (most
commonly dyspnea). Occasionally, symptomatic ventricular
arrhythmias are the presenting event. LV dilation and systolic
dysfunction (EF < 50%) are essential for diagnosis. Dilated
cardiomyopathy occurs more often in blacks than whites and in men
more than women. A growing number of cardiomyopathies due to
genetic abnormalities are being recognized, and it is estimated these
may represent up to 30–48% of cases. Often no cause can be
identified, but chronic alcohol abuse and unrecognized myocarditis
are probably frequent causes. There is increasing recognition that
chronic tachycardia may also precipitate a dilated cardiomyopathy
that may improve over time if rate control can be achieved.
Amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, and diabetes may
rarely present as dilated cardiomyopathies, as well as the more
classic restrictive picture. The RV may be primarily involved in
arrhythmogenic RV dysplasia, an unusual cardiomyopathy with
displacement of myocardial cells by adipose tissue, or in Uhl
disease, in which there is extreme thinning of the RV walls. The
function of the RV often determines how well patients do over the
long term since RV dysfunction may or may not be present in
patients with severe LV dysfunction.
Dilated cardiomyopathy can now be considered a disease that
results from more varied perturbations, including, but not limited to,
defects of the cytoskeleton. Positional cloning and candidate gene
approaches have been successful in identifying greater than 40
disease loci, many of which have led to disease genes in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, restrictive cardiomyopathy, dilated
cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia.
This exciting area is only now being explored. Since most dilated
cardiomyopathies are considered “idiopathic,” the potential for
discovery of a genetic predisposition seems very promising.
 
Table 10–12. Classification of the cardiomyopathies.
 
Intraventricular thrombus is not uncommon in dilated
cardiomyopathy. Histologically, the picture is one of extensive
fibrosis unless a specific diagnosis, such as an infiltrative process, is
established. Myocardial biopsy is rarely useful in establishing the
diagnosis, though occasionally the underlying cause (eg, sarcoidosis,
hemochromatosis) can be discerned. Biopsy is most useful in
transplant rejection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In most patients, symptoms of heart failure develop gradually. The
physical examination reveals rales, an elevated JVP, cardiomegaly,
S3 gallop rhythm, often the murmurs of functional mitral or tricuspid
regurgitation, peripheral edema, or ascites. In severe CHF,
Cheyne-Stokes breathing, pulsus alternans, pallor, and cyanosis
may be present.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
The major findings are listed in Table 10–12. Sinus tachycardia is
common. Other common abnormalities include left bundle branch
block and ventricular or atrial arrhythmias. The chest radiograph
reveals cardiomegaly, evidence for left and/or right heart failure, and
pleural effusions (right > left).
C. Diagnostic Studies
An echocardiogram is indicated to exclude unsuspected valvular or
other lesions and confirm the presence of dilated cardiomyopathy
and the reduced systolic function (as opposed to pure diastolic
heart failure). Mitral Doppler inflow patterns also help in the
diagnosis of associated diastolic dysfunction. Color flow Doppler
can reveal tricuspid or mitral regurgitation, and continuous Doppler
can help define PA pressures. Exercise or pharmacologic stress
myocardial perfusion imaging may suggest the possibility of
underlying coronary disease. Radionuclide ventriculography
provides a noninvasive measure of the EF and both RV and LV
wall motion. Cardiac MRI is particularly helpful in inflammatory or
infiltrative processes, such as sarcoidosis or hemochromatosis, and
is the diagnostic study of choice for RV dysplasia where there is
fatty infiltration. MRI can also help define an ischemic etiology by
noting gadolinium hyperenhancement consistent with myocardial
scar. Cardiac catheterization is seldom of specific value unless
myocardial ischemia or LV aneurysm is suspected. The serum
ferritin is an adequate screening study for hemochromatosis. The
erythrocyte sedimentation rate may be low due to liver congestion if
right heart failure is present. The serum level of BNP or pro-BNP
can be used to help quantitate the severity of CHF.
 Treatment
Standard therapy for heart failure should include ACE inhibitors, β-
blockers, diuretics, and an aldosterone antagonist. Digoxin is a
second-line drug but remains favored as an adjunct by some
clinicians. Calcium channel blockers should generally be avoided
unless absolutely necessary for rate control in atrial fibrillation.
Sodium restriction is helpful, especially in acute CHF. When atrial
fibrillation is present, heart rate control is important if sinus rhythm
cannot be established or maintained. There are few data to suggest
an advantage of sinus rhythm over atrial fibrillation on long-term
outcomes. Many patients may be candidates for cardiac
synchronization therapy with biventricular pacing and an implantable
defibrillator. Few cases of cardiomyopathy are amenable to specific
therapy for the underlying cause. Alcohol use should be
discontinued, since there is often marked recovery of cardiac
function following a period of abstinence in alcoholic
cardiomyopathy. 
Endocrine 
causes 
(hyperthyroidism 
or
hypothyroidism, acromegaly, and pheochromocytoma) should be
treated. Immunosuppressive therapy is not indicated in chronic
dilated cardiomyopathy. The management of CHF is outlined in the
section on heart failure. There are some patients who may benefit
from implantable LV assist devices either as a bridge to
transplantation or to temporize while cardiac function returns.
 Prognosis
The prognosis of dilated cardiomyopathy without clinical heart
failure is variable, with some patients remaining stable, some
deteriorating gradually, and others declining rapidly. Once heart
failure is manifest, the natural history is similar to that of other causes
of heart failure, with an annual mortality around 11–13%. Arterial
and pulmonary emboli are more common in dilated cardiomyopathy
than in ischemic cardiomyopathy. Suitable candidates may benefit
from long-term anticoagulation, and all patients with atrial fibrillation
should be so treated. Some clinicians use warfarin to prevent or
treat an LV thrombus.
 When to Refer
 
•    Referral to a cardiologist is warranted when there is any
question about the etiology of reduced systolic function.
•    Essentially all patients with a dilated cardiomyopathy
need to have a coronary evaluation to exclude an
underlying ischemic cause that might be treatable.
•    Referral should also be considered when heart failure
symptoms emerge, especially if there is a possibility the
patient may eventually be a cardiac transplant candidate.
Anderson L et al. The role of endomyocardial biopsy in the
management of cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from
the American Heart Association, the American College of
Cardiology, and the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J.
2008 Dec;29(13):1696–97. [PMID: 18456711]
 
La Vencchia L et al. Right ventricular function predicts transplant-
free survival in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. J Cardiovasc
Med (Hagerstown). 2006 Sep;7(9):706–10. [PMID: 16932086]
 
Jefferies JL et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet. 2010 Feb
27;375(9716):752–62. [PMID: 20189027]
 
TAKO-TSUBO CARDIOMYOPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Occurs after a major catecholamine discharge.
 Acute chest pain or shortness of breath.
 Predominately affects postmenopausal women.
 Presents as an acute anterior myocardial infarction, but
coronaries normal at cardiac catheterization.
 Imaging reveals apical left ventricular ballooning due to
anteroapical stunning of the myocardium.
 Most patients recover completely.
 
 General Considerations
LV apical ballooning (Tako-Tsubo syndrome) can follow a high
catecholamine stress. The resulting shape of the LV suggests a
rounded ampulla form similar to a Japanese octopus pot (tako-
tsubo pot). Mid-ventricular ballooning has also been described. The
acute myocardial injury is more common in postmenopausal
women. It has been described following some stressful event, such
as hypoglycemia, lightning strikes, earthquakes, postventricular
tachycardia, during alcohol withdrawal, following surgery, during
hyperthyroidism, after stroke, and following emotional stress
(“broken-heart syndrome”). Virtually any event that triggers excess
catecholamines may be implicated. Pericarditis and even tamponade
has been described in isolated cases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms are similar to any acute coronary syndrome. Typical
angina and dyspnea is usually present. Syncope is rare, although
arrhythmias are not uncommon.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
The ECG reveals ST segment elevation as well as deep anterior T
wave inversion. The chest radiograph is either normal or reveals
pulmonary congestion. The dramatic T wave inversions gradually
resolve over time.
C. Diagnostic Studies
The echocardiogram reveals LV apical dyskinesia. The urgent
cardiac catheterization reveals the LV apical ballooning in
association with normal coronaries. Initial cardiac enzymes are
positive but often taper quickly. In almost all cases, MRI
hyperenhancement studies reveal no long-term scarring.
 Treatment
Immediate therapy is similar to any acute myocardial infarction.
Initiation of long-term therapy depends on whether LV dysfunction
persists. Most patients receive aspirin, β-blockers, and ACE-
inhibitors until the LV fully recovers.
 Prognosis
Prognosis is good unless there is a serious complication (such as
mitral regurgitation, ventricular rupture, ventricular tachycardia).
Recovery is expected in most cases after a period of weeks to
months. At times, the LV function recovers in days. Rarely, repeat
episodes have been reported.
Nef HM et al. Mechanisms of stress (Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy.
Nat Rev Cardiol. 2010 Apr;7(4):187–93. [PMID: 20195267]
 
Sharkey SW et al. Natural history and expansive clinical profile of
stress (tako-tsubo) cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010
Jan;55(4):333–41. [PMID: 20117439]
 
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 May present with dyspnea, chest pain, syncope.
 Though IV outflow gradient is classic, symptoms are primarily
related to diastolic dysfunction.
 Echocardiogram shows septal hypertrophy, which is usually
asymmetric, and enhanced contractility. Systolic anterior motion
of the anterior mitral valve is present if there is outflow tract
obstruction.
 The highest risk group for sudden death includes those with a
marked lVH, with a family history for sudden death, with
ventricular ectopy, and with an abnormal BP response to
exercise.
 
 General Considerations
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is noted when there is LV
hypertrophy unrelated to any pressure or volume overload. The
hypertrophy reduces LV systolic stress, increases the EF, and can
result in an “empty ventricle” at end-systole. The interventricular
septum may be disproportionately involved (asymmetric septal
hypertrophy), but in some cases the hypertrophy is localized to mid
ventricle or to the apex. The LV outflow tract is often narrowed
during systole between the hypertrophic septum and an anteriorly
displaced anterior mitral valve leaflet, during dynamic LV outflow
obstruction (demonstrable systolic anterior motion of the mitral
valve). The obstruction is worsened by factors that increase
myocardial 
contractility 
(sympathetic 
stimulation, 
digoxin,
postextrasystolic beat) or that decrease LV filling (Valsalva
maneuver, peripheral vasodilators). The amount of obstruction is
preload and afterload dependent and can vary from day to day. The
consequence of the hypertrophy is elevated LV diastolic pressures
rather than systolic dysfunction. Rarely, systolic dysfunction
develops late in the disease. The LV is usually more involved than
the RV and the atria are frequently significantly enlarged. It has been
increasingly 
appreciated 
that 
hypertrophic 
obstructive
cardiomyopathy (HOCM) is inherited as an autosomal dominant
trait with variable penetrance and is caused by mutations of one of a
large number of genes, most of which code for myosin heavy chains
or proteins regulating calcium handling. The prognosis is related to
the specific gene mutation. Patients usually present in early
adulthood. Elite athletes may demonstrate considerable hypertrophy
that can be confused with HOCM, but generally diastolic
dysfunction is not present in the athlete. The apical variety is
particularly common in those of Asian descent. A mid-ventricular
obstructive form is also known. A hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in
the elderly (usually in association with hypertension) has also been
defined as a distinct entity. Mitral annular calcification is often
present. Mitral regurgitation is variable and often dynamic with the
degree of outflow tract obstruction.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The most frequent symptoms are dyspnea and chest pain (Table
10–12). Syncope is also common and is typically postexertional,
when diastolic filling diminishes and out-flow obstruction increases
due to residual circulating catecholamines. Arrhythmias are an
important problem. Atrial fibrillation is a long-term consequence of
chronically elevated LA pressures and is a poor prognostic sign.
Ventricular arrhythmias are also common, and sudden death may
occur, often in athletes after extraordinary exertion.
Features on physical examination are a bisferiens carotid pulse,
triple apical impulse (due to the prominent atrial filling wave and
early and late systolic impulses), and a loud S4. The JVP may reveal
a prominent a wave due to reduced RV compliance. In cases with
outflow obstruction, a loud systolic murmur is present along the left
sternal border that increases with upright posture or Valsalva
maneuver and decreases with squatting. These maneuvers help
differentiate the murmur of HOCM from that of aortic stenosis,
since in HOCM, reducing the LV volume increases obstruction and
the murmur intensity; whereas in valvular aortic stenosis, reducing
the stroke volume across the valve decreases the murmur. Mitral
regurgitation is frequently present as well.
B. ECG and Chest Radiography
LVH is nearly universal in symptomatic patients, though entirely
normal ECGs are present in up to 25%, usually in those with
localized hypertrophy. Exaggerated septal Q waves inferolaterally
may mimic myocardial infarction. The chest radiograph is often
unimpressive. Unlike aortic stenosis, the ascending aorta is not
dilated.
C. Diagnostic Studies
The echocardiogram is diagnostic, revealing asymmetric LVH,
systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve, early closing followed by
reopening of the aortic valve, a small and hypercontractile LV, and
delayed relaxation and filling of the LV during diastole. The septum
is usually 1.3–1.5 times the thickness of the posterior wall. Septal
motion tends to be reduced. Doppler ultrasound reveals turbulent
flow and a dynamic gradient in the LV outflow tract and,
commonly, mitral regurgitation. Abnormalities in the diastolic filling
pattern are present in 80% of patients. Echocardiography can
usually differentiate the disease from ventricular noncompaction.
Myocardial perfusion imaging may suggest septal ischemia in the
presence of normal coronary arteries. Cardiac MRI confirms the
hypertrophy and contrast enhancement frequently reveals evidence
for scar at the junction of the RV attachment to the septum. Cardiac
catheterization confirms the diagnosis and assesses the presence of
CAD. Frequently, coronary arterial bridging (squeezing in systole)
occurs, especially of the septal arteries.
 Treatment
β-Blockers should be the initial drug in symptomatic individuals,
especially when dynamic outflow obstruction is noted on the
echocardiogram. The resulting slower heart rates assist with
diastolic filling of the stiff LV. Dyspnea, angina, and arrhythmias
respond in about 50% of patients. Calcium channel blockers,
especially verapamil, have also been effective in symptomatic
patients. Their effect is due primarily to improved diastolic function;
however, their vasodilating actions can also increase outflow
obstruction and cause hypotension. Disopyramide is also used
because of its negative inotropic effects; it is usually used in addition
to the medical regimen rather than as primary therapy. Diuretics are
frequently necessary due to the high diastolic pressure and PCWP.
Patients do best in sinus rhythm, and atrial fibrillation should be
aggressively treated with antiarrhythmics. Dual-chamber pacing may
prevent the progression of hypertrophy and obstruction.
Nonsurgical septal ablation has been performed by injection of
alcohol into septal branches of the left coronary artery with good
results in small series of patients. Patients with malignant ventricular
arrhythmias and unexplained syncope in the presence of a positive
family history for sudden death with or without an abnormal BP
response to exercise are probably best managed with an
implantable defibrillator. Excision of part of the outflow myocardial
septum (myotomy–myomectomy) by surgeons experienced with the
procedure has been successful in patients with severe symptoms. A
few surgeons advocate mitral valve replacement, as this results in
resolution of the gradient as well, and prevents associated mitral
regurgitation. In some cases, myomectomy has been combined with
an Alfieri stitch on the mitral valve with success. Rare cases with
progression to dilation or with intractable symptoms can be
considered for cardiac transplantation.
 Prognosis
The natural history of HOCM is highly variable. Several specific
mutations are associated with a higher incidence of early malignant
arrhythmias and sudden death, and definition of the genetic
abnormality provides the best estimate of prognosis. Some patients
remain asymptomatic for many years or for life. Sudden death,
especially during exercise, may be the initial event. The highest
risk patients are those with a family history of sudden death, those
with marked hyper-trophy, and those that do not increase their
systemic BP with exercise. MRI data suggest that the extent of
scarring on hyperenhancement may also be predictive of adverse
events. HOCM is the pathologic feature most frequently associated
with sudden death in athletes. Pregnancy is generally well tolerated.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is no longer indicated. A final stage may
be a transition into dilated cardiomyopathy in 5–10% of patients
due to the long-term effects of LV remodeling.
 When to Refer
Patients should be referred to a cardiologist when symptoms are
difficult to control, syncope has occurred, or there are any of the
high-risk features present as noted above.
Bruder O et al. Myocardial scar by cardiovascular magnetic
resonance imaging predicts major events in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Sep 7;56(11):875–87.
[PMID: 20667520]
 
Fifer MA et al. Management of symptoms in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 2008 Jan 22;117(3):429–39.
[PMID: 18212300]
 
Gimeno JR et al. Exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias and risk
of sudden cardiac death in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J. 2009 Nov;30(21):2599–605.
[PMID: 19689975]
 
Ho CY. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart Fail Clin. 2010
Apr;6(2):141–59. [PMID: 20347784]
 
Marian AJ. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from genetics to
treatment. Eur J Clin Invest. 2010 Apr;40(4):360–9. [PMID:
20503496]
 
Sorajja P et al. Outcome of alcohol septal ablation for obstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 2008 Jul 8;
118(2):131–9. [PMID: 18591440]
 
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Right heart failure tends to dominate over left heart failure.
 Pulmonary hypertension present.
 Amyloidosis is the most common cause.
 Echocardiography is key to diagnosis. Rapid early filling is
present with diastolic dysfunction. normal or near normal Ef.
 MRI and cardiac catheterization are helpful. Myocardial biopsy
can confirm amyloid.
 
 General Considerations
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by impaired diastolic
filling with reasonably preserved contractile function. The condition
is relatively uncommon, with the most frequent cause being
amyloidosis. In Africa, endomyocardial fibrosis, a specific entity in
which there is severe fibrosis of the endocardium, often with
eosinophilia (Löffler syndrome), is seen. Other causes of restrictive
cardiomyopathy 
are 
infiltrative 
cardiomyopathies 
(eg,
hemochromatosis, sarcoidosis) and connective tissue diseases (eg,
scleroderma).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Restrictive cardiomyopathy must be distinguished from constrictive
pericarditis (Table 10–12). The key feature is that ventricular
interaction is accentuated with respiration in constrictive pericarditis,
and that interaction is absent in restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Pulmonary arterial pressure is invariably elevated in restrictive
cardiomyopathy due to the high pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure and is normal in uncomplicated constrictive pericarditis.
B. Diagnostic Studies
Conduction disturbances are frequently present. Low voltage on the
ECG combined with ventricular hypertrophy on the echocardiogram
is suggestive of disease. Cardiac MRI presents a distinctive pattern
of diffuse hyperenhancement of the gadolinium image in amyloidosis
and is a useful screening test. The echocardiogram reveals a small
thickened LV with bright myocardium (speckled), rapid early
diastolic filling revealed by the mitral inflow Doppler, and biatrial
enlargement. Atrial septal thickening may be evident. Rectal,
abdominal fat, or gingival biopsies can confirm systemic
involvement, but myocardial involvement may still be present if these
are negative, and requires endomyocardial biopsy for the
confirmation of cardiac amyloid. Demonstration of tissue infiltration
on biopsy specimens using special stains followed by
immunohistochemical studies and genetic testing is essential to
define which specific protein is involved.
 Treatment
Unfortunately, little useful therapy is available for either the causative
conditions or the restrictive cardiomyopathy itself. Diuretics can
help, but excessive diuresis can produce worsening kidney
dysfunction. As with most patients with severe right heart failure,
loop diuretics, thiazides, and aldosterone antagonists are all useful.
Recently, the use of ultrafiltration devices have allowed for
improved diuresis. Digoxin may precipitate arrhythmias and
generally should not be used. β--Blockers help slow heart rates and
improve filling. Corticosteroids may be helpful in sarcoidosis but
they are more effective for the conduction abnormalities than heart
failure. In amyloidosis, the therapeutic strategy depends on the
characterization of the type of amyloid protein and extent of disease
and may include chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation. In
familial amyloidosis, liver transplantation may be an option. Cardiac
transplantation has also been used in patients with primary cardiac
amyloidosis.
 When to Refer
All patients with the diagnosis of a restrictive cardiomyopathy
should be referred to a cardiologist to decide etiology and plan
appropriate treatment. This is especially true if amyloidosis is
suspected.
Falk RH et al. Amyloid heart disease. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010
Jan–Feb;52(4):347–61. [PMID: 20109604]
 
Denfield SW et al. Restrictive cardiomyopathy in childhood. Heart
Fail Clin. 2010 Oct;6(4):445–52. [PMID: 20869645]
 
Nihoyannopoulos P et al. Restrictive cardiomyopathies. Eur J
Echocardiogr. 2009 Dec;10(8):iii23–33. [PMID: 19889655]
 
Sen-Chowdhry S et al. Genetics of restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Heart Fail Clin. 2010 Apr;6(2):179–86. [PMID: 20347786]
 
RHEUMATIC FEVER
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Uncommon in the United States (approximately 2 cases/100,000
population); more common (100 cases/100,000 population) in
developing countries.
 Diagnosis based on Jones criteria and confirmation of
streptococcal infection.
 
 General Considerations
Rheumatic fever is a systemic immune process that is a sequela to
β-hemolytic streptococcal infection of the pharynx. Some experts
believe molecular mimicry between streptococcal antigens and
human proteins are at the core of the problem. The elucidation of
chemokines and their receptors involved with the recruitment of Th
cells, as well as the function of T regulatory cells likely contributes
to the heart lesion responsible for rheumatic heart disease.
Pyodermic infections are not associated with rheumatic fever. Signs
of rheumatic fever usually commence 2–3 weeks after infection but
may appear as early as 1 week or as late as 5 weeks. In recent
years, the disease has become quite uncommon in the United
States, except in immigrants; however, there have been reports of
new outbreaks in several regions of the United States. The peak
incidence is between ages 5 and 15 years; rheumatic fever is rare
before age 4 years or after age 40 years. Rheumatic carditis and
valvulitis may be self-limited or may lead to slowly progressive
valvular deformity. The characteristic lesion is a perivascular
granulomatous reaction with vasculitis. The mitral valve is attacked
in 75–80% of cases, the aortic valve in 30% (but rarely as the sole
valve), and the tricuspid and pulmonary valves in under 5% of
cases. Overall, carditis is thought to occur in about 30–45% of
cases of acute rheumatic fever.
Chronic rheumatic heart disease results from single or
repeated attacks of rheumatic fever that produce rigidity and
deformity of valve cusps, fusion of the commissures, or shortening
and fusion of the chordae tendineae. Valvular stenosis or
regurgitation results, and the two often coexist. The mitral valve
alone is affected in 50–60% of cases; combined lesions of the aortic
and mitral valves occur in 20%; pure aortic lesions are less
common. Tricuspid involvement occurs in about 10% of cases but
only in association with mitral or aortic disease and is thought to be
more common when recurrent infections have occurred. The
pulmonary valve is rarely affected. A history of rheumatic fever is
obtainable in only 60% of patients with rheumatic heart disease.
 Clinical Findings
The diagnostic criteria first described by Jones were updated in
1992. The presence of two major criteria—or one major and two
minor criteria—establishes the diagnosis. Echocardiographic studies
revealing valvular abnormalities have suggested that subclinical
cardiac involvement may be missed using the strict Jones criteria.
India, New Zealand, and Australia have all published revised
guidelines.
A. Major Criteria
1. Carditis—Carditis is most likely to be evident in children and
adolescents. Any of the following suggests the presence of carditis:
(1) pericarditis; (2) cardiomegaly, detected by physical signs,
radiography, or echocardiography; (3) CHF, right- or left-sided—
the former perhaps more prominent in children, with painful liver
engorgement due to tricuspid regurgitation; and (4) mitral or aortic
regurgitation murmurs, indicative of dilation of a valve ring with or
without associated valvulitis. The Carey–Coombs short mid-
diastolic mitral murmur may be present.
In the absence of any of the above definitive signs, the diagnosis
of carditis depends on the following less specific abnormalities: (1)
ECG changes, including changing contour of P waves or inversion
of T waves; (2) changing quality of heart sounds; and (3) sinus
tachycardia, arrhythmia, or ectopic beats.
2. Erythema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules
—Erythema marginatum begins as rapidly enlarging macules that
assume the shape of rings or crescents with clear centers. They may
be raised, confluent, and either transient or persistent.
Subcutaneous nodules are uncommon except in children. They
are small (≤2 cm in diameter), firm, and non-tender and are
attached to fascia or tendon sheaths over bony prominences. They
persist for days or weeks, are recurrent, and are indistinguishable
from rheumatoid nodules.
3. 
Sydenham 
chorea—Sydenham 
chorea—involuntary
choreoathetoid movements primarily of the face, tongue, and upper
extremities—may be the sole manifestation; only 50% of cases have
other overt signs of rheumatic fever. Girls are more frequently
affected, and occurrence in adults is rare. This is the least common
(3% of cases) but most diagnostic of the manifestations of rheumatic
fever.
4. Polyarthritis—This is a migratory polyarthritis that involves the
large joints sequentially. In adults, only a single joint may be
affected. The arthritis lasts 1–5 weeks and subsides without residual
deformity. Prompt response of arthritis to therapeutic doses of
salicylates or nonsteroidal agents is characteristic.
B. Minor Criteria
These include fever, polyarthralgias, reversible prolongation of the
PR interval, and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or CRP.
Supporting evidence includes positive throat culture or rapid
streptococcal antigen test and elevated or rising streptococcal
antibody titer.
C. Laboratory Findings
There is nonspecific evidence of inflammatory disease, as shown by
a rapid sedimentation rate. High or increasing titers of
antistreptococcal antibodies (antistreptolysin O and anti-DNase B)
are used to confirm recent infection; 10% of cases lack this
serologic evidence.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
The patient should be kept at strict bed rest until the temperature
returns to normal (without the use of antipyretic medications) and
the sedimentation rate, plus the resting pulse rate, and the ECG
have all returned to baseline.
B. Medical Measures
1. Salicylates—The salicylates markedly reduce fever and relieve
joint pain and swelling. They have no effect on the natural course of
the disease. Adults may require large doses of aspirin, 0.6–0.9 g
every 4 hours; children are treated with lower doses.
2. Penicillin—Penicillin (benzathine penicillin, 1.2 million units
intramuscularly once, or procaine penicillin, 600,000 units
intramuscularly daily for 10 days) is used to eradicate streptococcal
infection if present. Erythromycin may be substituted (40 mg/kg/d).
3. Corticosteroids—There is no proof that cardiac damage is
prevented or minimized by corticosteroids. A short course of
corticosteroids (prednisone, 40–60 mg orally daily, with tapering
over 2 weeks) usually causes rapid improvement of the joint
symptoms and is indicated when response to salicylates has been
inadequate.
 Prevention of Recurrent Rheumatic
Fever
The initial episode of rheumatic fever can usually be prevented by
early treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis. (See Chapter 33.)
Prevention of recurrent episodes of rheumatic fever is critical.
Recurrences of rheumatic fever are most common in patients who
have had carditis during their initial episode and in children, 20% of
whom will have a second episode within 5 years. The preferred
method of prophylaxis is with benzathine penicillin G, 1.2 million
units intramuscularly every 4 weeks. Oral penicillin (200,000–
250,000 units twice daily) is less reliable.
If the patient is allergic to penicillin, sulfadiazine (or sulfisoxazole),
1 g daily, or erythromycin, 250 mg orally twice daily, may be
substituted. The macrolide azithromycin is similarly effective against
group A streptococcal infection. If the patient has not had an
immediate hyper-sensitivity (anaphylactic-type) reaction to
penicillin, then cephalosporin may also be used.
Recurrences are uncommon after 5 years following the first
episode, and in patients over 25 years of age. Prophylaxis is usually
discontinued after these times except in groups with a high risk of
streptococcal infection—parents or teachers of young children,
nurses, military recruits, etc. Secondary prevention of rheumatic
fever depends on whether carditis has occurred. If there is no
evidence for carditis, preventive therapy can be stopped at age 21
years. If carditis has occurred but there is no residual valvular
disease, it can be stopped at 10 years after the episode. If carditis
has occurred with residual valvular involvement, it should be
continued for 10 years after the last episode or until age 40 years if
the patient is in a situation in which reexposure would be expected.
 Prognosis
Initial episodes of rheumatic fever may last months in children and
weeks in adults. The immediate mortality rate is 1–2%. Persistent
rheumatic carditis with cardiomegaly, heart failure, and pericarditis
implies a poor prognosis; 30% of children thus affected die within
10 years after the initial attack. After 10 years, two-thirds of
patients will have detectable valvular abnormalities (usually
thickened valves with limited mobility), but significant symptomatic
valvular heart disease or persistent cardiomyopathy occurs in <
10% of patients with a single episode. In developing countries,
acute rheumatic fever occurs earlier in life, recurs more frequently,
and the evolution to chronic valvular disease is both accelerated and
more severe.
Atatoa-Carr P et al. Rheumatic fever diagnosis, management, and
secondary prevention: a New Zealand guideline. N Z Med J. 2008
Apr 4;121(1271):59–69. [PMID: 18392063]
 
Carapetis J et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever. Pediatr Infect Dis
J. 2010 Jan;29(1):91–2. [PMID: 20035211]
 
Lee JL et al. Acute rheumatic fever and its consequences: a
persistent threat to developing nations in the 21st century.
Autoimmun Rev. 2009 Dec;9(2):117–23. [PMID: 19386288]
 
Saxena A et al; Working Group on Pediatric Acute Rheumatic
Fever and Cardiology Chapter of Indian Academy of Pediatrics.
Consensus guidelines on pediatric acute rheumatic fever and
rheumatic heart disease. Indian Pediatr. 2008 Jul; 45(7):565–73.
[PMID: 18695275]
 
Singhi AK et al. Acute rheumatic fever: subcutaneous nodules and
carditis. Circulation. 2010 Feb 23;121(7):946–7. [PMID:
20177010]
 
DISEASES OF THE
PERICARDIUM
 
ACUTE INFLAMMATORY PERICARDITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Anterior pleuritic chest pain that is worse supine than upright.
 Pericardial rub.
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate usually elevated.
 ECG reveals diffuse ST segment elevation with associated PR
depression.
 
 General Considerations
Acute (< 2 weeks) inflammation of the pericardium may be
infectious in origin or may be due to systemic diseases (autoimmune
syndromes, 
uremia), 
neoplasm, 
radiation, 
drug 
toxicity,
hemopericardium, postcardiac surgery, or contiguous inflammatory
processes in the myocardium or lung. In many of these conditions,
the pathologic process involves both the pericardium and the
myocardium.
Viral infections (especially infections with coxsackieviruses and
echoviruses but also influenza, Epstein–Barr, varicella, hepatitis,
mumps, and HIV viruses) are the most common cause of acute
pericarditis and probably are responsible for many cases classified
as idiopathic. Males—usually under age 50 years—are most
commonly affected. The differential diagnosis is primarily with
myocardial infarction. Tuberculous pericarditis has become rare
in developed countries but remains common in other areas. It results
from direct lymphatic or hematogenous spread; clinical pulmonary
involvement may be absent or minor, although associated pleural
effusions are common. Bacterial pericarditis has become rare
and usually results from direct extension from pulmonary infections.
Pneumococci can cause a primary pericardial infection. Borrelia
burgdorferi, the organism responsible for Lyme disease, can also
cause 
myopericarditis. Uremic pericarditis is a common
complication of chronic kidney disease. The pathogenesis is
uncertain; it occurs both with untreated uremia and in otherwise
stable dialysis patients. Spread of adjacent lung cancer as well as
invasion by breast cancer, renal cell carcinoma, Hodgkin disease,
and lymphomas are the most common neoplastic processes
involving the pericardium and have become the most frequent
causes of pericardial tamponade in many countries. Pericarditis may
occur 2–5 days after infarction due to an inflammatory reaction to
transmural myocardial necrosis [postmyocardial infarction or
postcardiotomy pericarditis (Dressler syndrome)]. Radiation
can initiate a fibrinous and fibrotic process in the pericardium,
presenting as subacute pericarditis or constriction. Radiation
pericarditis usually follows treatments of more than 4000 cGy
delivered to ports including more than 30% of the heart.
Other causes of pericarditis include connective tissue
diseases, such as lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis,
drug-induced pericarditis (minoxidil, penicillins, clozapine), and
myxedema.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The presentation and course of inflammatory pericarditis depend on
its cause, but most syndromes have associated chest pain, which is
usually pleuritic and postural (relieved by sitting). The pain is
substernal but may radiate to the neck, shoulders, back, or
epigastrium. Dyspnea may also be present and the patient is often
febrile. A pericardial friction rub is characteristic, with or without
evidence of fluid accumulation or constriction (see below). The
presentation of tuberculous pericarditis tends to be subacute, but
nonspecific symptoms (fever, night sweats, fatigue) may be present
for days to months. Pericardial involvement develops in 1–8% of
patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. Symptoms and signs of
bacterial pericarditis are similar to those of other types of
inflammatory pericarditides, but patients appear toxic and are often
critically ill. Uremic pericarditis can present with or without
symptoms; fever is absent. Often neoplastic pericarditis is
painless, and the presenting symptoms relate to hemodynamic
compromise or the primary disease. Postmyocardial infarction or
post-cardiotomy pericarditis (Dressler syndrome) usually
presents as a recurrence of pain with pleural-pericardial features. A
rub is often audible, and repolarization changes on the ECG may be
confused with ischemia. Large effusions are uncommon, and
spontaneous resolution usually occurs in a few days. Dressler
syndrome occurs days to weeks to several months after myocardial
infarction or open heart surgery, may be recurrent, and probably
represents an autoimmune syndrome. Patients present with typical
pain, fever, malaise, and leukocytosis. Rarely, other symptoms of an
autoimmune disorder, such as joint pain and fever, may occur.
Tamponade is rare with Dressler syndrome after myocardial
infarction but not when it occurs postoperatively. The clinical onset
of radiation pericarditis is usually within the first year but may be
delayed for many years; often a full decade may past before
constriction becomes evident.
B. Laboratory Findings and Diagnostic Studies
The diagnosis of viral pericarditis is usually clinical, and
leukocytosis is often present. Rising viral titers in paired sera may be
obtained for confirmation but are rarely done. Cardiac enzymes
may be slightly elevated, reflecting an epicardial myocarditis
component. The echocardiogram is often normal or reveals only a
trivial amount of fluid during the acute inflammatory process. The
diagnosis of tuberculous pericarditis can be inferred if acid-fast
bacilli are found elsewhere. The tuberculous pericardial effusions
are usually small or moderate but may be large when chronic. The
yield of organisms by pericardiocentesis is low; pericardial biopsy
has a higher yield but may also be negative, and pericardiectomy
may be required. If bacterial pericarditis is suspected on clinical
grounds, diagnostic pericardiocentesis may be of value. In uremic
patients not on dialysis, the incidence of pericarditis correlates
roughly with the level of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine.
The pericardium is characteristically “shaggy” in uremic pericarditis,
and the effusion is hemorrhagic and exudative. The diagnosis of
neoplastic pericarditis can occasionally be made by cytologic
examination of the effusion or by pericardial biopsy, but it may be
difficult to establish clinically if the patient has received mediastinal
radiation within the previous year. Neoplastic pericardial effusions
develop over a long period of time and may become quite huge (>2
L). The sedimentation rate is high in postmyocardial infarction or
postcardiotomy pericarditis. Large pericardial effusions and
accompanying pleural effusions are frequent. Myxedema pericardial
effusions due to hypothyroidism usually are characterized by the
presence of cholesterol crystals.
C. Other Studies
The ECG usually shows generalized ST and T wave changes and
may manifest a characteristic progression beginning with diffuse ST
elevation, followed by a return to baseline and then to T wave
inversion. Atrial injury is often present and manifested by PR
depression especially in the limb leads. The chest radiograph is
frequently normal, but may show cardiac enlargement if pericardial
fluid is present, as well as signs of related pulmonary disease. Mass
lesions and enlarged lymph nodes may suggest a neoplastic process.
MRI and CT scan can visualize neighboring tumor in neo-plastic
pericarditis. A screening chest CT or MRI is often recommended to
ensure there are no extracardiac diseases contiguous to the
pericardium.
 Treatment
Treatment of viral pericarditis is generally symptomatic. Aspirin
(650 mg orally every 3–4 hours) or other nonsteroidal agents (eg,
indomethacin, 100–150 mg orally daily in divided doses) are usually
effective. A short (2 week course) of corticosteroids may be
beneficial in unresponsive cases. In general, symptoms subside in
several days to weeks. The major early complication is tamponade,
which occurs in < 5% of patients. There may be recurrences in the
first few weeks or months. Rare patients will continue to experience
recurrences chronically. These patients may require long-term anti-
inflammatory medications, either corticosteroids or colchicine. At
times, recurrent pericarditis may require more significant
immunosuppression, such as cyclophosphamide or methotrexate. If
more significant immunosuppression fails, pericardial stripping may
be required in recurrent cases even without constrictive pericarditis.
Standard antituberculous drug therapy is usually successful for
tuberculous pericarditis 
(see Chapter 9), but constrictive
pericarditis can occur. Uremic pericarditis usually resolves with
the institution of—or with more aggressive—dialysis. Tamponade is
fairly common, and partial pericardiectomy (pericardial window)
may be necessary. Whereas anti-inflammatory agents may relieve
the pain and fever associated with uremic pericarditis, indo-
methacin and systemic corticosteroids do not affect its natural
history. The prognosis with neoplastic effusion is dismal, with only
a small minority surviving 1 year. If it is compromising the clinical
comfort of the patient, the effusion is initially drained
percutaneously. Early attempts at ballooning the pericardium from a
subxiphoid approach have been mostly abandoned in favor of
surgical approaches. A pericardial window, either by a subxiphoid
approach or via video-assisted thoracic surgery, allows for partial
pericardiectomy. Instillation of chemotherapeutic agents or
tetracycline may be used to reduce the recurrence rate. Aspirin or
other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in dosages given for
viral pericarditis above for 2–4 weeks are usually effective for the
treatment 
of postmyocardial infarction or postcardiotomy
pericarditis (Dressler syndrome). In more severe cases,
corticosteroids should be given in rapidly tapering doses. Relapses
do occur and may require slow withdrawal of anti-inflammatory
therapy over several months. Colchicine may be required for
months to even years to help prevent recurrences and is generally
superior to corticosteroids in management of recurrent cases.
Symptomatic therapy is the initial approach to radiation
pericarditis, but recurrent effusions and constriction often require
surgery.
 When to Refer
Patients who do not respond initially to conservative management or
who appear to be developing constrictive pericarditis should be
referred to a cardiologist for further assessment.
Khandaker MH et al. Pericardial disease: diagnosis and
management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010 Jun;85(6):572–93. [PMID:
20511488]
 
Lotrionte M et al. International collaborative systematic review of
controlled clinical trials on the pharmacologic treatment of acute
pericarditis and its recurrences. Am Heart J. 2010 Oct;
160(4):662–70. [PMID: 20934560]
 
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION & TAMPONADE
Pericardial effusion can develop during any of the pericarditis
processes. The speed of accumulation determines the physiologic
importance of the effusion. Because the pericardium stretches, large
effusions (>1000 mL) that develop slowly may produce no
hemodynamic effects. Conversely, smaller effusions that appear
rapidly can cause tamponade due to the curvilinear relationship
between the volume of fluid and the intrapericardial pressure.
Tamponade is characterized by elevated intrapericardial pressure
(>15 mm Hg), which restricts venous return and ventricular filling.
As a result, the stroke volume and arterial pulse pressure fall, and
the heart rate and venous pressure rise. Shock and death may
result.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pericardial effusions may be associated with pain if they occur as
part of an acute inflammatory process or may be painless, as is
often the case with neoplastic or uremic effusion. Dyspnea and
cough are common, especially with tamponade. Other symptoms
may result from the primary disease.
A pericardial friction rub may be present even with large
effusions. In cardiac tamponade, tachycardia, tachypnea, a narrow
pulse pressure, and a relatively preserved systolic pressure are
characteristic. Pulsus paradoxus—a > 10 mm Hg decline in systolic
pressure during inspiration due to further impairment of LV filling—
is the classic finding, but this finding may also occur with obstructive
lung disease or asthma. Central venous pressure is elevated and
since the intrapericardial, and thus intracardiac, pressures are high
even at the initiation of diastole, there is no evident y descent in the
RA, RV, or LV hemodynamic tracings. This differs from
constriction where most of the initial filling of the RV and LV occurs
during early diastole, and it is only in mid to late diastole that the
ventricles can no longer fill. Edema or ascites are rarely present in
tamponade; these signs favor a more chronic process.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory tests tend to reflect the underlying processes (see
causes of pericarditis above). The echocardiogram is diagnostic.
C. Diagnostic Studies
Chest radiograph can suggest chronic effusion by an enlarged
cardiac silhouette with a globular configuration but may appear
normal in acute situations. The ECG often reveals nonspecific T
wave changes and low QRS voltage. Electrical alternans is present
uncommonly but is pathognomonic due to the heart swinging within
the large effusion. Echocardiography is the primary method for
demonstrating pericardial effusion and is quite sensitive. If
tamponade is present, the high intrapericardial pressure may
collapse lower pressure cardiac structures, such as the RA and RV.
In tamponade, the normal inspiratory reduction in LV filling is
accentuated due to RV/LV interaction and there is a > 25%
reduction in maximal mitral inflow velocities. RV collapse is
particularly evident in diastole as the enlarging diastolic LV crowds
out the RV within the fixed space provided by the ventricles and
pericardium. Cardiac CT and MRI also demonstrate pericardial
fluid, pericardial thickening, and any associated contiguous lesions.
Diagnostic pericardiocentesis or biopsy is often indicated for
microbiologic and cytologic studies; a pericardial biopsy may be
performed relatively simply through a small subxiphoid incision.
Unfortunately, the quality of the pericardial fluid rarely leads to a
diagnosis, and any type of fluid (serous, serosanguinous, bloody,
etc) can be seen in most diseases. Pericardial fluid analysis is most
useful in excluding a bacterial cause.
g
 Treatment
Small effusions can be followed clinically by careful observations of
the JVP and by testing for a paradoxical pulse. Serial
echocardiograms are indicated if no intervention is immediately
contemplated. 
When 
tamponade 
is 
present, 
urgent
pericardiocentesis is required. Because the pressure–volume
relationship in the pericardial fluid is curvilinear and upsloping,
removal of a small amount of fluid often produces a dramatic fall in
the intrapericardial pressure and immediate hemodynamic benefit;
but complete drainage with a catheter is preferable. Continued or
repeat drainage may be indicated, especially in malignant effusions.
Pericardial windows via video-assisted thorascopy have been
particularly effective in preventing recurrences.
Additional therapy is determined by the nature of the primary
process. Recurrent effusion in neoplastic disease and uremia, in
particular, may require partial pericardiectomy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any unexplained pericardial effusion should be referred
to a cardiologist for a complete evaluation and treatment.
•    Trivial pericardial effusions are common, especially in
CHF, and need not be referred unless symptoms of
pericarditis are evident.
•    Hypotension or a paradoxical pulse suggesting the
pericardial effusion is hemodynamically compromising the
patient should prompt an immediate referral.
•    Echocardiographic signs of tamponade should always
trigger referral.
Kühn B et al. Etiology, management, and outcome of pediatric
pericardial effusions. Pediatr Cardiol. 2008 Jan;29(1):90–4.
[PMID: 17674083]
 
Meurin P et al; French Society of Cardiology. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug treatment for postoperative pericardial effusion:
a multicenter randomized, double-blind trial. Ann Intern Med.
2010 Feb 2;152(3):137–43. [PMID: 20124229]
 
O'Connor CJ et al. The intraoperative management of patients with
pericardial tamponade. Anesthesiol Clin. 2010 Mar;28(1): 87–96.
[PMID: 20400042]
 
Roy CL et al. Does this patient with a pericardial effusion have
cardiac tamponade? JAMA. 2007 Apr 25;297(16):1810–8.
[PMID: 17456823]
 
CONSTRICTIVE PERICARDITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Evidence of right heart failure with an elevated JVP, edema,
hepatomegaly, and ascites.
 No fall or an elevation of the JVP with inspiration (Kussmaul
sign).
 Echocardiographic evidence for septal bounce and reduced
mitral inflow velocities with inspiration.
 Catheterization evidence for RV-LV interaction, a “square root”
sign, equalization of diastolic pressures, normal pulmonary artery
pressure, and discordance of RV/LV systolic pressures with
inspiration (RV systolic rises, LV systolic falls).
 Area of RV/LV pressure tracing ratio that decreases with
inspiration.
 
 General Considerations
Inflammation can lead to a thickened, fibrotic, adherent pericardium
that restricts diastolic filling and produces chronically elevated
venous pressures. In the past, tuberculosis was the most common
cause of constrictive pericarditis, but the process now more often
occurs after radiation therapy, cardiac surgery, or viral pericarditis;
histoplasmosis is another uncommon cause, occurring mainly in
individuals who live in the Ohio River Valley.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The principal symptoms are slowly progressive dyspnea, fatigue,
and weakness. Chronic edema, hepatic congestion, and ascites are
usually present. Ascites often seems out of proportion to the degree
of peripheral edema. The examination reveals these signs and a
characteristically elevated jugular venous pressure with a rapid y
descent. This can be detected at bedside by careful observation of
the jugular pulse and noting an apparent increased pulse wave at the
end of systole (due to an apparent accentuation of the v wave by
the rapid y descent). Kussmaul sign—a failure of the JVP to fall
with inspiration—is also a frequent finding. The apex may actually
retract with systole and a pericardial “knock” may be heard in early
diastole. Pulsus paradoxus is unusual. Atrial fibrillation is common.
B. Diagnostic Studies
At times constrictive pericarditis is extremely difficult to differentiate
from restrictive cardiomyopathy. When unclear, the use of both
noninvasive testing and cardiac catheterization is required to sort out
the difference.
1. Radiographic findings—The chest radiograph may show
normal heart size or cardiomegaly. Pericardial calcification is best
seen on the lateral view and is uncommon. It rarely involves the LV
apex, and finding of calcification at the LV apex is more consistent
with LV aneurysm.
2. Echocardiography—Echocardiography rarely demonstrates a
thickened pericardium. A septal “bounce” reflecting the rapid early
filling is common, though. RV/LV interaction may be demonstrated
by a reduction in the mitral inflow pattern of > 25%, much as in
tamponade.
3. Cardiac CT and MRI—These imaging tests are only
occasionally helpful. Pericardial thickening of > 4 mm must be
present to establish the diagnosis, and no pericardial thickening is
demonstrable in 20–25% of patients with constrictive pericarditis.
Some MRI techniques demonstrate the septal bounce and can
provide evidence for ventricular interaction.
4. Cardiac catheterization—This procedure is often confirmatory
or can be diagnostic in difficult cases. As a generality, the
pulmonary pressure is low in constriction (as opposed to restrictive
cardiomyopathy). In constrictive pericarditis, because of the need to
demonstrate RV/LV interaction, cardiac catheterization should
include simultaneous measurement of both the LV and RV pressure
tracings with inspiration and expiration. Hemodynamically, patients
with constriction have equalization of end-diastolic pressures
throughout their cardiac chambers, there is rapid early filling then an
abrupt increase in diastolic pressure (“square-root” sign), the RV
end-diastolic pressure is more than one-third the systolic pressure,
simultaneous measurements of RV and LV systolic pressure reveal
a discordance with inspiration (the RV rises as the LV falls), and
there is usually a Kussmaul sign (failure of the RA pressure to fall
with inspiration). The area of the RV pressure tracing may also be
less in expiration and greater during inspiration, reflecting the
variability in filling of the RV with respiration. The ratio of the RV
tracing area to the LV tracing area should fall with inspiration if
constriction is present. In restrictive cardiomyopathy, the LV
diastolic pressure is usually greater than the RV diastolic pressure
by 5 mm Hg, there is pulmonary hypertension, and simultaneous
measurements of the RV and LV systolic pressure reveal a
concordant drop in the peak systolic ventricular pressures during
inspiration with no change in the RV/LV tracing area ratio with
inspiration.
 Treatment
Initial treatment consists of diuresis. As in other disorders of right
heart failure, the diuresis should be aggressive, using loop diuretics
(torsemide if bowel edema is suspected), thiazides, and aldosterone
antagonists (especially if ascites is present). At times, aquaphoresis
may be of value. Surgical pericardiectomy should be done when
diuretics are unable to control symptoms. Pericardiectomy removes
only the pericardium between the phrenic nerve pathways,
however, and most patients still require diuretics after the
procedure, though symptoms are usually dramatically improved.
Morbidity and mortality after pericardiectomy are high (up to 15%)
and are greatest in those with the most disability prior to the
procedure. For that reason, most experts recommend earlier rather
than later pericardiectomy if symptoms are present.
 When to Refer
If the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis is unclear or the
symptoms resist medical therapy, then referral to a cardiologist is
warranted to both establish the diagnosis and recommend therapy.
Ariyarajah V et al. The utility of cardiovascular magnetic resonance
in constrictive pericardial disease. Cardiol Rev. 2009 Mar-
Apr;17(2):77-82. [PMID: 19367149]
 
Bansal R et al. Pericardial constriction after cardiac transplantation.
J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Mar;29(3):371–7. [PMID:
19804990]
 
Dal-Bianco JP et al. Role of echocardiography in the diagnosis of
constrictive pericarditis. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2009 Jan;
22(1):24-33. [PMID: 19130999]
 
Marnejon T et al. The constricted heart. Postgrad Med. 2008
Apr; 120(1):8-10. [PMID: 18467803]
 
Talreja DR et al. Constrictive pericarditis in the modern era: novel
criteria for diagnosis in the cardiac catheterization laboratory. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2008 Jan 22;51(3):315–9. [PMID: 18206742]
 
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
& PULMONARY HEART
DISEASE
 
IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most frequently seen in younger women.
 Dyspnea, and often cyanosis, with no evidence of left heart
disease.
 Enlarged pulmonary arteries on chest radiograph.
 Elevated JVP and RV heave.
 Echocardiography is often diagnostic.
 
 General Considerations
The normal pulmonary bed offers about one-tenth as much
resistance to blood flow as the systemic arterial system. Pulmonary
hypertension is classified as mild if the mean PA pressure is > 20
mm Hg, moderate if > 30 mm Hg, and severe if > 45 mm Hg.
Experts now recommend that a diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary
hypertension should be firmly based on a mean PA pressure of ≥
25 mm Hg in association with a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
of < 16 mm Hg at rest.
Formally called “primary” pulmonary hypertension, the
preferred term now is “idiopathic pulmonary hyper-tension” and is
defined as pulmonary hypertension and elevated pulmonary vascular
resistance (PVR) in the absence of other disease of the lungs or
heart. Its cause is unknown, though there are clear genetic patterns
that have been identified, and it likely represents a derangement in
one or more of the biologic pathways described above. A mutation
in the BMPR2 gene (which encodes bone morphogenic receptor
protein 2), a cell surface receptor for transforming growth factor-β
(TGF-β), is the most common genetic abnormality known. Rarely,
two other surface receptor genes have been identified including
activin-like kinase-type (ALK-1) and endoglin (ENG). About 20%
of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension patients will have
BMPR2 mutation. Pathologically, it is characterized by diffuse
narrowing of the pulmonary arterioles. Circumstantial evidence
suggests that unrecognized recurrent pulmonary emboli or in situ
thrombosis may play a role in some cases. However, the latter may
well be an exacerbating factor (precipitated by local endothelial
injury) rather than a cause of the syndrome. Idiopathic pulmonary
hypertension must be distinguished from other causes of severe
secondary pulmonary hypertension, such as systemic sclerosis,
HIV-related pulmonary hypertension, cirrhosis, and congenital heart
defects (primarily those with a shunt distal to the level of the
tricuspid valve). Rarely, pulmonary venous disease (pulmonary
veno-occlusive disease) or peripheral PA stenosis may be present.
Anorexic drugs used in weight loss programs have also been
implicated in some patients. Left heart disease, in particular mitral
stenosis, or any reason for an elevated LA pressure must be
excluded as well. Table 10–13 includes clinical disorders causing
pulmonary hypertension.
 
Table 10–13. Causes of pulmonary hypertension.
 
Pulmonary arterial disease
     Primary causes
        Idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
        Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn
     Secondary causes
        Connective tissue disease
        Eisenmenger physiology (congenital heart disease)
        Portal hypertension
        HIV
        Drugs/toxins (especially anorexigens)
Pulmonary venous hypertension
     Left-sided heart disease
     Pulmonary venous obstruction-congenital
        Veno-occlusive disease
        Fibrosing mediastinitis and pulmonary venous
obstruction (usually related to histoplasmosis or radiation)
Disorders of the lung or hypoxemia
     Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
     Interstitial lung disease
     Sleep apnea
     High altitude (chronic exposure)
     Alveolar-capillary dysplasia
Chronic thromboembolic disease
     Thrombotic obstruction (clot)
     Pulmonary emboli (tumor, foreign material)
Disorders of pulmonary vasculature
     Schistosomiasis
     Sarcoidosis
     Histiocytosis X
     Other
Modified from Rich S (editor). Primary pulmonary hypertension: Executive
summary from the World Symposium–Primary Pulmonary Hypertension,
1998.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical picture is similar to that of pulmonary hyper-tension
from other causes. Chronic lung disease, especially sleep apnea,
can be overlooked as a cause for pulmonary hypertension. Patients
are characteristically young women who have evidence of right
heart failure that is usually progressive, leading to death in 2–8
years. This is a decidedly different prognosis than patients with
Eisenmenger physiology due to a left-to-right shunt; 40% of patients
with Eisenmenger physiology are alive 25 years after the diagnosis
has been made. Patients have manifestations of low cardiac output,
with weakness and fatigue, as well as edema and ascites as right
heart failure advances. Peripheral cyanosis is present, and syncope
on effort may occur.
B. Diagnostic Studies
The laboratory evaluation of idiopathic pulmonary hyper-tension
must exclude a secondary cause. A hypercoagulable state should be
sought by measuring proteins C and S levels, the presence of a
lupus anticoagulant, the level of factor V Leiden, and D-dimer.
Chronic pulmonary emboli must be excluded (usually by lung scan
or contrast spiral CT). The chest radiograph helps exclude a
primary pulmonary etiology—evidence for patchy pulmonary
edema may raise the suspicion of pulmonary veno-occlusive
disease. A sleep study may be warranted if sleep apnea is
suspected. The ECG is generally consistent with RVH and RA
enlargement. Echocardiography/Doppler demonstrates an enlarged
RV and RA—at times they may be huge and hypocontractile.
Severe pulmonic or tricuspid regurgitation may be present. Septal
flattening is consistent with pulmonary hypertension. Doppler
interrogation of the tricuspid regurgitation jet helps provide an
estimate of RV systolic pressure. Pulmonary function tests help
exclude other disorders, though primary pulmonary hypertension
may present with a reduced carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of
the lung (DLCO) and severe desaturation (particularly if a PFO has
been stretched open and a right-to-left shunt is present). Chest CT
demonstrates enlarged pulmonary arteries and excludes other
causes (such as emphysema or interstitial lung disease). Pulmonary
angiography (or MR angiography or CT angiography) reveals loss
of the smaller acinar pulmonary vessels and tapering of the larger
ones. Catheterization allows measurement of pulmonary pressures
and testing for vasoreactivity using a variety of agents, including
100% oxygen, adenosine, epoprostenol, and nitric oxide. A positive
response is one that decreases the pulmonary mean pressure by >
20%, and the mean pulmonary pressure is reduced to ≤ 45 mm Hg.
 Treatment & Prognosis
A variety of therapeutic options are now available and approved for
use. The therapeutic algorithm is based on response to vasodilators.
If the patient responds readily to vasodilators, then calcium channel
blockers are the first-line therapy. If these are ineffective or the
patient does not respond to vasodilators, then therapy depends on
clinical function. If the patient has WHO Class 2 symptoms, then
either phosphodiesterase inhibitors (sildenafil or tadalafil) or
endothelin receptor blockers (bosentan or ambrisentan) are
recommended. If the patient has WHO Class 3 symptoms, then
prostacyclin analogs (epoprostenol intravenously, iloprost by
inhalation, or beraprost or treprostinal subcutaneously) should be
added to the regimen. For patients with WHO Class 4 symptoms,
either epoprostenol or iloprost should be used as the sole agent,
though some experts still advocate combination therapies. Most
authorities advocate long-term oral anticoagulation to prevent in situ
pulmonary thrombosis. Supplemental oxygen, particularly at night,
appears to improve symptoms and helps reduce pulmonary
pressures. Diuretics help with right heart edema. Pulmonary
transplantation is a viable option in selected centers, though the
operative mortality is high (around 20–25%) and 2-year survival
only about 55%. Women with significant pulmonary hypertension
should not get pregnant, and permanent birth control measures
should be considered. Future advances in therapy include the
possible use of angiogenesis inhibitors, growth factor inhibitors, and
endothelial stem cells or progenitor cell therapy.
Most patient die of RV failure, and a severely dilated RV with
poor contractile function has been shown to predict early mortality.
MRI provides the best measure of RV volume and function.
Osteopontin levels, which are increased, can be used as
biomarkers; they appear to correlate with prognosis.
 When to Refer
All patients with suspected idiopathic pulmonary hyper-tension
should be referred to either a cardiologist or pulmonologist who
specializes in the evaluation and treatment of patients with
unexplained pulmonary hypertension (RV systolic > 35 mm Hg as
measured by an echocardiogram).
Barst RJ et al. Updated evidence-based treatment algorithm in
pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Jun
30;54(1 Suppl):S78–84. [PMID: 19555861]
 
Benza RL et al. Predicting survival in pulmonary arterial hyper-
tension: insights from the Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-term
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Disease Management
(REVEAL). Circulation. 2010 Jul 13;122(2): 164–72. [PMID:
20585012]
 
Ghofrani HA et al. Uncertainties in the diagnosis and treatment of
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Circulation. 2008 Sep
9;118(11):1195–201. [PMID: 18779455]
 
Hoeper MM et al. Diagnosis, assessment and treatment of non-
pulmonary arterial pulmonary hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2009 Jun 30;54(1 Suppl):S85–96. [PMID: 19555862]
 
Humbert M et al. Survival in patients with idiopathic, familial and
anorexigen-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension in the
modern management era. Circulation. 2010 Jul 13;122(2):156–63.
[PMID: 20585011]
 
Lorenzen JM et al. Osteopontin in patients with primary pulmonary
hypertension. Chest. 2010 Oct 14. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
20947652]
 
Stringham R et al. Pulmonary arterial hypertension: an update on
diagnosis and treatment. Am Fam Physician. 2010 Aug
15;82(4):370–7. [PMID: 20704168]
 
PULMONARY HEART DISEASE (Cor Pulmonale)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms and signs of chronic bronchitis and pulmonary
emphysema.
 Elevated jugular venous pressure, parasternal lift, edema,
hepatomegaly, ascites.
 ECG shows tall, peaked P waves (P pulmonale), right axis
deviation, and RVH.
 Chest radiograph: Enlarged RV and PA.
 Echocardiogram or radionuclide angiography excludes primary
lV dysfunction.
 
 General Considerations
The term “cor pulmonale” denotes RV systolic and diastolic failure
resulting from pulmonary disease and the attendant hypoxia or from
pulmonary vascular disease (pulmonary hypertension). Its clinical
features depend on both the primary underlying disease and its
effects on the heart.
Cor pulmonale is most commonly caused by COPD or idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Less frequent causes include pneumoconiosis,
kyphoscoliosis, idiopathic pulmonary hypertension, repeated
episodes of subclinical or clinical pulmonary embolization,
Pickwickian syndrome, schistosomiasis, and obliterative pulmonary
capillary or lymphangitic infiltration from metastatic carcinoma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The predominant symptoms of compensated cor pulmonale are
related to the pulmonary disorder and include chronic productive
cough, exertional dyspnea, wheezing respirations, easy fatigability,
and weakness. When the pulmonary disease causes RV failure,
these symptoms may be intensified. Dependent edema and right
upper quadrant pain may also appear. The signs of cor pulmonale
include cyanosis, clubbing, distended neck veins, RV heave or
gallop (or both), prominent lower sternal or epigastric pulsations, an
enlarged and tender liver, dependent edema, and ascites. Severe
lung disease can be a cause of low cardiac output by reducing LV
filling and subsequently LV preload and stroke volume.
B. Laboratory Findings
Polycythemia is often present in cor pulmonale secondary to chronic
hypoxemia. The arterial oxygen saturation is often below 85% and
frequently falls with exertion; Pco2 may or may not be elevated.
C. ECG and Chest Radiography
The ECG may show right axis deviation and peaked P waves.
Deep S waves are present in lead V6. Right axis deviation and low
voltage may be noted in patients with pulmonary emphysema. Frank
RVH is uncommon except in idiopathic pulmonary hypertension.
The ECG often mimics myocardial infarction; Q waves may be
present in leads II, III, and aVF because of the vertically placed
heart, but they are rarely deep or wide, as in inferior myocardial
infarction. Supraventricular arrhythmias are frequent and
nonspecific.
The chest radiograph discloses the presence or absence of
parenchymal disease and a prominent or enlarged RV and PA.
D. Diagnostic Studies
Pulmonary function tests usually confirm the underlying lung disease.
The echocardiogram should show normal LV size and function but
RV and RA dilation. Perfusion lung scans are rarely of value, but, if
negative, they help exclude chronic pulmonary emboli. Multislice
CT has replaced pulmonary angiography as the most specific
method of diagnosis for the pulmonary emboli. The serum BNP
level may be elevated from RV dysfunction.
 Differential Diagnosis
In its early stages, cor pulmonale can be diagnosed on the basis of
the clinical examination and radiologic, echocardiographic, or ECG
evidence. Catheterization of the right heart will establish a definitive
diagnosis but is more often performed to exclude left-sided heart
failure or pulmonary venous disease, which can be an unrecognized
cause of right-sided failure in some patients. Differential diagnostic
considerations relate primarily to the specific pulmonary disease that
has produced RV failure (see above).
 Treatment
The details of the treatment of chronic pulmonary disease (chronic
respiratory failure) are discussed in Chapter 9. Otherwise, therapy
is directed at the pulmonary process responsible for right heart
failure. Oxygen, salt and fluid restriction, and diuretics are
mainstays, with combination diuretic therapy (loop diuretics,
thiazides and spironolactone) often useful, as described above for
other causes of right heart failure.
 Prognosis
Compensated cor pulmonale has the same prognosis as the
underlying pulmonary disease. Once signs of heart failure appear,
the average life expectancy is 2–5 years, but survival is significantly
longer when uncomplicated emphysema is the cause.
 When to Refer
Patients with unexplained or difficult to manage right heart failure
should be referred to a cardiologist or a pulmonologist in an effort
to uncover correctable causes and to address therapeutic options.
Barr RG et al. Percent emphysema, airflow obstruction and
impaired left ventricular filling. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jan 21;
362(3):217–27. [PMID: 20089972]
 
Han MK et al. Pulmonary diseases and the heart. Circulation.
2007 Dec 18;116(25):2992–3005. [PMID: 18086941]
 
Hoeper MM et al. Diagnosis, assessment and treatment of non-
pulmonary arterial pulmonary hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2009 Jun 30;54(1 Suppl):S85–96. [PMID: 19555862]
 
NEOPLASTIC DISEASES OF
THE HEART
 
Primary cardiac tumors are rare and constitute only a small fraction
of all tumors that involve the heart or pericardium. The most
common primary tumor is atrial myxoma; it comprises about 50%
of all tumors in adult case series. It is generally attached to the atrial
septum and is more likely to affect the LA than the RA. Familial
myxomas occur as part of the Carney complex—that consists of
myxomas, pigmented skin lesions, and endocrine neoplasia. Patients
with myxoma can present with the characteristics of a systemic
illness, with obstruction of blood flow through the heart, or with
signs of peripheral embolization. The characteristics include fever,
malaise, weight loss, leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, and
emboli (peripheral or pulmonary, depending on the location of the
tumor). This is often confused with infective endocarditis,
lymphoma, other cancers, or autoimmune diseases. In other cases,
the tumor may grow to considerable size and produce symptoms by
obstructing mitral inflow. Episodic pulmonary edema (classically
occurring when an upright posture is assumed) and signs of low
output may result. Physical examination may reveal a diastolic sound
related to motion of the tumor (“tumor plop”) or a diastolic murmur
similar to that of mitral stenosis. Right-sided myxomas may cause
symptoms of right-sided failure.
The diagnosis is established by echocardiography or by
pathologic study of embolic material. Cardiac MRI is useful as an
adjunct only. Contrast angiography is frequently not necessary.
Surgical excision is usually curative, though recurrences do occur
and serial echocardiographic follow-up, on at least a yearly basis, is
recommended.
The second most common primary cardiac tumors are valvular
papillary fibroelastomas and atrial septal lipomas. These tend to be
benign and usually require no therapy, although large ones may
embolize or cause valvular dysfunction. Other primary cardiac
tumors include rhabdomyomas (that often appear multiple in both
the RV and LV), fibrous histiocytomas, hemangiomas, and a variety
of unusual sarcomas. The diagnosis may be supported by an
abnormal cardiac contour on radiograph. Echocardiography is
usually helpful but may miss tumors infiltrating the ventricular wall.
Cardiac MRI is emerging as the diagnostic procedure of choice.
Metastases from malignant tumors can also affect the heart. Most
often this occurs in malignant melanoma, but other tumors involving
the heart include bronchogenic carcinoma, carcinoma of the breast,
the lymphomas, renal cell carcinoma, and, in patients with AIDS,
Kaposi sarcoma. These are often clinically silent but may lead to
pericardial tamponade, arrhythmias and conduction disturbances,
heart failure, and peripheral emboli. The diagnosis is often made by
echocardiography, but cardiac MRI and CT scanning are also
helpful. ECG may reveal regional Q waves. The prognosis is dismal
for secondary cardiac tumors; effective treatment is not available.
On rare occasions, surgical resection or chemotherapy is
warranted. Primary pericardial tumors, such as mesotheliomas
related to asbestos exposure, may also occur.
Many primary tumors may be resectable. Atrial myxomas should
be removed surgically due to the high incidence of embolization
from these friable tumors. Papillary fibroelastomas are usually
benign but may embolize and large ones should be considered for
surgical excision. Large pericardial effusions from metastatic tumors
may be drained for comfort, but the fluid recurs. Rhabdomyomas
may be surgically cured if the tumor is accessible and can be
removed while still leaving enough functioning myocardium intact.
 When to Refer
All patients with suspected cardiac tumors should be referred to a
cardiologist or cardiac surgeon for evaluation and possible therapy.
Castillo JG et al. Characterization and management of cardiac
tumors. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2010 Mar;14(1): 6–20.
[PMID: 20472615]
 
Michael RJ. Cardiac tumor issue overview. Methodist DeBakey
Cardiovasc J. 2010 Jul–Sep;6(3):2–3. [PMID: 20834204]
 
O'Donnell DH et al. Cardiac tumors: optimal cardiac MR
sequences and spectrum of imaging appearances. Am J Roentgen.
2009 Aug;193(2):377–87. [PMID: 19620434]
 
CARDIAC INVOLVEMENT IN
MISCELLANEOUS SYSTEMIC
DISEASES
 
The heart may be involved in a number of systemic syndromes.
Many of these have been mentioned briefly in other sections of this
chapter. The pericardium, myocardium, heart valves, and coronary
arteries may be involved either singly or in various combinations. In
most cases the cardiac manifestations are not the dominant feature,
but in some it is the primary cause of symptoms and may be fatal.
The most common type of myocardial involvement is an
infiltrative cardiomyopathy, such as systemic amyloidosis,
sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis, Fabry or glycogen storage disease.
These result in a restrictive cardiomyopathy. Cardiac calcinosis can
occur in hyperparathyroidism (usually the secondary form) and in
primary oxalosis. A number of muscular dystrophies can cause a
cardiomyopathic picture (particularly Duchenne, less frequently
myotonic dystrophy, and several rarer forms). Involvement of the
heart in Duchenne dystrophy can result in a focal cardiomyopathy of
the posterior wall; the classic ECG has prominent anterior
precordial forces. In addition to LV dysfunction and heart failure, all
of these conditions frequently cause conduction abnormalities,
which may be the presenting or only feature. The myocardium may
also be involved in inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. It is
commonly affected in polymyositis and dermatomyositis, but usually
this is subclinical. Systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and
mixed connective tissue disease may cause myocarditis, but these
more commonly involve the pericardium, coronary arteries, or
valves. 
Several 
endocrinopathies, 
including 
acromegaly,
thyrotoxicosis, myxedema, and pheochromocytoma, can produce
dilated cardiomyopathies that resolve when the underlying disease is
appropriately treated. Similarly, the heart may be involved
transiently in Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Pericardial involvement is particularly common in many of the
connective tissue diseases. Systemic lupus erythematosus may
present with pericarditis, and pericardial involvement is not
uncommon (but is less frequently symptomatic) in active rheumatoid
arthritis, systemic sclerosis, and mixed connective tissue disease.
Endocardial involvement takes the form of patchy fibrous—
predominantly on the right side—or inflammatory or sclerotic
changes of the heart valves. Carcinoid heart disease results from the
layering of plaque-like material over the tricuspid valve, RV
endocardium, and pulmonic valve and presents with right heart
failure due to tricuspid and pulmonic regurgitation. The
hypereosinophilic syndromes involve the endocardium, leading to
restrictive cardiomyopathy. A variety of arthritic syndromes are
associated with aortic valvulitis or aortitis with resulting aortic
regurgitation. These include ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and reactive arthritis (formerly called Reiter syndrome).
Disorders of collagen (Marfan syndrome is the most frequent,
followed by Ehlers–Danlos syndrome) often affect the ascending
aorta, with resulting aneurysmal dilation and aortic regurgitation and
susceptibility to aortic dissection. Mitral valve prolapse is also a
common finding in these disorders.
Almost any vasculitic syndrome can involve the coronary arteries,
leading to myocardial infarction. This is most common with
polyarteritis nodosa and systemic lupus erythematosus. Two
vasculitic syndromes have a particular predilection for the coronary
arteries—Kawasaki disease and Takayasu disease. Kawasaki
disease can result in coronary aneurysms, occasionally of huge size.
Takayasu disease affects the great vessels more often than the
coronaries and smooth, tapering lesions are usually seen,
particularly at the vessel ostia. In these, myocardial infarction may
be the presenting symptom.
Therapy is usually aimed at the underlying disease process. Anti-
inflammatory agents have traditionally been used, but there is new
interest in the use of emerging biological agents for some disease
states. Some enzyme replacement therapies (ie, α-galactosidase for
Fabry disease) may be effective. Replacement of hormone
deficiency or blocking hormonal excess can be effective. Surgical
intervention is indicated when an anatomic lesion can be repaired.
 When to Refer
The patient should be referred to a cardiologist or relevant specialist
(eg, rheumatologist) (or both) whenever there is more than minor
involvement of the cardiac structures. Valvular and great vessel or
coronary involvement should prompt a thorough cardiovascular
evaluation.
Chung SA et al. Advances in the use of biological agents for the
treatment of systemic vasculitis. Current Opin Rheumatol. 2009
Jan;21(1):3–9. [PMID: 19077713]
 
Finsterer J et al. Cardiac findings in congenital muscular
dystrophies. Pediatrics. 2010 Sep;126(3):538–45. [PMID:
20679303]
 
Hidron A et al. Cardiac involvement with parasitic infections. Clin
Microbiol Rev. 2010 Apr;23(2):324–49. [PMID: 20375355]
 
Meune C et al. Heart involvement in systemic sclerosis: evolving
concept and diagnostic methodologies. Arch Cardiovasc Dis.
2010 Jan;103(1):46–52. [PMID: 20142120]
 
Mukerji S et al. Cardiovascular complications of the Guillain-Barré
syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Nov 15;104(10):1452–5. [PMID:
19892067]
 
Patel MR et al. Detection of myocardial damage in patients with
sarcoidosis. Circulation. 2009 Nov 17;120(20):1969–77. [PMID:
19884472]
 
Turiel M et al. The heart in rheumatoid arthritis. Autoimmun Rev.
2010 Apr;9(6):414–8. [PMID: 19913641]
 
TRAUMATIC HEART DISEASE
 
Penetrating wounds to the heart are usually lethal unless surgically
repaired. Stab wounds to the RV occasionally lead to
hemopericardium without progressing to tamponade.
Blunt trauma is a more frequent cause of cardiac injuries,
particularly outside of the emergency department setting. This type
of injury is quite frequent in motor vehicle accidents and may occur
with any form of chest trauma, including CPR efforts. The most
common injuries are myocardial contusions or hematomas. Other
forms of nonischemic cardiac injury include metabolic injury due to
burns, electrical current, or sepsis. These may be asymptomatic
(particularly in the setting of more severe injuries) or may present
with chest pain of a nonspecific nature or, not uncommonly, with a
pericardial component. Elevations of cardiac enzymes are frequent
but the levels do not correlate with prognosis. Echocardiography
may reveal an akinetic segment or pericardial effusion.
Pericardiocentesis is warranted if tamponade is evident. Heart
failure is uncommon if there are no associated cardiac or pericardial
injuries, and conservative management is usually sufficient.
Severe trauma may also cause myocardial or valvular rupture.
Cardiac rupture may involve any chamber, but survival is most likely
if injury is to one of the atria or the RV. Hemopericardium or
pericardial tamponade is the usual clinical presentation, and surgery
is almost always necessary. Mitral and aortic valve rupture may
occur during severe blunt trauma—the former presumably if the
impact occurs during systole and the latter if during diastole.
Patients reach the hospital in shock or severe heart failure.
Immediate surgical repair is essential. The same types of injuries
may result in transection of the aorta, either at the level of the arch
or distal to the takeoff of the left subclavian artery. Transthoracic
echocardiography and TEE are the most helpful and immediately
available diagnostic techniques.
Blunt trauma may also result in damage to the coronary arteries.
Acute or subacute coronary thrombosis is the most common
presentation. The clinical syndrome is one of acute myocardial
infarction with attendant ECG, enzymatic, and contractile
abnormalities. Emergent revascularization is sometimes feasible,
either by the percutaneous route or by coronary artery bypass
surgery. LV aneurysms are common outcomes of traumatic
coronary occlusions, likely due to sudden occlusion with not
collateral vascular support. Coronary artery dissection or rupture
may also occur in the setting of blunt cardiac trauma.
As expected, patients with severe preexisting conditions fare the
least well after cardiac trauma. Data from ReCONECT, a trauma
consortium, reveals that mortality was linked to volume of cases
seen at various centers, preexisting coronary disease or CHF,
intubation, age, and a severity scoring index.
Embrey R. Cardiac trauma. Thorac Surg Clin. 2007
Feb;17(1):87–93. [PMID: 17650701]
 
Harrington DL et al; Research Consortium of New England
Centers for Trauma (ReCONECT). Factors associated with
survival following blunt chest trauma in older patients: results from
a large regional trauma cooperative. Arch Surg. 2010
May;145(5):432–7. [PMID: 20479340]
 
Navid F et al. Great vessel and cardiac trauma: diagnostic and
management strategies. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008
Spring;20(1):31–8. [PMID: 18420124]
 
Seamon MJ et al. Emergency department thoracotomy for
penetrating injuries of the heart and great vessels: an appraisal of
283 consecutive cases from two urban trauma centers. J Trauma.
2009 Dec;67(6):1250–8. [PMID: 20009674]
 
THE CARDIAC PATIENT &
SURGERY
 
There are now guidelines to help the physician and patient better
define the risk of both cardiac and noncardiac surgery in heart
patients. The easiest to use algorithms for cardiac surgery can be
found on either of two websites: one includes the euroSCORE
(www.euroSCORE.org/calc.html) and the other the STS (Society
of Thoracic Surgeons) database that provides a longitudinal look at
the risk of cardiac surgery (www.ctsnet.org/section/stsdatabase).
The EuroScore method invariably results in a greater risk score than
the STS.
To assess the risk of noncardiac surgery, the guidelines from the
ACC/AHA Task Force provide clinically useful algorithms to help
determine 
risk 
(www.acc.org 
or
http://content.onlinejacc.org/cgi/content/full/50/17/e59), 
including
the controversy surrounding β-blocker prophylaxis.
Numerous studies have evaluated the excess risk of surgery in
patients with various cardiac diseases. Recent (within 3 months)
myocardial infarction, unstable angina, CHF, and significant aortic
stenosis are associated with substantial increases in operative
morbidity and mortality rates.
In patients judged to be at high risk or medium risk, there is now
controversy regarding the use of β-blockers. Traditionally, it was
recommended that they should be initiated preoperatively unless
contraindicated. Recent data do not support their value in most
situations.
Fleisher LA et al. ACC/AHA 2007 Guidelines on Perioperative
Cardiovascular Evaluation and Care for Noncardiac Surgery:
Executive Summary: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines on
Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation for Noncardiac Surgery)
Developed in Collaboration With the American Society of
Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology,
Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, and
Society for Vascular Surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Oct
23;50(17):1707–32. [PMID: 17950159]
 
Fleisher LA et al. 2009 ACCF/AHA focused update on
perioperative beta blockade incorporated into the ACC/AHA
2007 guidelines on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and
care for noncardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Nov
24;54(22):e13–e118. [PMID: 19926002]
 
Piazza N et al. Relationship between logistic EuroSCORE and the
Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality score in
patients implanted with the CoreValve ReValving system–a Bern-
Rotterdam Study. Am Heart J. 2010 Feb;159(2):323–9. [PMID:
20152233]
 
HEART DISEASE &
PREGNANCY
 
The management of cardiac disease in pregnancy is discussed in the
references listed below. Only a few major points can be covered in
this brief section.
A comprehensive review of the safety of drugs in pregnancy and
during 
breast-feeding 
can 
be 
found 
at
www.perinatology.com/exposures/druglist.htm.
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2;118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
CARDIOVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF
PREGNANCY
Pregnancy-related hypertension (eclampsia and preeclampsia) is
discussed in Chapter 19.
1. Cardiomyopathy of Pregnancy (Peripartum
Cardiomyopathy)
In approximately one in 3000 to 4000 live births, dilated
cardiomyopathy develops in the mother in the final month of
pregnancy or within 6 months after delivery. The cause is unclear,
but immune and viral causes have been postulated. More recently, it
has been noted that the disease may be related to a cathepsin-D
cleavage product of the hormone prolactin-suggesting blockage of
prolactin may be a potential therapeutic strategy if proven in clinical
trials using bromocriptine. The disease occurs more frequently in
women over age 30 years, is generally related to the first or second
pregnancy, and is associated with gestational hyper-tension and
drugs used to stop uterine contractions. The course of the disease is
variable; many cases improve or resolve completely over several
months, but others progress to refractory heart failure. About 60%
of patients make a complete recovery. Serum BNP levels are
routinely elevated in pregnancy, but serial values may be useful in
predicting who may be at increased risk for a worse outcome.
Immunosuppressive therapy has been advocated, but few
supportive data are available. Recently, β-blockers have been
administered judiciously to these patients, with at least anecdotal
success. Some experts advocate anticoagulation because of an
increased risk of thrombotic events, and both warfarin and heparin
have their proponents. In severe cases, transient use of
extracorporeal oxygenation (ECMO) has been lifesaving.
Recurrence in subsequent pregnancies is common, particularly if
cardiac function has not completely recovered.
Biteker M et al. Role of bromocriptine in peripartum
cardiomyopathy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Aug;201(2):e13.
[PMID: 19306960]
 
Leinwand LA. Molecular events underlying pregnancy-induced
cardiomyopathy. Cell. 2007 Feb 9;128(3):437–8. [PMID:
17289564]
 
Moioli M et al. Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Arch Gyencol Obstet.
2010 Feb;281(2):183–8. [PMID: 19655159]
 
Sliwa K et al. Management of peripartum cardiomyopathy. Curr
Heart Fail Rep. 2008 Dec;5(4):238–44. [PMID: 19032920]
 
Tanous D et al. B-type natriuretic peptide in pregnant women with
heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Oct 5;56(15): 1247–53.
[PMID: 20883932]
 
2. Coronary Artery & Other Vascular Abnormalities
There have been a number of reports of myocardial infarction
during pregnancy. It is known that pregnancy predisposes to
dissection of the aorta and other arteries, perhaps because of the
accompanying connective tissue changes. The risk may be
particularly high in patients with Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos
syndromes. However, coronary artery dissection is responsible for
only a minority of the infarctions; most are caused by atherosclerotic
CAD or coronary emboli. Most of the events occur near term or
shortly following delivery, and paradoxical emboli through a PFO
has been implicated in a few instances. Clinical management is
essentially similar to that of other patients with acute infarction,
unless there is a connective tissue disorder. If nonatherosclerotic
dissection is present, coronary intervention is risky as further
dissection can be aggravated. In most instances, conservative
management is warranted. At times, extensive aortic dissection
requires surgical intervention.
Goland S et al. Pregnancy in Marfan syndrome: maternal and fetal
risks and recommendations for patient assessment and
management. Cardiol Rev. 2009 Nov–Dec;17(6):253–62.
[PMID: 19829173]
 
Kealey A. Coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction in
pregnancy: a review of epidemiology, diagnosis, medical and
surgical management. Can J Cardiol. 2010 Jun;26(6):185–9.
[PMID: 20548979]
 
 
3. 
Prophylaxis 
for 
Infective
Endocarditis 
During 
Pregnancy 
&
Delivery
The ACC/AHA Task Force addressing adults with congenital heart
disease has formulated new guidelines outlining recommendations
for pregnant women during labor and delivery.
There are no class 1 indications nor class 3 contraindications.
The patients who should be considered for coverage with antibiotics
during delivery include those who fall into the class 2A category
(level of evidence: B).
In select patients with the highest risk of adverse outcomes, it is
reasonable to consider antibiotic prophylaxis against infective
endocarditis before vaginal delivery at the time of membrane
rupture. This includes patients with the following indications: (1)
prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for cardiac
valve repair, and (2) unrepaired and palliated cyanotic congenital
heart disease, including surgically constructed palliative shunts
conduits.
Warnes CA et al. ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the
Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease. A Report
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2008
Dec 2; 118(23):e714–833. [PMID: 18997169]
 
Wilson W et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines
from the American Heart Association: a guideline from the
American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis and
Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease
in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care
and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. J Am
Dent Assoc. 2007 Jun;138(6):739–45, 747–60. [PMID:
17545263]
 
 Management of Labor
Although vaginal delivery is usually well tolerated, unstable patients
(including patients with severe hypertension and worsening heart
failure) should have planned cesarean section. An increased risk of
aortic rupture has been noted during delivery in patients with
coarctation of the aorta and severe aortic root dilation with Marfan
syndrome, and vaginal delivery should be avoided in these
conditions. For most patients, even those with congenital heart
disease, vaginal delivery is preferred.
CARDIOVASCULAR
SCREENING OF ATHLETES
 
The sudden death of a competitive athlete inevitably becomes an
occasion for local if not national publicity. On each occasion, the
public and the medical community ask whether such events could
be prevented by more careful or complete screening. Although each
event is tragic, it must be appreciated that there are approximately 5
million competitive athletes at the high school level or above in any
given year in the United States. The number of cardiac deaths
occurring during athletic participation is unknown, but estimates at
the high school level range from one in 300,000 to one in 100,000
participants. Death rates among more mature athletes increase as
the prevalence of CAD rises. These numbers highlight the problem
of how to screen individual participants. Even an inexpensive test
such as an ECG would generate an enormous cost if required of all
athletes, and it is likely that few at-risk individuals would be
detected. Echocardiography, either as a routine test or as a follow-
up examination for abnormal ECGs, would be prohibitively
expensive except for the elite professional athlete. Thus, the most
feasible approach is that of a careful medical history and cardiac
examination performed by personnel aware of the conditions
responsible for most sudden deaths in competitive athletes. In a
series of 158 athletic deaths in the United States between 1985 and
1995, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (36%) and coronary anomalies
(19%) were by far the most frequent underlying conditions. LV
hypertrophy was present in another 10%, ruptured aorta
(presumably due to Marfan syndrome or cystic medial necrosis) in
6%, myocarditis or dilated cardiomyopathy in 6%, aortic stenosis in
4%, and arrhythmogenic RV dysplasia in 3%. In addition,
commotio cordis, or sudden death due to direct myocardial injury,
may occur. More common in children, it may occur even after a
minor direct blow to the heart; it is thought to be due to the
precipitation of a premature ventricular contraction just prior to the
peak of the T wave on ECG.
It is likely that a careful family and medical history and
cardiovascular examination will identify some individuals at risk. A
family history of premature sudden death or cardiovascular disease
or of any of these predisposing conditions should mandate further
workup, including an ECG and echocardiogram. Symptoms of
chest pain, syncope, or near-syncope also warrant further
evaluation. A Marfan-like appearance, significant elevation of BP or
abnormalities of heart rate or rhythm, and pathologic heart murmurs
or heart sounds should also be investigated before clearance for
athletic participation is given. Such an evaluation is recommended
before participation at the high school and college levels and every
2 years during athletic competition.
Stress-induced syncope or chest pressure may be the first clue to
an anomalous origin of a coronary artery. Anatomically, this lesion
occurs most often when the left anterior descending artery arises
from the right coronary cusp and traverses between the aorta and
pulmonary trunks. The “slit-like” orifice that results from the
angulation at the vessel origin is thought to cause ischemia when the
aorta and pulmonary arteries enlarge during rigorous exercise.
The toughest distinction may be in sorting out the healthy athlete
with LVH from the athlete with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In
general, the healthy athlete's heart is less likely to have an unusual
pattern of LVH, or to have LA enlargement, an abnormal ECG, an
LV cavity < 45 mm in diameter at end-diastole, an abnormal
diastolic filling pattern, or a family history of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. In addition, the athlete is more likely to be male
than the individual with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Increased
risk is also evident in patients with evidence of either Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome, those with prolonged QTc, or the
Brugada syndrome on their ECG.
Selective use of routine ECG and stress testing is recommended
in men above age 40 years and women above age 50 years who
continue to participate in vigorous exercise and at earlier ages when
there is a positive family history for premature CAD, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, or multiple risk factors. Because at least some of
the risk features (long QT, LVH, Brugada syndrome, Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome) may be evident on routine ECG
screening, several cost-effectiveness studies have been done. Most
suggest that pre-participation ECGs are of value. The issue remains
controversial.
Maron BJ et al; Working Groups of the American Heart
Association Committee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and
Prevention; Councils on Clinical Cardiology and Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young. Recommendations for physical activity and
recreational sports participation for young patients with genetic
cardiovascular diseases. Circulation. 2004 Jun 8;109(22):2807–
16. [PMID: 15184297]
 
Westrol MS et al. Causes of sudden cardiac arrest in young
athletes. Postgrad Med. 2010 Jul;122(4):144–57. [PMID:
20675977]
 
Wheeler MT et al. Cost-effectiveness of preparticipation screening
for prevention of sudden cardiac death in young athletes. Ann
Intern Med. 2010 Mar 2;152(5):276–86. [PMID: 20194233]
 
 
 
Systemic Hypertension
Michael Sutters, MD, MRCP (UK)
Sixty-six million Americans have elevated blood pressure (systolic
blood pressure ≥ 140 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 90 mm
Hg); of these, 72% are aware of their diagnosis, but only 61% are
receiving treatment and only 35% are under control using a
threshold criterion of 140/90 mm Hg. The prevalence of
hypertension increases with age and is more common in blacks than
in whites. The mortality rates for stroke and coronary heart disease,
two of the major complications of hypertension, have declined by
50–60% over the past three decades but have recently leveled off.
The numbers of patients with end-stage kidney disease and heart
failure—two other conditions in which hypertension plays a major
causative role—continue to rise.
Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality increase as both systolic
and diastolic blood pressures rise, but in individuals over age 50
years, the systolic pressure and pulse pressure are better predictors
of complications than diastolic pressure. Table 11–1 provides a
summary of the classification and management of blood pressure in
adults from the 7th Report of the U.S. Joint National Commission
on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure (JNC 7).
HOW IS BLOOD PRESSURE MEASURED AND
HYPERTENSION DIAGNOSED?
Blood pressure should be measured with a well-calibrated
sphygmomanometer. The bladder width within the cuff should
encircle at least 80% of the arm circumference. Readings should be
taken after the patient has been resting comfortably, back
supported in the sitting or supine position, for at least 5 minutes and
at least 30 minutes after smoking or coffee ingestion. A video
demonstrating the correct technique can be found at
http://www.abdn.ac.uk/medical/bhs/tutorial/tutorial.htm.
Hypertension is diagnosed when systolic blood pressure is
consistently elevated above 140 mm Hg, or diastolic blood pressure
is above 90 mm Hg; a single elevated blood pressure reading is not
sufficient to establish the diagnosis of hypertension. The major
exceptions to this rule are hypertensive presentations with
unequivocal evidence of life-threatening end-organ damage, as seen
in hypertensive emergency, or in hypertensive urgency where blood
pressure is > 220/125 mm Hg but life-threatening end-organ
damage is absent. In less severe cases, the diagnosis of
hypertension depends on a series of measurements of blood
pressure, since readings can vary and tend to regress toward the
mean with time. Patients whose initial blood pressure is in the
hypertensive range exhibit the greatest fall toward the normal range
between the first and second encounters. However, the concern for
diagnostic precision needs to be balanced by an appreciation of the
importance of establishing the diagnosis of hypertension as quickly
as possible, since a 3-month delay in treatment of hypertension in
high-risk patients is associated with a twofold increase in
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The guidelines of the 2005
Canadian Hypertension Education Program provide an algorithm
designed to expedite the diagnosis of hypertension (Figure 11–1).
To this end, these guidelines recommend short intervals between
initial office visits and stress the importance of early identification of
target organ damage which, if present, obviates the need for
protracted confirmation of blood pressure elevation prior to
pharmacologic intervention. As discussed below, antihypertensive
regimens should be designed to bring blood pressure down to target
levels swiftly. The Canadian guidelines exploit the less volatile
ambulatory and home blood pressure measurements as
complements to office-based evaluations. Hypertension is
diagnosed at lower levels when based on measurements taken
outside the office environment. Blood pressure is normally lowest at
night and the loss of this nocturnal dip is strongly associated with
cardiovascular risk, particularly thrombotic stroke. An accentuation
of the normal morning increase in blood pressure is associated with
increased likelihood of cerebral hemorrhage. The importance of
ambulatory and diurnal blood pressure readings as powerful
predictors of cardiovascular events demonstrates the need to
consider blood pressure beyond the averaging out of occasional
office readings. This point is well illustrated by the fact that visit-to-
visit variability of systolic blood pressure predicts cardiovascular
events independently of mean systolic blood pressure.
 
Table 11–1. Classification and management of blood pressure for
adults aged 18 years or older.
 
1Treatment determined by highest BP category.
2See Table 11–4.
3Treat patients with chronic kidney disease or diabetes mellitus to BP goal
of < 130/80 mm Hg.
4Initial combined therapy should be used cautiously in those at risk for
orthostatic hypotension.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker;
BP, blood pressure; CCB, calcium channel blocker.
Data from Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003 May 21;289(19):2560–72.
PREHYPERTENSION
Data from the Framingham cohort indicate that blood pressure
bears a linear relationship with cardiovascular risk down to a
systolic blood pressure of 115 mm Hg; based on these data, it is
recommended that individuals with blood pressures in the gray area
of 120–139/80–89 mm Hg be categorized as having
prehypertension (Table 11–1). This demonstrates a trend away
from defining hypertension as a simple numerical threshold and
toward a more subtle appreciation of blood pressure as a
component of overall cardiovascular risk. This trend gains support
from increasing evidence for a relationship between blood pressure
and disruption of cardiovascular function at levels below the
hypertensive threshold. Because prehypertension often develops
into hypertension (50% of people within 4 years), even low-risk
prehypertensive patients should be monitored annually.
Chobanian AV. Shattuck Lecture. The hypertension paradox–
more uncontrolled disease despite improved therapy. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Aug 27;361(9):878–87. [PMID: 19710486]
 
Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of
High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 Report. JAMA. 2003 May
21;289(19):2560–72. [PMID: 12748199]
 
Mallick S et al. Home blood pressure monitoring in clinical
practice: a review. Am J Med. 2009 Sep;122(9):803–10. [PMID:
19699371]
 
Padwal RJ et al. The 2008 Canadian Hypertension Education
Program recommendations for the management of hyper-tension:
Part 1—blood pressure measurement, diagnosis and assessment of
risk. Can J Cardiol. 2008 Jun;24(6):455–63. [PMID: 18548142]
 
Pimenta E et al. Prehypertension: epidemiology, consequences and
treatment. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2010 Jan;6(1):21–30. [PMID:
19918256]
 
Rothwell PM et al. Prognostic significance of visit-to-visit
variability, maximum systolic blood pressure, and episodic hyper-
tension. Lancet. 2010 Mar 13;375(9718):895–905. [PMID:
20226988]
 
Waeber B et al. Nighttime blood pressure: a target for therapy?
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2010 Dec;12(6):474–9. [PMID: 20862569]
 
Waeber B et al. Target organ damage: how to detect it and how to
treat it? J Hypertens. 2009 Jun;27(Suppl 3):S13–8. [PMID:
19506446]
 
Weir MR et al. How early should blood pressure control be
achieved for optimal cardiovascular outcomes? J Hum Hypertens.
2011 Apr;25(4):211–7 [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20596060]
 
Williams B. The changing face of hypertension treatment: treatment
strategies from the 2007 ESH/ESC Hypertension Guidelines. J
Hypertens Suppl. 2009 Jun;27(3):S19–26. [PMID: 19506447]
 
 
Figure 11–1. The 2005 Canadian Hypertension Education
Program recommendations for the assessment and diagnosis of
hypertension. Patients with an elevated blood pressure measured
during visits 4–5 may still have white-coat (office-induced)
hypertension. (Reprinted, with permission from: Bolli P et al;
Canadian Hypertension Education Program. Applying the 2005
Canadian Hypertension Education Program recommendations: 1.
Diagnosis of hypertension. CMAJ. 2005 Aug 30;173(5):480–3. ©
2005 CMA Media Inc.)
 
APPROACH TO HYPERTENSION
Etiology & Classification
A. Primary Essential Hypertension
Essential hypertension is the term applied to the 95% of
hypertensive patients in which elevated blood pressure results from
complex interactions between multiple genetic and environmental
factors. The proportion regarded as “essential” will diminish with
improved detection of clearly defined secondary causes and with
better understanding of pathophysiology. Essential hypertension
occurs in 10–15% of white adults and 20–30% of black adults in
the United States. The onset is usually between ages 25 and 55
years; it is uncommon before age 20 years. The best understood
endogenous and environmental determinants of blood pressure are
discussed below.
1. Sympathetic nervous system hyperactivity—This is most
apparent in younger persons with hypertension, who may exhibit
tachycardia and an elevated cardiac output. However, correlations
between plasma catecholamines and blood pressure are poor.
Insensitivity of the baroreflexes may play a role in the genesis of
adrenergic hyperactivity.
2. Abnormal cardiovascular or renal development—The
normal cardiovascular system develops so that elasticity of the great
arteries is matched to the resistance in the periphery to optimize
large vessel pressure waves. In this way, myocardial oxygen
consumption is minimized and coronary flow maximized. Elevated
blood pressure later in life could arise from abnormal development
of aortic elasticity or reduced development of the microvascular
network. This has been postulated as the sequence of events in low
birth weight infants, who have an increased risk of hypertension
developing in adulthood. Another hypothesis proposes that the
association between low birth weight and hypertension arises from
reduced nephron number.
3. Renin–angiotensin system activity—Renin, a proteolytic
enzyme, is secreted by cells surrounding glomerular afferent
arterioles in response to a number of stimuli, including reduced renal
perfusion pressure, diminished intravascular volume, circulating
catecholamines, increased sympathetic nervous system activity,
increased arteriolar stretch, and hypokalemia. Renin acts on
angiotensinogen to cleave off the ten-amino-acid peptide
angiotensin I. This peptide is then acted upon by angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) to create the eight-amino-acid peptide
angiotensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor and stimulant of aldosterone
release from the adrenal glands. Despite the role of renin in the
regulation of blood pressure, it probably does not play a central role
in the pathogenesis of most primary (essential) hypertension; only
10% of patients have high renin activity, whereas 60% have normal
levels, and 30% have low levels. Black persons with hypertension
and older patients tend to have lower plasma renin activity, which
may be associated with expanded intravascular volume.
4. Defect in natriuresis—According to the classic Guyton
hypothesis, increased salt intake triggers an increase in blood
pressure that in turn promotes increased natriuresis, thereby bringing
blood pressure back toward basal levels. Salt has long been
implicated in the genesis of hypertension, and so-called salt-
sensitive hypertension probably arises from a defect in this self-
regulating pressure-natriuresis feedback loop.
5. Intracellular sodium and calcium—Intracellular Na+ is
elevated in primary (essential) hypertension. An increase in
intracellular Na+ may lead to increased intracellular Ca2+
concentration as a result of facilitated exchange and might explain
the increase in vascular smooth muscle tone that is characteristic of
established hypertension.
6. Exacerbating factors—A number of conditions have the
potential to elevate blood pressure. Obesity is associated with an
increase in intravascular volume, elevated cardiac output, activation
of the renin-angiotensin system and, probably, increased
sympathetic outflow. Weight reduction lowers blood pressure
modestly. In patients with sleep apnea, treatment with continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) has been associated with
improvements in blood pressure. Increased salt intake probably
increases blood pressure in some individuals so dietary salt
restriction is recommended in patients with hypertension (see
below).
Excessive use of alcohol also raises blood pressure, perhaps by
increasing plasma catecholamines. Hypertension can be difficult to
control in patients who consume more than 40 g of ethanol (two
drinks) daily or drink in “binges.” Cigarette smoking raises blood
pressure, again by increasing plasma norepinephrine. Although the
long-term effect of smoking on blood pressure is less clear, the
synergistic effects of smoking and high blood pressure on
cardiovascular risk are well documented. The relationship of
exercise to hypertension is variable. Aerobic exercise lowers
blood pressure in previously sedentary individuals, but increasingly
strenuous exercise in already active subjects has less effect. The
relationship between stress and hyper-tension is not established.
Polycythemia, whether primary or due to diminished plasma
volume, increases blood viscosity and may raise blood pressure.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) produce
increases in blood pressure averaging 5 mm Hg and are best
avoided in patients with borderline or elevated blood pressures.
Low potassium intake is associated with higher blood pressure in
some patients; an intake of 90 mmol/d is recommended.
There is a growing recognition that the complex of abnormalities
termed the “metabolic syndrome” is associated with both the
development of hypertension and an increased risk of adverse
cardiovascular outcomes. The metabolic syndrome (sometimes also
called syndrome X or the “deadly quartet”) consists of upper body
obesity, 
hyperinsulinemia 
and 
insulin 
resistance,
hypertriglyceridemia, and hypertension. Affected patients usually
also have low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels and
have been found to have elevated catecholamines and inflammatory
markers such as C-reactive protein.
B. Secondary Hypertension
Approximately 5% of patients with hypertension have identifiable
specific causes (Table 11–2). Secondary hyper-tension should be
suspected in patients in whom hypertension develops at an early
age, those who first exhibit hypertension when over age 50 years,
or those previously well controlled who become refractory to
treatment. Causes include genetic syndromes, kidney disease, renal
vascular hypertension, primary hyperaldosteronism, Cushing
syndrome, pheochromocytoma, coarctation of the aorta,
hypertension 
associated 
with 
pregnancy, 
estrogen 
use,
hypercalcemia and medications.
 
Table 11–2. Identifiable causes of hypertension.
 
Sleep apnea
Drug-induced or drug-related
Chronic kidney disease
Primary aldosteronism
Renovascular disease
Long-term corticosteroid therapy and Cushing syndrome
Pheochromocytoma
Coarctation of the aorta
Thyroid or parathyroid disease
Data from Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003 May 21;289(19):2560–72.
1. Genetic causes—Hypertension can be caused by mutations in
single genes, inherited on a mendelian basis. Although rare, these
conditions provide important insight into blood pressure regulation
and possibly the genetic basis of essential hypertension.
Glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism is an autosomal
dominant cause of early-onset hypertension with normal or high
aldosterone and low renin levels. It is caused by the formation of a
chimeric gene encoding both the enzyme responsible for the
synthesis of aldosterone (transcriptionally regulated by angiotensin
II) and an enzyme responsible for synthesis of cortisol
(transcriptionally regulated by ACTH). As a consequence,
aldosterone synthesis becomes driven by ACTH, which can be
suppressed by exogenous cortisol. In the syndrome of apparent
mineralocorticoid excess, early-onset hypertension with
hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis is inherited on an autosomal
recessive basis. Although plasma renin is low and plasma
aldosterone level is very low in these patients, aldosterone
antagonists are effective in controlling hypertension. This disease is
caused by loss of the enzyme, 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase,
which normally metabolizes cortisol and thus protects the otherwise
“promiscuous” mineralocorticoid receptor in the distal nephron from
inappropriate glucocorticoid activation. Similarly, glycyrrhetinic
acid, found in licorice, causes increased blood pressure through
inhibition of 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The syndrome of
hyper-tension exacerbated in pregnancy is inherited as an
autosomal dominant trait. In these patients, a mutation in the
mineralocorticoid receptor makes it abnormally responsive to
progesterone and, paradoxically, to spironolactone. Liddle
syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by
early-onset hypertension, hypokalemic alkalosis, low renin and low
aldosterone levels. This is caused by a mutation that results in
constitutive activation of the epithelial sodium channel of the distal
nephron, with resultant unregulated sodium reabsorption and
volume expansion.
2. Renal disease—Renal parenchymal disease is the most
common cause of secondary hypertension. Most cases are related
to increased intravascular volume or increased activity of the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system.
3. Renal vascular hypertension—Renal artery stenosis is present
in 1–2% of hypertensive patients. Its cause in most younger
individuals is fibromuscular dysplasia, particularly in women under
50 years of age. The remainder of renal vascular disease is due to
atherosclerotic stenoses of the renal arteries. The mechanism of
hypertension is excessive renin release due to reduction in renal
perfusion pressure.
Renal vascular hypertension should be suspected in the following
circumstances: (1) if the documented onset is before age 20 or after
age 50 years, (2) hypertension is resistant to three or more drugs,
(3) if there are epigastric or renal artery bruits, (4) if there is
atherosclerotic disease of the aorta or peripheral arteries (15–25%
of patients with symptomatic lower limb atherosclerotic vascular
disease have renal artery stenosis), (5) if there is abrupt
deterioration in kidney function after administration of ACE
inhibitors, or (6) if episodes of pulmonary edema are associated
with abrupt surges in blood pressure. There is no ideal screening
test for renal vascular hypertension. If suspicion is sufficiently high
and endovascular intervention is a viable option, renal arteriography,
the definitive diagnostic test, is the best approach. Renal
arteriography is not recommended as a routine adjunct to coronary
studies. Where suspicion is moderate to low, noninvasive
angiography using magnetic resonance (MR) or CT are reasonable
approaches. With improvements in technology, Doppler
sonography may play an increasing role in detection of renal artery
stenosis, providing physiologic indices of stenosis severity and ease
of repeated examination to detect progression. However, results of
all these modalities vary greatly between institutions. In 2006, a
public health advisory was issued regarding the use of gadolinium (a
contrast agent used in MRA), warning that it might precipitate
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in patients with advanced kidney
disease. Clearly, no diagnostic study should be undertaken without
a careful consideration of the risk-benefit ratio. In young patients
with fibromuscular disease, angioplasty is very effective, but there is
controversy regarding the best approach to the treatment of
atheromatous renal artery stenosis. Correction of the stenosis in
selected patients might reduce the number of medications required
to control blood pressure and could protect kidney function, but the
extent of preexisting parenchymal damage to the affected and
contralateral kidney has a significant influence on both blood
pressure and kidney function outcomes following revascularization.
A reasonable approach advocates medical therapy as long as
hypertension can be well controlled and there is no progression of
kidney disease. The addition of a statin should be considered.
Endovascular intervention might be considered in patients with
uncontrollable hypertension, progressive kidney disease, or episodic
pulmonary edema attributable to the lesion. Angioplasty might also
be warranted when progression of stenosis is either demonstrated
or is predicted by a constellation of risk factors, including systolic
blood pressure >160 mm Hg, advanced age, diabetes mellitus, and
high-grade stenosis (>60%) at the time of diagnosis. However,
conclusive outcomes data to guide management are still awaited.
Although ACE inhibitors have improved the success rate of medical
therapy of hypertension due to renal artery stenosis, they have been
associated with marked hypotension and (usually reversible) kidney
dysfunction in individuals with bilateral disease. Thus, kidney
function and blood pressure should be closely monitored during the
first weeks of therapy in patients in whom this is a consideration.
4. Primary hyperaldosteronism—Over the past decade, studies
have suggested that primary hyperaldosteronism might account for
some 10% of essential hypertension. However, this could be an
overestimate due to sampling bias and problems with the specificity
of a screening test based on the measurement of plasma aldosterone
concentration (normal: 1–16 ng/dL) and plasma renin activity
(normal: 1–2.5 ng/mL/h) and calculation of the plasma
aldosterone/renin ratio (normal <30). This is because “bottoming
out” of renin assays leads to exponential increases in the plasma
aldosterone/renin ratio even when aldosterone levels are normal.
Hence, an elevated plasma aldosterone/renin ratio should probably
not be taken as evidence of hyperaldosteronism unless the
aldosterone level is actually elevated. The primacy of aldosterone in
driving hypertension in low-renin patients has been questioned
because 
spironolactone, 
which 
is 
uniquely 
potent 
in
hyperaldosteronism, seems to be not much more effective at
lowering blood pressure than thiazide diuretics in this group. The
lesion responsible for hyperaldosteronism is an adrenal adenoma or
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and can be demonstrated by CT or
MRI scanning. Screening is appropriate in patients with resistant
hypertension, (needing more than three drugs for control) and those
with spontaneous or thiazide-induced hypokalemia, incidentaloma,
or family history of primary hyperaldosteronism.
During the workup for hyperaldosteronism, medications that alter
renin and aldosterone levels, including ACE inhibitors, angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs), diuretics (especially spironolactone), β-
blockers, and clonidine, should be discontinued at least a week
before sampling. Calcium channel and α-receptor blockers can be
used to control blood pressure during this drug washout period.
Based on this approach, patients with aldosterone/renin ratios of
≥30 with a plasma aldosterone level >16 ng/dL might require
further evaluation for primary hyperaldosteronism.
5. Cushing syndrome—Hypertension occurs in about 80% of
patients with spontaneous Cushing syndrome. Excess glucocorticoid
may induce salt and water retention through mineralocorticoid
effects, through increased angiotensinogen levels, or through
permissive effects in the regulation of vascular tone.
Diagnosis and treatment of Cushing syndrome are discussed in
Chapter 26.
6. Pheochromocytoma—Pheochromocytomas are un common;
they are probably found in <0.1% of all patients with hypertension
and in approximately two individuals per million population.
However, autopsy studies indicate that pheochromocytomas are
very often undiagnosed in life. The blood pressure elevation caused
by the catecholamine excess results mainly from α-receptor-
mediated vasoconstriction of arterioles, with a contribution from β1-
receptor-mediated increases in cardiac output and renin release.
Chronic vasoconstriction of the arterial and venous beds leads to a
reduction in plasma volume and predisposes to postural
hypotension. Glucose intolerance develops in some patients.
Hypertensive crisis in pheochromocytoma may be precipitated by a
variety 
of 
drugs, 
including 
tricyclic 
antidepressants,
antidopaminergic agents, metoclopramide, and naloxone. The
diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytoma are discussed in
Chapter 26.
7. Coarctation of the aorta—This uncommon cause of
hypertension is discussed in Chapter 10.
8. Hypertension associated with pregnancy—Hyper-tension
occurring de novo or worsening during pregnancy, including
preeclampsia and eclampsia, is one of the most common causes of
maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality (see Chapter 19).
9. Estrogen use—A small increase in blood pressure occurs in
most women taking oral contraceptives. However, a more
significant increase that brings the blood pressure to above 140/90
mm Hg is noted in about 5% of women, mostly in obese individuals
older than age 35 who have been treated for more than 5 years.
This is caused by volume expansion due to increased hepatic
synthesis of angiotensinogen and consequent activation of the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system. Postmenopausal estrogen does not
generally cause hypertension, but rather maintains endothelium-
mediated vasodilation.
10. Other causes of secondary hypertension—Hyper-tension
has also been associated with hypercalcemia, acromegaly,
hyperthyroidism, 
hypothyroidism, 
baroreceptor 
denervation,
compression of the rostral ventrolateral medulla, and increased
intracranial pressure. A number of medications may cause or
exacerbate 
hypertension—most 
importantly 
cyclosporine,
tacrolimus, angiogenesis inhibitors, decongestants, and NSAIDs;
cocaine and alcohol should also be considered.
 When to Refer
Referral to a hypertension specialist should be considered in cases
of severe, resistant or early/late onset hypertension or when
secondary hypertension is suggested by screening.
Beetz N et al. Phosducin influences sympathetic activity and
prevents stress-induced hypertension in humans and mice. J Clin
Invest. 2009 Dec;119(12):3597–612. [PMID: 19959875]
 
Bogaert YE et al. The role of obesity in the pathogenesis of
hypertension. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol. 2009 Feb;5(2):101–11.
[PMID: 19107106]
 
Hood SJ et al. The spironolactone, amiloride, losartan, and
thiazide (SALT) double-blind crossover trial in patients with low-
renin hypertension and elevated aldosterone-renin ratio.
Circulation. 2007 Jul 17;116(3):268–75. [PMID: 17606839]
 
Kaplan NM. Current diagnosis and treatment of primary
aldosteronism. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2010 Nov;8(11):
1527–30. [PMID: 21090927]
 
Karagiannis A et al. Pheochromocytoma: an update on genetics
and management. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Dec;14(4): 935–56.
[PMID: 18045948]
 
Manger WM. The protean manifestations of pheochromocytoma.
Horm Metab Res. 2009 Sep;41(9):658–63. [PMID: 19242899]
 
Messerli FH et al. Essential hypertension. Lancet. 2007 Aug 18;
370(9587):591–603. [PMID: 17707755]
 
Nuyt AM et al. Developmental programming and hypertension.
Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2009 Mar;18(2):144–52. [PMID:
19434052]
 
Ritz E. Salt and hypertension. Nephrology (Carlton). 2010 Jun;
15(Suppl 2):49–52. [PMID: 20586949]
 
Shetty R et al. Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis: current therapy
and future developments. Am Heart J. 2009 Aug; 158(2):154–62.
[PMID: 19619689]
 
Simon JF. Stenting atherosclerotic renal arteries: time to be less
aggressive. Cleve Clin J Med. 2010 Mar;77(3):178–89. [PMID:
20200168]
 
 
Complications 
of 
Untreated
Hypertension
Elevated blood pressure results in structural and functional changes
in the vasculature and heart. Most of the adverse outcomes in
hypertension are associated with thrombosis rather than bleeding,
possibly because increased vascular shear stress converts the
normally anticoagulant endothelium to a prothrombotic state. The
excess morbidity and mortality related to hypertension
approximately doubles for each 6 mm Hg increase in diastolic blood
pressure. However, target-organ damage varies markedly between
individuals with similar levels of office hypertension; ambulatory
pressures are superior to office readings in the prediction of end-
organ damage and variability in blood pressure from visit to visit
predicts cardiovascular endpoints independently of mean office-
based systolic blood pressure.
A. Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease
Cardiac complications are the major causes of morbidity and
mortality in primary (essential) hypertension. For any level of blood
pressure, left ventricular hypertrophy is associated with incremental
cardiovascular risk in association with congestive heart failure
(through systolic or diastolic dysfunction), ventricular arrhythmias,
myocardial ischemia, and sudden death.
The occurrence of heart failure is reduced by 50% with
antihypertensive therapy. Hypertensive left ventricular hyper-trophy
regresses with therapy and is most closely related to the degree of
systolic blood pressure reduction. Diuretics have produced equal or
greater reductions of left ventricular mass when compared with
other drug classes. β-Blockers are less effective in reducing left
ventricular hypertrophy but play a specific role in patients with
established coronary artery disease or impaired left ventricular
function.
B. Hypertensive Cerebrovascular Disease and Dementia
Hypertension is the major predisposing cause of hemorrhagic and
ischemic stroke. Cerebrovascular complications are more closely
correlated with systolic than diastolic blood pressure. The incidence
of these complications is markedly reduced by antihypertensive
therapy. Preceding hypertension is associated with a higher
incidence of subsequent dementia of both vascular and Alzheimer
types. Effective blood pressure control may reduce the risk of
development of cognitive dysfunction later in life, but once cerebral
small vessel disease is established, low blood pressure might
exacerbate this problem.
C. Hypertensive Kidney Disease
Chronic hypertension leads to nephrosclerosis, a common cause of
kidney disease that is particularly prevalent in blacks. Aggressive
blood pressure control, to 130/80 mm Hg or lower, slows the
progression of all forms of chronic kidney disease, especially when
proteinuria is present.
D. Aortic Dissection
Hypertension is a contributing factor in many patients with
dissection of the aorta. Its diagnosis and treatment are discussed in
Chapter 12.
E. Atherosclerotic Complications
Most Americans with hypertension die of complications of
atherosclerosis, but antihypertensive therapy seems to have a lesser
impact on atherosclerotic complications compared with the other
effects of treatment outlined above. Prevention of cardiovascular
outcomes related to atherosclerosis probably requires control of
multiple risk factors, of which hypertension is only one.
Dharmashankar K et al. Vascular endothelial function and
hypertension: insights and directions. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2010
Dec;12(6):448–55. [PMID: 20857237]
 
Duron E et al. Antihypertensive treatments, cognitive decline, and
dementia. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;20(3):903–14. [PMID:
20182022]
 
Feihl F et al. The macrocirculation and microcirculation of
hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2009 Jun;11(3):182–9.
[PMID: 19442327]
 
Hill GS. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis. Curr Opin Nephrol
Hypertens. 2008 May;17(3):266–70.[PMID: 18408477]
 
Lee HY et al. Aging and arterial stiffness. Circ J. 2010 Oct 25;
74(11):2257–62. [PMID: 20962429]
 
 Clinical Findings
The clinical and laboratory findings are mainly referable to
involvement of the target organs: heart, brain, kidneys, eyes, and
peripheral arteries.
A. Symptoms
Mild to moderate primary (essential) hypertension is largely
asymptomatic for many years. The most frequent symptom,
headache, is also very nonspecific. Accelerated hypertension is
associated with somnolence, confusion, visual disturbances, and
nausea and vomiting (hypertensive encephalopathy).
Hypertension in patients with pheochromocytomas that secrete
predominantly norepinephrine is usually sustained but may be
episodic. The typical attack lasts from minutes to hours and is
associated with headache, anxiety, palpitation, profuse perspiration,
pallor, tremor, and nausea and vomiting. Blood pressure is
markedly elevated, and angina or acute pulmonary edema may
occur. In primary aldosteronism, patients may have muscular
weakness, polyuria, and nocturia due to hypokalemia; malignant
hypertension is rare. Chronic hypertension often leads to left
ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, which can present
with exertional and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Cerebral
involvement causes stroke due to thrombosis or hemorrhage from
microaneurysms 
of 
small penetrating intracranial arteries.
Hypertensive encephalopathy is probably caused by acute capillary
congestion and exudation with cerebral edema, which is reversible.
B. Signs
Like symptoms, physical findings depend on the cause of
hypertension, its duration and severity, and the degree of effect on
target organs.
1. Blood pressure—Blood pressure is taken in both arms and, if
lower extremity pulses are diminished or delayed, in the legs to
exclude coarctation of the aorta. An orthostatic drop is present in
pheochromocytoma. Older patients may have falsely elevated
readings by sphygmomanometry because of noncompressible
vessels. This may be suspected in the presence of Osler sign—a
palpable brachial or radial artery when the cuff is inflated above
systolic pressure. Occasionally, it may be necessary to make direct
measurements of intra-arterial pressure, especially in patients with
apparent severe hypertension who do not tolerate therapy.
2. Retinas—Narrowing of arterial diameter to <50% of venous
diameter, copper or silver wire appearance, exu-dates,
hemorrhages, or papilledema are associated with a worse
prognosis.
3. Heart—A left ventricular heave indicates severe or longstanding
hypertrophy. Aortic insufficiency may be auscultated in up to 5% of
patients, and hemodynamically insignificant aortic insufficiency can
be detected by Doppler echocardiography in 10–20%. A
presystolic (S4) gallop due to decreased compliance of the left
ventricle is quite common in patients in sinus rhythm.
4. Pulses—Radial-femoral delay suggests coarctation of the aorta;
loss of peripheral pulses occurs due to atherosclerosis, less
commonly aortic dissection, and rarely Takayasu arteritis, all of
which can involve the renal arteries.
C. Laboratory Findings
Recommended testing includes the following: hemoglobin; urinalysis
and renal function studies, to detect hematuria, proteinuria, and
casts, signifying primary kidney disease or nephrosclerosis; fasting
blood sugar level, since hypertension is a risk factor for the
g
,
yp
development of diabetes and hyperglycemia can be a presenting
feature of pheochromocytoma; plasma lipids, as an indicator of
atherosclerosis risk and an additional target for therapy; serum uric
acid which, if elevated, is a relative contraindication to diuretic
therapy; and serum electrolytes. Measurement of the plasma
aldosterone/renin ratio is indicated to screen for mineralocorticoid
excess in hypertensive patients with hypokalemic alkalosis (even if
they are taking diuretics), resistant hypertension, or an adrenal
incidentaloma (see Primary Hyperaldosteronism, above).
D. Electrocardiography and Chest Radiographs
Electrocardiographic criteria are highly specific but not very
sensitive for left ventricular hypertrophy. The “strain” pattern of ST–
T wave changes is a sign of more advanced disease and is
associated with a poor prognosis. A chest radiograph is not
necessary in the workup for uncomplicated hypertension.
E. Echocardiography
The primary role of echocardiography should be to evaluate
patients with clinical symptoms or signs of cardiac disease.
F. Diagnostic Studies
Additional diagnostic studies are indicated only if the clinical
presentation or routine tests suggest secondary or complicated
hypertension. These may include tests such as 24-hour urine free
cortisol, plasma metanephrines and the plasma aldosterone/renin
ratio for endocrine causes of hypertension, renal ultrasound to
diagnose primary kidney disease (polycystic kidneys, obstructive
uropathy), and testing for renal artery stenosis. Further evaluation
may include abdominal imaging studies (ultrasound, CT scan, or
MRI) or renal arteriography.
G. Summary
Since most hypertension is essential or primary, few studies are
necessary beyond those listed above. If conventional therapy is
unsuccessful or if symptoms suggest a secondary cause, further
studies are indicated.
Wong TY et al. The eye in hypertension. Lancet. 2007 Feb 3;
369(9559):425–35. [PMID: 17276782]
 
 Nonpharmacologic Therapy
Lifestyle modification may have an impact on morbidity and
mortality. A diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy foods
and low in saturated and total fats (DASH diet) has been shown to
lower blood pressure. Additional measures, listed in Table 11–3,
can prevent or mitigate hyper-tension or its cardiovascular
consequences.
All patients with high-normal or elevated blood pressures, those
who have a family history of cardiovascular complications of
hypertension, and those who have multiple coronary risk factors
should be counseled about nonpharmacologic approaches to
lowering blood pressure. Approaches of proved but modest value
include weight reduction, reduced alcohol consumption and, in
some patients, reduced salt intake. Gradually increasing activity
levels should be encouraged in previously sedentary patients, but
strenuous exercise training programs in already active individuals
may have less benefit. Calcium and potassium supplements have
been advocated, but their ability to lower blood pressure is limited.
Smoking cessation will reduce overall cardiovascular risk. Overall,
the effects of lifestyle modification on blood pressure are modest.
Although all patients should be urged to modify risk factors,
medication is likely to be required for optimal blood pressure
control in stage 1 hypertension.
 
Table 11–3. Lifestyle modifications to manage hypertension.1
 
1For overall cardiovascular risk reduction, stop smoking. The effects of
implementing these modifications are dose and time dependent and
could be higher for some individuals.
BMI, body mass index calculated as weight in kilograms divided by the
square of height in meters; BP, blood pressure; DASH, Dietary Approaches
to Stop Hypertension.
Data from Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003 May 21;289(19):2560–72.
Blumenthal JA et al. Effects of the DASH diet alone and in
combination with exercise and weight loss on blood pressure and
cardiovascular biomarkers in men and women with high blood
pressure: the ENCORE study. Arch Intern Med. 2010 Jan
25;170(2):126–35. [PMID: 20101007]
 
Cook NR et al. Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative
Research Group. Joint effects of sodium and potassium intake on
subsequent cardiovascular disease: the Trials of Hypertension
Prevention follow-up study. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Jan
p
y
12;169(1):32–40. [PMID: 19139321]
 
Sacks FM et al. Dietary therapy in hypertension. N Engl J Med.
2010 Jun 3;362(22):2102–12. [PMID: 20519681]
 
 
Who 
Should 
Be 
Treated 
with
Medications?
The decision to initiate drug therapy is relatively straightforward
once hypertension has been unequivocally diagnosed (Table 11–1
and Figure 11–1), but less clear in persons with prehypertension
(blood pressure of 120–139/80–89 mm Hg). Some experts have
suggested that early blood pressure elevation, and perhaps
antecedent metabolic abnormalities, lead to vascular damage that
propels further blood pressure elevation in an ever accelerating
spiral of progression. If so, then interception early in the course
might modify the natural history of the disease, leading to diminished
requirements for multiple antihypertensive agents and, perhaps, a
much more dramatic effect on cardiovascular risk than can be
attained with initiation of treatment once hypertension is established.
In beginning to address this question, the TROPHY study showed
that treatment of prehypertension in a population at no particular
risk for cardiovascular events only seemed to delay the onset of
hypertension, since blood pressure in the treated group increased
toward the placebo group when treatment was discontinued. The
situation is a little clearer in nonhypertensive patients at elevated
cardiovascular risk, in whom the HOPE and PROGRESS trials
indicated improved outcomes with antihypertensive medication
(ACE inhibitor and ACE inhibitor plus diuretic, respectively). These
observations have prompted some to think in terms of “optimizing”
blood pressure to a suggested 120/80 mm Hg. However, the public
health consequences of recommendations to treat prehypertension
would be enormous. Forty-eight percent of all Americans have
hypertension or prehypertension, and much higher proportions fit
these categories in a typical family medicine population. The JNC 7
guidelines suggest that antihypertensive medications be offered to
persons with prehypertension with compelling indications for
treatment such as chronic kidney disease or diabetes mellitus (Table
11–4). According to the British Hypertension Society (BHS)
recommendations (Figure 11–2), risk analysis should be used to
target treatment to patients with borderline hypertension who are
most likely to benefit, particularly individuals at high combined risk
of coronary heart or stroke event (>20–30% within 10 years). Risk
is calculated according to Framingham study criteria (calculated
from several of the risk factors listed in Table 11–5). A low-risk
patient with blood pressure between 120–139/80–89 mm Hg may
be advised to make lifestyle modifications (Table 11–3) and be
monitored 
without 
receiving 
an 
absolute 
diagnosis 
of
prehypertension. A risk calculation tool can be downloaded from
http://www.bhsoc.org/Cardiovascular_Risk_Charts_and_Calculators.stm
(in using this tool, convert serum cholesterol from mg/dL to mmol/L
by dividing by 38.7). Free iPhone application coronary heart
disease risk calculators are available. In general, a 20% total
cardiovascular risk (which includes stroke) is equivalent to a 15%
coronary heart disease risk.
 
Table 11–4. Clinical trial and guideline basis for compelling
indications for individual drug classes.1
 
1Compelling indications for antihypertensive drugs are based on benefits
from outcome studies or existing clinical guidelines; the compelling
indication is managed in parallel with the blood pressure.
2Conditions for which clinical trials demonstrate benefit of specific classes
of antihypertensive drugs.
AASK, African American Study of Kidney Disease and Hypertension;
ACC/AHA, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association;
ACE, angiotensin converting enzyme; AIRE, Acute Infarction Ramipril
Efficacy; ALLHAT, Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to
Prevent Heart Attack Trial; ANBP2, Second Australian National Blood
Pressure Study; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; BHAT, β-Blocker Heart
Attack Trial; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CIBIS, Cardiac Insufficiency
Bisoprolol Study; CONVINCE, Controlled Onset Verapamil Investigation of
Cardiovascular End Points; COPERNICUS, Carvedilol Prospective
Randomized Cumulative Survival Study; EPHESUS, Eplerenone Post-
Acute Myocardial Infarction Heart Failure Efficacy and Survival Study; HOPE,
Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study; IDNT, Irbesartan Diabetic
Nephropathy Trial; LIFE, Losartan Intervention For Endpoint Reduction in
Hypertension Study; MERIT-HF, Metoprolol CR/XL Randomized Intervention
Trial in Congestive Heart Failure; NKF-ADA, National Kidney Foundation–
American Diabetes Association; PROGRESS, Perindopril Protection
Against Recurrent Stroke Study; RALES, Randomized Aldactone Evaluation
Study; REIN, Ramipril Efficacy in Nephropathy Study; RENAAL, Reduction
of Endpoints in Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus with the
Angiotensin II Antagonist Losartan Study; SAVE, Survival and Ventricular
Enlargement Study; SOLVD, Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction;
TRACE, Trandolapril Cardiac Evaluation Study; UKPDS, United Kingdom
Prospective Diabetes Study; ValHEFT, Valsartan Heart Failure Trial.
Data from Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003 May 21;289(19):2560–72.
 Goals of Treatment
Treatment should ideally be offered to all persons in whom blood
pressure reduction, irrespective of initial blood pressure levels, will
reduce overall cardiovascular risk (see above). Most experts
believe that blood pressure targets for hypertensive patients at the
greatest risk for cardiovascular events, particularly patients with
diabetes and those with chronic kidney disease, should be lower (<
130/80 mm Hg) than for individuals at lower total cardiovascular
risk (< 140/90 mm Hg). Observational studies suggest that there
does not seem to be a blood pressure level below which
decrements in risk taper off. However, this may not be true with
respect to pharmacologically modulated blood pressure in non–
high-risk hypertensive patients. In fact, over-enthusiastic treatment
may have adverse consequences: there is an association between
lower blood pressure and cognitive decline in elderly patients
subjected to intensification of antihypertensive treatment later in life.
Similarly, excessive lowering of diastolic pressure, perhaps below
70 mm Hg, should be avoided in patients with coronary artery
disease. Overall, however, several studies in older persons with
predominantly systolic hypertension have confirmed that anti-
hypertensive therapy prevents fatal and nonfatal myocardial
infarction and overall cardiovascular mortality. These trials have also
placed the focus on control of systolic blood pressure—in contrast
to the historical emphasis on diastolic blood pressures.
There is no clear consensus on blood pressure goals in the
management of prehypertension, but pressure should still be treated
until it is < 130/80 mm Hg in prehypertensive patients with diabetes
or chronic kidney disease and perhaps also in others at high risk for
a cardiovascular event.
Large-scale trials in hypertension have focused on discrete end
points occurring over relatively short intervals, thereby placing the
emphasis on the prevention of catastrophic events in advanced
disease. More recently, in parallel with a new emphasis on
hypertension in the context of overall cardiovascular risk, attention
is turning to the importance of the long view. Accordingly, treatment
of persons with hypertension should focus on comprehensive risk
reduction with more careful consideration of the possible long-term
adverse consequences of the metabolic derangements linked to
some antihypertensives (particularly conventional β-blockers and
thiazide diuretics).
 
Figure 11–2. British Hypertension Society algorithm for
diagnosis and treatment of hypertension, incorporating total
cardiovascular risk in deciding which “prehypertensive” patients to
treat. (CVD, cardiovascular disease.) CVD risk chart available at
http://www.bhsoc.org/Cardiovascular_Risk_ChartsandCalculators.stm
(Reproduced, with permission, from: Guidelines for management of
hypertension: report of the Fourth Working Party of the British
Hypertension Society, 2004-BHS IV. J Hum Hypertens. 2004
Mar;18(3):139–185.)
 
Statins should be more widely used. In this respect, there is
evidence from the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial
(ASCOT) that statins can significantly improve outcomes in persons
with hypertension (with modest background cardiovascular risk)
whose total cholesterol is < 250 mg/dL (6.5 mmol/L). Notably, this
effect appeared to be synergistic with calcium channel blocker/ACE
inhibitor regimens but not β-blocker/diuretic regimens. The BHS
guidelines recommend that statins be offered as secondary
prevention to patients whose total cholesterol exceeds 135 mg/dL
(3.5 mmol/L) if they have documented coronary artery disease or a
history of ischemic stroke. In addition, statins should be considered
as primary prevention in patients with long-standing type 2 diabetes
mellitus or in those with type 2 diabetes mellitus who are older than
age 50 years, and perhaps in all persons with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Ideally, total and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
should be reduced by 30% and 40% respectively, or to
approximately <155 mg/dL (4 mmol/L) and <77 mg/dL (2
mmol/L), whichever is the greatest reduction. However, total and
LDL cholesterol levels of <194 mg/dL (5 mmol/L) and < 116
mg/dL (3 mmol/L) respectively, or reductions of 25% and 30% are
regarded as clinically acceptable objectives. Primary prevention
with statins might also be reasonably extended to all patients with
total cholesterol >135 mg/dL (3.5 mmol/L) and a total
cardiovascular risk >20% (to similar target cholesterol levels), but
trial evidence for this is not currently available. Low-dose aspirin
(81 mg/day) is likely to be beneficial in patients older than age 50
with either target organ damage or elevated total cardiovascular risk
(> 20–30%). Care should be taken to ensure that blood pressure is
controlled to the recommended levels before starting aspirin to
minimize the risk of bleeding.
 
Table 11–5. Cardiovascular risk factors.
 
Major risk factors
     Hypertension1
     Cigarette smoking
     Obesity (BMI ≥ 30)1
     Physical inactivity
     Dyslipidemia1
     Diabetes mellitus1
     Microalbuminuria or estimated GFR < 60 mL/min Age
(> 55 years for men, > 65 years for women)
     Family history of premature cardiovascular disease
(men < 55 years or women < 65 years)
Target-organ damage
     Heart
        Left ventricular hypertrophy
        Angina or prior myocardial infarction
        Prior coronary revascularization
        Heart failure
     Brain
        Stroke or transient ischemic attack
     Chronic kidney disease
     Peripheral arterial disease
     Retinopathy
1Components of the metabolic syndrome.
BMI indicates body mass index calculated as weight in kilograms divided
by the square of height in meters; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
Data from Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003 May 21; 289(19):2560–72.
Arguedas JA et al. Treatment blood pressure targets for
hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8;(3):
CD004349. [PMID: 19588353]
 
Julius S et al; Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study
Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an
angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006 Apr 20;
354(16):1685–97. [PMID: 16537662]
 
Papadopoulos DP et al. Is it time to treat prehypertension?
Hypertens Res. 2008 Sep;31(9):1681–6. [PMID: 18971545]
 
Sever PS et al; ASCOT Investigators. Prevention of coronary and
stroke events with atorvastatin in hypertensive patients who have
average or lower-than-average cholesterol concentrations, in the
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial—Lipid Lowering
Arm (ASCOT-LLA): a multicentre randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2003 Apr 5;361(9364):1149–58. [PMID: 12686036]
 
Sever P et al; ASCOT Steering Committee Members. Potential
synergy between lipid-lowering and blood-pressure-lowering in the
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial. Eur Heart J. 2006
Dec;27(24):2982–8. [PMID: 17145722]
 
Turnbull F et al; Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’
Collaboration. Effects of different blood pressure-lowering
regimens on major cardiovascular events in individuals with and
without diabetes mellitus: results of prospectively designed
overviews of randomized trials. Arch Intern Med. 2005 Jun
27;165(12):1410–9. [PMID: 15983291]
 
Williams B et al. Systolic pressure is all that matters. Lancet. 2008
Jun 28;371(9631):2219–21. [PMID: 18561995]
 
DRUG THERAPY: CURRENT ANTIHYPERTENSIVE
AGENTS
There are now many classes of potentially antihypertensive drugs of
which six (diuretics, β-blockers, renin inhibitors, ACE inhibitors,
calcium channel blockers, and ARBs) are suitable for initial therapy
based on efficacy and tolerability. A number of considerations enter
into the selection of the initial regimen for a given patient. These
include the weight of evidence for beneficial effects on clinical
outcomes, the safety and tolerability of the drug, its cost,
demographic differences in response, concomitant medical
conditions, and lifestyle issues. The specific classes of anti-
hypertensive medications are discussed below, and guidelines for
the choice of initial medications are offered.
A. Diuretics
Thiazide diuretics (Table 11–6) are the antihypertensives that have
been most extensively studied and most consistently effective in
clinical trials. They lower blood pressure initially by decreasing
plasma volume, but during long-term therapy, their major
hemodynamic effect is reduction of peripheral vascular resistance.
Most of the antihypertensive effect of these agents is achieved at
lower dosages than used previously (typically, 12.5 or 25 mg of
hydrochlorothiazide or equivalent), but their biochemical and
metabolic effects are dose related. Chlorthalidone has the
advantage of better 24-hour blood pressure control than
hydrochlorothiazide. The loop diuretics (such as furosemide) may
lead to electrolyte and volume depletion more readily than the
thiazides and have short durations of action; therefore, loop
diuretics should not be used in hypertension except in the presence
of kidney dysfunction (serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dL [208.3
mcmol/L]). Relative to the β-blockers and the ACE inhibitors,
diuretics are more potent in blacks, older individuals, the obese, and
other subgroups with increased plasma volume or low plasma renin
activity (or both). Interestingly, they are relatively more effective in
smokers than in nonsmokers. Long-term thiazide administration also
mitigates the loss of bone mineral content in older women at risk for
osteoporosis.
Overall, diuretics administered alone control blood pressure in
50% of patients with mild to moderate hyper-tension and can be
used effectively in combination with all other agents. They are also
useful for lowering isolated or predominantly systolic hypertension.
The adverse effects of diuretics relate primarily to the metabolic
changes listed in Table 11–6. Erectile dysfunction, skin rashes, and
photosensitivity are less frequent. Hypokalemia has been a concern
but is uncommon at the recommended dosages (12.5–25 mg
hydrochlorothiazide). The risk can be minimized by limiting dietary
salt or increasing dietary potassium; potassium replacement is not
usually required to maintain serum K+ at >3.5 mmol/L. Higher
serum K+ levels are prudent in patients at special risk from
intracellular potassium depletion, such as those taking digoxin or
with a history of ventricular arrhythmias. If higher doses of diuretic
are required, the drug should be used in combination with a
potassium-sparing agent or with an ACE inhibitor or ARB.
Compared with ACE inhibitors and ARBs, diuretic therapy is
associated with a slightly higher incidence of mild new-onset
diabetes. Diuretics also increase serum uric acid and may
precipitate gout. Increases in blood glucose, triglycerides, LDL
cholesterol, and plasma insulin may occur but are relatively minor
during long-term low-dose therapy.
 
Table 11–6. Antihypertensive drugs: Diuretics.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed.
Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare), Inc. AWP may not
accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide contractual
variations exist among institutions.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; GI, gastrointestinal; LDL, low-density
lipoprotein.
B. β-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
These drugs are effective in hypertension because they decrease the
heart rate and cardiac output. Even after continued use of β-
blockers, cardiac output remains lower and systemic vascular
resistance higher with agents that do not have intrinsic
sympathomimetic or α-blocking activity. The β-blockers also
decrease renin release and are more efficacious in populations with
elevated plasma renin activity, such as younger white patients. They
neutralize the reflex tachycardia caused by vasodilators and are
especially useful in patients with associated conditions that benefit
from the cardioprotective effects of these agents. These include
individuals with angina pectoris, previous myocardial infarction, and
stable congestive heart failure as well as those with migraine
headaches and somatic manifestations of anxiety.
Although all β-blockers appear to be similar in antihypertensive
potency, they differ in a number of pharmacologic properties (these
differences are summarized in Table 11–7), including specificity to
the cardiac β1-receptors (cardioselectivity) and whether they also
block the β2-receptors in the bronchi and vasculature; at higher
dosages, however, all agents are nonselective. The β-blockers also
differ in their pharmacokinetics and lipid solubility—which
determines whether they cross the blood–brain barrier and affect
the incidence of central nervous system side effects—and route of
metabolism. Unlike the traditional β-blockers, carvedilol and
nebivolol are vasodilators that diminish peripheral vascular
resistance. The implications of this distinction are discussed below.
The side effects of all β-blockers include inducing or
exacerbating bronchospasm in predisposed patients (eg, those with
asthma and some patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease [COPD]); sinus node dysfunction and atrioventricular (AV)
conduction depression (resulting in bradycardia or AV block); nasal
congestion; Raynaud phenomenon; and central nervous system
symptoms with nightmares, excitement, depression, and confusion.
Fatigue, lethargy, and erectile dysfunction may occur. The
traditional β-blockers (but not the vasodilator β-blockers carvedilol
and nebivolol) have an adverse effect on lipids and glucose
metabolism. β-Blockers have traditionally been considered
contraindicated in patients with congestive heart failure. Evolving
experience suggests that they have a propitious effect on the natural
history of patients with chronic stable heart failure and reduced
ejection fraction (see Chapter 10). β-Blockers are used cautiously
in patients with type 1 diabetes, since they can mask the symptoms
of hypoglycemia and prolong these episodes by inhibiting
gluconeogenesis. These drugs should also be used with caution in
patients with advanced peripheral vascular disease associated with
rest pain or nonhealing ulcers, but they are generally well tolerated
in 
patients 
with 
mild 
claudication. 
In 
treatment 
of
pheochromocytoma, β-blockers should not be administered until α-
blockade has been established. Otherwise, blockade of
vasodilatory β2-adrenergic receptors will allow unopposed
vasoconstrictor α-adrenergic receptor activation with worsening of
hypertension. For the same reason, β-blockers should not be used
to treat hypertension arising from cocaine use.
Because of the lack of efficacy in prevention of myocardial
infarction and inferiority compared with other drugs in prevention of
stroke and left ventricular hypertrophy, there is now increasing
doubt whether traditional β-blockers should still be regarded as
ideal first-line agents in the treatment of hypertension without
specific compelling indications (such as active coronary artery
disease). In addition to adverse metabolic changes associated with
their use, some experts have suggested that the therapeutic
shortcomings of traditional β-blockers are the consequence of the
particular hemodynamic profile associated with these drugs.
Pressure peaks in the aorta are augmented by reflection of pressure
waves from the peripheral circulation. These reflected waves are
delayed in patients taking ACE inhibitors and thiazide diuretics,
resulting in decreased systolic and pulse pressures. By contrast,
traditional β-blockers appear to potentiate reflection of pressure
waves, possibly because peripheral resistance vessels are a
reflection point and peripheral resistance is increased by these
drugs. This might explain why the traditional β-blockers are less
effective at controlling systolic and pulse pressure.
Despite these concerns, the compelling indications for β-blockers
remain, such as active coronary artery disease and impaired left
ventricular function. Great care should be exercised if the decision is
made, in the absence of compelling indications, to remove β-
blockers from the treatment regimen since abrupt withdrawal can
precipitate acute coronary events and severe increases in blood
pressure.
C. Renin Inhibitors
Since renin cleavage of angiotensinogen is the rate-limiting step in
the renin-angiotensin cascade, the most efficient inactivation of this
system would be expected with renin inhibition, but this option has
only recently become available. Conventional ACE inhibitors and
ARBs probably offer incomplete blockade, even in combination.
Aliskiren, a renin inhibitor, was recently approved by the FDA for
use as monotherapy or combination therapy of hypertension. This
drug binds the proteolytic site of renin, thereby preventing cleavage
of angiotensinogen. As a consequence, levels of angiotensins I and
II are reduced and renin concentration is increased. Aliskiren is
synergistic with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs in lowering
blood pressure. As yet there is no clinical trial data with this new
drug, so the effect of aliskiren on outcomes in hypertension,
diabetes, or cardiovascular disease remains unknown.
D. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
ACE inhibitors are being increasingly used as the initial medication
in mild to moderate hypertension (Table 11–8). Their primary mode
of action is inhibition of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system,
but they also inhibit bradykinin degradation, stimulate the synthesis
of vasodilating prostaglandins and, sometimes, reduce sympathetic
nervous system activity. These latter actions may explain why they
exhibit some effect even in patients with low plasma renin activity.
ACE inhibitors appear to be more effective in younger white
patients. They are relatively less effective in blacks and older
persons and in predominantly systolic hypertension. Although as
single therapy they achieve adequate antihypertensive control in only
about 40–50% of patients, the combination of an ACE inhibitor and
a diuretic or calcium channel blocker is potent.
 
Table 11–7. Antihypertensive drugs: β-Adrenergic blocking agents.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed.
Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. AWP may not
accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide contractual
variations exist among institutions.
2Agents with β1 selectivity are less likely to precipitate bronchospasm and
decreased peripheral blood flow in low doses, but selectivity is only relative.
3Agents with ISA cause less resting bradycardia and lipid changes.
4MSA generally occurs at concentrations greater than those necessary for
β-adrenergic blockade. The clinical importance of MSA by β-blockers has
not been defined.
5Adverse effects of all β-blockers: bronchospasm, fatigue, sleep
β
p
,
g
,
p
disturbance and nightmares, bradycardia and atrioventricular block,
worsening of congestive heart failure, cold extremities, gastrointestinal
disturbances, erectile dysfunction, triglycerides, ↓ HDL cholesterol, rare
blood dyscrasias.
ANA, antinuclear antibody; ISA, intrinsic sympathomimetic activity; LE,
lupus erythematosus; MI, myocardial infarction; MSA, membrane-
stabilizing activity; SR, sustained release; 0, no effect; +, some effect; ++,
moderate effect; +++, most effect.
 
Table 11–8. Antihypertensive drugs: Renin and ACE inhibitors and
angiotensin II receptor blockers.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed.
Source:Red Book Update 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. AWP
may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide
contractual variations exist among institutions.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; HCTZ, hydrochlorothiazide.
ACE inhibitors are the agents of choice in persons with type 1
diabetes with frank proteinuria or evidence of kidney dysfunction
because they delay the progression to end-stage kidney disease.
Many authorities have expanded this indication to include persons
with type 2 diabetes and those who have type 1 diabetes with
microalbuminuria, even when they do not meet the usual criteria for
antihypertensive therapy. ACE inhibitors may also delay the
progression of nondiabetic kidney disease. The Heart Outcomes
Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) trial demonstrated that the ACE
inhibitor ramipril reduced the number of cardiovascular deaths,
nonfatal myocardial infarctions, and nonfatal strokes and also
reduced the incidence of new-onset heart failure, kidney
dysfunction, and new-onset diabetes in a population of patients at
high risk for vascular events. Although this was not specifically a
hypertensive population, the benefits were associated with a modest
reduction in blood pressure, and the results inferentially support the
use of ACE inhibitors in similar hyper-tensive patients. ACE
inhibitors are a drug of choice (usually in conjunction with a diuretic
and a β-blocker) in patients with congestive heart failure and are
indicated also in asymptomatic patients with reduced ejection
fraction. An advantage of the ACE inhibitors is their relative
freedom from troublesome side effects. Severe hypotension can
occur in patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis; acute renal
failure may ensue but is usually reversible with discontinuation of
ACE inhibition. Hyperkalemia may develop in patients with intrinsic
kidney disease and type IV renal tubular acidosis (commonly seen
in diabetics) and in the elderly. A chronic dry cough is common,
seen in 10% of patients or more, and may require stopping the
drug. Skin rashes are observed with any ACE inhibitor.
Angioedema is an uncommon but potentially dangerous side effect
of all agents of this class because of their inhibition of kininase.
Exposure of the fetus to ACE inhibitors during the second and third
trimesters of pregnancy has been associated with a variety of
defects due to hypotension and reduced renal blood flow.
E. Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
A growing body of data indicates that ARBs can improve
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with hypertension as well as in
patients with related conditions such as heart failure and type 2
diabetes with nephropathy. ARBs have not been compared with
ACE inhibitors in randomized controlled trials in patients with
hypertension, but two trials comparing losartan with captopril in
heart failure and post-myocardial infarction left ventricular
dysfunction showed trends toward worse outcomes in the losartan
group. Whether this suggestion of reduced efficacy is specific to
losartan or may also be true for other ARBs is as yet unknown.
However, the Losartan Intervention for Endpoints (LIFE) trial in
nearly 9000 hypertensive patients with electrocardiographic
evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy—comparing losartan with
the β-blocker atenolol as initial therapy—demonstrated a significant
reduction in stroke with losartan. Of note is that in diabetic patients,
death and myocardial infarction were also reduced, and there was a
lower occurrence of new-onset diabetes. In this trial, as in the
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart
Attack Trial (ALLHAT) with an ACE inhibitor, blacks exhibited
less blood pressure reduction and less benefit with regard to clinical
end points. ARBs may synergize with ACE inhibitors in protection
of heart and kidney, and ARB/ACE inhibitor combinations may also
improve control of hypertension.
Unlike ACE inhibitors, the ARBs do not cause cough and are
less likely to be associated with skin rashes or angioedema.
However, as seen with ACE inhibitors, hyperkalemia can be a
problem, and patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis may exhibit
hypotension and worsened kidney function.
F. Aldosterone Receptor Antagonists
Spironolactone and eplerenone are natriuretic in sodium-retaining
states, such as heart failure and cirrhosis, but only very weakly so in
hypertension. These drugs have reemerged in the treatment of
hypertension, particularly in resistant patients and are helpful
additions to most other antihypertensive medications. Consistent
with the increasingly appreciated importance of aldosterone in
essential hyper-tension, the aldosterone receptor blockers are
effective at lowering blood pressure in all hypertensive patients
regardless of renin level, and are also effective in blacks.
Aldosterone plays a central role in target organ damage, including
the development of ventricular and vascular hypertrophy and renal
fibrosis. Aldosterone receptor antagonists ameliorate these
consequences of hypertension, to some extent independently of
effects on blood pressure. Spironolactone can cause breast pain
and gynecomastia in men through activity at the progesterone
receptor, an effect not seen with the more specific eplerenone.
Hyperkalemia is a problem with both drugs, chiefly in patients with
chronic kidney disease.
G. Calcium Channel Blocking Agents
These agents act by causing peripheral vasodilation but with less
reflex tachycardia and fluid retention than other vasodilators. They
are effective as single-drug therapy in approximately 60% of
patients in all demographic groups and all grades of hypertension
(Table 11–9). For these reasons, they may be preferable to β-
blockers and ACE inhibitors in blacks and older persons.
Verapamil and diltiazem should be combined cautiously with β-
blockers because of their potential for depressing AV conduction
and sinus node automaticity as well as contractility.
 
Table 11–9. Antihypertensive drugs: Calcium channel blocking
agents.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed.
Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. AWP may not
accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide contractual
variations exist among institutions.
AV, atrioventricular; GI, gastrointestinal.
Initial concerns about possible adverse cardiac effects of calcium
channel blockers have been convincingly allayed by several
subsequent large studies which have demonstrated that calcium
channel blockers are equivalent to ACE inhibitors and thiazide
diuretics in prevention of coronary heart disease, major
cardiovascular events, cardiovascular death, and total mortality. A
protective effect against stroke with calcium channel blockers is well
established, and in two trials (ALLHAT and the Systolic
Hypertension in Europe trial), these agents appeared to be more
effective than diuretic-based therapy.
The most common side effects of calcium channel blockers are
headache, peripheral edema, bradycardia, and constipation
(especially with verapamil in the elderly). The dihydropyridine
agents—nifedipine, nicardipine, isradipine, felodipine, nisoldipine,
and amlodipine—are more likely to produce symptoms of
vasodilation, such as headache, flushing, palpitations, and peripheral
edema. Calcium channel blockers have negative inotropic effects
and should be used cautiously in patients with cardiac dysfunction.
Amlodipine is the only calcium channel blocker with established
safety in patients with severe heart failure. Most calcium channel
blockers are now available in preparations that can be administered
once daily.
H. α-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
Prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin (Table 11–10) block
postsynaptic α-receptors, relax smooth muscle, and reduce blood
pressure by lowering peripheral vascular resistance. These agents
are effective as single-drug therapy in some individuals, but
tachyphylaxis may appear during long-term therapy and side effects
are relatively common. These include marked hypotension and
syncope after the first dose which, therefore, should be small and
given at bedtime. Post-dosing palpitations, headache, and
nervousness may continue to occur during long-term therapy; these
symptoms may be less frequent or severe with doxazosin because
of its more gradual onset of action. Cataractectomy in patients
exposed to α-blockers can be complicated by the floppy iris
syndrome, even after discontinuation of the drug, so the
ophthalmologist should be alerted that the patient has been taking
the drug prior to surgery.
Unlike the β-blockers and diuretics, the α-blockers have no
adverse effect on serum lipid levels—in fact, they increase HDL
cholesterol while reducing total cholesterol. Whether this is
beneficial in the long term has not been established. In ALLHAT,
persons receiving doxazosin as initial therapy had a significant
increase in heart failure hospitalizations and a higher incidence of
stroke relative to the persons receiving diuretics, prompting
discontinuation of this arm of the study. To summarize, α-blockers
should generally not be used as initial agents to treat hypertension—
except perhaps in men with symptomatic prostatism.
I. Drugs with Central Sympatholytic Action
Methyldopa, clonidine, guanabenz, and guanfacine (Table 11–10)
lower blood pressure by stimulating α-adrenergic receptors in the
central nervous system, thus reducing efferent peripheral
sympathetic outflow. These agents are effective as single therapy in
some patients, but they are usually used as second- or third-line
agents because of the high frequency of drug intolerance, including
sedation, fatigue, dry mouth, postural hypotension, and erectile
dysfunction. An important concern is rebound hypertension
following withdrawal. Methyldopa also causes hepatitis and
hemolytic anemia and is avoided except in individuals who have
already tolerated long-term therapy. There is considerable
experience with methyldopa in pregnant women, and it is still used
for this population. Clonidine is available in patches and may have
particular value in patients in whom compliance is a troublesome
issue.
J. Arteriolar Dilators
Hydralazine and minoxidil (Table 11–10) relax vascular smooth
muscle and produce peripheral vasodilation. When given alone, they
stimulate reflex tachycardia, increase myocardial contractility, and
cause headache, palpitations, and fluid retention. They are usually
given in combination with diuretics and β-blockers in resistant
patients. 
Hydralazine 
produces 
frequent 
gastrointestinal
disturbances and may induce a lupus-like syndrome. Minoxidil
causes hirsutism and marked fluid retention; this agent is reserved
for the most refractory of cases.
K. Peripheral Sympathetic Inhibitors
These agents are now used infrequently and usually in refractory
hypertension. Reserpine remains a cost-effective antihypertensive
agent (Table 11–10). Its reputation for inducing mental depression
and its other side effects—sedation, nasal stuffiness, sleep
disturbances, and peptic ulcers—has made it unpopular, though
these problems are uncommon at low dosages. Guanethidine and
guanadrel inhibit catecholamine release from peripheral neurons but
frequently cause orthostatic hypotension (especially in the morning
or after exercise), diarrhea, and fluid retention.
 
Developing 
an 
Antihypertensive
Regimen
Historically, data from a number of large trials support the overall
conclusion that antihypertensive therapy with diuretics and β-
blockers has a major beneficial effect on a broad spectrum of
cardiovascular outcomes, reducing the incidence of stroke by 30–
50% and of congestive heart failure by 40–50%, and halting
progression to accelerated hypertension syndromes. The decreases
in fatal and nonfatal coronary heart disease and cardiovascular and
total mortality have been less dramatic, ranging from 10% to 15%.
Similar placebo-controlled data pertaining to the newer agents are
generally lacking, except for stroke reduction with the calcium
channel blocker nitrendipine in the Systolic Hypertension in Europe
trial. However, there is substantial evidence that ACE inhibitors,
and to a lesser extent ARBs, reduce adverse cardiovascular
outcomes in other related populations (eg, patients with diabetic
nephropathy, heart failure, or postmyocardial infarction and
individuals at high risk for cardiovascular events). Most large clinical
trials that have compared outcomes in relatively unselected patients
have failed to show a difference between newer agents—such as
ACE inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and ARBs—and the
older diuretic-based regimens with regard to survival, myocardial
infarction, and stroke. Where differences have been observed, they
have mostly been attributable to subtle asymmetries in blood
pressure control rather than to any inherent advantages of one agent
over another. Therefore, experts have recommended thiazide
diuretics as the first-line treatment of older and perhaps all patients
with hypertension because these agents are very effective and less
expensive than the newer drugs. More recently, recommendations
for initial treatment have become more flexible, identifying ACE
inhibitors, ARB, and calcium channel blockers as valid choices.
Exceptions are appropriate for individuals who have specific (or
“compelling”) indications for another class of agent, as outlined in
Table 11–4.
 
Table 11–10. α-Adrenoceptor blocking agents, sympatholytics,
and vasodilators.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed.
Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare) Inc. AWP may not
accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because wide contractual
variations exist among institutions.
GI, gastrointestinal; LE, lupus erythematosus.
As discussed above, many experts would suggest that β-
blockers no longer be considered ideal first-line drugs in the
treatment of hypertension without compelling indications for their
use. Although theoretical considerations suggest that vasodilator β-
blockers (such as carvedilol and nebivolol) may be superior to the
older drugs, this possibility remains to be tested.
For the purpose of devising an optimal treatment regimen, drugs
can be divided into two complementary groups easily remembered
as AB and CD. A and B refer to drugs that interrupt the renin-
angiotensin system (ACE/ARB/renin inhibitor and β-blockers) and
C and D refer to those that do not (calcium channel blockers and
thiazide diuretics). Combinations of drugs between these groups are
likely to be more potent in lowering blood pressure than
combinations within a group. Drugs A/B are more effective in
young, white persons, in whom renins tend to be higher, and drugs
C/D are more effective in old or black persons, in whom renin
levels are generally lower. Figure 11–3 illustrates guidelines
established by the BHS for developing a rational antihypertensive
regimen. In the BHS guidelines, “B” is placed in parentheses to
reflect the increasingly prevalent view that β-blockers should no
longer be considered an ideal first-line agent. In trials that include
patients with systolic hypertension, most patients require two or
more medications and even then a substantial proportion fail to
achieve the goal systolic blood pressure of < 140 mm Hg (<130
mm Hg in high-risk persons). In diabetic patients, three or four
drugs are usually required to reduce systolic blood pressure to
<140 mm Hg. In many patients, blood pressure cannot be
adequately controlled with any combination. As a result, debating
the appropriate first-line agent is less relevant than determining the
most appropriate combinations of agents. This has led many experts
and practitioners to reconsider the use of fixed-dose combination
antihypertensive agents as first-line therapy in patients with
substantially elevated systolic pressures (> 160/100 mm Hg) or
difficult-to-control hypertension (which is often associated with
diabetes or kidney dysfunction). Based both on antihypertensive
efficacy and complementarity, combinations of an ACE inhibitor or
ARB plus a calcium channel blocker or diuretic are recommended.
In light of side effect profiles, some experts have expressed the view
that calcium channel blockers might be preferable to thiazides in the
younger hypertensive patient. Furthermore, based on the results
from the ACCOMPLISH trial, a combination of ACE inhibitor and
calcium channel blocker may also prove optimal for patients at high
risk for cardiovascular events. The initial use of low-dose
combinations allows faster blood pressure reduction without
substantially higher intolerance rates and is likely to be better
accepted by patients. Dual treatment with an ACE inhibitor plus
ARB offers little additive hypotensive effect but does increase the
risk of adverse effects. Combined renin-angiotensin system
blockade with ACE inhibitor or ARB plus renin inhibitor may be
more potent. A suggested approach to treatment, tailored to patient
demographics, is outlined in Table 11–11.
 
Figure 11–3. The British Hypertension Society's
recommendations for combining blood pressure lowering drugs.
The “ABCD” rule. A, Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or
angiotensin receptor blocker; B, β-blocker (the parentheses
indicate that β-blockers should no longer be considered ideal first-
line agents); C, calcium channel blockers; D, diuretic (thiazide).
(Reprinted, with permission, from Williams B; British Hypertension
Society. Guidelines for management of hypertension: report of the
Fourth Working Party of the British Hypertension Society, 2004-
BHS IV. J Hum Hypertens. 2004 Mar;18(3):139–185.)
 
As a prelude to treatment, the patient should be informed of
common side effects and the need for diligent compliance. In
patients with mild hypertension (<160/100 mm Hg), treatment
should start with a single agent at a low dose, and follow-up visits
should usually be at 4- to 6-week intervals to allow for full
medication effects to be established (especially with diuretics)
before further titration or adjustment. If, after titration to usual
doses, the patient has shown a discernible but incomplete response
and a good tolerance of the initial drug, a second medication should
be added. As a rule of thumb, a blood pressure reduction of 10 mm
Hg can be expected for each antihypertensive agent added to the
regimen. In those with more severe hypertension, or with
comorbidities likely to render them resistant to treatment, initiation
with combination therapy is advised and more frequent follow-up is
indicated.
 
Table 11–11. Choice of antihypertensive agent based on
demographic considerations.1,2
 
1Compelling indications may alter the selection of an antihypertensive
drug.
2Start with full dose of one agent, or lower doses of combination therapy.
3ACE and ARB can be synergistic in combination.
4Women of childbearing age should avoid ACE and ARB or discontinue as
soon as pregnancy is diagnosed.
5The adverse metabolic effects of thiazide diuretics and β-blockers should
be considered in younger patients but may be less important in the older
patient.
6For patients with significant renal impairment, use loop diuretic instead of
thiazide.
7α-Antagonists may precipitate or exacerbate orthostatic hypotension in
the elderly.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin II receptor
blocker; CCB, calcium channel blocker.
Patients who are compliant with their medications and who do
not respond to conventional combination regimens should usually be
evaluated for secondary hypertension before proceeding to more
complex regimens.
 
Special 
Considerations 
in 
the
Treatment of Diabetic Hypertensive
Patients
Hypertensive patients with diabetes are at particularly high risk for
cardiovascular events. More aggressive treatment of hypertension in
these patients prevents progressive nephropathy, and a meta-
analysis supports the notion that lower treatment goals are
especially effective at reducing cardiovascular risk in diabetic
patients compared with nondiabetic patients. Because of the
beneficial effects of ACE inhibitors (and ARBs or perhaps renin
inhibitors in intolerant patients) in diabetic nephropathy, they should
be part of the initial treatment regimen. However, most diabetic
patients require combinations of three to five agents to achieve
target blood pressure, usually including a diuretic and a calcium
channel blocker or β-blocker. In addition to rigorous blood
pressure control, treatment of persons with diabetes should include
aggressive treatment of other risk factors and early intervention for
coronary disease and left ventricular dysfunction.
 Treatment of Hypertension in Chronic
Kidney Disease
Hypertension is present in 40% of patients with a glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) of 60–90 mL/min, and 75% of patients with a
GFR < 30 mL/min. ACE inhibitors and ARBs have been shown to
delay progression of kidney disease in persons with type 1 and type
2 diabetes, respectively. It is also likely that inhibition of the renin-
angiotensin system protects kidney function in nondiabetic kidney
disease associated with significant proteinuria. There is evidence of
a significantly additive anti-proteinuric effect from blocking multiple
points in the renin-angiotensin cascade. Whether ACE inhibitors,
ARB, or renin inhibitors offer efficacy beyond their antihypertensive
activity is debated, and control of blood pressure with other agents
is also very effective at protecting kidney function.
As discussed above, hypertension should be treated until blood
pressure reaches < 130/80 mm Hg in patients with chronic kidney
disease. There is a lack of definitive data to show that this level of
blood pressure control slows the decline of GFR in persons with
hypertensive chronic kidney disease without high-grade proteinuria.
However, since all patients with chronic kidney disease are at high
risk for cardiovascular damage, treatment of blood pressure to the
< 130/80 mm Hg target is appropriate, and interruption of the
renin-angiotensin system would seem a reasonable approach.
Transition from thiazide to loop diuretic is often necessary to control
volume expansion as kidney function worsens. Evidence has
demonstrated that ACE inhibitors remain protective and safe in
kidney disease associated with significant proteinuria and serum
creatinine as high as 5 mg/dL (380 mcmol/L). Note that such
treatment would likely result in acute worsening of kidney function in
patients with significant renal artery stenosis, so kidney function and
electrolytes should be monitored carefully after introduction of ACE
inhibitors. In any event, persistence with ACE inhibitor/ARB
therapy in the face of hyperkalemia is probably not warranted, since
other antihypertensive medications are renoprotective as long as
goal blood pressures are maintained.
 Hypertension Management in Blacks
Substantial evidence indicates that blacks are not only more likely to
become hypertensive and more susceptible to the cardiovascular
complications of hypertension—they also respond differently to
many antihypertensive medications. This may reflect genetic
differences in the cause of hypertension or the subsequent
responses to it, differences in occurrence of comorbid conditions
such as diabetes or obesity, or environmental factors such as diet,
activity, stress, or access to health care services. In any case, as in
all persons with hypertension, a multifaceted program of education
and lifestyle modification is warranted. Early introduction of
combination therapy has been advocated. Because it appears that
ACE inhibitors and ARBs—in the absence of concomitant diuretics
—are less effective in blacks than in whites, initial therapy should
generally be a diuretic or a diuretic combination with a calcium
channel blocker.
 Follow-Up of Patients Receiving
Hypertension Therapy
Once blood pressure is controlled on a well-tolerated regimen,
follow-up visits can be infrequent and laboratory testing limited to
tests appropriate for the patient and the medications used. Yearly
monitoring of blood lipids is recommended, and an
electrocardiogram should be repeated at 2- to 4-year intervals
depending on whether initial abnormalities are present, the presence
of coronary risk factors, and age. Pharmacy care programs have
been shown to improve compliance with medications. Patients who
have had excellent blood pressure control for several years,
especially if they have lost weight and initiated favorable lifestyle
modifications, should be considered for “step-down” of therapy to
determine whether lower doses or discontinuation of medications
are feasible.
ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT
Collaborative Research Group. Major outcomes in high-risk
hypertensive patients randomized to angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic. The
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart
Attack Trial (ALLHAT). JAMA. 2002 Dec 18; 288(23):2981–
97. [PMID: 12479763]
 
Basile JN. One size does not fit all: the role of vasodilating beta-
blockers in controlling hypertension as a means of reducing
cardiovascular and stroke risk. Am J Med. 2010 Jul;123 (7 Suppl
1):S9–15. [PMID: 20609697]
 
Chobanian AV. Does it matter how hypertension is controlled? N
Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 4;359(23):2485–8. [PMID: 19052130]
 
Epstein BJ et al. Recent changes in the landscape of combination
RAS blockade. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2009 Nov;
7(11):1373–84. [PMID: 19900020]
 
Flack JM et al. Management of high blood pressure in blacks: an
update of the International Society on Hypertension in Blacks
consensus statement. Hypertension. 2010 Nov;56(5):780–800.
[PMID: 20921433]
 
Jamerson K et al; ACCOMPLISH Trial Investigators. Benazepril
plus amlodipine or hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension in high-
risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 4;359(23):2417–28.
[PMID: 19052124]
 
RESISTANT HYPERTENSION
Resistant hypertension is defined in JNC 7 as the failure to reach
blood pressure control in patients who are adherent to full doses of
an appropriate three-drug regimen (including a diuretic). In this
situation, the clinician should first exclude identifiable causes of
hypertension (Table 11–2), and then carefully explore reasons why
the patient might not be at goal blood pressure (Table 11–12). The
clinician should pay particular attention to the type of diuretic being
used in relation to the patient's kidney function. Aldosterone may
play an important role in resistant hyper-tension and aldosterone
receptor blockers can be very useful. If goal blood pressure cannot
be achieved following completion of these steps, consultation with a
hypertension specialist should be considered.
 
Table 11–12. Causes of resistant hypertension.
 
Improper blood pressure measurement
Volume overload and pseudotolerance
     Excess sodium intake
     Volume retention from kidney disease
     Inadequate diuretic therapy
Drug-induced or other causes
     Nonadherence
     Inadequate doses
     Inappropriate combinations
     Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; cyclooxygenase-
2 inhibitors
     Cocaine, amphetamines, other illicit drugs
     Sympathomimetics (decongestants, anorectics)
     Oral contraceptives
     Adrenal steroids
     Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
     Erythropoietin
     Licorice (including some chewing tobacco)
     Selected over-the-counter dietary supplements and
medicines (eg, ephedra, ma huang, bitter orange)
Associated conditions
     Obesity
     Excess alcohol intake
Identifiable causes of hypertension (see Table 11–2)
Data from Chobanian AV et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003 May 21;289(19):2560–72.
Czarina Acelajado M et al. Treatment of resistant hypertension.
Minerva Cardioangiol. 2009 Dec;57(6):787–812. [PMID:
19942848]
 
HYPERTENSIVE URGENCIES & EMERGENCIES
Hypertensive emergencies have become less frequent in recent
years but still require prompt recognition and aggressive but careful
management. A spectrum of urgent presentations exists, and the
appropriate therapeutic approach varies accordingly.
Hypertensive urgencies are situations in which blood pressure
must be reduced within a few hours. These include patients with
asymptomatic severe hypertension (systolic blood pressure > 220
mm Hg or diastolic pressure > 125 mm Hg that persists after a
period of observation) and those with optic disk edema,
progressive target organ complications, and severe perioperative
hypertension. Elevated blood pressure levels alone—in the absence
of symptoms or new or progressive target organ damage—rarely
require emergency therapy. Parenteral drug therapy is not usually
required, and partial reduction of blood pressure with relief of
symptoms is the goal.
Hypertensive emergencies require substantial reduction of
blood pressure within 1 hour to avoid the risk of serious morbidity
or death. Although blood pressure is usually strikingly elevated
(diastolic pressure >130 mm Hg), the correlation between pressure
and end-organ damage is often poor. It is the latter that determines
the seriousness of the emergency and the approach to treatment.
Emergencies include hypertensive encephalopathy (headache,
irritability, confusion, and altered mental status due to
cerebrovascular spasm), hypertensive nephropathy (hematuria,
proteinuria, and progressive kidney dysfunction due to arteriolar
necrosis and intimal hyperplasia of the interlobular arteries),
intracranial hemorrhage, aortic dissection, preeclampsiaeclampsia,
pulmonary edema, unstable angina, or myocardial infarction.
Malignant hypertension is by historical definition characterized
by encephalopathy or nephropathy with accompanying papilledema.
Progressive kidney disease usually ensues if treatment is not
provided. The therapeutic approach is identical to that used with
other antihypertensive emergencies.
Parenteral therapy is indicated in most hypertensive emergencies,
especially if encephalopathy is present. The initial goal in
hypertensive emergencies is to reduce the pressure by no more than
25% (within minutes to 1 or 2 hours) and then toward a level of
160/100 mm Hg within 2–6 hours. Excessive reductions in pressure
may precipitate coronary, cerebral, or renal ischemia. To avoid
such declines, the use of agents that have a predictable, dose-
dependent, transient, and not precipitous antihypertensive effect is
preferable. In that regard, the use of sublingual or oral fast-acting
nifedipine preparations is best avoided.
Acute ischemic stroke is often associated with marked elevation
of blood pressure, which will usually fall spontaneously. In such
cases, antihypertensives should only be used if the blood pressure
exceeds 220/120 mm Hg, and blood pressure should be reduced
cautiously by 10–15%. If thrombolytics are to be given, blood
pressure should be maintained at <185/110 mm Hg during
treatment and for 24 hours following treatment.
In hemorrhagic stroke, the aim is to minimize bleeding with a
target mean arterial pressure of <130 mm Hg. In acute
subarachnoid hemorrhage, as long as the bleeding source remains
uncorrected, a compromise must be struck between preventing
further bleeding and maintaining cerebral perfusion in the face of
cerebral vasospasm. In this situation, blood pressure goals depend
on the patient's usual blood pressure. In normotensive patients, the
target should be a systolic blood pressure of 110–120 mm Hg; in
hypertensive patients, blood pressure should be treated to 20%
below baseline pressure. In the treatment of hypertensive
emergencies complicated by (or precipitated by) central nervous
system injury, labetalol or nicardipine are good choices, since they
are nonsedating and do not appear to cause significant increases in
cerebral blood flow or intracranial pressure in this setting. In
hypertensive 
emergencies 
arising 
from 
catecholaminergic
mechanisms, such as pheochromocytoma or cocaine use, β-
blockers can worsen the hypertension because of unopposed
peripheral vasoconstriction; phentolamine is a better choice.
Labetalol is useful in these patients if the heart rate must be
controlled.
 Pharmacologic Management
A. Parenteral Agents
A growing number of agents are available for management of acute
hypertensive problems. (Table 11–13 lists drugs, dosages, and
adverse effects.) Sodium nitroprusside is the agent of choice for the
most serious emergencies because of its rapid and easily
controllable action, but continuous monitoring is essential when this
agent is used. In the presence of myocardial ischemia, intravenous
nitroglycerin or an intravenous β-blocker, such as labetalol or
esmolol, is preferable.
1. Nitroprusside sodium—This agent is given by controlled
intravenous infusion gradually titrated to the desired effect. It lowers
the blood pressure within seconds by direct arteriolar and venous
dilation. Monitoring with an intra-arterial line avoids hypotension.
Nitroprusside—in combination with a β-blocker—is especially
useful in patients with aortic dissection.
2. Nitroglycerin, intravenous—This agent is a less potent
antihypertensive than nitroprusside and should be reserved for
patients with accompanying acute ischemic syndromes.
3. Labetalol—This combined β- and α-blocking agent is the most
potent adrenergic blocker for rapid blood pressure reduction. Other
β-blockers are far less potent. Excessive blood pressure drops are
unusual. Experience with this agent in hypertensive syndromes
associated with pregnancy has been favorable.
4. Esmolol—This rapidly acting β-blocker is approved only for
treatment of supraventricular tachycardia but is often used for
lowering blood pressure. It is less potent than labetalol and should
be reserved for patients in whom there is particular concern about
serious adverse events related to β-blockers.
5. Fenoldopam—Fenoldopam is a peripheral dopamine-1 (DA1)
receptor agonist that causes a dose-dependent reduction in arterial
pressure without evidence of tolerance, rebound, or withdrawal or
deterioration of kidney function. In higher dosage ranges,
tachycardia may occur.
6. Nicardipine—Intravenous nicardipine is the most potent and the
longest acting of the parenteral calcium channel blockers. As a
primarily arterial vasodilator, it has the potential to precipitate reflex
tachycardia, and for that reason it should not be used without a β-
blocker in patients with coronary artery disease.
7. Clevidipine—Intravenous clevidipine is an L-type calcium
channel blocker with a 1-minute half-life, which facilitates swift and
tight control of severe hypertension. It acts on arterial resistance
vessels and is devoid of venodilatory or cardiodepressant effects.
 
Table 11–13. Drugs for hypertensive emergencies and urgencies.
 
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CNS, central nervous system; GI,
gastrointestinal.
8. enalaprilat—This is the active form of the oral ACE inhibitor
enalapril. The onset of action is usually within 15 minutes, but the
peak effect may be delayed for up to 6 hours. Thus, enalaprilat is
used primarily as an adjunctive agent.
9. Diuretics—Intravenous loop diuretics can be very helpful when
the patient has signs of heart failure or fluid retention, but the onset
of their hypotensive response is slow, making them an adjunct
rather than a primary agent for hypertensive emergencies. Low
dosages should be used initially (furosemide, 20 mg, or bumetanide,
0.5 mg). They facilitate the response to vasodilators, which often
stimulate fluid retention.
10. Diazoxide—Diazoxide acts promptly as a vasodilator without
decreasing renal blood flow. To avoid hypotension, it should be
given in small boluses or as an infusion rather than as the previously
recommended large bolus. One use of diazoxide has been in
preeclampsia-eclampsia. Hyperglycemia and sodium and water
retention may occur. The drug should be used only for short periods
and is best combined with a loop diuretic.
11. Hydralazine—Hydralazine can be given intravenously or
intramuscularly, but its effect is less predictable than that of other
drugs in this group. It produces reflex tachycardia and should not be
given without β-blockers in patients with possible coronary disease
or aortic dissection. Hydralazine is now used primarily in pregnancy
and in children, but even in these situations, newer agents are
supplanting it.
12. Trimethaphan—The ganglionic blocking agent trimethaphan is
titrated with the patient sitting; its activity depends on this. The
patient can be placed supine if the hypotensive effect is excessive.
The effect occurs within a few minutes and persists for the duration
of the infusion. This agent has largely been replaced by nitroprusside
and newer medications.
B. Oral Agents
Patients with less severe acute hypertensive syndromes can often be
treated with oral therapy. Abrupt blood pressure lowering is not
usually necessary in asymptomatic individuals, and the use of agents
such as rapid-acting nifedipine probably causes more adverse
effects than benefits.
1. Nifedipine—The effect of fast-acting nifedipine capsules is
unpredictable and may be excessive, resulting in hypotension and
reflex tachycardia. Because myocardial infarction and stroke have
been reported in this setting, the use of sublingual nifedipine is not
advised.
2. Clonidine—Clonidine, 0.2 mg orally initially, followed by 0.1 mg
every hour to a total of 0.8 mg, will usually lower blood pressure
over a period of several hours. Sedation is frequent, and rebound
hypertension may occur if the drug is stopped.
3. Captopril—Captopril, 12.5–25 mg orally, will also lower blood
pressure in 15–30 minutes. The response is variable and may be
excessive.
C. Subsequent Therapy
When the blood pressure has been brought under control,
combinations of oral antihypertensive agents can be added as
parenteral drugs are tapered off over a period of 2–3 days. Most
subsequent regimens should include a diuretic.
Awad AS et al. Role of clevidipine butyrate in the treatment of
acute hypertension in the critical care setting: a review. Vasc
Health Risk Manag. 2010 Aug 9;6:457–64. [PMID: 20730061]
 
Rodriguez MA et al. Hypertensive crisis. Cardiol Rev. 2010 Mar–
Apr;18(2):102–7. [PMID: 20160537]
 
 
 
Blood Vessel &
Lymphatic Disorders
Joseph H. Rapp, MD
Christopher D. Owens, MD, MSc
Meshell D. Johnson, MD
ATHEROSCLEROTIC
PERIPHERAL VASCULAR
DISEASE
 
OCCLUSIVE DISEASE: AORTA & ILIAC ARTERIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Claudication: cramping pain or tiredness in the calf, thigh, or hip
while walking.
 Diminished femoral pulses.
 Tissue loss (ulceration, gangrene) or rest pain.
 
 General Considerations
Occlusive atherosclerotic lesions can develop in the vessels of the
legs and, less commonly, the arms. These peripheral lesions are
symptoms of a systemic atherosclerotic process. Pathologic
changes of atherosclerosis may be diffuse, but flow-limiting stenoses
occur segmentally. In the lower extremities, they classically occur in
three anatomic segments: the aortoiliac segment, femoral-popliteal
segment, and the infrapopliteal or tibial segment of the arterial tree.
Lesions in the distal aorta and proximal common iliac arteries often
occur in men aged 50–60 years. The patient with aortoiliac disease
is usually a smoker and the aortoiliac disease may be the initial
manifestation of systemic atherosclerosis. Disease progression may
lead to complete occlusion of one or both common iliac arteries,
which can precipitate occlusion of the entire abdominal aorta to the
level of the renal arteries. Lesions affecting the external iliac arteries
are less common as are lesions isolated to the aorta. This is
particularly true of younger patients with isolated aortoiliac disease,
ie, with no involvement of the more distal vessels of the lower
extremities.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pain occurs because blood flow cannot keep up with the increased
demand of exercise. This pain, termed “claudication,” never occurs
at rest, but with exercise, it is severe and cramping, and it primarily
occurs in the calf muscles. The pain may extend into the thigh and
buttocks with continued exercise. It may be bilateral if there is
bilateral disease. Although generally reproducible, there is day-to-
day variation in severity, and thus it is termed “intermittent
claudication.” Rarely, patients complain only of weakness in the legs
when walking, or simply extreme limb fatigue. The symptoms are
relieved with rest. With bilateral common iliac disease, erectile
dysfunction is a common complaint. Femoral pulses are absent or
very weak as are the distal pulses. A bruit may be heard over the
aorta, iliac, or femoral arteries or over all three arteries.
B. Doppler Findings
The ratio of systolic blood pressure detected by Doppler
examination at the ankle compared with the brachial artery is
reduced to below 0.9 (normal ratio is 1.0–1.2); this difference is
exaggerated by exercise. Segmental waveforms or pulse volume
recordings obtained by strain gaze technology through blood
pressure cuffs demonstrate blunting of the arterial inflow throughout
the lower extremity.
C. Imaging
CT angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiography
(MRA) have largely replaced invasive angiography to determine the
anatomic location of disease. Imaging is only required when
symptoms require intervention, since a history and physical
examination with segmental waveform analysis should appropriately
identify the involved levels of the arterial tree.
 Treatment
A. Conservative Care
A program that includes smoking cessation; risk factor reduction;
weight loss; and consistent, moderate exercise will substantially
improve walking distance. A trial of phosphodiesterase inhibitors,
such as cilostazol 100 mg orally twice a day, may be beneficial in
approximately two-thirds of patients. Antiplatelet agents reduce
overall cardiovascular morbidity but do not ameliorate symptoms.
Several large trials have failed to show a benefit from warfarin
therapy. In the initial stages of a rehabilitation program, simply
slowing the cadence of walking will allow patients to walk further
without pain.
B. Endovascular Techniques
When the atherosclerotic lesions are truly segmental, they can be
effectively treated with angioplasty and stenting. This approach
matches the results of surgery for single stenoses but both
effectiveness and durability decreases with longer or multiple
stenoses.
C. Surgical Intervention
A prosthetic aorto-femoral bypass graft that bypasses the diseased
segments of the aortoiliac system is a highly effective and durable
treatment for this disease. Patients who are poor risks for surgery
may be treated with a graft from the axillary artery to the femoral
arteries (axillo-femoral bypass graft) or, in the unusual case of iliac
disease limited to one side, a graft from the contralateral femoral
artery (fem-fem bypass). The axillo-femoral and femoral to femoral
grafts have lower operative risk; however, they are less durable.
 Complications
The complications of the aorto-femoral bypass are those of any
major abdominal reconstruction in a patient population that has a
high prevalence of cardiovascular disease. Mortality should be low,
in the range of 2–3%, but morbidity is higher with a 5–10% rate of
myocardial infarction. The total complication rate may be >10%.
Complications of endovascular repair include rupture of heavily
calcified arteries, embolization, and vessel dissection. These are
relatively uncommon and the total complication rate should be <3%.
 Prognosis
Without intervention patients with aortoiliac disease may have a
further reduction in walking distance but symptoms rarely progress
to rest pain or threatened limb loss. Life expectancy is limited by
their attendant cardiac disease with a mortality rate of 25–40% at 5
years.
Symptomatic relief is generally excellent after intervention. After
aorto-femoral bypass, a patency rate of 90% at 5 years is common.
Patency rates and symptom relief for less extensive procedures are
also good with 20–30% symptom return at 3 years.
 When to Refer
Patients with progressive reduction in walking distance and those
with limitations in ambulation that interfere with their activities of
daily living should be referred for consultation to a vascular surgeon.
Bachoo P et al. Endovascular stents for intermittent claudication.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 20;(1):CD003228.
[PMID: 20091540]
 
Hirsch AT et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice Guidelines for the
management of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower
extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a collaborative
report from the American Association for Vascular
Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and
Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop
Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Peripheral Arterial
Disease): endorsed by the American Association of
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing;
TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus; and Vascular Disease
Foundation. Circulation. 2006 Mar 21;113(11):e463–654.
[PMID: 16549646]
 
Le Faucheur A et al. Variability and short-term determinants of
walking capacity in patients with intermittent claudication. J Vasc
Surg. 2010 Apr;51(4):886–92. [PMID: 20347684]
 
Linnemann B et al. Variability of non-response to aspirin in patients
with peripheral arterial occlusive disease during long-term follow-
up. Ann Hematol. 2009 Oct;88(10):979–88. [PMID: 19247655]
 
WAVE Investigators. The effects of oral anticoagulants in patients
with peripheral arterial disease: rationale, design, and baseline
characteristics of the Warfarin and Antiplatelet Vascular Evaluation
(WAVE) trial, including a meta-analysis of trials. Am Heart J.
2006 Jan;151(1):1–9. [PMID: 16368284]
 
OCCLUSIVE DISEASE: SUPERFICIAL & COMMON
FEMORAL & POPLITEAL ARTERIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cramping pain or tiredness in the calf with exercise.
 Reduced popliteal or pedal pulses.
 Foot pain at rest, relieved by dependency.
 Foot gangrene or ulceration.
 
 General Considerations
The superficial femoral artery is the artery most commonly occluded
by atherosclerosis. The disease frequently occurs where the
superficial femoral artery passes through the abductor magnis
tendon in the distal thigh. The common femoral artery and the
popliteal artery are less commonly diseased but lesions in these
vessels are debilitating, resulting in short-distance claudication. As
with atherosclerosis of the aortoiliac segment, these lesions are
closely associated with a history of smoking.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of intermittent claudication caused by lesions of the
common femoral artery, superficial femoral artery, and popliteal
artery are confined to the calf. Occlusion or stenosis of the
superficial femoral artery at the abductor canal when the patient has
good collateral vessels from the profunda femoris will cause
claudication at approximately 2–4 blocks. However, with
concomitant disease of the profunda femoris or the popliteal artery,
much shorter distances may trigger symptoms. With short-distance
claudication, dependent rubor of the foot with blanching on
elevation may be present. Chronic low blood flow states will also
cause atrophic changes in the lower leg and foot with loss of hair,
thinning of the skin and subcutaneous tissues, and disuse atrophy of
the muscles. With segmental occlusive disease of the superficial
femoral artery, the common femoral pulsation is normal, but the
popliteal and pedal pulses are reduced.
B. Laboratory Findings
The ankle-brachial index (ABI) is reduced; levels below 0.5 suggest
severe reduction in flow. ABI readings depend on arterial
compression. Since the vessels may be calcified in diabetic patients
and the elderly, ABIs can be misleading and must be accompanied
by a waveform analysis. Pulse volume recordings with cuffs placed
at the high thigh, mid thigh, calf, and ankle will delineate the levels of
obstruction with reduced pressures and blunted waveforms.
Angiography, CTA, or MRA all adequately show the anatomic
location of the obstructive lesions. Generally, these studies are only
done if revascularization is planned.
 Treatment
A. Conservative Care
As with aortoiliac disease, conservative management has an
important role for some patients, particularly those individuals with
superficial femoral artery occlusion and good profunda femoris
collateral vessels. For these patients conservative management as
noted above can result in excellent outcomes with no intervention
required.
B. Surgical Intervention
1. Bypass surgery—Intervention is indicated if intermittent
claudication is progressive, incapacitating or interferes significantly
with essential daily activities. Intervention is mandatory if there is
rest pain or threatened tissue loss of the foot. The most effective
and durable treatment for lesions of the superficial femoral artery is
a femoral-popliteal bypass with autogenous saphenous vein.
Synthetic material, usually polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), can be
used, but these grafts do not have the durability of vein bypass.
2. Endovascular surgery—Endovascular techniques may be
effective for lesions of the superficial femoral artery. The BASIL
trial found similar short-term results for surgery and angioplasty but
worse long-term outcomes with angioplasty. Angioplasty may be
combined with stenting either with a bare metal stent or a PTFE-
covered stent to form an endoluminal bypass. Cryoplasty,
angioplasty with balloon cooled to −20°C, and endoluminal
atherectomy also have their proponents. These techniques have
lower morbidity than bypass surgery but also have a lower rate of
success and durability.
Endovascular therapy is most effective when the lesions are <10
cm long and in patients who are undergoing aggressive risk factor
modification.
3. Thromboendarterectomy—Removal of the atherosclerotic
plaque is limited to the lesions of the common femoral and the
profunda femoris artery where bypass grafts and endovascular
techniques have a more limited role.
 Complications
Open surgical procedures of the lower extremity, particularly long
bypasses with vein harvest, have a risk of wound infection that is
higher than in other areas of the body. Wound infection or seroma
can occur in as many as 15–20% of cases. Myocardial infarction
rates after open surgery are 5–10%, with a 1–4% mortality rate.
Complication rates of endovascular therapy are 1–5%, making
these therapies attractive despite their lower durability.
 Prognosis
The prognosis for motivated patients with isolated superficial
femoral artery disease is excellent, and surgery is not recommended
for mild or moderate claudication in these patients. However, when
claudication significantly limits daily activity and undermines quality
of life as well as overall cardiovascular health, intervention may be
warranted. All interventions require close postprocedure follow-up
with ultrasound surveillance so that any recurrent narrowing can be
treated promptly to prevent complete occlusion. The reported
patency rate of bypass grafts and endovascular procedures of the
femoral artery, superficial femoral artery, and popliteal artery may
be as high as 70% at 3 years. The only large randomized control
trial on the subject suggests early outcomes (1–2 years) are similar
but later outcomes (3–5 years) favor bypass.
Because of the extensive atherosclerotic disease, including
associated coronary lesions, 5-year survival among patients with
lower extremity disease can be as high as 50%, particularly with
involvement of the infrapopliteal vessels (see below). However, with
aggressive risk factor modification, substantial improvement in
longevity has been reported.
 When to Refer
Patients with progressive symptoms, short distance claudication,
rest pain, or any ulceration should be referred to a peripheral
vascular specialist.
Bradbury AW et al; BASIL trial Participants. Bypass versus
Angioplasty in Severe Ischaemia of the Leg (BASIL) trial: analysis
of amputation free and overall survival by treatment received. J
Vasc Surg. 2010 May;51(5 Suppl):18S–31S. [PMID: 20435259]
 
Conte MS. Bypass versus Angioplasty in Severe Ischaemia of the
Leg (BASIL) and the (hoped for) dawn of evidence-based
treatment for advanced limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 2010
May;51(5 Suppl):69S–75S. [PMID: 20435263]
 
Forbes JF et al; BASIL trial Participants. Bypass versus
Angioplasty in Severe Ischaemia of the Leg (BASIL) trial: Health-
related quality of life outcomes, resource utilization, and cost-
effectiveness analysis. J Vasc Surg. 2010 May;51(5 Suppl):43S–
51S. [PMID: 20435261]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Peripheral arterial disease.
JAMA. 2009 Jan 14;301(2):236. [PMID: 19141772]
 
White C. Intermittent claudication. N Engl J Med. 2007 Mar
22;356(12):1241–50. [PMID: 17377162]
 
OCCLUSIVE DISEASE: LOWER LEG & FOOT
ARTERIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe pain of the forefoot that is relieved by dependency.
 Pain or numbness of the foot with walking.
 Ulceration or gangrene of the foot or toes.
 Pallor when the foot is elevated.
 
 General Considerations
Occlusive processes of the lower leg and foot primarily involve the
tibial vessels with rare involvement of the arteries of the foot. There
often is extensive calcification of the artery wall. Diabetes mellitus is
a risk factor for this distribution of atherosclerosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Unless there are associated lesions in the aortoiliac or
femoral/superficial femoral artery segments, claudication may not be
evident. The gastrocnemius and soleus muscles may receive
adequate blood supply from collateral vessels from the popliteal
artery; therefore, when disease is isolated to the tibial vessels, there
may be foot ischemia without attendant claudication, and rest pain
or ulceration may be the first sign of severe vascular insufficiency.
Classically, rest pain is confined to the dorsum of the foot at the
area of the metatarsal heads and is relieved with dependency. The
pain is severe, usually burning in character and will awaken the
patient from sleep. Because of the high incidence of neuropathy in
these patients, it is important to differentiate rest pain from
neuropathic dysesthesia. If the pain is relieved by simply dangling
the foot over the edge of the bed, which increases blood flow to the
foot, then the rest pain is due to vascular insufficiency. On
examination, depending on whether associated proximal disease is
present, there may or may not be femoral and popliteal pulses, but
the pedal pulses will be absent. Dependent rubor may be prominent
with pallor on elevation. The skin of the foot is generally cool,
atrophic, and hairless.
B. Laboratory Findings
The ABI may be quite low (in the range of 0.3 or lower), but ABIs
may be falsely elevated because of the noncompressability of the
calcified tibial vessels. Waveform analysis is important in these
patients; a monophasic flow pattern denotes critically low flow.
Segmental pulse volume recordings will show a fall-off in blood
pressure between the calf and ankle, although pulse volume
recordings also may also be affected by tibial vessel calcification.
C. Imaging
MRA or angiography is often needed to delineate the anatomy of
the tibial-popliteal segment. CTA is less helpful for detection of
lesions in this location.
 Treatment
Good foot care may avoid ulceration, and most diabetic patients
will do well with a conservative regimen. However, if ulcerations
appear and there is no significant healing within 2–3 weeks,
revascularization will be required. Poor blood flow or infrequent
rest pain is not an absolute indication for revascularization.
However, rest pain occurring nightly with monophasic waveforms
requires revascularization to prevent threatened tissue loss.
A. Bypass and Endovascular Techniques
Bypass with vein to the distal tibial or pedal arteries has been shown
to be an effective mechanism to treat rest pain and heal gangrene or
ischemic ulcerations of the foot. Because the foot often has relative
sparing of vascular disease, these bypasses have had adequate
patency rates (70% at 3 years). Fortunately, in nearly all series, limb
salvage rates are much higher than patency rates.
Endovascular techniques are beginning to be used in the tibial
vessels with modest results, but bypass grafting remains the primary
technique of revascularization.
B. Amputation
Patients with rest pain and tissue loss are at high risk for amputation,
particularly if revascularization cannot be done. It may be necessary
to debride necrotic or severely infected tissue. Amputations of the
second through fifth toes may have little or no effect on the
mechanics of walking. However, removal of the first toe or a
transmetatarsal amputation, removing all toes and the heads of the
metatarsals, are durable but increase the energy required of walking
by 5–10%. Unfortunately, the next level that can be successfully
used for a prosthesis is at the below-knee level. The energy
expenditure of walking is then increased by 50%. With an above-
knee amputation, the energy required to ambulate may be increased
as much as 100%. While there are good prosthetic alternatives for
these patients, activity levels are limited after amputation, and there
are issues relating to self-image. These factors combine to demand
revascularization whenever possible to preserve the limb.
 Complications
The complications of intervention are similar to those listed for
superficial femoral artery disease with evidence that the overall
cardiovascular risk increases with decreasing ABI. The patients
with critical limb ischemia require aggressive risk factor
modification. Wound infection rates after bypass are higher if there
is an open wound in the foot.
 Prognosis
Patients with tibial atherosclerosis have extensive athero-sclerotic
burden and a high prevalence of diabetes. Their prognosis without
intervention is poor and complicated by the risk of amputation.
 When to Refer
Patients with diabetes should be referred to a vascular specialist for
evaluation if there is a reduction in the pedal pulses, even if small.
Intervention may not be necessary but the severity of the disease
will be quantified, which has implications for future symptom
development.
Nguyen LL et al. Prospective multicenter study of quality of life
before and after lower extremity vein bypass in 1404 patients with
critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 2006 Nov;44(5): 977–83.
[PMID: 17098529]
 
Raghunathan A et al. Postoperative outcomes for patients
undergoing elective revascularization for critical limb ischemia and
intermittent claudication: a subanalysis of the Coronary Artery
Revascularization Prophylaxis (CARP) trial. J Vasc Surg. 2006
Jun;43(6):1175–82. [PMID: 16765234]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Peripheral arterial disease.
JAMA. 2009 Jan 14;301(2):236. [PMID: 19141772]
 
ACUTE ARTERIAL OCCLUSION OF A LIMB
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden pain in an extremity.
 Generally associated with some element of neurologic dysfunction
with numbness, weakness, or complete paralysis.
 Absent extremity pulses.
 
 General Considerations
Acute occlusion may be due to an embolus or to thrombosis of a
diseased atherosclerotic segment. Arterial to arterial emboli can
occur, but emboli large enough to occlude proximal arteries in the
lower extremities are almost always from the heart. Over 50% of
the emboli from cardiac sources go to the lower extremities, 20% to
the cerebrovascular circulation, and the remainder to the upper
extremities and mesenteric and renal circulation. Atrial fibrillation is
the most common cause of cardiac thrombus formation; other
causes are valvular disease or ischemic heart disease where
thrombus has formed on the ventricular surface of a transmural
myocardial infarct.
Emboli from arterial sources such as arterial ulcerations or
calcified excrescences are usually small and go to the distal arterial
tree (toes).
The typical patient with primary thrombosis has had a history of
claudication and now has an acute occlusion. If the stenosis has
developed over time, collateral blood vessels will develop, and the
resulting occlusion may only cause a minimal increase in symptoms.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The sudden onset of extremity pain, with loss or reduction in pulses,
is diagnostic of acute arterial occlusion. This often will be
accompanied by neurologic dysfunction, such as numbness or
paralysis in extreme cases. With popliteal occlusion, symptoms may
only affect the foot. With proximal occlusions, the whole leg may be
affected. Signs of severe arterial ischemia include pallor on
elevation, coolness of the extremity, and mottling. Impaired
neurologic function progressing to anesthesia accompanied with
paralysis suggest a poor prognosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
There will be little or no flow found with Doppler examination of the
distal vessels. Imaging, if done, may show an abrupt cutoff of
contrast with embolic occlusion. Blood work may indicate systemic
acidosis.
C. Imaging
Whenever possible, imaging should be done in the operating room
because obtaining angiography, MRA, or CTA may delay
revascularization and jeopardize the viability of the extremity.
However, in cases with only modest symptoms and where light
touch of the extremity is maintained, imaging may be helpful in
planning the revascularization procedure.
 Treatment
Immediate revascularization is required in all cases of symptomatic
acute arterial thrombosis. Evidence of neurologic injury, including
loss of light touch sensation, indicates that collateral flow is
inadequate to maintain limb viability and revascularization should be
accomplished within 3 hours. Longer delays carry a significant risk
of irreversible tissue damage. This risk approaches 100% at 6
hours.
A. Heparin
As soon as the diagnosis is made, unfractionated heparin should be
administered (5000–10,000 units) intravenously. This helps prevent
clot propagation and may also help relieve associated vessel spasm.
There may be some reduction in symptoms with aggressive
anticoagulation, but revascularization will still be required.
B. Endovascular Techniques
Catheter directed chemical thrombolysis into the clot with TPA may
be done but often requires 24 hours or longer to fully lyse the
thrombus. This approach can be taken only in patients with an intact
neurologic exam. An echocardiogram should be done first to
identify additional clot in the atrium. If an additional clot is found,
thrombolysis may be ill advised because of the risk of subsequent
emboli from the cardiac clot. Catheter-based local mechanical
thrombolysis may be an excellent alternative.
C. Surgical Intervention
General anesthesia is usually indicated; local anesthesia may be used
in extremely high-risk patients if the exploration is to be limited to
the common femoral artery. In extreme cases, it may be necessary
to perform embolectomy from the femoral, popliteal and even the
pedal vessels to revascularize the limb. Devices to pulverize and
aspirate clot and intraoperative thrombolysis with tissue
plasminogen activator (TPA) are being used to improve outcomes.
 Complications
Complications of revascularization of an acutely ischemic limb can
include severe acidosis and myocardial arrest. In cases where
several hours have elapsed but recovery of viable tissue may still be
possible, significant levels of lactic acid, potassium, and other
harmful agents may be released into the circulation during
revascularization. Pretreatment of the patient with sodium
bicarbonate prior to reestablishing arterial flow is required. Surgery
in the presence of thrombolytic agents and heparin carries a high
risk of postoperative wound hematoma.
 Prognosis
There is a 10–25% risk of amputation with acute arterial occlusion,
and a 25% or higher in-hospital mortality rate. Prognosis for acute
occlusion of an atherosclerotic segment is generally much better
because the collateral flow can maintain extremity viability. The
longer term survival reflects the overall condition of the patient. In
high-risk patients, an acute arterial occlusion suggests a dismal
prognosis.
OCCLUSIVE CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of weakness and numbness of an extremity,
aphasia, dysarthria, or unilateral blindness (amaurosis fugax).
 Bruit heard loudest in the mid neck.
 
 General Considerations
Unlike the other vascular territories, symptoms of occlusive
cerebrovascular disease are predominantly due to emboli. Transient
ischemic attacks (TIAs) are the result of small emboli, and the risk
of additional emboli causing permanent deficits is high. One-third of
all strokes may be due to emboli. In the absence of atrial fibrillation,
approximately 90% of these emboli originate from the proximal
internal carotid artery, an area uniquely prone to the development of
atherosclerosis. Lesions in the proximal great vessels and the
common carotid are far less common. Intracranial atherosclerotic
lesions are uncommon in the West but are the most common
location of cerebrovascular disease in China.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Generally, the symptoms of a TIA last only a few minutes but may
continue up to 24 hours. The most common lesions are in the cortex
with both motor and sensory involvement. Emboli to the retinal
artery cause unilateral blindness which, when transient, is termed
“amaurosis fugax.” Posterior circulation symptoms referable to the
brainstem, cerebellum, and visual regions of the brain are due to
atherosclerosis of the vertebral basilar systems and are much less
common.
Signs of cerebrovascular disease include bruits in the mid-
cervical area. However, they are not specific for narrowing within
the vessel. There is poor correlation between the degree of stenosis
and the presence of the bruit. Furthermore, absence of a bruit does
not exclude the possibility of carotid stenosis. Nonfocal symptoms,
such as dizziness and unsteadiness, seldom are related to
cerebrovascular atherosclerosis.
B. Imaging
Duplex ultrasonography is the imaging modality of choice with a
high specificity and sensitivity for detecting and grading the degree
of stenosis at the carotid bifurcation: 50% stenosis in a symptomatic
patient and 80% in an asymptomatic patient require intervention.
Mild to moderate disease (30–50% stenosis) indicates the need for
ongoing surveillance and aggressive risk factor modification.
Excellent depiction of the full anatomy of the cerebrovascular
circulation from arch to cranium can be obtained with either MRA
or CTA. Each of these modalities may have false-positive or false-
negative findings. Since the decision to intervene in cases of carotid
stenosis depends on an accurate assessment of the degree of
stenosis, it is recommended that at least two modalities be used to
confirm the degree of stenosis. Cerebral angiography is reserved for
cases that cannot be resolved by these less invasive imaging
modalities.
 Treatment
A. Asymptomatic Patients
Patients with no neurologic symptoms but with carotid stenosis on
imaging will benefit from carotid intervention if they are considered
to be at low risk for intervention and their expected survival is >5
years. Recommendation for intervention also presumes that the
treating institution has a stroke rate in asymptomatic patients that is
acceptable (< 3%). Large studies indicate a reduction in stroke rate
from 11.5% to 5.0% over 5 years with surgical treatment of
asymptomatic carotid stenoses of >60%. However, the usual
practice is to only treat those patients who have > 80% stenosis.
Patients with carotid stenosis that suddenly worsens are thought to
have an unstable plaque and are at particularly high risk for embolic
stroke.
B. Symptomatic Patients
Large randomized trials have shown that patients with TIAs or
strokes from which they have completely or nearly completely
recovered will benefit from carotid intervention if the ipsilateral
carotid artery has a stenosis of ≥70%, and they are likely to derive
benefit if the artery has a stenosis of 50–69%. In these situations,
carotid endarterectomy (CEA) has been shown to have a durable
effect in preventing further events.
 Complications
The primary complication of carotid intervention is stroke due to
embolization of plaque material during the procedure. The American
Heart Association has recommended upper limits of acceptable
combined morbidity and mortality for these interventions: 3% for
asymptomatic, 5% for those with TIAs, and 7% for patients with
previous stroke. Results that do not match these guidelines will
jeopardize the therapeutic benefit of carotid intervention.
A. Carotid Endarterectomy
In addition to stroke risk, CEA carries an 8% risk of transient
cranial nerve injury (usually the vagus or hypoglossal nerve) and 1–
2% risk of permanent deficits. There is also the risk of
postoperative neck hematoma, which can cause acute compromise
of the airway. Coronary artery disease exists as a comorbidity in
most of these patients. Myocardial infarction rates after CEA are
approximately 5%.
B. Angioplasty and Stenting
Carotid angioplasty and stenting has been advocated as an
alternative to CEA. Carotid angioplasty and stenting offers the
advantage of avoidance of both cranial nerve injury and neck
hematoma. However, emboli are more common during carotid
angioplasty and stenting in spite of the use of embolic protection
devices during the procedure. The International Carotid Stenting
Study showed increased stroke rates with carotid angioplasty and
stenting in symptomatic patients while the Carotid Revascularization
Endarterectomy versus Stent Trial (CREST) showed similar overall
morbidity with higher myocardial infarction rates with CEA and
higher stroke rates with carotid angioplasty and stenting.
C. Recurrent Carotid Stenosis
Scarring of the arterial wall at the site of the intervention after both
angioplasty and endarterectomy may create recurrent stenosis.
These lesions tend to be less embologenic, and treatment need not
be as aggressive as for primary disease. The cranial nerve risk for
these patients may be higher with repeat endarterectomy than with
angioplasty of the narrowed segment.
 Prognosis
Prognosis for patients with carotid stenosis who have had a TIA or
small stroke is poor without treatment; 25% of these patients will
have a stroke with most of the events occurring in the first year of
follow-up. Patients with carotid stenosis without symptoms have an
annual stroke rate of just over 2% even with risk factor modification
and antiplatelet agents. Symptomatic patients most likely have
unstable plaques with ulceration or recent plaque enlargement.
Prospective ultrasound screening is recommended in asymptomatic
patients because approximately 10% of asymptomatic patients have
evidence of plaque progression in a given year. Concomitant
coronary artery disease is common and is an important factor in
these patients both for perioperative risk and long-term prognosis.
Aggressive risk factor modification should be prescribed for
patients with cerebrovascular disease regardless of planned
intervention.
 When to Refer
Asymptomatic or symptomatic patients with a carotid stenosis of
>80% and patients with carotid stenosis of > 50% stenosis with
symptoms of a TIA or stroke should be referred to a vascular
specialist.
Bonati LH et al; CAVATAS Investigators. Long-term risk of
carotid restenosis in patients randomly assigned to endovascular
treatment or endarterectomy in the Carotid and Vertebral Artery
Transluminal Angioplasty Study (CAVATAS): long-term follow-
up of a randomized trial. Lancet Neurol. 2009 Oct;8(10):908-17.
[PMID: 19717347]
 
Brott TG et al; CREST Investigators. Stenting versus
endarterectomy for treatment of carotid-artery stenosis. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Jul 1;363(1):11–23. [PMID: 20505173]
 
Hussain MS et al. Symptomatic delayed reocclusion after initial
successful revascularization in acute ischemic stroke. J Stroke
Cerebrovasc Dis. 2010 Jan;19(1):36–9. [PMID: 20123225]
 
International Carotid Stenting Study investigators; Ederle J et al.
Carotid artery stenting compared with endarterectomy in patients
with symptomatic carotid stenosis (International Carotid Stenting
Study): an interim analysis of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2010 Mar 20;375(9719):985–97. [PMID: 20189239]
 
Mas JL et al; EVA-3S Investigators. Endarterectomy versus
stenting in patients with symptomatic severe carotid stenosis. N
Engl J Med. 2006 Oct 19;355(16):1660–71. [PMID: 17050890]
 
Zeebregts CJ. Carotid artery stenting: a 2009 update. Curr Opin
Cardiol. 2009 Nov;24(6):528–31. [PMID: 19638930]
 
VISCERAL ARTERY INSUFFICIENCY (Intestinal Angina)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe postprandial abdominal pain.
 Weight loss with a “fear of eating.”
 Acute mesenteric ischemia: severe abdominal pain yet minimal
findings on physical examination.
 
 General Considerations
Acute visceral artery insufficiency results from either embolic
occlusion or primary thrombosis of at least one major mesenteric
vessel. Ischemia can also result from nonocclusive mesenteric
vascular insufficiency, which is generally seen in patients with low
flow states, such as congestive heart failure, or hypotension. A
chronic syndrome occurs when there is adequate perfusion for the
viscera at rest but ischemia occurs with severe abdominal pain when
flow demands increase with feeding. Because of the rich collateral
network in the mesentery, generally at least two of the three major
visceral vessels (celiac, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric
arteries) are affected before symptoms develop. Ischemic colitis,
a variant of mesenteric ischemia, usually occurs in the distribution of
the inferior mesenteric artery. The intestinal mucosa is the most
sensitive to ischemia and will slough if underperfused. The clinical
presentation is similar to inflammatory bowel disease. Ischemic
colitis can occur after aortic surgery, particularly aortic aneurysm
resection or aorto- femoral bypass for occlusive disease, when
there is sudden reduction in blood flow to the inferior mesenteric
artery.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Acute intestinal ischemia—Patients with primary visceral
arterial thrombosis often give an antecedent history consistent with
chronic intestinal ischemia. The key finding with acute mesenteric
ischemia is severe, steady epigastric and periumbilical pain with
minimal or no findings on physical examination of the abdomen
because the visceral peritoneum is severely ischemic or infarcted
and the parietal peritoneum is not involved. A high white cell count,
lactic acidosis, hypotension, and abdominal distention may aid in the
diagnosis.
2. Chronic intestinal ischemia—Patients are generally over 45
years of age and may have evidence of atherosclerosis in other
vascular beds. Symptoms consist of epigastric or periumbilical
postprandial pain lasting 1–3 hours. To avoid the pain, patients limit
food intake and may develop a fear of eating. Weight loss is
universal.
3. Ischemic colitis—Characteristic symptoms are left lower
quadrant pain and tenderness, abdominal cramping, and mild
diarrhea, which is often bloody.
B. Imaging and Colonoscopy
In patients with acute or chronic mesenteric ischemia, a CTA or
MRA can demonstrate narrowing of the proximal visceral vessels.
In acute mesenteric ischemia from a nonocclusive low flow state,
angiography is needed to display the typical “pruned tree”
appearance of the distal visceral vascular bed. Ultrasound scanning
of the mesenteric vessels may show proximal obstructing lesions in
laboratories that have experience with this technique.
In patients with ischemic colitis, colonoscopy may reveal
segmental ischemic changes, most often in the rectal sigmoid and
splenic flexure where collateral circulation may be poor.
 Treatment
A high suspicion of acute mesenteric ischemia dictates immediate
exploration to determine bowel viability. If the bowel remains
viable, bypass can be done from the aorta to the celiac and the
superior mesentery artery. In cases where bowel viability is
questionable or bowel resection will be required, the bypass can be
done with autologous vein, or with PTFE. There is a surprisingly
low incidence of graft infection in these cases. For the treatment of
nonocclusive mesenteric disease, vasodilators can be delivered
through a catheter in the mesenteric arteries.
In chronic visceral ischemia, angioplasty and stenting of the
proximal vessel may be beneficial depending on the anatomy of the
stenosis. Should an endovascular solution not be available, an
aorto-visceral artery bypass is the preferred management. The long-
term results are highly durable. Visceral artery endarterectomy is
reserved for cases with multiple lesions where bypass would be
difficult.
The mainstay of treatment of ischemic colitis is maintenance of
blood pressure and perfusion until collateral circulation becomes
well established. The patient must be monitored closely for evidence
of perforation, which will require resection.
 Prognosis
The combined morbidity and mortality rates are 10–15% from
surgical intervention in these debilitated patients. However, without
intervention both acute and chronic visceral ischemia are uniformly
fatal. Adequate collateral circulation usually develops in those who
have ischemic colitis; the prognosis for this entity is better than
chronic mesenteric insufficiency.
 When to Refer
Any patient in whom there is a suspicion of visceral ischemia should
be referred for imaging and possible intervention.
Acosta S. Epidemiology of mesenteric vascular disease: clinical
implications. Semin Vasc Surg. 2010 Mar;23(1):4–8. [PMID:
20298944]
 
Acosta S et al. Clinical implications for the management of acute
thromboembolic occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery:
autopsy findings in 213 patients. Ann Surg. 2005
Mar;241(3):516–22. [PMID: 15729076]
 
Cangemi JR et al. Intestinal ischemia in the elderly. Gastroenterol
Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;38(3):527–40. [PMID: 19699412]
 
ACUTE MESENTERIC VEIN OCCLUSION
The hallmarks of acute mesenteric vein occlusion are post-prandial
pain and evidence of a hypercoagulable state. Acute mesenteric
vein occlusion presents similarly to the arterial occlusive syndromes
but is much less common. Patients at risk include those with a
systemic hypercoagulable state, such as that observed with
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria or protein C, protein S,
antithrombin deficiencies, or the JAK2 mutation. These lesions are
difficult to treat surgically, and thrombolysis is the mainstay of
therapy. Aggressive long-term anticoagulation is required for these
patients.
NONATHEROSCLEROTIC
VASCULAR DISEASE
 
THROMBOANGIITIS OBLITERANS (Buerger Disease)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Typically occurs in young male cigarette smokers.
 Distal extremities involved with severe circulatory insufficiency.
 Thrombosis of the superficial veins may occur.
 Amputation will be necessary unless the patient stops smoking.
 
 General Considerations
Buerger disease is a segmental, inflammatory, and thrombotic
process of the distal most arteries and occasionally veins of the
extremities. Pathologic examination reveals arteritis in the affected
vessels. The cause is not known but it is rarely seen in nonsmokers.
Arteries most commonly affected are the plantar and digital vessels
of the foot and lower leg. In advanced stages, the fingers and hands
may become involved. Fortunately, the incidence of Buerger
disease seems to have decreased in the past decade.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Buerger disease may be initially difficult to differentiate from routine
peripheral vascular disease, but in most cases, the lesions are on the
toes and the patient is younger than 40 years old. The observation
of superficial thrombophlebitis may aid the diagnosis. Because the
distal vessels are usually affected, intermittent claudication is not
common with Buerger disease, but rest pain, particularly pain in the
distal most extremity (ie, toes), is frequent. This pain often
progresses to tissue loss and amputation, unless the patient stops
smoking. The progression of the disease seems to be intermittent
with acute and dramatic episodes followed by some periods of
remission.
B. Imaging
MRA or invasive angiography can demonstrate the obliteration of
the distal arterial tree typical of Buerger disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
In atherosclerotic peripheral vascular disease, the onset of tissue
ischemia tends to be less dramatic than in Buerger disease, and
symptoms of proximal arterial involvement, such as claudication,
predominate.
Symptoms of Raynaud disease may be difficult to differentiate
from Buerger disease. Repetitive atheroemboli may also mimic
Buerger disease and may be difficult to differentiate. It may be
necessary to image the proximal arterial tree to rule out sources of
arterial emboli.
 Treatment
Smoking cessation is the mainstay of therapy and will halt the
disease in most cases. As the distal arterial tree is occluded,
revascularization is not possible. Sympathectomy is rarely effective.
 Prognosis
If smoking cessation can be achieved, the outlook for Buerger
disease may be better than in patients with premature peripheral
vascular disease. If smoking cessation is not achieved, then the
prognosis is generally poor, with amputation of both lower and
upper extremities the eventual outcome.
Al Mheid I et al. Cell therapy in peripheral arterial disease.
Angiology. 2008 Dec-2009 Jan;59(6):705–16. [PMID:
18818233]
 
Małecki R et al. Thromboangiitis obliterans in the 21st century—a
new face of disease. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Oct;206(2):328-34.
[PMID: 19269635]
 
ARTERIAL ANEURYSMS
 
ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSMS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most aortic aneurysms are asymptomatic until rupture.
 Abdominal aortic aneurysms measuring 5 cm are palpable in
80% of patients.
 Back or abdominal pain with aneurysmal tenderness may
precede rupture.
 Rupture is catastrophic; hypotension; excruciating abdominal pain
that radiates to the back.
 
 General Considerations
Dilatation of the infrarenal aorta is a normal part of aging. The aorta
of a healthy young man measures approximately 2 cm. An aneurysm
is considered present when the aortic diameter exceeds 3 cm, but
aneurysms rarely rupture until their diameter exceeds 5 cm.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms are found in 2% of men over 55 years
of age; the male to female ratio is 8:1. Ninety percent of abdominal
atherosclerotic aneurysms originate below the renal arteries. The
aneurysms usually involve the aortic bifurcation and often involve the
common iliac arteries.
Inflammatory aneurysms are an unusual variant. These have an
inflammatory peel, similar to the inflammation seen with
retroperitoneal fibrosis that surrounds the aneurysm and encases
adjacent retroperitoneal structures, such as the duodenum and,
occasionally, the ureters.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Asymptomatic—Although 80% of 5-cm infrarenal aneurysms
are palpable on routine physical examination, most aneurysms are
discovered as incidental findings on ultrasound or CT imaging during
the evaluation of unrelated abdominal symptoms.
2. Symptomatic—
A. PAIN—Aneurysmal expansion may be accompanied by pain that
is mild to severe midabdominal discomfort often radiating to the
lower back. The pain may be constant or intermittent and is
exacerbated by even gentle pressure on the aneurysm sack. Pain
may also accompany inflammatory aneurysms. Most aneurysms
have a thick layer of thrombus lining the aneurysmal sac. In rare
instances, the thrombus can embolize to the lower extremities.
B. RUPTURE—The sudden escape of blood into the retroperitoneal
space causes severe pain, a palpable abdominal mass, and
hypotension. Free rupture into the peritoneal cavity is a lethal event.
B. Laboratory Findings
Even with a contained rupture, there may be little change in routine
laboratory findings. The hematocrit will be normal, since there has
been no opportunity for hemodilution.
Aneurysms are associated with the cardiopulmonary diseases of
elderly male smokers, which include coronary artery disease,
carotid disease, renal impairment, and emphysema. Preoperative
testing may indicate the presence of these comorbid conditions,
which may increase the risk of intervention.
C. Imaging
Abdominal ultrasonography is the diagnostic study of choice for
initial screening for the presence of an aneurysm. In approximately
three-quarters of patients with aneurysms, curvilinear calcifications
outlining portions of the aneurysm wall may be visible on plain films
of the abdomen or back. CT scans provide a more reliable
assessment of aneurysm diameter and should be done when the
aneurysm nears the diameter threshold (5.5 cm) for treatment.
Contrast-enhanced CT scans show the arteries above and below
the aneurysm. The visualization of this vasculature is essential for
planning repair.
 Screening
Data support the use of abdominal ultrasound to screen 65- to 74-
year-old men, but not women, who have a history of smoking.
Repeated screening does not appear to be needed if the aorta
shows no enlargement.
 Treatment
A. Elective Repair
In general, elective repair is indicated for aortic aneurysms ≥5.5 cm
in diameter or aneurysms that have undergone rapid expansion (>5
mm in 6 months). Symptoms such as pain or tenderness may
indicate impending rupture. These patients need to undergo
aneurysm repair regardless of the aneurysm's diameter.
B. Aneurysmal Rupture
A ruptured aneurysm is lethal. Approximately half of patients who
arrive at the hospital with an infrarenal abdominal aorta rupture will
die. The actual number of deaths is likely much higher (80–90%)
when considering all patients with rupture, many of whom never
make it to the hospital, or those patients who have aneurysms that
involve the take off of the renal or mesenteric vessels. Fortunately
many patients have bleeding that is contained in the retroperitoneum
(contained rupture), which may arrest the blood loss long enough
for the patient to undergo urgent operation. Endovascular repair is
available for urgent aneurysm repair in most major vascular centers,
although the results offer only slight improvement over open repair
for these critically ill patients.
C. Inflammatory Aneurysm
The presence of peri-aortic inflammation (inflammatory aneurysm) is
not an indication for surgical treatment, unless there is associated
compression of retroperitoneal structures, such as the ureter.
Interestingly, the inflammation that encases an inflammatory
aneurysm recedes after either endovascular or surgical aneurysm
repair.
D. Assessment of Operative Risk
Aneurysms appear to be a variant of systemic atherosclerosis.
Patients with aneurysms have a high rate of coronary disease. A
2004 trial demonstrated minimal value in addressing stable coronary
artery disease prior to aneurysm resection. However, in patients
with significant symptoms of coronary disease, the coronary disease
should be treated first. Aneurysm resection should follow shortly
thereafter because there is a significant increased risk in aneurysm
rupture after the coronary procedures. In patients with concomitant
carotid stenosis, there is no benefit in repairing asymptomatic
carotid disease prior to aneurysm resection unless it is symptomatic
or involves bilateral critical stenoses.
E. Open Surgical Resection Versus Endovascular Repair
In open surgical aneurysm repair, a graft is sutured to the non-
dilated vessels above and below the aneurysm. This involves an
abdominal incision, extensive dissection, and interruption of aortic
blood flow. The mortality rate is low (2–5%) in centers that have a
high volume for this procedure and when it is performed in good
risk patients. Older, sicker patients may not tolerate the
cardiopulmonary stresses of the operation. With endovascular
repair, a stent-graft is used to line the aorta and exclude the
aneurysm. The anatomic requirements to securely achieve aneurysm
exclusion vary according to the performance characteristics of the
specific stent-graft device. In general, successful attachment
requires a segment of non-dilated aorta (neck) between the renal
arteries and the aneurysm that is at least 15 mm in length, and
device insertion requires the lumen of the iliac arteries to be at least
7 mm in diameter. Most studies have found that endovascular
aneurysm repair offers patients reduced operative morbidity and
mortality as well as shorter recovery periods. However, long-term
survival is equivalent between the two techniques. Patients who are
suitable for, and elect to undergo endovascular repair, will require
more repeat interventions and will need to be followed on a yearly
basis with an imaging procedure to ensure that there has been no
migration of the endovascular device.
F. Thrombus in an Aneurysm
The presence of thrombus alone is not an indication for
anticoagulation.
 Complications
Myocardial infarction, the most common complication, occurs in up
to 10% of patients who undergo open aneurysm repair. The
incidence of myocardial infarction is substantially lower with
endovascular repair. For routine infrarenal aneurysms, renal injury is
unusual; however, when it does occur, or if the baseline creatinine is
elevated, it is a significant complicating factor in the postoperative
period. Respiratory complications are similar to those seen in most
major abdominal surgery. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, even years
after aortic surgeries, suggests the possibility of graft enteric fistula;
the incidence of this complication is higher when the initial surgery is
performed on an emergency basis.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate for an open elective surgical resection is 1–5%,
and the mortality rate for endovascular therapy is 0.5–2%. Of those
who survive surgery, approximately 60% are alive at 5 years;
myocardial infarction is the leading cause of death. The decision to
repair aneurysms in high-risk patients has been made easier with the
reduced perioperative morbidity and mortality of the endovascular
approach.
Mortality rates of untreated aneurysms vary with aneurysm
diameter. The mortality rate among patients with large aneurysms
who have not undergone surgery, has been defined as follows: 12%
annual risk of rupture with an aneurysm ≥6 cm in diameter and a
25% annual risk of rupture in aneurysms of ≥7 cm diameter. In
general, a patient with an aortic aneurysm ≥5.5 cm has a threefold
greater chance of dying of a consequence of rupture of the
aneurysm than of dying of the surgical resection.
At present, endovascular aneurysm repair may be less definitive
than open surgical repair and requires close follow up with an
imaging procedure. Device migration, component separation, limb
thrombosis, or limb kinking are common reasons for repeat
intervention. With complete exclusion of blood from the aneurysm
sac, the pressure is lowered, which causes the aneurysm to shrink.
An “endoleak” from the top or bottom of the graft (type 1) or
through a graft defect (type 3) is associated with a persistent risk of
rupture. Indirect leakage of blood through persistent lumbar and
inferior mesenteric branches of the aneurysm (endoleak, type 2)
produces an intermediate picture with somewhat reduced pressure
in the sac, slow shrinkage, and low rupture risk. However, type 2
endoleak warrants close observation because aneurysm dilatation
and rupture can occur.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any patient with a 4 cm aortic aneurysm or larger should
be referred for imaging and assessment by a vascular
specialist.
•    Urgent referrals should be made if the patient complains
of pain and gentle palpation of the aneurysm confirms that it
is the source.
 When to Admit
Patients with signs of aortic rupture require hospital admission.
De Bruin JL et al. Long-term outcome of open or endovascular
repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 2010;
362:1881–9. [PMID: 20484396]
 
Hellmann DB et al. Inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm.
JAMA. 2007 Jan 24;297(4):395–400. [PMID: 17244836]
 
Kim LG et al. Multicentre Aneurysm Screening Group. A
sustained mortality benefit from screening for abdominal aortic
aneurysm. Ann Intern Med. 2007 May 15;146(10):699–706.
[PMID: 17502630]
 
Lederle FA et al; Open Versus Endovascular Repair (OVER)
Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group. Outcomes following
endovascular vs open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm: a
randomized trial. JAMA. 2009 Oct 14;302(14): 1535–42.
[PMID: 19826022]
 
Prinssen M et al; Dutch Randomized Endovascular Aneurysm
Management (DREAM) Trial Group. A randomized trial
comparing conventional and endovascular repair of abdominal
aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med. 2004 Oct 14;351 (16): 1607–
18. [PMID: 15483279]
 
Schermerhorn ML et al. Endovascular vs. open repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysms in the Medicare population. N Engl J
Med. 2008 Jan 31;358(5):464–74. [PMID: 18234751]
 
United Kingdom EVAR Trial Investigators; Greenhalgh RM et al.
Endovascular versus open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N
Engl J Med. 2010 May 20;362(20):1863–71. [PMID: 20382983]
 
THORACIC AORTIC ANEURYSMS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Widened mediastinum on chest radiograph.
 With rupture, sudden onset chest pain radiating to the back.
 
 General Considerations
Most thoracic aortic aneurysms are due to atherosclerosis; syphilis
is now a rare cause. Disorders of connective tissue and Ehlers-
Danlos and Marfan syndromes also are rare causes but have
important therapeutic implications. Traumatic, false aneurysms,
caused by partial tearing of the aortic wall with deceleration injuries,
may occur just beyond the origin of the left subclavian artery. Less
than 10% of aortic aneurysms occur in the thoracic aorta.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most thoracic aneurysms are asymptomatic. When symptoms
occur, they depend largely on the size and the position of the
aneurysm and its rate of growth. Substernal back or neck pain may
occur. Pressure on the trachea, esophagus, or superior vena cava
can result in the following symptoms and signs: dyspnea, stridor, or
brassy cough; dysphagia; and edema in the neck and arms as well
as distended neck veins. Stretching of the left recurrent laryngeal
nerve causes hoarseness. With aneurysms of the ascending aorta,
aortic regurgitation may be present due to dilation of the aortic valve
annulus. Rupture of a thoracic aneurysm is catastrophic because
bleeding is rarely contained, so there is not enough time for
emergent repair.
B. Imaging
The aneurysm may be diagnosed on chest radiograph by the
calcified outline of the dilated aorta. CT scanning is the modality of
choice to demonstrate the anatomy and size of the aneurysm and to
exclude lesions that can mimic aneurysms, such as neoplasms or
substernal goiter. MRI can also be useful. Cardiac catheterization
and echocardiography may be required to describe the relationship
of the coronary vessels to an aneurysm of the ascending aorta.
 Treatment
Indications for repair depend on the location of dilation, rate of
growth, associated symptoms, and overall condition of the patient.
Aneurysms measuring 6 cm or larger may be considered for repair.
Aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta are treated routinely
by endovascular grafting. Repair of arch aneurysms should be
undertaken only if there is a skilled surgical team with an acceptable
record of outcomes for these complex procedures. The availability
of thoracic aorta endograft technique for descending thoracic
aneurysms or experimental branched endovascular reconstructions
for arch aneurysms (custom made grafts with branches to the
vessels involved in the aneurysm) does not change the indications
for aneurysm repair. Aneurysms that involve the proximal aortic
arch or ascending aorta represent particularly challenging problems.
Open surgery is usually required, which carries substantial risk of
morbidity, including stroke, diffuse neurologic injury, and intellectual
impairment.
 Complications
With the exception of endovascular repair for discrete saccular
aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta, the morbidity and
mortality of thoracic repair is considerably higher than that for infra-
renal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Paraplegia remains a rare,
but devastating, complication. Most large series report
approximately 4% rate of paraplegia following endovascular repair
of thoracic aortic aneurysms. The spinal arterial supply is segmental
through intercostal branches of the aorta with variable degrees of
intersegmental connection. Therefore, the more extensive the
aneurysm, the greater is the risk of paraplegia with resection. Prior
infrarenal abdominal aortic surgery, subclavian or internal iliac artery
stenosis, and hypotension all increase the paraplegia risk.
Involvement of the aortic arch also increases the risk of stroke, even
when the aneurysm does not directly affect the carotid artery.
 Prognosis
Generally, degenerative aneurysms of the thoracic aorta will enlarge
and require repair to prevent death from rupture. However, stable
aneurysms can be followed with CT scanning. Saccular aneurysms,
particularly those distal to the left subclavian artery and the
descending thoracic aorta, have had good results with endovascular
repair. Resection of large complex aneurysms of the aortic arch
involves major technical issues and requires a skilled surgical team
and should only be attempted in low-risk patients. Experimental
branched, or fenestrated technology for endovascular grafting holds
promise for reduced morbidity and mortality.
 When to Refer
Patients who are deemed to have a reasonable surgical risk with a
5–6 cm aneurysm should be considered for repair, particularly if the
aneurysm involves the descending thoracic aorta.
 When to Admit
Any patient with chest or back pain with a known or suspected
thoracic aorta aneurysm must be admitted to the hospital and
undergo appropriate imaging studies to rule out the aneurysm as a
cause of the pain.
Chuter TA. Branched and fenestrated stent grafts for endovascular
repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2006
Feb;43(Suppl A):111A–115A. [PMID: 16473163]
 
Jonker FH et al. Meta-analysis of open versus endovascular repair
for ruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg.
2010 Apr;51(4):1026–32. [PMID: 20347700]
 
Jonker FH et al. Outcomes of endovascular repair of ruptured
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Circulation. 2010 Jun
29;121(25):2718–23. [PMID: 20547930]
 
Svensson LG et al; Society of Thoracic Surgeons Endovascular
Surgery Task Force. Expert consensus document on the treatment
of descending thoracic aortic disease using endovascular stent-
grafts. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008 Jan;85(1 Suppl): S1–41. [PMID:
18083364]
 
Torsello GB et al. Midterm results from the TRAVIATA registry:
treatment of thoracic aortic disease with the Valiant stent graft. J
Endovasc Ther. 2010 Apr;17(2):137–50. [PMID: 20426628]
 
AORTIC DISSECTION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden searing chest pain with radiation to the back, abdomen,
or neck in a hypertensive patient.
 Widened mediastinum on chest radiograph.
 Pulse discrepancy in the extremities.
 Acute aortic regurgitation may develop.
 
 General Considerations
Aortic dissection occurs when a spontaneous intimal tear develops
and blood dissects into the media of the aorta. The tear probably
results from the repetitive torque applied to the ascending and
proximal descending aorta during the cardiac cycle; hypertension is
an important component of this disease process. Type A
dissection involves the arch proximal to the left subclavian artery,
and type B dissection occurs in the proximal descending thoracic
aorta typically just beyond the left subclavian artery. Dissections
may occur in the absence of hypertension but abnormalities of
smooth muscle, elastic tissue, or collagen are more common in these
patients. Pregnancy, bicuspid aortic valve, and coarctation also are
associated with increased risk of dissection.
Blood entering the intimal tear may extend the dissection into the
abdominal aorta, the lower extremities, the carotid arteries or, less
commonly, the subclavian arteries. Both absolute pressure levels
and the pulse pressure are important in propagation of dissection.
The aortic dissection is a true emergency and requires immediate
control of blood pressure to limit the extent of the dissection. With
type A dissection, which has the worse prognosis, death may occur
within hours, usually due to rupture of the dissection into the
pericardial sac. Rupture into the pleural cavity is also possible. The
intimal/medial flap of the aortic wall created by the dissection may
occlude major aortic branches, resulting in ischemia of the brain,
intestines, kidney, or lower extremities. Patients whose blood
pressure is controlled and who survive the acute episode without
complications may have long-term survival without surgical
treatment.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Severe persistent chest pain of sudden onset radiating down the
back or possibly into the anterior chest is characteristic. Radiation
of the pain into the neck may also occur. The patient is usually
hypertensive. Syncope, hemiplegia, or paralysis of the lower
extremities may occur. Intestinal ischemia or renal insufficiency may
develop. Peripheral pulses may be diminished or unequal. A
diastolic murmur may develop as a result of a dissection in the
ascending aorta close to the aortic valve, causing valvular
regurgitation, heart failure, and cardiac tamponade.
B. Electrocardiographic Findings
Left ventricular hypertrophy from long-standing hypertension is
often present. Acute changes suggesting myocardial ischemia do not
develop unless dissection involves the coronary artery ostium.
Classically, inferior wall abnormalities predominate since dissection
leads to compromise of the right rather than the left coronary artery.
In some patients, the ECG may be completely normal.
C. Imaging
A multiplanar CT scan is the immediate diagnostic imaging modality
of choice; clinicians should have a low threshold for obtaining a CT
scan in any hypertensive patient with chest pain and equivocal
findings on ECG.
The CT scan should include both the chest and abdomen to fully
delineate the extent of the dissected aorta. MRI is an excellent
imaging modality for chronic dissections, but in the acute situation,
the longer imaging time and the difficulty of monitoring patients in the
MRI scanner make the CT scan preferable. Chest radiographs may
reveal an abnormal aortic contour or widened superior
mediastinum. Although transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is
an excellent diagnostic imaging method, it is generally not readily
available in the acute setting.
 Differential Diagnosis
Aortic dissection is most commonly misdiagnosed as myocardial
infarction or other causes of chest pain such as pulmonary
embolization. Dissections may occur with minimal pain; branch
vessel occlusion of the lower extremity can mimic arterial embolus.
 Treatment
A. Medical
Aggressive measures to lower blood pressure should occur when
an aortic dissection is suspected, even before the diagnostic studies
have been completed. Treatment requires a simultaneous reduction
of the systolic blood pressure to 100–120 mm Hg and pulse
pressure. β-Blockers have the most desirable effect of reducing the
left ventricular ejection force that continues to weaken the arterial
wall and should be first-line therapy. Labetalol, both an α- and β-
blocker, lowers pulse pressure and achieve rapid blood pressure
control. Give 20 mg over 2 minutes by intravenous injection.
Additional doses of 40–80 mg intravenously can be given every 10
minutes (maximum dose 300 mg) until the desired blood pressure
has been reached. Alternatively, 2 mg/min may be given by
intravenous infusion, titrated to desired effect. In patients who have
asthma, bradycardia, or other conditions that necessitate the
patient's reaction to β-blockers be tested, esmolol is a reasonable
choice because of its short half-life. Give a loading dose of esmolol,
0.5 mg/kg over 1 minute followed by an infusion of .0025–.02
mg/kg/min. Titrate the infusion to a goal heart rate of 60–70
beats/min. If β-blockade alone does not control the hypertension,
nitroprusside may be added as follows: 50 mg of nitroprusside in
1000 mL of 5% dextrose and water, infused at a rate of 0.5
mL/min; the infusion rate is increased by 0.5 mL every 5 minutes
until adequate control of the pressure has been achieved. In patients
with bronchial asthma, while there are no data supporting the use of
the calcium-channel antagonists, diltiazem and verapamil are
potential alternatives to treatment with β-blocking drugs. Morphine
sulfate is the appropriate drug to use for pain relief. Long-term
medical care of patients should include β-blockers in their
antihypertensive regimen.
B. Surgical Intervention
Urgent surgical intervention is required for all type A dissections.
If a skilled cardiovascular team is not available, the patient should
be transferred to an appropriate facility. The procedure involves
grafting and replacing the diseased portion of the arch and
brachiocephalic vessels as necessary. Replacement of the aortic
valve may be required with reattachment of the coronary arteries.
Urgent surgery is required for type B dissections if there is
aortic branch compromise resulting in malperfusion of the renal,
visceral, or extremity vessels. While endovascular therapy may have
a role in the treatment of complications following type B dissection,
there is no evidence to support the early endovascular intervention
of uncomplicated type B dissections.
 Prognosis & Follow-up
The mortality rate for untreated type A dissections is approximately
1% per hour for 72 hours and over 90% at 3 months. Mortality is
also extremely high for untreated complicated type B dissections.
The surgical and endovascular options for these patients also have
significant morbidity and mortality. They are technically demanding
and require an experienced team to achieve perioperative
mortalities of < 10%. Patients with uncomplicated type B
dissections whose blood pressure is controlled and who survive the
acute episode without complications may have long-term survival
without surgical treatment. Aneurysmal enlargement of the false
lumen may develop in these patients despite adequate
antihypertensive therapy. Yearly CT scans are required to monitor
the size of the aneurysm. Indications for repair are determined by
size (≥ 6 cm), similar to undissected thoracic aneurysms.
Endovascular covering of the intimal tear in the acute setting may
prevent this complication, but initial trials on the routine
endovascular treatment of type B dissections have not shown an
advantage for early intervention and therefore cannot be widely
endorsed at this time.
 When to Admit
Any dissection involving the aortic arch (type A) should be
immediately repaired. Acute type B dissections require repair only
when there is evidence of rupture or major branch occlusion.
Feezor RJ et al. Early outcomes after endovascular management of
acute, complicated type B aortic dissection. J Vasc Surg. 2009
Mar;49(3):561–6. [PMID: 19268759]
 
Ince H et al. Diagnosis and management of patients with aortic
dissection. Heart. 2007 Feb;93(2):266–70. [PMID: 17228080]
 
Litmanovich D et al. CT and MRI in diseases of the aorta. AJR
Am J Roentgenol. 2009 Oct;193(4):928–40. [PMID: 19770313]
 
Nienaber CA et al. Randomized comparison of strategies for type
B aortic dissection: the INvestigation of STEnt Grafts in Aortic
Dissection (INSTEAD) trial. Circulation. 2009 Dec
22;120(25):2519–28. [PMID: 19996018]
 
VENOUS DISEASES
 
VARICOSE VEINS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Dilated, tortuous superficial veins in the lower extremities.
 May be asymptomatic or associated with aching discomfort or
pain.
 Edema, pigmentation, and stasis ulcers of the skin may develop.
 Usually hereditary, with most patients reporting a family member
with similar lesions.
 Increased frequency after pregnancy.
 
 General Considerations
Varicose veins develop in the lower extremities. Periods of high
venous pressure related to prolonged standing or heavy lifting are
contributing factors, but the highest incidence occurs in women after
pregnancy. Varicosities develop in 15% of all adults.
The greater saphenous vein and its tributaries are most commonly
involved, but the short saphenous vein (posterior lower leg) may
also be affected. Distention of the vein prevents the valve leaflets
from coapting, creating incompetence. Thus, dilation at any point
along the vein leads to increased pressure and distention of the vein
segment below that valve, which in turn causes progressive failure of
the next lower valve and progressive venous reflux. Perforating
veins that connect the deep and superficial systems may become
incompetent, allowing blood to reflux into the superficial veins from
the deep system through the incompetent perforators and increasing
venous pressure and distention.
Secondary varicosities can develop as a result of obstructive
changes and valve damage in the deep venous system following
thrombophlebitis, or rarely as a result of proximal venous occlusion
due to neoplasm or fibrosis. Congenital or acquired arteriovenous
fistulas or venous malformations are also associated with varicosities
and should be considered in young patients with varicosities.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptom severity is not correlated with the number and size of the
varicosities; extensive varicose veins may produce no subjective
symptoms, whereas minimal varicosities may produce many
symptoms. Dull, aching heaviness or a feeling of fatigue of the legs
brought on by periods of standing is the most common complaint.
Clinicians must be careful to identify symptoms of arteriosclerotic
peripheral vascular disease, such as intermittent claudication and
coldness of the feet, since occlusive arterial disease is usually a
contraindication to the operative treatment of varicosities distal to
the knee. Itching from a venous stasis dermatitis may occur either
above the ankle or directly overlying large varicosities.
Dilated, tortuous veins beneath the skin in the thigh and leg are
generally visible upon standing, although in very obese patients
palpation may be necessary to detect their presence and location.
Some swelling is common but secondary tissue changes may be
absent even in extensive varicosities. However, if the varicosities are
of long duration, brownish pigmentation and thinning of the skin
above the ankle may be present. The presence of a bruit or a thrill is
useful in making the diagnosis of an associated arteriovenous fistula.
B. Imaging
The identification of the source of venous reflux that feeds the
symptomatic veins is necessary for effective surgical treatment.
Duplex ultrasonography by a technician experienced in the diagnosis
and localization of venous reflux is the test of choice for planning
therapy. In most cases, reflux will arise from the greater saphenous
vein.
 Differential Diagnosis
Primary varicose veins should be differentiated from those
secondary to chronic venous insufficiency of the deep system of
veins with extensive swelling, fibrosis, pigmentation, and ulceration
of the distal lower leg (the postphlebitic syndrome). Pain or
discomfort secondary to arthritis, radiculopathy, or arterial
insufficiency should be distinguished from symptoms associated with
coexistent varicose veins. In adolescent patients with varicose veins,
imaging of the deep venous system is important to exclude a
congenital malformation or atresia of the deep veins. Surgical
treatment of varicose veins in these patients is contraindicated
because the varicosities may play a significant role in venous
drainage of the limb.
 Complications
Thrombophlebitis within a varicose vein is uncommon. This presents
as subacute to acute localized pain and palpable hardness at the site
of the phlebitis. The process is self-limiting, has a low risk of
embolization, and usually resolves within weeks. Rarely, the
phlebitis extends to involve the greater saphenous vein.
Predisposing conditions for thrombophlebitis include pregnancy,
local trauma, or prolonged periods of sitting.
In older patients, superficial varicosities may bleed with even
minor trauma. The amount of bleeding can be alarming as the
pressure in the varicosity is high.
 Treatment
A. Nonsurgical Measures
Nonsurgical treatment is effective. Elastic graduated compression
stockings (medium or heavy weight) give external support to the
veins. These stockings may be useful in early varicosities to prevent
progression of disease. When elastic stockings worn during standing
are combined with elevation of the legs when possible, good control
can be maintained and the development of complications can often
be avoided. This approach may be used in elderly patients, in those
who refuse or wish to defer surgery, and in those with mild
asymptomatic varicosities.
B. Surgical Measures
Treatment with endovenous ablation (with either radio-frequency or
laser) or, less commonly, with greater saphenous vein stripping is
very effective for reflux arising from the greater saphenous vein.
Less common sources of reflux include the lesser saphenous vein
(for varicosities in the posterior calf), and nonsaphenous
incompetent perforator veins arising directly from the deep venous
system in the thigh. Correction of reflux is performed at the same
time as excision of the symptomatic varicose veins. Phlebectomy
without correction of reflux results in a high rate of recurrent
varicosities, as the uncorrected reflux progressively dilates adjacent
veins. Concurrent reflux detected by ultrasonography in the deep
system is not a contraindication to treatment of superficial reflux
because the majority of deep vein dilatation is secondary to volume
overload in this setting, which will resolve with correction of the
superficial reflux.
C. Compression Sclerotherapy
Sclerotherapy to obliterate and produce permanent fibrosis of the
involved veins is generally reserved for the treatment of small
varicose veins < 4 mm in diameter. Use of foam sclerotherapy can
allow treatment of larger veins, although systemic embolization of
the foam sclerosant may be a concern. The injection of the
sclerosing solution into the varicosed vein is followed by a period of
compression of the segment, resulting in obliteration of the vein.
Complications such as phlebitis, tissue necrosis, or infection may
occur, and vary in incidence with the skill of the clinician.
 Prognosis
Surgical correction of venous insufficiency (reflux) and excision of
varicose veins provide excellent results. The 5-year success rate (as
defined as lack of pain and recurrent varicosities) is 85–90%.
Simple excision (phlebectomy) or injection sclerotherapy without
correction of reflux is associated with higher rates of recurrence.
Even after adequate treatment, secondary tissue changes, such as
lipodermo-sclerosis, may persist.
 When to Refer
 
•    Absolute indications for referral for saphenous ablation
include phlebitis and bleeding.
•    Pain and cosmetic concerns are responsible for the
majority of referrals for ablation.
Bergan JJ et al. Chronic venous disease. N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug
3;355(5):488–98. [PMID: 16885552]
 
Figueiredo M et al. Results of surgical treatment compared with
ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy in patients with varicose
veins: a prospective randomised study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg.
2009 Dec;38(6):758–63. [PMID: 19744867]
 
Rasmussen LH et al. Randomised clinical trial comparing
endovenous laser ablation with stripping of the great saphenous
vein: clinical outcome and recurrence after 2 years. Eur J Vasc
Endovasc Surg. 2010 May;39(5):630–5. [PMID: 20064730]
 
Subramonia S et al. Randomized clinical trial of radiofrequency
ablation or conventional high ligation and stripping for great
saphenous varicose veins. Br J Surg. 2010 Mar;97(3):328–36.
[PMID: 20035541]
 
SUPERFICIAL VENOUS THROMBOPHLEBITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Induration, redness, and tenderness along a superficial vein,
usually the saphenous vein.
 Induration at the site of a recent intravenous line or trauma.
 Significant swelling of the extremity may not be seen.
 
 General Considerations
Short-term venous catheterization of superficial arm veins as well as
the use of longer term peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC)
lines are the most common cause of superficial thrombophlebitis.
Intravenous catheter sites should be observed daily for signs of local
inflammation and should be removed if a local reaction develops in
the vein. Serious thrombotic or septic complications can occur if this
policy is not followed.
Superficial thrombophlebitis may occur spontaneously, as in
pregnant or postpartum women or in individuals with varicose veins
or thromboangiitis obliterans; or it may be associated with trauma,
as in the case of a blow to the leg or following intravenous therapy
with irritating solutions. It also may be a manifestation of systemic
hypercoagulability secondary to abdominal cancer such as
carcinoma of the pancreas and may be the earliest sign of these
conditions. Superficial thrombophlebitis may be associated with
occult deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in about 20% of cases.
Pulmonary emboli are exceedingly rare and occur from an
associated DVT. (See Chapters 9 and 14 for discussion on Deep
Venous Thrombosis.)
 Clinical Findings
In spontaneous superficial thrombophlebitis, the long saphenous
vein is most often involved. The patient usually experiences a dull
pain in the region of the involved vein. Local findings consist of
induration, redness, and tenderness along the course of a vein. The
process may be localized, or it may involve most of the long
saphenous vein and its tributaries. The inflammatory reaction
generally subsides in 1–2 weeks; a firm cord may remain for a much
longer period. Edema of the extremity is uncommon.
Localized redness and induration at the site of a recent
intravenous line requires urgent attention. Chills and high fever
suggest septic phlebitis and indicate that aggressive debridement of
the area is warranted.
 Differential Diagnosis
The linear rather than circular nature of the lesion and the
distribution along the course of a superficial vein serve to
differentiate superficial phlebitis from cellulitis, erythema nodosum,
erythema induratum, panniculitis, and fibrositis. Lymphangitis and
deep thrombophlebitis must also be considered.
 Treatment
For spontaneous thrombophlebitis if the process is well localized
and not near the saphenofemoral junction, local heat, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications are usually effective in
limiting the process. If the induration is extensive or is progressing
toward the saphenofemoral junction (leg) or cephalo-axillary
junction (arm), ligation and division of the vein at the junction of the
deep and superficial veins is indicated.
Anticoagulation therapy is usually not indicated unless the disease
is rapidly progressing or there is concern for extension into the deep
system.
Septic superficial thrombophlebitis is an intravascular abscess
and may require excision of the involved vein in order to control the
infection. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathogen.
Because of the lethal nature of this complication, broad-spectrum
antibiotics should be instituted immediately. If cultures are positive,
therapy should be continued for 7–10 days or for 4–6 weeks if
complicating endocarditis cannot be excluded. Other organisms,
including fungi, may also be responsible. Septic superficial
thrombophlebitis must also be treated with heparin to limit additional
thrombus formation and functional extension of the abscess.
 Prognosis
With spontaneous thrombophlebitis, the course is generally benign
and brief. The prognosis depends on the underlying pathologic
process. In patients with phlebitis secondary to varicose veins,
recurrent episodes are likely unless correction of the underlying
venous reflux and excision of varicosities is done. The mortality
from septic thrombophlebitis is 20% or higher and requires
aggressive treatment. However, if the involvement is localized, the
mortality is low and prognosis is excellent with early treatment.
van Weert H et al. Spontaneous superficial venous
thrombophlebitis: does it increase risk for thromboembolism? A
historic follow-up study in primary care. J Fam Pract. 2006 Jan;
55(1):52–7. [PMID: 16388768]
 
CHRONIC VENOUS INSUFFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of prior DVT or leg injury.
 Edema, stasis (brawny) skin pigmentation, subcutaneous
liposclerosis in the lower leg.
 Large ulcerations at or above the ankle are common (stasis
ulcers).
 
 General Considerations
Chronic venous insufficiency can result from changes secondary to
deep venous thrombophlebitis, although a definite history of
phlebitis is not obtainable in about 25% of these patients. There
may be a history of leg trauma. Obesity is often a complicating
factor. Chronic venous insufficiency also may occur in association
with superficial venous reflux and varicose veins or as a result of
neoplastic obstruction of the pelvic veins or congenital or acquired
arteriovenous fistula.
The basic pathology is caused by valve leaflets that do not coapt
because they are either thickened and scarred (the post-thrombotic
syndrome) or in a dilated vein and are therefore functionally
inadequate. This results in an abnormally high hydrostatic force
transmitted to the subcutaneous veins and tissues of the lower leg.
The resulting edema results in dramatic and deleterious secondary
changes. The stigmata of chronic venous insufficiency include
fibrosis of the subcutaneous tissue and skin, pigmentation of skin
(hemosiderin taken up by the dermal macrophages) and, later,
ulceration which is extremely slow to heal. Itching may precipitate
the formation of ulceration or local wound cellulitis. Dilation of the
superficial veins may occur, leading to varicosities. Whereas
primary varicose veins with no abnormality of the deep venous
system may be associated with some similar changes, the edema is
more pronounced in the post-thrombotic extremities, and the
secondary changes are more extensive and debilitating.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Progressive pitting edema of the leg (particularly the lower leg) is
the usual initial symptom. Secondary changes in the skin and
subcutaneous tissues develop. The usual symptoms are itching, a
dull discomfort made worse by periods of standing, and pain if an
ulceration is present. The skin at the ankle is usually thin, shiny, and
a brownish pigmentation (hemosiderin) often develops. If the
condition is long-standing, the subcutaneous tissues become thick
and fibrous. Ulcerations may occur, usually just above the ankle, on
the medial or anterior aspect of the leg. Healing results in a thin scar
on a fibrotic base that often breaks down with minor trauma or
another bout of leg swelling. Varicosities frequently appear that are
associated with incompetent perforating veins. Cellulitis, which is
often difficult to distinguish from the hemosiderin pigmentation, may
be diagnosed by blanching erythema.
B. Imaging
Patients with post-thrombotic syndrome or signs of chronic venous
insufficiency should undergo duplex ultrasonography to determine
whether superficial reflux is present and to evaluate the degree of
deep reflux and obstruction.
 Differential Diagnosis
Patients with congestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, or
decompensated liver disease may have bilateral edema of the lower
extremities. Swelling from lymphedema may be unilateral, and
varicosities are absent. Edema from these causes pits easily and
brawny discoloration is rare. Lipedema is a disorder of adipose
tissue that occurs almost exclusively in women, is bilateral and
symmetric, and is characterized by stopping at a distinct line just
above the ankles.
Primary varicose veins may be difficult to differentiate from the
secondary varicosities that often develop in this condition, as
discussed above.
Other conditions associated with chronic ulcers of the leg include
autoimmune diseases (eg, Felty syndrome), arterial insufficiency
(often very painful with absent pulses), sickle cell anemia, erythema
induratum (bilateral and usually on the posterior aspect of the lower
part of the leg), and fungal infections (cultures specific: no chronic
swelling or varicosities).
 Prevention
Irreversible tissue changes and associated complications in the
lower legs can be minimized through early and aggressive
anticoagulation of acute DVT to minimize the valve damage and by
prescribing stockings if chronic edema develops in subsequent
years. Catheter-directed thrombolysis or mechanical thrombectomy
of acute DVT may be of greater value than simple anticoagulants in
preventing post-thrombotic syndrome and chronic venous
insufficiency.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Well-fitting, graduated compression stockings worn from the mid
foot to just below the knee during the day and evening are the
mainstays of treatment. Long periods of sitting or standing should be
avoided. During the day, the patient's legs should be elevated
intermittently, and at night, the legs should be kept above the level
of the heart with pillows under the mattress. Pneumatic compression
of the leg, which can pump the fluid out of the leg, is used in cases
refractory to the above measures.
B. Ulceration
As the primary pathology is edema, healing of the ulcer will not
occur until the edema is controlled. A lesion can often be treated on
an ambulatory basis by means of a semi-rigid gauze boot made with
Unna paste (Gelocast, Medicopaste) or a multi-layer compression
(such as Profore) and applied to the leg after much of the swelling
has been reduced by a period of elevation. The pumping action of
the calf muscles on the blood flow out of the lower extremity is
enhanced by a circumferential nonelastic bandage on the ankle and
lower leg. The boot must be changed every 2–3 days, depending
on the amount of drainage from the ulcer. The ulcer, tendons, and
bony prominences must be adequately padded. As an alternative
and after the ulcer has healed, elastic stockings with graduated
compression below the knee are used in an effort to prevent
recurrent edema and ulceration. If compression stockings are used
with ulcers, an absorbent dressing must be applied under the
stocking as the wounds can leak large volumes of fluid. Home
compression therapy with a pneumatic compression device is also
effective at reducing edema but many patients have severe pain with
the “milking” action of the pump device. Some patients will require
admission for complete bed rest and leg elevation to achieve ulcer
healing.
C. Correction of Superficial Reflux
Incompetent (refluxing) perforator veins that feed the area of
ulceration can be treated with percutaneous means (radiofrequency
ablation or endovenous laser treatment) to help decrease the venous
pressure in the area of ulceration and promote healing. Venous
valvular reconstructive surgery is under investigation. Where there is
substantial obstruction of the deep venous system, superficial
varicosities supply the venous return and they should not be
removed.
 Prognosis
Individuals with chronic venous insufficiency often have recurrent
problems, particularly if they do not consistently wear support
stockings that have at least 30 mm Hg compression.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with significant saphenous reflux should be
evaluated for ablation as this may reduce the recirculation
of blood and return the deep system to competence.
•    Patients with ulcers should be monitored by a wound
care team so that these challenging wounds can receive
aggressive care.
Bergan JJ et al. Chronic venous disease. N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug
3; 355(5):488–98. [PMID: 16885552]
 
Eberhard RT et al. Chronic venous insufficiency. Circulation. 2005
May 10;111(18):2398–409. [PMID: 15883226]
 
Grey JE et al. Venous and arterial leg ulcers. BMJ. 2006 Feb 11;
332(7537):347–50. [PMID: 16470058]
 
Patel NP et al. Current management of venous ulceration. Plast
Reconstr Surg. 2006 Jun;117(7 Suppl):254S–260S. [PMID:
16799394]
 
SUPERIOR VENA CAVAL OBSTRUCTION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Swelling of the neck, face and upper extremities.
 Dilated veins over the upper chest and neck.
 
 General Considerations
Partial or complete obstruction of the superior vena cava is a
relatively rare condition that is usually secondary to neoplastic or
inflammatory processes in the superior mediastinum. The most
frequent causes are (1) neoplasms, such as lymphomas, primary
malignant mediastinal tumors, or carcinoma of the lung with direct
extension (over 80%); (2) chronic fibrotic mediastinitis, either of
unknown origin or secondary to tuberculosis, histoplasmosis,
pyogenic infections, or drugs, especially methysergide; (3) DVT,
often by extension of the process from the axillary or subclavian
vein into the innominate vein and vena cava associated with
catheterization of these veins for dialysis or for hyperalimentation;
(4) aneurysm of the aortic arch; and (5) constrictive pericarditis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset of symptoms is acute or subacute. Symptoms include
swelling of the neck and face, and upper extremities. Symptoms are
often perceived as congestion and present as headache, dizziness,
visual disturbances, stupor, syncope, or cough. Symptoms are
particularly exacerbated when the patient is supine or bends over.
There is progressive obstruction of the venous drainage of the head,
neck, and upper extremities. The cutaneous veins of the upper chest
and lower neck become dilated, and flushing of the face and neck
develops. Brawny edema of the face, neck, and arms occurs later,
and cyanosis of these areas then appears. Cerebral and laryngeal
edema ultimately results in impaired function of the brain as well as
respiratory insufficiency. Bending over or lying down accentuates
the symptoms; sitting quietly is generally preferred. The
manifestations are more severe if the obstruction develops rapidly
and if the azygos junction or the vena cava between that vein and
the heart is obstructed.
B. Laboratory Findings
The venous pressure is elevated (often > 20 cm of water) in the arm
and is normal in the leg. Since lung cancer is a common cause,
bronchoscopy is often performed; transbronchial biopsy, however,
is relatively contraindicated because of venous hypertension and the
risk of bleeding.
C. Imaging
Chest radiographs and a CT scan will define the location and often
the nature of the obstructive process, and contrast venography or
magnetic resonance venography (MRV) will map out the extent and
degree of the venous obstruction and the collateral circulation.
Brachial venography or radionuclide scanning following intravenous
injection of technetium Tc-99m pertechnetate demonstrates a block
to the flow of contrast material into the right heart and enlarged
collateral veins. These techniques also allow estimation of blood
flow around the occlusion as well as serial evaluation of the
response to therapy.
 Treatment
Urgent treatment for neoplasm consists of (1) cautious use of
intravenous diuretics and (2) mediastinal irradiation, starting within
24 hours, with a treatment plan designed to give a high daily dose
but a short total course of therapy to rapidly shrink the local tumor
even further. Intensive combined therapy will palliate the process in
up to 90% of patients. In patients with a subacute presentation,
radiation therapy alone usually suffices. Chemotherapy is added if
lymphoma or small-cell carcinoma is diagnosed.
Conservative measures, such as elevation of the head of the bed
and lifestyle modification to avoid bending over, are useful.
Occasionally, anticoagulation is needed, while thrombolysis is rarely
needed. Balloon angioplasty of the obstructed caval segment
combined with stent placement provides prompt relief of symptoms
and is the procedure of choice. Long-term outcome is complicated
by risk of re-occlusion from either thrombosis or further growth of
neoplasm. Surgical procedures to bypass the obstruction are
complicated by bleeding relating to high venous pressure. In cases
where the thrombosis is secondary to an indwelling catheter,
thrombolysis may be attempted. Clinical judgment is required since
a long-standing clot may be fibrotic and the risk of bleeding will
outweigh the potential benefit.
 Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the nature and degree of obstruction and
its speed of onset. Slowly developing forms secondary to fibrosis
may be tolerated for years. A high degree of obstruction of rapid
onset secondary to cancer is often fatal in a few days or weeks
because of increased intracranial pressure and cerebral hemorrhage,
but treatment of the tumor with radiation and chemo-therapeutic
drugs may result in significant palliation. Balloon angioplasty and
stenting provides good relief but may require re-treatment for
recurrent symptoms secondary to thrombosis or restenosis.
 When to Refer
Referral should occur with any patient with progressive head and
neck swelling to rule out superior vena cava syndrome.
 When to Admit
Any patient with acute edema of the head and neck or any patient in
whom signs and symptoms of airway compromise, such as
hoarseness or stridor, develop should be admitted.
Watkinson AF et al. Endovascular stenting to treat obstruction of
the superior vena cava. BMJ. 2008 Jun 21;336(7658): 1434–7.
[PMID: 18566082]
 
Wilson LD et al. Clinical practice. Superior vena cava syndrome
with malignant causes. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 3;356(18):
1862–9. [PMID: 17476012]
 
DISEASES OF THE
LYMPHATIC CHANNELS
 
LYMPHANGITIS & LYMPHADENITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Red streak from wound or area of cellulitis toward regional
lymph nodes, which are usually enlarged and tender.
 Chills, fever, and malaise may be present.
 
 General Considerations
Lymphangitis and lymphadenitis are common manifestations of a
bacterial infection that is usually caused by hemolytic streptococci
or S aureus (or by both organisms) and usually arises from the site
of an infected wound. The wound may be very small or superficial,
or an established abscess may be present, feeding bacteria into the
lymphatics. The involvement of the lymphatics is often manifested by
a red streak in the skin extending in the direction of the regional
lymph nodes, which are, in turn, generally tender and engorged.
Systemic manifestations include fever, chills, and malaise. The
infection may progress rapidly, often in a matter of hours, and may
lead to septicemia and even death.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Throbbing pain is usually present in the area of cellulitis at the site of
bacterial invasion. Malaise, anorexia, sweating, chills, and fever of
38–40°C develop rapidly. The red streak, when present may be
definite or may be very faint and easily missed, especially in dark-
skinned patients. It is usually tender or indurated in the area of
cellulitis. The involved regional lymph nodes may be significantly
enlarged and are usually quite tender. The pulse is often rapid.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukocytosis with a left shift is usually present. Blood cultures may
be positive, most often for staphylococcal or streptococcal species.
Culture and sensitivity studies of the wound exudate or pus may be
helpful in treatment of the more severe or refractory infections but
are often difficult to interpret because of skin contaminants.
 Differential Diagnosis
Lymphangitis may be confused with superficial thrombophlebitis,
but the erythema and induration of thrombophlebitis is localized in
and around the thrombosed vein. Venous thrombosis is not
associated with lymphadenitis, and a wound of entrance with
secondary cellulitis is generally absent.
Cat-scratch fever should be considered when lymphadenitis is
present; the nodes, though often very large, are relatively nontender.
Exposure to cats is common, but the patient may have forgotten
about the scratch.
It is extremely important to differentiate cellulitis from acute
streptococcal hemolytic gangrene or necrotizing fasciitis. These are
deeper infections that may be extensive and are potentially lethal.
Patients appear more seriously ill; there may be redness due to
leakage of red cells, creating a non-blanching erythema; and
subcutaneous crepitus may be palpated or auscultated using the
diaphragm with light pressure over the involved area. Immediate
wide debridement of all involved deep tissues should be done if
these signs are present.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Prompt treatment should include heat (hot, moist compresses or
heating pad), elevation when feasible, and immobilization of the
infected area. Analgesics may be prescribed for pain.
B. Specific Measures
Antibiotic therapy should always be instituted when local infection
becomes invasive, as manifested by cellulitis and lymphangitis.
Because such infections are so frequently caused by streptococci,
cephalosporins or extended-spectrum penicillins are commonly
used. Given the increasing incidence of methicillin-resistant S aureus
(MRSA) in the community, coverage of this pathogen with
appropriate antibiotic therapy (eg, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole)
should be considered (see Table 30–4).
C. Wound Care
Any wound that is the initiating site of lymphangitis should be treated
aggressively. Any necrotic tissue must be debrided and loculated
pus drained.
 Prognosis
With proper therapy including an antibiotic effective against the
invading bacteria, control of the infection can usually be achieved in
a few days. Delayed or inadequate therapy can lead to
overwhelming infection with septicemia.
 When to Admit
Infections causing lymphangitis should be treated in the hospital with
intravenous antibiotics. Debridement may be required.
LYMPHEDEMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painless persistent edema of one or both lower extremities,
primarily in young women.
 Pitting edema without ulceration, varicosities, or stasis
pigmentation.
 There may be episodes of lymphangitis and cellulitis.
 
 General Considerations
When lymphedema is due to congenital developmental
abnormalities consisting of hypoplastic or hyperplastic involvement
of the proximal or distal lymphatics, it is referred to as the primary
form. The obstruction may be in the pelvic or lumbar lymph
channels and nodes when the disease is extensive and progressive.
The secondary form of lymphedema involves inflammatory or
mechanical lymphatic obstruction from trauma, regional lymph node
resection or irradiation, or extensive involvement of regional nodes
by malignant disease or filariasis. Secondary dilation of the
lymphatics that occurs in both forms leads to incompetence of the
valve system, disrupts the orderly flow along the lymph vessels, and
results in progressive stasis of a protein-rich fluid. Episodes of acute
and chronic inflammation may be superimposed, with further stasis
and secondary fibrosis.
 Clinical Findings
Hypertrophy of the limb results, with markedly thickened and
fibrotic skin and subcutaneous tissue in very advanced cases.
Lymphangiography and radioactive isotope studies may identify
focal defects in lymph flow but are of little value in planning therapy.
T2–weighted MRI has been used to identify lymphatics and
proximal obstructing masses.
 Treatment
Since there is no effective cure for lymphedema, the treatment
strategies are designed to control the problem and allow normal
activity and function. Most patients can be treated with some of the
following measures: (1) The flow of lymph out of the extremity can
be aided through intermittent elevation of the extremity, especially
during the sleeping hours (foot of bed elevated 15–20 degrees,
achieved by placing pillows beneath the mattress); the constant use
of graduated elastic compression stockings; and massage toward
the trunk—either by hand or by means of pneumatic pressure
devices designed to milk edema out of an extremity. (2) Secondary
cellulitis in the extremity should be avoided by means of good
hygiene and treatment of any trichophytosis of the toes. Once an
infection starts, it should be treated by periods of elevation and
antibiotic therapy that covers Staphylococcus and Streptococcus
organisms. Infections can be a serious and recurring problem and
are often difficult to control. Prophylactic antibiotics have not been
shown to be of benefit. (3) Intermittent courses of diuretic therapy,
especially in those with premenstrual or seasonal exacerbations, are
rarely helpful. (4) Amputation is used only for the rare complication
of lymphangiosarcoma in the extremity.
 Prognosis
With aggressive treatment, including pneumatic compression
devices, good relief of symptoms can be achieved. The long-term
outlook is dictated by the associated conditions and avoidance of
recurrent cellulitis.
Ashikaga T et al; National Surgical Adjuvant Breast, Bowel
Project. Morbidity results from the NSABP B-32 trial comparing
sentinel lymph node dissection versus axillary dissection. J Surg
Oncol. 2010 Aug 1;102(2):111–8. [PMID: 20648579]
 
Haghighat S et al. Comparing two treatment methods for post
mastectomy lymphedema: complex decongestive therapy alone
and in combination with intermittent pneumatic compression.
Lymphology. 2010 Mar;43(1):25-33. [PMID: 20552817]
 
Rockson SG. Diagnosis and management of lymphatic vascular
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008 Sep 2;52(10):799–806. [PMID:
18755341]
 
Torres Lacomba M et al. Effectiveness of early physiotherapy to
prevent lymphoedema after surgery for breast cancer: randomised,
single blinded, clinical trial. BMJ. 2010 Jan 12;340: b5396.
[PMID: 20068255]
 
SHOCK
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hypotension, tachycardia, oliguria, altered mental status.
 Peripheral hypoperfusion and impaired oxygen delivery.
 
 General Considerations
Shock occurs when the rate of arterial blood flow is inadequate to
meet tissue metabolic needs. This results in regional hypoxia and
subsequent lactic acidosis from anaerobic metabolism in peripheral
tissues as well as eventual end-organ damage and failure.
 Classification (Table 12–1)
A. Hypovolemic Shock
Hypovolemic shock results from decreased intravascular volume
secondary to loss of blood or fluids and electrolytes. The etiology
may be suggested by the clinical setting (eg, trauma) or by signs and
symptoms of blood loss (eg, gastrointestinal bleeding) or
dehydration 
(eg, 
vomiting 
or 
diarrhea). 
Compensatory
vasoconstriction may transiently maintain the blood pressure but
unreplaced losses of over 15% of the intravascular volume can
result in hypotension and progressive tissue hypoxia.
 
Table 12–1. Classification of shock by mechanism and common
causes.
 
Hypovolemic shock
     Loss of blood (hemorrhagic shock)
        External hemorrhage
           Trauma
           Gastrointestinal tract bleeding
        Internal hemorrhage
           Hematoma
           Hemothorax or hemoperitoneum
     Loss of plasma
        Burns
        Exfoliative dermatitis
     Loss of fluid and electrolytes
        External
          Vomiting
          Diarrhea
          Excessive sweating
          Hyperosmolar states (diabetic ketoacidosis,
hyperosmolar nonketotic coma)
        Internal (third spacing)
          Pancreatitis
          Ascites
          Bowel obstruction
Cardiogenic shock
     Dysrhythmia
        Tachyarrhythmia
        Bradyarrhythmia
     “Pump failure” (secondary to myocardial infarction or
other cardiomyopathy)
     Acute valvular dysfunction (especially regurgitant
lesions)
     Rupture of ventricular septum or free ventricular wall
Obstructive shock
     Tension pneumothorax
     Pericardial disease (tamponade, constriction)
     Disease of pulmonary vasculature (massive pulmonary
emboli, pulmonary hypertension)
     Cardiac tumor (atrial myxoma)
     Left atrial mural thrombus
     Obstructive valvular disease (aortic or mitral stenosis)
Distributive shock
     Septic shock
     Anaphylactic shock
     Neurogenic shock
     Vasodilator drugs
     Acute adrenal insufficiency
Reproduced, with permission, from Stone CK, Humphries RL (editors).
Current Emergency Diagnosis & Treatment, 5th ed. p. 193. McGraw-Hill,
2004.
B. Cardiogenic Shock
Cardiogenic shock results from cardiac failure with the resultant
inability of the heart to maintain adequate tissue perfusion. The
clinical definition of cardiogenic shock is evidence of tissue hypoxia
due to decreased cardiac output (cardiac index < 2.2 L/min/m2) in
the presence of adequate intravascular volume. This is most often
caused by myocardial infarction but can also be due to
cardiomyopathy, myocardial contusion, valvular incompetence or
stenosis, or arrhythmias. See Chapter 10.
C. Obstructive Shock
Cardiac tamponade, tension pneumothorax, and massive pulmonary
embolism can cause an acute decrease in cardiac output resulting in
shock. These are medical emergencies requiring prompt diagnosis
and treatment.
D. Distributive Shock
Distributive or vasodilatory shock has many causes including sepsis,
anaphylaxis, systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
produced by severe pancreatitis or burns, traumatic spinal cord
injury, or acute adrenal insufficiency. The reduction in systemic
vascular resistance results in inadequate cardiac output and tissue
hypoperfusion despite normal circulatory volume.
1. Septic shock—Sepsis is the most common cause of distributive
shock and carries a mortality rate of 20–50%. Sepsis is typically
secondary to gramnegative bacteremia (due to organisms such as
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, and Pseudomonas) and
less often due to gramnegative anaerobes (Bacteroides), but the
incidence of sepsis from gram-positive bacteria (eg, S aureus) and
fungal organisms is increasing. Risk factors include extremes of age,
diabetes, immunosuppression, and history of a recent invasive
procedure.
2. Neurogenic shock—Neurogenic shock is caused by traumatic
spinal cord injury or effects of an epidural or spinal anesthetic. This
results in loss of sympathetic tone with a reduction in systemic
vascular resistance and hypotension without a compensatory
tachycardia. Reflex vagal parasympathetic stimulation evoked by
pain, gastric dilation, or fright may simulate neurogenic shock,
producing hypotension, bradycardia, and syncope.
 Clinical Findings
Hypotension is traditionally defined as a systolic blood pressure of
90 mm Hg or less or a mean arterial pressure of < 60–65 mm Hg
but must be evaluated relative to the patient's normal blood
pressure. A drop in systolic pressure of more than 10–20 mm Hg
or an increase in pulse of more than 15 beats per minute with
positional change suggests depleted intravascular volume. However,
blood pressure is often not the best indicator of end-organ perfusion
because compensatory mechanisms, such as increased heart rate,
increased cardiac contractility, and vasoconstriction can occur to
prevent hypotension. Patients with hypotension often have cool or
mottled extremities and weak or thready peripheral pulses.
Splanchnic vasoconstriction may lead to oliguria, bowel ischemia,
and hepatic dysfunction, which can ultimately result in multiorgan
failure. Mentation may be normal or patients may become restless,
agitated, confused, lethargic, or comatose as a result of inadequate
perfusion of the brain.
Hypovolemic shock is evident when signs of hypoper-fusion,
such as oliguria, altered mental status, and cool extremities, are
present. Jugular venous pressure is low, and there is a narrow pulse
pressure indicative of reduced stroke volume. Rapid replacement of
fluids restores tissue perfusion. In cardiogenic shock, there are
also signs of global hypoperfusion with oliguria, altered mental
status, and cool extremities. Jugular venous pressure is elevated and
there may be evidence of pulmonary edema with respiratory
compromise in the setting of left-sided heart failure. A transthoracic
echocardiogram (TTE) or a TEE is an effective diagnostic tool to
differentiate hypovolemic from cardiogenic shock. In hypovolemic
shock, the left ventricle will be small because of decreased filling,
but contractility is often preserved. Cardiogenic shock results from
cardiac failure with a resultant decrease in left ventricular
contractility. In some cases, the left ventricle may appear dilated
and full because of the inability of the left ventricle to eject a
sufficient stroke volume.
I n obstructive shock, the central venous pressure may be
elevated but the TEE or TTE may show reduced left ventricular
filling, a pericardial effusion in the case of tamponade, or thickened
pericardium as in the case of pericarditis. Pericardiocentesis or
pericardial window for pericardial tamponade, chest tube placement
for tension pneumothorax, or catheter-directed thrombolytic
therapy in the case of massive pulmonary embolism can be life-
saving in cases of obstructive shock.
In distributive shock, signs include hyperdynamic heart sounds,
warm extremities initially, and a wide pulse pressure indicative of
large stroke volume. The echocardiogram may show a
hyperdynamic left ventricle. Fluid resuscitation may have little effect
on blood pressure, urinary output, or mentation.
Septic shock is diagnosed when there is clinical evidence of
infection in the setting of persistent hypotension and evidence of
organ hypoperfusion, such as lactic acidosis, decreased urinary
output, or altered mental status despite volume resuscitation.
Neurogenic shock is diagnosed when there is evidence of central
nervous system injury and persistent hypotension despite volume
resuscitation.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Treatment depends on prompt diagnosis and an accurate appraisal
of inciting conditions. Initial management consists of basic life
support with an assessment of the patient's airway, breathing, and
circulation. This may entail airway intubation and mechanical
ventilation. Ventilatory failure should be anticipated in patients with
a severe metabolic acidosis in association with shock. Mechanical
ventilation along with sedation can decrease the oxygen demand of
the respiratory muscles and allow improved oxygen delivery to
other hypoperfused tissues. Intravenous access and fluid
resuscitation should be instituted along with cardiac monitoring and
assessment of hemodynamic parameters such as blood pressure
and heart rate. Cardiac monitoring can detect myocardial ischemia
or malignant arrhythmias, which can be treated by standard
advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) protocols.
Unresponsive or minimally responsive patients should have their
glucose checked immediately and if their glucose level is low, 1
ampule of 50% dextrose intravenously should be given. An
arterial line should be placed for continuous blood pressure
measurement, and a Foley catheter should be inserted to monitor
urinary output. Blood specimens should be evaluated for complete
blood count, electrolytes, glucose, arterial blood gas determinations,
coagulation parameters, lactate levels, typing and cross-matching,
and bacterial cultures. An electrocardiogram and chest radiograph
should also be part of the initial assessment.
B. Central Venous Pressure
Early consideration is given to placement of a central venous
catheter (CVC) for infusion of fluids and medications and for
hemodynamic pressure measurements. A CVC can provide
measurements of the central venous pressure (CVP) and the central
venous oxygen saturation, both of which can be used to manage
sepsis. Pulmonary artery catheters (PACs) allow measurement of
the pulmonary artery pressure, left-sided filling pressure or the
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), and cardiac output.
These catheters had previously been used in critically ill patients to
guide response to volume and vasopressor therapy, but data
emerged suggesting that PACs increased mortality, prompting
further studies. Meta-analyses of multiple studies, including
randomized controlled trials, suggested that the use of PACs did not
increase overall mortality or length of hospital stay, but was
associated with higher use of inotropes and intravenous vasodilators
in critically ill patients from different patient populations (including
those with sepsis, myocardial ischemia, and those who were
postsurgical). Thus, the routine use of PACs cannot be
recommended. However, in some complex situations, PACs may
be useful in distinguishing between cardiogenic and septic shock.
The attendant risks associated with PACs (such as infection,
arrhythmias, vein thrombosis, and pulmonary artery rupture) can be
as high as 4–9%; therefore, the value of the information they might
provide must be carefully weighed in each patient. TTE is a
noninvasive alternative to the PAC and is becoming more widely
used. TTE can provide information about the pulmonary artery
pressure, PCWP, and cardiac output; in addition, TTE can provide
valuable information about current cardiac function. There has been
increasing evidence to suggest that respiratory variation in radial
artery pulse pressure or aortic blood flow may be more sensitive
than CVP as a measure of fluid responsiveness in volume
resuscitation, but this evidence is still evolving.
A CVP < 5 mm Hg suggests hypovolemia, and a CVP over 18
mm Hg suggests volume overload, cardiac failure, tamponade, or
pulmonary hypertension. A cardiac index < 2 L/min/m2 indicates a
need for inotropic support. A high cardiac index > 4 L/min/m2 in a
hypotensive patient is consistent with early septic shock. The
systemic vascular resistance is low (< 800 dynes · s/cm−5) in sepsis
and neurogenic shock and high (<1500 dynes · s/cm–5) in
hypovolemic and cardiogenic shock. Treatment is directed at
maintaining a CVP of 8–12 mm Hg, a mean arterial pressure of 65–
90 mm Hg, a cardiac index of 2–4 L/min/m2, and a central venous
oxygen saturation of > 70%.
C. Volume Replacement
Volume replacement is critical in the initial management of shock.
Hemorrhagic shock is treated with immediate efforts to achieve
hemostasis and rapid infusions of blood substitutes, such as type-
specific or type O negative packed red blood cells (PRBCs) or
whole blood, which also provides extra volume and clotting factors.
Each unit of PRBC or whole blood is expected to raise the
hematocrit by 3%. Hypovolemic shock secondary to dehydration
is managed with rapid boluses of isotonic crystalloid (0.9% saline or
lactated Ringer solution) usually in 1-liter increments. Cardiogenic
shock in the absence of fluid overload requires smaller fluid
challenges, usually in increments of 250 mL. Septic shock usually
requires large volumes of fluid for resuscitation as the associated
capillary leak releases fluid into the extravascular space. Caution
must be used with large-volume resuscitation with unwarmed fluids
because this can produce hypothermia, which can lead to
hypothermia-induced coagulopathy. Warming of fluids before
administration can avoid this complication.
Meta-analyses of studies of critically ill heterogenous populations
comparing crystalloid and colloid resuscitation (with albumin)
indicate no benefit of colloid over crystalloid solutions. Clinical trials
and meta-analyses have also found no difference in mortality
between trauma patients receiving hypertonic saline (7.5%) and
those receiving isotonic crystalloid. More positive results were
found with hypertonic saline plus dextran with an increase in survival
over patients managed with isotonic saline, particularly in patients
with traumatic brain injury.
D. Early Goal-Directed Therapy
Early goal-directed therapy following set protocols for the treatment
of 
septic 
shock 
provides 
significant 
benefits 
(see
www.survivingsepsis.org<http://www.survivingsepsis.org/>). There
has been a great deal of publicity recently about the success of
these interventions in reducing septic deaths. In a randomized
controlled trial, patients with severe sepsis or septic shock were
assigned to receive either 6 hours of early goal-directed therapy or
usual care prior to admission to the intensive care unit. Patients
assigned to early goal-directed care received fluid resuscitation to
achieve a CVP of 8–12 mm Hg; vasopressors to maintain a mean
arterial blood pressure of at least 65 mm Hg; PRBCs to reach a
hematocrit of 30% if the central venous oxygen saturation was <
70%; and if, after PRBC transfusion, the central venous oxygen
saturation remained < 70%, dobutamine to raise the central venous
oxygen saturation > 70%. When compared with controls, these
patients had a significantly lower in-hospital mortality rate (46.5%
for standard therapy, 30.5% for early goal- directed therapy; P =
0.009) and 60-day mortality rate (57% for standard therapy, 44%
for early goal-directed therapy; P = 0.03). A meta-analysis of
hemodynamic optimization trials has also suggested that early
treatment before the develop ment of organ failure results in
improved survival.
Compensated shock can occur in the setting of normalized
hemodynamic parameters with ongoing global tissue hypoxia.
Traditional endpoints of resuscitation such as blood pressure, heart
rate, urinary output, mental status, and skin perfusion can therefore
be misleading. Additional endpoints such as lactate levels and base
deficit can help guide further resuscitative therapy. Patients who
respond well to initial efforts demonstrate a survival advantage over
nonresponders.
E. Medications
1. Vasoactive therapy—Vasopressors and inotropic agents are
administered only after adequate fluid resuscitation. Choice of
vasoactive therapy depends on the presumed etiology of shock as
well as cardiac output. If there is evidence of low cardiac output
with high filling pressures, inotropic support is needed to improve
contractility. If there is continued hypotension with evidence of high
cardiac output after adequate volume resuscitation, then
vasopressor support is needed to improve vasomotor tone.
Dobutamine, a predominantly β-adrenergic agonist, is the first-
line drug for cardiogenic shock, increasing contractility and
decreasing afterload. The initial dose is 0.5–1 mcg/kg/min as a
continuous intravenous infusion, which can be titrated every few
minutes as needed to hemodynamic effect; the usual dosage range is
2–20 mcg/kg/min intravenously. Tachyphylaxis can occur after 48
hours secondary to the down-regulation of β-adrenergic receptors.
Amrinone or milrinone are phosphodiesterase inhibitors that can be
substituted for dobutamine. These drugs increase cyclic AMP levels
and increase cardiac contractility, bypassing the β-adrenergic
receptor. However, vasodilation is a side effect of both amrinone
and milrinone.
For vasodilatory shock when increased vasoconstriction is
required to maintain an adequate perfusion pressure, α-adrenergic
agonists such as phenylephrine and norepinephrine are generally
used. Although norepinephrine is both an β-adrenergic and β-
adrenergic agonist, it preferentially increases mean arterial pressure
over cardiac output. The initial dose is 1–2 mcg/min as an
intravenous infusion, titrated to maintain the systolic blood pressure
to at least 80 mm Hg. The usual maintenance dose is 2–4 mcg/min
intravenously (maximum dose is 30 mcg/min). Patients with
refractory shock may require dosages of 10–30 mcg/min
intravenously. Epinephrine, also with both β-adrenergic and β-
adrenergic effects, may be used in severe shock and during acute
resuscitation. It is the vasopressor of choice for anaphylactic shock.
For severe shock, give 1 mcg/min as a continuous intravenous
infusion initially and titrate to hemodynamic response; the usual
dosage range is 1–10 mcg/min intravenously.
Dopamine has variable effects according to dosage. At low
doses (2–5 mcg/kg/min intravenously), stimulation of dopaminergic
and β-adrenergic receptors produces increased glomerular filtration,
heart rate, and contractility. At doses of 5–10 mcg/kg/min, β1-
adrenergic effects predominate, resulting in an increase in heart rate
and cardiac contractility. At higher doses (> 10 mcg/kg/min), α-
adrenergic 
effects 
predominate, 
resulting 
in 
peripheral
vasoconstriction. The maximum dose is typically 50 mcg/kg/min.
Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone or ADH) is often used as an
adjunctive therapy to catecholamine vasopressors in the treatment
o f distributive or vasodilatory shock. Vasopressin causes
peripheral vasoconstriction via V1 receptors located on smooth
muscle cells and attenuation of nitric oxide (NO) synthesis and
cGMP, the second messenger of NO. The rationale for using low-
dose vasopressin in the management of septic shock includes the
relative deficiency of vasopressin in late shock and the increased
sensitivity of the systemic circulation to the vasopressor effects of
vasopressin. Vasopressin also potentiates the effects of
catecholamines on the vasculature and stimulates cortisol
production. In the Vasopressin and Septic Shock Trial (VASST),
low doses of vasopressin did not reduce mortality compared with
norepinephrine in patients with septic shock who were being treated
with catecholamine vasopressors. Some studies have reported
reduced 
catecholamine 
requirements 
with 
vasopressin
administration. Infusion of vasopressin at a low dose (0.01–0.04
units/min) may be safe and beneficial in septic patients with
hypotension that is refractory to fluid resuscitation and conventional
catecholamine vasopressors. Higher doses of vasopressin decrease
cardiac output and may put patients at greater risk for splanchnic
and coronary artery ischemia. The role of vasopressin in
catecholamine-refractory shock or as an initial vasopressor is still
unclear and warrants further study.
NO plays an important role in the vasodilatation associated with
septic shock. Endotoxin and inflammatory cytokines induce calcium
independent NO synthase that results in a sustained production of
NO. The NO pathway is inhibited by methylene blue which, when
given to patients with septic shock, has been shown to increase
mean arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance while
decreasing vasopressor requirements. However, no improvement in
survival has been demonstrated. A large randomized study showed
an increased mortality rate in patients with septic shock who
received 
another 
NO 
inhibitor, 
NG-methyl-L-arginine
hydrochloride.
There is no evidence documenting a survival benefit from, or the
superiority of, a particular vasopressor in septic shock.
Norepinephrine and dopamine are the initial vasopressors of choice
to maintain the mean arterial pressure >65 mm Hg, but the clinician
must consider using other agents such as phenylephrine if
dysrhythmias or tachycardias prevent the use of agents with β-
adrenergic activity. And while studies do not favor the use of
vasopressin as first-line therapy, it may be useful as a second-line
agent in the treatment of septic shock.
2. Corticosteroids—Corticosteroids are the treatment of choice in
patients with shock secondary to adrenal insufficiency. The
observation that severe sepsis may be associated with relative
adrenal insufficiency or glucocorticoid receptor resistance has led to
several trials to evaluate the role of treatment with corticosteroids in
septic shock. Early trials where high doses of corticosteroids were
administered to patients in septic shock did not show improved
survival; rather, some worse outcomes were observed from
increased rates of secondary infections. Subsequent trials have
studied the use of low-dose corticosteroids in patients who were in
septic shock and had relative adrenal insufficiency, defined by a
cortisol response of 9 mcg/dL or less after one injection of 250 mcg
of corticotropin. Low-dose corticosteroid regimens included
hydrocortisone 50 mg every 6 hours and 50 mcg of 9-alpha-
fludrocortisone once a day, both for 7 days, or hydrocortisone 50
mg by intravenous bolus, followed by a continuous infusion of 0.18
mg/kg of body weight/h until cessation of vasopressor support.
These trials demonstrated a shorter duration of use of vasopressors,
significantly reduced 28-day mortality rates, and no increased
adverse effects. There was no benefit from low-dose corticosteroid
use in patients who did not have adrenal insufficiency. In 2008, the
Corticosteroid Therapy of Septic Shock (CORTICUS) study
demonstrated that low-dose hydrocortisone (50 mg intravenously
every 6 hours for 5 days and then tapered over 6 days) did not
improve survival in patients with septic shock, either overall or in
patients who did not respond to corticotropin. This study was a
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial that is the
largest to date of corticosteroids in septic patients. One limitation of
the CORTICUS trial was that it was not adequately powered to
detect a clinically important difference in mortality. Thus, there is still
uncertainty over the role of corticosteroids and corticotropin
stimulation testing in patients with septic shock.
3. Activated protein C (Drotrecogin alpha)—Activated protein
C is an endogenous protein that has antithrombotic, profibrinolytic,
and anti-inflammatory properties. A large randomized trial published
in 2001 demonstrated an improved 28-day mortality rate (from
31% to 25%) in patients with severe sepsis and organ failure when
treated with recombinant human activated protein C (rhAPC) as a
continuous infusion of 24 mcg/kg/h for 96 hours. A retrospective
follow up of the persons enrolled in the trial demonstrated that the
survival benefit observed in patients with severe sepsis persisted
only to hospital discharge. Post hoc analysis, however, suggested
that the benefit of rhAPC on long-term survival was greater in
patients with APACHE (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health
Evaluation) II scores ≥ 25. Subsequently, a randomized, placebo-
controlled study from 2005 evaluating patients with severe sepsis
and a low risk of death, as defined by an APACHE II score of <
25 or single organ failure, confirmed the finding of no mortality
benefit at 28 days. However, a 2009 review found value in giving
rhAPC to patients with APACHE II scores of > 25 (a high risk of
death) and dysfunction of more than one organ, but the treatment
needs to be started within the first 24 hours after the onset of severe
sepsis and balanced against the higher risks of bleeding in those
who receive rhAPC.
4. Antibiotics—Definitive therapy for septic shock includes an
early initiation of empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics after
appropriate cultures have been obtained. Imaging studies may
prove useful to attempt localization of sources of infection. Surgical
management may also be necessary if necrotic tissue or loculated
infections are present (see Table 30–9).
5. Sodium bicarbonate—For patients with sepsis of any etiology
and lactic acidosis, clinical studies have failed to show any
hemodynamic benefit from bicarbonate therapy, either in increasing
cardiac output or in decreasing the vasopressor requirement even in
patients with severe acidemia.
F. Other Treatment Modalities
Cardiac failure may require use of transcutaneous or transvenous
pacing or placement of an intra-arterial balloon pump. Emergent
revascularization by percutaneous angioplasty or coronary artery
bypass surgery appears to improve long-term outcome with
increased survival compared with initial medical stabilization for
patients with myocardial ischemia leading to cardiogenic shock.
Urgent hemodialysis or continuous venovenous hemofiltration may
be indicated for maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance during
acute renal insufficiency resulting in shock from multiple modalities.
Alam HB et al. New developments in fluid resuscitation. Surg Clin
North Am. 2007 Feb;87(1):55–72. [PMID: 17127123]
 
Castellanos-Ortega A et al. Impact of the Surviving Sepsis
Campaign protocols on hospital length of stay and mortality in
septic shock patients: results of a three-year follow-up quasi-
experimental study. Crit Care Med. 2010 Apr;38(4): 1036–43.
[PMID: 20154597]
 
COIITSS Study Investigators; Annane D et al. Corticosteroid
treatment and intensive insulin therapy for septic shock in adults: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010 Jan 27; 303(4):341–8.
[PMID: 20103758]
 
De Backer D et al; SOAP II Investigators. Comparison of
dopamine and norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Mar 4;362(9):779–89. [PMID: 20200382]
 
Ferrer R et al; Edusepsis Study Group. Effectiveness of treatments
for severe sepsis: a prospective, multicenter, observational study.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Nov 1;180(9): 861–6. [PMID:
19696442]
 
Levy MM et al. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign: results of an
international guideline-based performance improvement program
targeting severe sepsis. Crit Care Med. 2010 Feb;38(2): 367–74.
[PMID: 20035219]
 
Marik PE et al. Recommendations for the diagnosis and
management of corticosteroid insufficiency in critically ill adult
patients: consensus statements from an international task force by
the American College of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med.
2008 Jun;36(6):1937–49. [PMID: 18496365]
 
Patel GP et al. Efficacy and safety of dopamine versus
norepinephrine in the management of septic shock. Shock. 2010
Apr;33 (4):375-80. [PMID: 19851126]
 
Prondzinsky R et al. Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in
patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by
cardiogenic shock: the prospective, randomized IABP SHOCK
Trial for attenuation of multiorgan dysfunction syndrome. Crit Care
Med. 2010 Jan;38(1):152–60. [PMID: 19770739]
 
Russell JA et al; VASST Investigators. Vasopressin versus
norepinephrine infusion in patients with septic shock. N Engl J
Med. 2008 Feb 28;358(9):877–87. [PMID: 18305265]
 
Sprung CL et al. Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic
shock. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan;358(2):111–24. [PMID:
18184957]
 
Toussaint S et al. Activated protein C for sepsis. N Engl J Med.
2009 Dec 31;361(27):2646–52. [PMID: 20042756]
 
 
 
Blood Disorders
Charles A. Linker, MD
Lloyd E. Damon, MD
ANEMIAS
 
General Approach to Anemias
Anemia is present in adults if the hematocrit is < 41% (hemoglobin
< 13.5 g/dL) in males or < 37% (hemoglobin < 12 g/dL) in females.
Congenital anemia is suggested by the patient's personal and family
history. Poor diet may result in folic acid deficiency and contribute
to iron deficiency, but bleeding is much more commonly the cause
of iron deficiency in adults. Physical examination includes attention
to signs of primary hematologic diseases (lymph-adenopathy;
hepatosplenomegaly; or bone tenderness, especially in the sternum
or anterior tibia). Mucosal changes such as a smooth tongue suggest
megaloblastic anemia.
Anemias are classified according to their pathophysiologic basis,
ie, whether related to diminished production or accelerated loss of
red blood cells (Table 13–1), or according to red blood cell size
(Table 13–2). A severely micro-cytic anemia (mean cell volume
[MCV] < 70 fL) is due either to iron deficiency or thalassemia,
while a severely macrocytic anemia (MCV > 125 fL) is almost
always due to either megaloblastic anemia or myelodysplasia.
IRON DEFICIENCY ANEMIAS
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Serum ferritin < 12 mcg/L.
 Caused by bleeding unless proved otherwise.
 Responds to iron therapy.
 
 General Considerations
Iron deficiency is the most common cause of anemia worldwide.
The causes are listed in Table 13–3. Aside from circulating red
blood cells, the major location of iron in the body is the storage
pool as ferritin or as hemosiderin in macrophages.
The average American diet contains 10–15 mg of iron per day.
About 10% of this amount is absorbed. Absorption occurs in the
stomach, duodenum, and upper jejunum. Dietary iron present as
heme is efficiently absorbed (10–20%) but nonheme iron less so
(1–5%), largely because of interference by phosphates, tannins, and
other food constituents. Small amounts of iron—approximately 1
mg/d—are normally lost through exfoliation of skin and mucosal
cells. There is no physiologic mechanism for increasing normal body
iron losses.
Menstrual blood loss plays a major role in iron metabolism. The
average monthly menstrual blood loss is approximately 50 mL, or
about 0.7 mg/d. However, menstrual blood loss may be five times
the average. To maintain adequate iron stores, women with heavy
menstrual losses must absorb 3–4 mg of iron from the diet each
day. This strains the upper limit of what may reasonably be
absorbed, and women with menorrhagia of this degree will almost
always become iron deficient without iron supplementation.
In general, iron metabolism is balanced between absorption of 1
mg/d and loss of 1 mg/d. Pregnancy may also upset the iron
balance, since requirements increase to 2–5 mg of iron per day
during pregnancy and lactation. Normal dietary iron cannot supply
these requirements, and medicinal iron is needed during pregnancy
and lactation. Repeated pregnancy (especially with breast-feeding)
may cause iron deficiency if increased requirements are not met with
supplemental medicinal iron. Decreased iron absorption can cause
iron deficiency, such as in people affected with celiac disease, and it
commonly occurs after surgical resection of the stomach.
By far, the most important cause of iron deficiency anemia in
adults is blood loss, especially gastrointestinal blood loss. Prolonged
aspirin use, or the use of other anti-inflammatory drugs, may cause it
even without a documented structural lesion. Iron deficiency
demands a search for a source of gastrointestinal bleeding if other
sites of blood loss (menorrhagia, other uterine bleeding, and
repeated blood donations) are excluded.
Chronic hemoglobinuria may lead to iron deficiency since iron is
lost in the urine, but this is uncommon; traumatic hemolysis due to a
prosthetic cardiac valve and other causes of intravascular hemolysis
(eg, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria) should also be
considered. Frequent blood donors may also be at risk for iron
deficiency.
 
Table 13–1. Classification of anemias by pathophysiology.
 
Decreased production
     Hemoglobin synthesis lesion: iron deficiency,
thalassemia, anemia of chronic disease
     DNA synthesis lesion: megaloblastic anemia
     Stem cell lesion: aplastic anemia, myeloproliferative
leukemia
     Bone marrow infiltration: carcinoma, lymphoma
     Pure red cell aplasia
Increased destruction
     Blood loss
     Hemolysis (intrinsic)
        Membrane lesion: hereditary spherocytosis,
elliptocytosis
        Hemoglobin lesion: sickle cell, unstable hemoglobin
        Glycolysis: pyruvate kinase deficiency, etc
        Oxidation lesion: glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency
     Hemolysis (extrinsic)
        Immune: warm antibody, cold antibody
        Microangiopathic: thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, mechanical cardiac
valve, paravalvular leak
        Infection: clostridial
        Hypersplenism
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
As a rule, the only symptoms of iron deficiency anemia are those of
the anemia itself (easy fatigability, tachycardia, palpitations and
tachypnea on exertion). Severe deficiency causes skin and mucosal
changes, including a smooth tongue, brittle nails, and cheilosis.
Dysphagia because of the formation of esophageal webs (Plummer–
Vinson syndrome) also occurs. Many iron-deficient patients
develop pica, craving for specific foods (ice chips, etc) often not
rich in iron.
B. Laboratory Findings
Iron deficiency develops in stages. The first is depletion of iron
stores. At this point, there is anemia and no change in red blood cell
size. The serum ferritin will become abnormally low. A ferritin value
< 12 mcg/L is a highly reliable indicator of depletion of iron stores.
However, because serum ferritin levels may rise in response to
inflammation or other stimuli, a normal ferritin level does not exclude
a diagnosis of iron deficiency. Bone marrow biopsy for evaluation
of iron stores is now rarely performed because of intraobserver
variation in its interpretation.
 
Table 13–2. Classification of anemias by mean cell volume.
 
Microcytic
     Iron deficiency
     Thalassemia
     Anemia of chronic disease
Macrocytic
     Megaloblastic
     Vitamin B12 deficiency
     Folate deficiency
Nonmegaloblastic
     Myelodysplasia, chemotherapy
     Liver disease
     Increased reticulocytosis
     Myxedema
Normocytic
     Many causes
 
Table 13–3. Causes of iron deficiency.
 
Deficient diet
Decreased absorption
Increased requirements
     Pregnancy
     Lactation
Blood loss
     Gastrointestinal
     Menstrual
     Blood donation
Hemoglobinuria
Iron sequestration
     Pulmonary hemosiderosis
 
After iron stores have been depleted, red blood cell formation
will continue with deficient supplies of iron. Serum iron values
decline to < 30 mcg/dL and transferrin levels rise, leading to
transferring saturation of < 15%.
In the early stages, the MCV remains normal. Subsequently, the
MCV falls and the blood smear shows hypochromic microcytic
cells. With further progression, anisocytosis (variations in red blood
cell size) and poikilocytosis (variation in shape of red cells) develop.
Severe iron deficiency will produce a bizarre peripheral blood
smear, with severely hypochromic cells, target cells, hypochromic
pencil-shaped cells, and occasionally small numbers of nucleated
red blood cells. The platelet count is commonly increased.
 Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of microcytic anemia include anemia of chronic
disease, thalassemia, and sideroblastic anemia. Anemia of chronic
disease is characterized by normal or increased iron stores in the
bone marrow and a normal or elevated ferritin level; the serum iron
is low, often drastically so, and the total iron-binding capacity
(TIBC) is either normal or low. Thalassemia produces a greater
degree of microcytosis for any given level of anemia than does iron
deficiency. Red blood cell morphology on the peripheral smear is
abnormal earlier in the course of thalassemia.
 Treatment
The diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia can be made either by the
laboratory demonstration of an iron-deficient state or by evaluating
the response to a therapeutic trial of iron replacement.
Since the anemia itself is rarely life-threatening, the most
important part of treatment is identification of the cause—especially
a source of occult blood loss.
A. Oral Iron
Ferrous sulfate, 325 mg three times daily, which provides 180 mg
of iron daily of which up to 10 mg is absorbed (though absorption
may exceed this amount in cases of severe deficiency), is the
preferred therapy. Compliance is improved by introducing the
medicine more slowly in a gradually escalating dose with food.
Alternatively, in cases of poor tolerance, one pill of ferrous sulfate
can be taken at bedtime on an empty stomach. It is preferable to
prescribe a lower dose of iron or to allow ingestion concurrent with
food than to insist on a more rigorous schedule that will not be
followed. An appropriate response is a return of the hematocrit
level halfway toward normal within 3 weeks with full return to
baseline after 2 months. Iron therapy should continue for 3–6
months after restoration of normal hematologic values to replenish
iron stores. Failure of response to iron therapy is usually due to
noncompliance, although occasional patients may absorb iron
poorly, particularly if the stomach is achlorhydric. Such patients may
benefit from concomitant administration of oral ascorbic acid (250
mg daily). Other reasons for failure to respond include incorrect
diagnosis (anemia of chronic disease, thalassemia), celiac disease,
and ongoing gastrointestinal blood loss that exceeds the rate of new
erythropoiesis.
B. Parenteral Iron
The indications are intolerance to oral iron, refractoriness to oral
iron, gastrointestinal disease (usually inflammatory bowel disease)
precluding the use of oral iron, and continued blood loss that cannot
be corrected, including dialysis. Recent improvements in the
formulation of parenteral iron preparations have greatly reduced the
risks and increased the ease of its administration. In the past, most
parenteral iron preparations were based on iron dextran, and
hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis, were seen. Current
preparations of iron sucrose are safe and can be given in less than 5
minutes, but the maximum dose allowed is 200 mg. Newer
preparations, such as polyglucose sorbitol carboxymethylether, can
be given in doses up to 500 mg by intravenous bolus over 20
seconds, with no test dose required.
The dose (total 1.5–2 g) may be calculated by estimating the
decrease in volume of red blood cell mass and then supplying 1 mg
of iron for each milliliter of volume of red blood cells below normal.
Approximately 1 g should then be added for storage iron. Total
body iron ranges between 2 g and 4 g: approximately 50 mg/kg in
men and 35 mg/kg in women. Most (70–95%) of the iron is present
in hemoglobin in circulating red blood cells. One milliliter of packed
red blood cells (not whole blood) contains approximately 1 mg of
iron. In men, red blood cell volume is approximately 30 mL/kg. A
70-kg man will therefore have approximately 2100 mL of packed
red blood cells and consequently 2100 mg of iron in his circulating
blood. In women, the red cell volume is about 27 mL/kg; a 50-kg
woman will thus have 1350 mg of iron circulating in her red blood
cells. Thus, a woman whose hemoglobin is 9 g/dL would be treated
with a total of 1315 mg of parenteral iron, 315 mg for the increased
red blood cell mass and 1000 mg to provide iron stores.
 When to Refer
Referral to a hematologist should not generally be necessary. Refer
the patient if he or she is not responsive to iron therapy.
Andrews NC. Forging a field: the golden age of iron biology.
Blood. 2008 Jul 15;112(2):219–30. [PMID: 18606887]
 
Auerbach M et al. Clinical use of intravenous iron: administration,
efficacy, and safety. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2010;2010:338–347. [PMID: 21239816]
 
Hershko C et al. Pathogenesis and management of iron deficiency
anemia: emerging role of celiac disease, helicobacter pylori, and
autoimmune gastritis. Semin Hematol. 2009 Oct; 46(4):339–50.
[PMID: 19786202]
 
Zhu A et al. Evaluation and treatment of iron deficiency anemia: a
gastroenterological perspective. Dig Dis Sci. 2010 Mar;55(3):
548–59. [PMID: 20108038]
 
ANEMIA OF CHRONIC DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Anemia, normocytic, or microcytic.
 Normal or increased iron stores.
 Underlying chronic disease.
 
 General Considerations
Many chronic systemic diseases are associated with mild or
moderate anemia. Common causes include chronic infection or
inflammation, cancer, and liver disease. The anemia of chronic
kidney disease is different in pathophysiology, involving reduced
production of erythropoietin, and is usually more severe. Hepcidin is
a key mediator of iron homeostasis, and upregulation of hepcidin in
response to mediators of inflammation, such as IL-6, is likely the
most important mechanism causing the anemia of chronic disease.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical features are those of the causative condition. The
diagnosis should be suspected in patients with known chronic
diseases. In cases of significant anemia, coexistent iron deficiency or
folic acid deficiency should be suspected. Decreased dietary intake
of folic acid or iron is common in these ill patients, and many will
also have ongoing gastrointestinal blood losses. Patients undergoing
hemodialysis regularly lose both iron and folic acid during dialysis.
B. Laboratory Findings
The hematocrit rarely falls below 60% of baseline (except in kidney
failure). The MCV is usually normal or slightly reduced. Red blood
cell morphology is nondiagnostic, and the reticulocyte count is
neither strikingly reduced nor increased. Serum iron values may be
low or unmeasurable, and transferrin saturation may be extremely
low, leading to an erroneous diagnosis of iron deficiency. In contrast
to iron deficiency, serum ferritin values should be normal or
increased. A serum ferritin value of < 30 mcg/L should suggest
coexistent iron deficiency.
 Treatment
In most cases no treatment is necessary. Purified recombinant
erythropoietin (epoetin alfa) is effective for treatment of the anemia
of kidney failure and other secondary anemias such as anemia
related to cancer or inflammatory disorders (eg, rheumatoid
arthritis). In kidney failure, optimal response to epoetin alfa requires
adequate intensity of dialysis as well as adequate iron stores.
Epoetin alfa must be injected subcutaneously and is very expensive.
One effective schedule is 30,000 units once weekly, or darbepoetin
300 mcg every 2 to 3 weeks. Because of its cost, erythropoietin
should be used only when the patient is transfusion-dependent or
when the quality of life is improved by the hematologic response.
Excessive use of erythropoietin, with elevation of the hemoglobin
level over 13 g/dL has been shown to increase the risk of heart
attack and stroke.
 When to Refer
Referral to a hematologist is not necessary.
Adamson JW. The anemia of inflammation/malignancy:
mechanisms and management. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
Program. 2008;2008:159–65. [PMID: 19074075]
 
Ferrucci L et al. Proinflammatory state, hepcidin, and anemia in
older persons. Blood. 2010 May 6;115(18):3810–6. [PMID:
20081092]
 
Ganz T et al. Iron sequestration and anemia of inflammation. Semin
Hematol. 2009 Oct;46(4):387–93. [PMID: 19786207]
 
Zhang AS et al. Molecular mechanisms of normal iron
homeostasis. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:
207–14. [PMID: 20008200]
 
THE THALASSEMIAS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Microcytosis disproportionate to the degree of anemia.
 Positive family history or lifelong personal history of microcytic
anemia.
 Abnormal red blood cell morphology with microcytes,
acanthocytes, and target cells.
 In β-thalassemia, elevated levels of hemoglobin A2 or F.
 
 General Considerations
The thalassemias are hereditary disorders characterized by
reduction in the synthesis of globin chains (α or β). Reduced globin
chain synthesis causes reduced hemoglobin synthesis and eventually
produces a hypochromic microcytic anemia because of defective
hemoglobinization of red blood cells. Thalassemias can be
considered among the hypoproliferative anemias, the hemolytic
anemias, and the anemias related to abnormal hemoglobin, since all
of these factors play a role in pathogenesis.
Normal adult hemoglobin is primarily hemoglobin A, which
represents approximately 98% of circulating hemoglobin.
Hemoglobin A is formed from a tetramer of two α chains and two β
chains—and can be designated α2β2. Two copies of the α-globin
gene are located on chromosome 16, and there is no substitute for
α-globin in the formation of hemoglobin. The β-globin gene resides
on chromosome 11 adjacent to genes encoding the β-like globin
chains, δ and γ. The tetramer of α2δ2 forms hemoglobin A2, which
normally comprises 1–2% of adult hemoglobin. The tetramer α2γ2
forms hemoglobin F, which is the major hemoglobin of fetal life but
which comprises < 1% of normal adult hemoglobin.
The thalassemias are described as “trait” when there are
laboratory features without significant clinical impact, “intermedia”
when there is a red blood cell transfusion requirement or other
moderate clinical impact, and “major” when the disorder is life-
threatening.
α-Thalassemia is due primarily to gene deletion causing
reduced α-globin chain synthesis (Table 13–4). Since all adult
hemoglobins are α containing, α-thalassemia produces no change in
the percentage distribution of hemoglobins A, A2, and F. In severe
forms of α-thalassemia, excess β chains may form a β4 tetramer
called hemoglobin H.
β-Thalassemias are usually caused by point mutations rather
than deletions (Table 13–5). These mutations result in premature
chain termination or in problems with transcription of RNA and
ultimately result in reduced or absent β-globin chain synthesis. The
molecular defects leading to β-thalassemia are numerous and
heterogeneous. Defects that result in absent globin chain expression
are termed β0, whereas those causing reduced synthesis are termed
β+. The reduced β-globin chain synthesis in β-thalassemia results in
a relative increase in the percentages of hemoglobins A2 and F
compared to hemoglobin A, as the β-like globins (γ and δ)
substitute for the missing β chains. In the presence of reduced β
chains, the excess α chains are unstable and precipitate, leading to
damage of red blood cell membranes. This leads to both
intramedullary and peripheral hemolysis. The bone marrow
becomes hyperplastic under the drive of anemia and ineffective
erythropoiesis resulting from the intramedullary destruction of the
developing erythroid cells. In cases of severe thalassemia, the
marked expansion of the erythroid element in the bone marrow may
cause severe bony deformities, osteopenia, and pathologic
fractures.
 
Table 13–4. α-Thalassemia syndromes.
 
MCV, mean cell volume.
 
Table 13–5. β-Thalassemia syndromes.
 
Hb, hemoglobin.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The α-thalassemia syndromes are seen primarily in persons from
southeast Asia and China, and, less commonly, in blacks. Normally,
adults have four copies of the α-globin chain. When three α-globin
genes are present, the patient is hematologically normal (silent
carrier). When two α-globin genes are present, the patient is said to
have α-thalassemia trait, one form of thalassemia minor. These
patients are clinically normal and have a normal life expectancy and
performance status, with a mild microcytic anemia. When only one
α-globin chain is present, the patient has hemoglobin H disease.
This is a chronic hemolytic anemia of variable severity (thalassemia
minor or intermedia). Physical examination will reveal pallor and
splenomegaly. Although affected individuals do not usually require
transfusions, they may do so during periods of hemolytic
exacerbation caused by infection or other stresses. When all four α-
globin genes are deleted, the affected fetus is stillborn as a result of
hydrops fetalis.
β-Thalassemia primarily affects persons of Mediterranean
origin (Italian, Greek) and to a lesser extent Asians and blacks.
Patients homozygous for β-thalassemia have thalassemia major.
Affected children are normal at birth but after 6 months, when
hemoglobin synthesis switches from hemoglobin F to hemoglobin A,
develop severe anemia requiring transfusion. Numerous clinical
problems ensue, including growth failure, bony deformities
(abnormal 
facial 
structure, 
pathologic 
fractures),
hepatosplenomegaly, and jaundice. The clinical course is modified
significantly by transfusion therapy, but the transfusional iron
overload (hemosiderosis) results in a clinical picture similar to
hemochromatosis, 
with 
heart 
failure, 
cirrhosis, 
and
endocrinopathies, usually after more than 100 units of red blood
cells. These problems develop because of the body's inability to
excrete the iron (see above) from transfused red cells. Before the
application of allogeneic stem cell transplantation and the
development of more effective forms of iron chelation, death from
cardiac failure usually occurred between the ages of 20 and 30
years. This has been profoundly changed by the early application of
transplantation.
Patients homozygous for a milder form of β-thalassemia (allowing
a higher rate of globin gene synthesis) have thalassemia intermedia.
These patients have chronic hemolytic anemia but do not require
transfusions except under periods of stress. They also may develop
iron overload because of periodic transfusion. They survive into
adult life but with hepatosplenomegaly and bony deformities.
Patients heterozygous for β-thalassemia have thalassemia minor and
a clinically insignificant microcytic anemia.
Prenatal diagnosis is available, and genetic counseling should be
offered and the opportunity for prenatal diagnosis discussed.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. α-Thalassemia trait—Patients with two α-globin genes have
mild anemia, with hematocrits between 28% and 40%. The MCV is
strikingly low (60–75 fL) despite the modest anemia, and the red
blood count is normal or increased. The peripheral blood smear
shows microcytes, hypochromia, occasional target cells, and
acanthocytes (cells with irregularly spaced bulbous projections).
The reticulocyte count and iron parameters are normal. Hemoglobin
electrophoresis will show no increase in the percentage of
hemoglobins A2 or F and no hemoglobin H. α-Thalassemia trait is
thus usually diagnosed by exclusion. Genetic testing to demonstrate
α-globin gene deletion is available only in research laboratories.
2. Hemoglobin H disease—These patients have a more marked
hemolytic anemia, with hematocrits between 22% and 32%. The
MCV is remarkably low (60–70 fL) and the peripheral blood
smear is markedly abnormal, with hypochromia, microcytosis,
target cells, and poikilocytosis. The reticulocyte count is elevated.
Hemoglobin electrophoresis will show the presence of a fast
migrating hemoglobin (hemoglobin H), which comprises 10–40% of
the hemoglobin. A peripheral blood smear can be stained with
supravital dyes to demonstrate the presence of hemoglobin H.
3. β-Thalassemia minor—As in α-thalassemia trait, these patients
have a modest anemia with hematocrit between 28% and 40%. The
MCV ranges from 55 to 75 fL, and the red blood cell count is
normal or increased. The peripheral blood smear is mildly
abnormal, with hypochromia, micro-cytosis, and target cells. In
contrast to α-thalassemia, basophilic stippling may be present. The
reticulocyte count is normal or slightly elevated. Hemoglobin
electrophoresis (using quantitative techniques) may show an
elevation of hemoglobin A2 to 4–8% and occasional elevations of
hemoglobin F to 1–5%.
4. β-Thalassemia major—β-Thalassemia major produces severe
anemia, and without transfusion the hematocrit may fall to < 10%.
The peripheral blood smear is bizarre, showing severe
poikilocytosis, hypochromia, microcytosis, target cells, basophilic
stippling, and nucleated red blood cells. Little or no hemoglobin A is
present. Variable amounts of hemoglobin A2 are seen, and the
major hemoglobin present is hemoglobin F.
 Differential Diagnosis
Mild forms of thalassemia must be differentiated from iron
deficiency. Compared to iron deficiency anemia, patients with
thalassemia have a lower MCV, a more normal red blood count,
and a more abnormal peripheral blood smear at modest levels of
anemia. Iron studies are normal. Severe forms of thalassemia may
be confused with other hemoglobinopathies. The diagnosis of β-
thalassemia is made by hemoglobin electrophoresis showing
elevated levels of hemoglobins A2 and F, but the diagnosis of α-
thalassemia is made by exclusion since there is no change in the
percentage of the hemoglobins.
 Treatment
Patients with mild thalassemia (α-thalassemia trait or β-thalassemia
minor) require no treatment and should be identified so that they will
not be subjected to repeated evaluations and treatment for iron
deficiency. Patients with hemoglobin H disease should take folic
acid supplementation and avoid medicinal iron and oxidative drugs
such as sulfonamides. Patients with severe thalassemia are
maintained on a regular transfusion schedule and receive folic acid
supplementation. Splenectomy is performed if hypersplenism causes
a marked increase in the transfusion requirement. Patients with
regular transfusion requirements should be treated with iron
chelation in order to prevent life-limiting organ damage from iron
overload. Subcutaneous infusion of deferoxamine has largely been
replaced by the oral agent deferasirox.
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is the treatment of
choice for β-thalassemia major. Children who have not yet
experienced iron overload and chronic organ toxicity do well, with
long-term survival in more than 80% of cases.
Angelucci E. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
thalassemia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2010;
2010:456–62. [PMID: 21239835]
 
Cohen AR et al. Effect of transfusional iron intake on response to
chelation therapy in beta-thalassemia major. Blood. 2008 Jan
15;111(2):583–7. [PMID: 17951527]
 
Cunningham MJ. Update on thalassemia: clinical care and
complications. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2010 Feb;24(1):
215–27. [PMID: 20113904]
 
Fucharoen S et al. Hb H disease: clinical course and disease
modifiers. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:26-
34. [PMID: 20008179]
 
SIDEROBLASTIC ANEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Presence of ringed sideroblasts in the bone marrow.
 Elevated serum iron levels and transferrin saturation.
 
 General Considerations
The sideroblastic anemias are a heterogeneous group of disorders in
which hemoglobin synthesis is reduced because of failure to
incorporate heme into protoporphyrin to form hemoglobin. Iron
accumulates, particularly in the mitochondria. The disorder is usually
acquired; it is most often a subtype of myelodysplasia. Other causes
include chronic alcoholism and lead poisoning.
 Clinical Findings
Patients have no specific clinical features other than those related to
anemia. The anemia is usually moderate, with hematocrits of 20–
30%, but transfusions may occasionally be required. Although the
MCV is usually normal or slightly increased, it may occasionally be
low, leading to confusion with iron deficiency. However, serum iron
level is elevated and transferrin saturation is high. The peripheral
blood smear characteristically shows a dimorphic population of red
blood cells, one normal and one hypochromic. In cases of lead
poisoning, coarse basophilic stippling of the red cells is seen and the
serum lead levels will be elevated.
The diagnosis is made by examination of the bone marrow.
Characteristically, there is marked erythroid hyperplasia, a sign of
ineffective erythropoiesis (expansion of the erythroid compartment
of the bone marrow that does not result in the production of
reticulocytes in the peripheral blood). The Prussian blue iron stain of
the bone marrow shows a generalized increase in iron stores and
the presence of ringed sidero-blasts, which are cells with iron
deposits encircling the red cell nucleus. Occasionally, the anemia is
so severe that support with transfusion is required. These patients
usually do not respond well to erythropoietin therapy, especially
when transfusion requirements are significant.
 When to Refer
Refer to a hematologist if transfusion support is needed.
Cuijpers ML et al. Recent advances in the understanding of iron
overload in sideroblastic myelodysplastic syndrome. Br J
Haematol. 2010 May;149(3):322–33. [PMID: 20067561]
 
Mufti GJ et al. Diagnosis and classification of myelodysplastic
syndrome: International Working Group on Morphology of
myelodysplastic syndrome (IWGM-MDS) consensus proposals
for the definition and enumeration of myeloblasts and ring
sideroblasts. Haematologica. 2008 Nov;93(11):1712–7. [PMID:
18838480]
 
VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Macrocytic anemia.
 Macro-ovalocytes and hypersegmented neutrophils on peripheral
blood smear.
 Serum vitamin B12 level < 100 pg/mL.
 
 General Considerations
Vitamin B12 belongs to the family of cobalamins and serves as a
cofactor for two important reactions in humans. As
methylcobalamin, it is a cofactor for methionine synthetase in the
conversion 
of 
homocysteine 
to 
methionine, 
and 
as
adenosylcobalamin for the conversion of methylmalonylcoenzyme A
(CoA) to succinyl-CoA. All vitamin B12 comes from the diet and is
present in all foods of animal origin. The daily absorption of vitamin
B12 is 5 mcg.
The liver contains 2000–5000 mcg of stored vitamin B12. Since
daily losses are 3–5 mcg/d, the body usually has sufficient stores of
vitamin B12 so that vitamin B12 deficiency develops more than 3
years after vitamin B12 absorption ceases.
Since vitamin B12 is present in all foods of animal origin, dietary
vitamin B12 deficiency is extremely rare and is seen only in vegans
—strict vegetarians who avoid all dairy products as well as meat
and fish (Table 13–6). Abdominal surgery may lead to vitamin B12
deficiency in several ways. Gastrectomy will eliminate the site of
intrinsic factor production; blind loop syndrome will cause
competition for vitamin B12 by bacterial overgrowth in the lumen of
the intestine; and surgical resection of the ileum will eliminate the site
of vitamin B12 absorption. Rare causes of vitamin B12 deficiency
include fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum) infection, in
which the parasite uses luminal vitamin B12, pancreatic insufficiency
(with failure to inactivate competing cobalamin-binding proteins),
and severe Crohn disease, causing sufficient destruction of the ileum
to impair vitamin B12 absorption.
 
Table 13–6. Causes of vitamin B12 deficiency.
 
Dietary deficiency (rare)
Decreased production of intrinsic factor
     Pernicious anemia
     Gastrectomy
Helicobacter pylori infection
Competition for vitamin B12 in gut
     Blind loop syndrome
     Fish tapeworm (rare)
Pancreatic insufficiency
Decreased ileal absorption of vitamin B12
     Surgical resection
     Crohn disease
Transcobalamin II deficiency (rare)
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The hallmark of symptomatic vitamin B12 deficiency is megaloblastic
anemia, historically referred to as pernicious anemia. However,
subclinical cobalamin deficiency is an increasingly recognized
condition, especially in those with predisposing conditions such as
ileal disease or gastric surgery. In advanced cases, the anemia may
be severe, with hematocrits as low as 10–15%, and may be
accompanied by leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. The
megaloblastic state also produces changes in mucosal cells, leading
to glossitis, as well as other vague gastrointestinal disturbances such
as anorexia and diarrhea. Vitamin B12 deficiency also leads to a
complex neurologic syndrome. Peripheral nerves are usually
affected first, and patients complain initially of paresthesias. The
posterior columns next become impaired, and patients complain of
difficulty with balance. In more advanced cases, cerebral function
may be altered as well, and on occasion dementia and other neuro-
psychiatric changes may precede hematologic changes.
Patients are usually pale and may be mildly icteric. Neurologic
examination may reveal decreased vibration and position sense but
is more commonly normal in early stages of the disease.
B. Laboratory Findings
The megaloblastic state produces an anemia of variable severity that
on occasion may be very severe. The MCV is usually strikingly
elevated, between 110 and 140 fL. However, it is possible to have
vitamin B12 deficiency with a normal MCV. Occasionally, the
normal MCV may be explained by coexistent thalassemia or iron
deficiency, but in other cases the reason is obscure. Patients with
neurologic symptoms and signs that suggest possible vitamin B12
deficiency should be evaluated for that deficiency despite a normal
MCV and the absence of anemia. The peripheral blood smear is
usually strikingly abnormal, with anisocytosis and poikilocytosis. A
characteristic finding is the macro-ovalocyte, but numerous other
abnormal shapes are usually seen. The neutrophils are
hypersegmented. Typical features include a mean lobe count greater
than four or the finding of six-lobed neutrophils. The reticulocyte
count is reduced. Because vitamin B12 deficiency affects all
hematopoietic cell lines, in severe cases the white blood cell count
and the platelet count are reduced, and pancytopenia is present.
Bone marrow morphology is characteristically abnormal. Marked
erythroid hyperplasia is present as a response to defective red
blood cell production (ineffective erythropoiesis). Megaloblastic
changes in the erythroid series include abnormally large cell size and
asynchronous maturation of the nucleus and cytoplasm—ie,
cytoplasmic maturation continues while impaired DNA synthesis
causes retarded nuclear development. In the myeloid series, giant
metamyelocytes are characteristically seen.
Other laboratory abnormalities include elevated serum lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) and a modest increase in indirect bilirubin.
These two findings are a reflection of intramedullary destruction of
developing abnormal erythroid cells and are similar to those
observed in peripheral hemolytic anemias.
The diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency is made by finding an
abnormally low vitamin B12 (cobalamin) serum level. Whereas the
normal vitamin B12 level is > 240 pg/mL, most patients with overt
vitamin B12 deficiency will have serum levels < 170 pg/mL, with
symptomatic patients usually having levels < 100 pg/mL. A level of
170–240 pg/mL is borderline. When the serum level of vitamin B12
is borderline, the diagnosis is best confirmed by finding an elevated
level of serum methylmalonic acid (> 1000 nmol/L). However,
elevated levels of serum methylmalonic acid can be due to kidney
insufficiency.
 Differential Diagnosis
Vitamin B12 deficiency should be differentiated from folic acid
deficiency, the other common cause of megaloblastic anemia, in
which red blood cell folic acid is low while vitamin B12 levels are
normal. The distinction between vitamin B12 deficiency and
myelodysplasia (the other common cause of macrocytic anemia with
abnormal morphology) is based on the characteristic morphology
and the low vitamin B12 and elevated methylmalonic acid levels.
 Treatment
Patients with vitamin B12 deficiency (pernicious anemia) have
historically been treated with parenteral therapy. Intramuscular
injections of 100 mcg of vitamin B12 are adequate for each dose.
Replacement is usually given daily for the first week, weekly for the
first month, and then monthly for life. It is a lifelong disorder, and if
patients discontinue their monthly therapy the vitamin deficiency will
recur. Oral cobalamin may be used instead of parenteral therapy,
even in pernicious anemia, since approximately 1% of the dose is
absorbed, and can provide equivalent results if a sufficient dose is
used. The usual dose is 100–250 mcg/d and must be continued
indefinitely.
Patients respond to therapy with an immediate improvement in
their sense of well-being. Hypokalemia may complicate the first
several days of therapy, particularly if the anemia is severe. A brisk
reticulocytosis occurs in 5–7 days, and the hematologic picture
normalizes in 2 months. Central nervous system symptoms and signs
are reversible if they are of relatively short duration (< 6 months)
but become permanent if treatment is not initiated promptly.
Transfusions should generally be avoided because they can lead to
congestive heart failure, given that the anemia develops slowly and
the plasma volume is increased.
 When to Refer
Referral to a hematologist is not usually necessary.
Andrès E et al. Efficacy of oral cobalamin (vitamin B12) therapy.
Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Feb;11(2):249–56. [PMID:
20088746]
 
Elmadfa I et al. Vitamin B-12 and homocysteine status among
vegetarians: a global perspective. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 May;
89(5):1693S–1698S. [PMID: 19357223]
 
Lahner E et al. Pernicious anemia: new insights from a
gastroenterological point of view. World J Gastroenterol. 2009
Nov 7;15(41):5121–8. [PMID: 19891010]
 
FOLIC ACID DEFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Macrocytic anemia.
 Macro-ovalocytes and hypersegmented neutrophils on peripheral
blood smear.
 Normal serum vitamin B12 levels.
 Reduced folic acid levels in red blood cells or serum.
 
 General Considerations
Folic acid is the term commonly used for pteroylmonoglutamic acid.
Folic acid is present in most fruits and vegetables (especially citrus
fruits and green leafy vegetables) and daily requirements of 50–100
mcg/d are usually met in the diet. Total body stores of folic acid are
approximately 5000 mcg, enough to supply requirements for 2–3
months.
By far the most common cause of folic acid deficiency is
inadequate dietary intake (Table 13–7). Alcoholic or anorectic
patients, persons who do not eat fresh fruits and vegetables, and
those who overcook their food are candidates for folic acid
deficiency. Reduced folic acid absorption is rarely seen, since
absorption occurs from the entire gastrointestinal tract. However,
drugs such as phenytoin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or
sulfasalazine may interfere with its absorption. Folic acid
requirements are increased in pregnancy, hemolytic anemia, and
exfoliative skin disease, and in these cases the increased
requirements (five to ten times normal) may not be met by a normal
diet. Patients with increased folic acid requirements should receive
supplementation with 1 mg/d of folic acid.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The features are similar to those of vitamin B12 deficiency, with
megaloblastic anemia and megaloblastic changes in mucosa.
However, there are none of the neurologic abnormalities associated
with vitamin B12 deficiency.
 
Table 13–7. Causes of folate deficiency.
 
Dietary deficiency
Decreased absorption
     Tropical sprue
     Drugs: phenytoin, sulfasalazine, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Increased requirement
     Chronic hemolytic anemia
     Pregnancy
     Exfoliative skin disease
Loss: dialysis
Inhibition of reduction to active form
     Methotrexate
B. Laboratory Findings
Megaloblastic anemia is identical to anemia resulting from vitamin
B12 deficiency (see above). However, the serum vitamin B12 level is
normal. A red blood cell folic acid level of < 150 ng/mL is
diagnostic of folic acid deficiency.
 Differential Diagnosis
The megaloblastic anemia of folic acid deficiency should be
differentiated from vitamin B12 deficiency by the finding of a normal
vitamin B12 level and a reduced red blood cell folic acid or serum
folic acid level. Alcoholic patients, who often have nutritional
deficiency, may also have anemia of liver disease. This latter
macrocytic anemia does not cause megaloblastic morphologic
changes but rather produces target cells in the peripheral blood.
Hypothyroidism is associated with mild macrocytosis but also with
pernicious anemia.
 Treatment
Folic acid deficiency is treated with folic acid, 1 mg/d orally. The
response is similar to that seen in the treatment of vitamin B12
deficiency, with rapid improvement and a sense of well-being,
reticulocytosis in 5–7 days, and total correction of hematologic
abnormalities within 2 months. Large doses of folic acid may
produce hematologic responses in cases of vitamin B12 deficiency
but will allow neurologic damage to progress.
 When to Refer
Referral to a hematologist is not usually necessary.
Sanghvi TG et al. Maternal iron-folic acid supplementation
programs: evidence of impact and implementation. Food Nutr Bull.
2010 Jun;31(2 Suppl):S100–7. [PMID: 20715594]
 
Varela-Moreiras G et al. Cobalamin, folic acid, and homo-
cysteine. Nutr Rev. 2009 May;67(Suppl 1):S69–72. [PMID:
19453682]
 
PURE RED CELL APLASIA
Adult acquired pure red cell aplasia is rare. It appears to be an
autoimmune disease mediated either by T lymphocytes or (rarely)
by an IgG antibody against erythroid precursors. In adults, the
disease is usually idiopathic. However, cases have been seen in
association with systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic lymphocytic
leukemia, lymphomas, or thymoma. Some drugs (phenytoin,
chloramphenicol) may cause red cell aplasia. Rarely, anti-
erythropoietin antibodies, which can cause pure red cell aplasia,
may develop in patients undergoing dialysis who are treated with
erythropoietin. Transient episodes of red cell aplasia are probably
common in response to viral infections, especially parvovirus
infections. However, these acute episodes will go unrecognized
unless the patient has a chronic hemolytic disorder, in which case
the hematocrit may fall precipitously.
The only signs are those of anemia unless the patient has an
associated autoimmune or lymphoproliferative disorder. The anemia
is often severe and normochromic, with low or absent reticulocytes.
Red blood cell morphology is normal, and the myeloid and platelet
lines are unaffected. The bone marrow is normocellular. All
elements present are normal, but erythroid precursors are markedly
reduced or absent. In some cases, chest imaging studies will reveal
a thymoma.
The disorder is distinguished from aplastic anemia (in which the
marrow is hypocellular and all cell lines are affected) and from
myelodysplasia. This latter disorder is recognized by the presence
of morphologic abnormalities that should not be present in pure red
cell aplasia.
Possible offending drugs should be stopped. With thymoma,
resection results in amelioration of anemia in some instances. High-
dose intravenous immune globulin has produced excellent responses
in a small number of cases, especially in parvovirus-related cases.
For most cases, the treatment of choice is immunosuppressive
therapy with a combination of antithymocyte globulin and
cyclosporine (or tacrolimus)—similar to therapy of aplastic anemia.
Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) has also had some
success.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred to a hematologist.
D'Arena G et al. Rituximab to treat chronic lymphoproliferative
disorder-associated pure red cell aplasia. Eur J Haematol. 2009
Mar;82(3):235–9. [PMID: 19067738]
 
Sawada K et al. Diagnosis and management of acquired pure red
cell aplasia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2009 Apr;23(2):
249–59. [PMID: 19327582]
 
Sloand EM et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with moderate
aplastic anemia and pure red cell aplasia treated with daclizumab.
Haematologica. 2010 Mar;95(3):382–7. [PMID: 20207845]
 
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS
Hemolytic disorders are generally classified according to whether
the defect is intrinsic to the red cell or due to some external factor
(Table 13–8). Intrinsic defects have been described in all
components of the red blood cell, including the membrane, enzyme
systems, and hemoglobin; most of these disorders are hereditary.
Hemolytic anemias due to external factors are the immune and
microangiopathic hemolytic anemias.
Certain laboratory features are common to all the hemolytic
anemias. Haptoglobin, a normal plasma protein that binds and
clears hemoglobin released into plasma, may be depressed in
hemolytic disorders. However, haptoglobin levels are influenced by
many factors and, by themselves, are not a reliable indicator of
hemolysis. When intravascular hemolysis occurs, transient
hemoglobinemia occurs. Hemoglobin is filtered through the
glomerulus and is usually reabsorbed by tubular cells.
Hemoglobinuria will be present only when the capacity for
reabsorption of hemoglobin by these cells is exceeded. In its
absence, evidence for prior intravascular hemolysis is the presence
o f hemosiderin in shed renal tubular cells (positive urine
hemosiderin). With severe intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinemia
and methemalbuminemia may be present. Hemolysis increases the
indirect bilirubin, and the total bili-rubin may rise to 4 mg/dL.
Bilirubin levels higher than this may indicate some degree of hepatic
dysfunction. Serum LDH levels are strikingly elevated in cases of
microangiopathic hemolysis (thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,
hemolytic- uremic syndrome) and may be elevated in other
hemolytic anemias.
 
Table 13–8. Classification of hemolytic anemias.
 
Intrinsic
     Membrane defects: hereditary spherocytosis,
hereditary ellipto- cytosis, paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria
     Glycolytic defects: pyruvate kinase deficiency, severe
hypophos-phatemia
     Oxidation vulnerability: glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency, methemoglobinemia
     Hemoglobinopathies: sickle cell syndromes, unstable
hemoglo- bins, methemoglobinemia
Extrinsic
     Immune: autoimmune, lymphoproliferative disease,
drug toxicity
     Microangiopathic: thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, valve hemolysis, metastatic
adenocarcinoma, vasculitis
     Infection: Plasmodium, Clostridium, Borrelia
     Hypersplenism
     Burns
HEREDITARY SPHEROCYTOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Positive family history.
 Splenomegaly.
 Spherocytes and increased reticulocytes on peripheral blood
smear.
 Microcytic, hyperchromic indices.
 
 General Considerations
Hereditary spherocytosis is a disorder of the red blood cell
membrane, leading to chronic hemolytic anemia.
The membrane defect is an abnormality in spectrin, actin, or
other red blood cell membrane proteins, such as band 3 or protein
4.2; these proteins provide most of the scaffolding for the red blood
cell membranes. The result is a decrease in surface-to-volume ratio
that results in a spherical shape of the cell. These spherical cells are
less deformable and unable to pass through 2-mcm fenestrations in
the splenic red pulp. Hemolysis takes place because of trapping of
red blood cells within the spleen.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hereditary spherocytosis is an autosomal dominant disease of
variable severity. It is often diagnosed during childhood, but milder
cases may be discovered incidentally late in adult life. Anemia may
or may not be present, since the bone marrow may be able to
compensate for shortened red cell survival. Severe anemia (aplastic
crisis) may occur in folic acid deficiency or when bone marrow
compensation is temporarily impaired by infection. Chronic
hemolysis causes jaundice and pigment (calcium bilirubinate)
gallstones, leading to attacks of cholecystitis. Examination may
reveal icterus and a palpable spleen.
B. Laboratory Findings
The anemia is of variable severity, and the hematocrit may be
normal. Reticulocytosis is always present. The peripheral blood
smear shows the presence of spherocytes, small cells that have lost
their central pallor. Spherocytes usually make up only a small
percentage of red blood cells on the peripheral smear. Hereditary
spherocytosis is the only important disorder associated with
microcytosis and an increased mean corpuscular hemoglobin
concentration (MCHC), often > 36 g/dL. As with other hemolytic
disorders, there may be an increase in indirect bilirubin. The
Coombs test is negative.
Because spherocytes are red cells that have lost some membrane
surface, they are abnormally vulnerable to swelling induced by
hypotonic media. Increased osmotic fragility merely reflects the
presence of spherocytes and does not distinguish hereditary
spherocytosis from other spherocytic hemolytic disorders such as
autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In some laboratories, the osmotic
fragility test has been supplanted by ektacytometry, which has the
advantages of better reliability and the ability to distinguish
spherocytes from other red blood cell abnormalities such as
elliptocytosis.
 Treatment
Patients should receive uninterrupted supplementation with folic
acid, 1 mg/d. The treatment of choice is splenectomy, which will
correct neither the membrane defect nor the spherocytosis but will
eliminate the site of hemolysis. In mild cases discovered late in adult
life, splenectomy may not be necessary.
 When to Refer
Patients in whom hereditary spherocytosis is suspected should have
the diagnosis confirmed by a hematologist, and decisions regarding
splenectomy should be made in consultation with a hematologist.
Kar R et al. Clinico-hematological profile of hereditary
spherocytosis: experience from a tertiary care center in North
India. Hematology. 2009 Jun;14(3):164–7. [PMID: 19490762]
 
Perrotta S et al. Hereditary spherocytosis. Lancet. 2008 Oct 18;
372(9647):1411–26. [PMID: 18940465]
 
Schilling RF. Risks and benefits of splenectomy versus no
splenectomy for hereditary spherocytosis—a personal view. Br J
Haematol. 2009 Jun;145(6):728–32. [PMID: 19388926]
 
PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL HEMOGLOBINURIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Episodic hemoglobinuria.
 Thrombosis is common.
 Suspect in confusing cases of hemolytic anemia or pancytopenia.
 Flow cytometry is best screening test.
 
 General Considerations
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is an acquired clonal
hematopoietic stem cell disorder that results in abnormal sensitivity
of the red blood cell membrane to lysis by complement. The
underlying cause is a defect in the gene for phosphatidylinositol class
A 
(PIG-A), 
which 
results 
in 
a 
deficiency 
of 
the
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor for cellular membrane
proteins. In particular, the complement-regulating proteins CD55
and CD59 are deficient.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Classically, patients report episodic hemoglobinuria resulting in
reddish brown urine. Hemoglobinuria is most often noticed in the
first morning urine, probably because of its increased concentration.
In addition to being prone to anemia, these patients are prone to
thrombosis, especially mesenteric and hepatic vein thromboses.
Other common sites of thrombosis include the central nervous
system (sagittal vein) and the skin, with formation of painful nodules.
This hypercoagulability may be related to platelet activation by
complement. As this is a hematopoietic stem cell disorder, PNH
may progress either to aplastic anemia, to myelodysplasia, or to
acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
B. Laboratory Findings
Anemia is of variable severity, and reticulocytosis may or may not
be present. Abnormalities on the blood smear are nondiagnostic
and may include macro-ovalocytes. Since the episodic hemolysis in
PNH is intravascular, the finding of urine hemosiderin is a useful
test. Serum LDH is characteristically elevated. Iron deficiency is
commonly present and is related to chronic iron loss from
hemoglobinuria.
The white blood cell count and platelet count may be decreased.
The best screening test is flow cytometry to demonstrate deficiency
of CD59 and CD55 on red blood cells. Bone marrow morphology
is variable and may show either generalized hypoplasia or erythroid
hyperplasia.
 Treatment
Iron replacement is often indicated for treatment of iron deficiency.
This may improve the anemia but may also cause a transient
increase in hemolysis. For unclear reasons, prednisone is effective in
decreasing hemolysis, and some patients can be managed effectively
with alternate-day steroids. In severe cases and cases of
transformation to myelodysplasia, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation has been used to treat the disorder. The anti-
complement C5 antibody eculizumab has been shown to be
effective in reducing intravascular hemolysis and transfusion
requirements. In patients treated with eculizumab, a component of
extravascular hemolysis may emerge.
 When to Refer
Most patients with PNH should be under the care of a
hematologist.
Bessler M et al. The pathophysiology of disease in patients with
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Hematology Am Soc
Hematol Educ Program. 2008:104–10. [PMID: 19074066]
 
Hill A et al. Eculizumab prevents intravascular hemolysis in patients
with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and unmasks low-level
extravascular hemolysis occurring through C3 opsonization.
Haematologica. 2010 Apr;95(4):567–73. [PMID: 20145265]
 
Madkaikar M et al. Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria:
diagnostic tests, advantages, & limitations. Eur J Haematol. 2009
Dec 1;83(6):503–11. [PMID: 19686268]
 
GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE
DEFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 X-linked recessive disorder seen commonly in American black
men.
 Episodic hemolysis in response to oxidant drugs or infection.
 Minimally abnormal peripheral blood smear.
 Reduced levels of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase between
hemolytic episodes.
 
 General Considerations
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a
hereditary enzyme defect that causes episodic hemolytic anemia
because of the decreased ability of red blood cells to deal with
oxidative stresses. Oxidized hemoglobin denatures and forms
precipitants called Heinz bodies. These Heinz bodies cause
membrane damage, which leads to removal of these cells by
reticuloendothelial cells within the spleen.
Numerous types of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency (G6PD) enzymes have been described. The normal type
found in whites is designated G6PD-B. Most American blacks have
G6PD-A, which is normal in function. Ten to 15 percent of
American blacks have the variant G6PD designated A−, in which
there is only 15% of normal enzyme activity, and enzyme activity
declines rapidly as the red blood cell ages past 40 days, a fact that
explains many of the clinical findings in this disorder. Many other
G6PD variants have been described, including some Mediterranean
variants with extremely low enzyme activity.
 Clinical Findings
G6PD deficiency is an X-linked recessive disorder affecting 10–
15% of American black males. Female carriers are rarely affected
—only when an unusually high percentage of cells producing the
normal enzyme are X-inactivated.
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients are usually healthy, without chronic hemolytic anemia or
splenomegaly. Hemolysis occurs as a result of oxidative stress on
the red blood cells, generated either by infection or exposure to
certain drugs. Common drugs initiating hemolysis include dapsone,
primaquine, quini-dine, quinine, sulfonamides, and nitrofurantoin.
Even with continuous use of the offending drug, the hemolytic
episode is self-limited because older red blood cells (with low
enzyme activity) are removed and replaced with a population of
young red blood cells with adequate functional levels of G6PD.
Severe G6PD deficiency (as in Mediterranean variants) may
produce a chronic hemolytic anemia.
B. Laboratory Findings
Between hemolytic episodes, the blood is normal. During episodes
of hemolysis, there is reticulocytosis and increased serum indirect
bilirubin. The red blood cell smear is not diagnostic but may reveal a
small number of “bite” cells—cells that appear to have had a bite
taken out of their periphery, or “blister” cells. This indicates pitting
of hemoglobin aggregates by the spleen. Heinz bodies may be
demonstrated by staining a peripheral blood smear with cresyl
violet; they are not visible on the usual Wright–Giemsa–stained
blood smear. Specific enzyme assays for G6PD may reveal a low
level but may be misleading if they are performed shortly after a
hemolytic episode when the enzyme-deficient cohort of cells has
been removed. In these cases, the enzyme assays should be
repeated weeks after hemolysis has resolved. In severe cases of
G6PD deficiency, enzyme levels are always low.
 Treatment
No treatment is necessary except to avoid known oxidant drugs.
Beutler E. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency: a
historical perspective. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):16–24. [PMID:
18156501]
 
Cappellini MD et al. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency. Lancet. 2008 Jan 5;371(9606):64–74. [PMID:
18177777]
 
SICKLE CELL ANEMIA & RELATED SYNDROMES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Recurrent pain episodes.
 Positive family history and lifelong history of hemolytic anemia.
 Irreversibly sickled cells on peripheral blood smear.
 Hemoglobin S is the major hemoglobin seen on electrophoresis.
 
 General Considerations
Sickle cell anemia is an autosomal recessive disorder in which an
abnormal hemoglobin leads to chronic hemolytic anemia with
numerous clinical consequences. A single DNA base change leads
to an amino acid substitution of valine for glutamine in the sixth
position on the β-globin chain. The abnormal β chain is designated
βs and the tetramer of 
 is designated hemoglobin S.
Hemoglobin S is unstable and polymerizes in the setting of various
stressors, including hypoxemia and acidosis, leading to the
formation of sickled red blood cells.
The rate of sickling is influenced by the concentration of
hemoglobin S and by the presence of other hemoglobins within the
cell. Hemoglobin F cannot participate in polymer formation, and its
presence markedly retards sickling. Other factors that increase
sickling are red cell dehydration and factors that lead to formation
of deoxyhemoglobin S, eg, acidosis and hypoxemia, either systemic
or locally in tissues. Hemolytic crises may be related to splenic
sequestration of sickled cells (primarily in childhood before the
spleen has been infarcted as a result of repeated sickling) or with
coexistent disorders such as G6PD deficiency.
The hemoglobin S gene is carried in 8% of American blacks, and
1 of 400 American black children will be born with sickle cell
anemia. Prenatal diagnosis is available for couples at risk for
producing a child with sickle cell anemia. Genetic counseling should
be made available to such couples.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The disorder has its onset during the first year of life, when
hemoglobin F levels fall as a signal is sent to switch from production
of γ-globin to β-globin.
Chronic hemolytic anemia produces jaundice, pigment (calcium
bilirubinate) gallstones, splenomegaly (early in life), and poorly
healing ulcers over the lower tibia. Life-threatening severe anemia
can occur during hemolytic or aplastic crises, generally associated
with viral or other infection or by folic acid deficiency.
Acute painful episodes due to acute vaso-occlusion from clusters
of sickled red cells may occur spontaneously or be provoked by
infection, dehydration, or hypoxia. Common sites of acute painful
episodes include the bones (especially the back and long bones)
and the chest. These episodes last hours to days and may produce
low-grade fever. Acute vaso-occlusion may cause strokes due to
sagittal sinus thrombosis and may also cause priapism. Vaso-
occlusive episodes are not associated with increased hemolysis.
Repeated episodes of vascular occlusion especially affect the
heart, lungs, and liver. Ischemic necrosis of bone occurs, rendering
the bone susceptible to osteomyelitis due to salmonellae and
(somewhat less commonly) staphylococci. Infarction of the papillae
of the renal medulla causes renal tubular concentrating defects and
gross hematuria, more often encountered in sickle cell trait than in
sickle cell anemia. Retinopathy similar to that noted in diabetes
mellitus is often present and may lead to visual impairment.
Pulmonary hypertension may develop and is associated with a poor
prognosis.
These patients are prone to delayed puberty. An increased
incidence of infection is related to hyposplenism as well as to
defects in the alternative pathway of complement.
On examination, patients are often chronically ill and jaundiced.
There is hepatomegaly, but the spleen is not palpable in adult life.
The heart is enlarged, with a hyper-dynamic precordium and
systolic murmurs. Nonhealing ulcers of the lower leg and
retinopathy may be present.
Sickle cell anemia becomes a chronic multisystem disease, with
death from organ failure. With improved supportive care, average
life expectancy is now between 40 and 50 years of age.
B. Laboratory Findings
Chronic hemolytic anemia is present. The hematocrit is usually 20–
30%. The peripheral blood smear is characteristically abnormal,
with irreversibly sickled cells comprising 5–50% of red cells. Other
findings include reticulocytosis (10–25%), nucleated red blood
cells, and hallmarks of hyposplenism such as Howell–Jolly bodies
and target cells. The white blood cell count is characteristically
elevated to 12,000–15,000/mcL, and reactive thrombocytosis may
occur. Indirect bilirubin levels are high.
After a screening test for sickle cell hemoglobin, the diagnosis of
sickle cell anemia is confirmed by hemoglobin electrophoresis
(Table 13–9). Hemoglobin S will usually comprise 85–98% of
hemoglobin. In homozygous S disease, no hemoglobin A will be
present. Hemoglobin F levels are variably increased, and high
hemoglobin F levels are associated with a more benign clinical
course.
 Treatment
No specific treatment is available for the primary disease. Patients
are maintained on folic acid supplementation (1 mg orally daily) and
given transfusions for aplastic or hemolytic crises. Pneu mococcal
vaccination reduces the incidence of infections with this pathogen.
When acute painful episodes occur, precipitating factors should
be identified and infections treated if present. The patient should be
kept well hydrated, and oxygen should be given if the patient is
hypoxic.
Acute vaso-occlusive crises can be treated with exchange
transfusion. Exchange transfusions are primarily indicated for the
treatment of intractable pain crises, acute chest syndrome, priapism,
and stroke. Long-term transfusion therapy has been shown to be
effective in reducing the risk of recurrent stroke in children.
Cytotoxic agents increase hemoglobin F levels by stimulating
erythropoiesis in more primitive erythroid precursors. Hydroxyurea
(500–750 mg orally daily) reduces the frequency of painful crises in
patients whose quality of life is disrupted by frequent pain crises.
Although there remains some level of concern about the possibility
of secondary malignancies from this type of treatment, substantial
data suggest that it is safe. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is being studied as a possible curative option for
severely affected young patients and early results are encouraging.
 When to Refer
Patients with sickle cell anemia should have their care coordinated
with a hematologist and should be referred to a Comprehensive
Sickle Cell Center if one is available.
 When to Admit
Patients should be admitted for management of acute chest crises or
for painful episodes that do not respond to out-patient care.
Buchanan G et al. Severe sickle cell disease—pathophysiology
and therapy. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2010 Jan;16 (1
Suppl):S64–7. [PMID: 19819341]
 
Charneski L et al. Effects of antiplatelet and anticoagulant
medications on the vasoocclusive and thrombotic complications of
sickle cell disease: A review of the literature. Am J Health Syst
Pharm. 2010 Jun 1;67(11):895–900. [PMID: 20484211]
 
Field JJ et al. Acute pain in children and adults with sickle cell
disease: management in the absence of evidence-based guidelines.
Curr Opin Hematol. 2009 May 16(3):173–8. [PMID: 19295432]
 
Mousa SA et al. Diagnosis and management of sickle cell
disorders. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;663:291–307. [PMID:
20617425]
 
Platt OS. Hydroxyurea for the treatment of sickle cell anemia. N
Engl J Med. 2008 Mar 27;358(13):1362–9. [PMID: 18367739]
 
Rees DC et al. Sickle-cell disease. Lancet 2010 Dec
11;376(9757): 2018–31. [PMID: 21131035]
 
Wright J et al. The management of painful crisis in sickle cell
disease. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2010 Jun;4(2):97–106.
[PMID: 20440206]
 
 
Table 13–9. Hemoglobin distribution in sickle cell syndromes.
 
Hb, hemoglobin.
SICKLE CELL TRAIT
People with the heterozygous genotype (AS) have sickle cell trait.
These persons are clinically normal and have acute painful episodes
only under extreme conditions such as vigorous exertion at high
altitudes (or in unpressurized aircraft). These persons are
hematologically normal, with no anemia and normal red blood cells
on peripheral blood smear. They may, however, have a defect in
renal tubular function, causing an inability to concentrate the urine,
and experience episodes of gross hematuria. This appears to be
caused by many years of sickling in the sluggish circulation of the
renal medulla. A screening test for sickle hemoglobin will be
positive, and hemoglobin electrophoresis will reveal that
approximately 40% of hemoglobin is hemoglobin S (Table 13–9).
No treatment is necessary. Genetic counseling is a reasonable
strategy.
Tsaras G et al. Complications associated with sickle cell trait: a
brief narrative review. Am J Med. 2009 Jun;122(6):507–12.
[PMID: 19393983]
 
SICKLE THALASSEMIA
Patients with homozygous sickle cell anemia and α-thalassemia have
a somewhat milder form of hemolysis because of a slower rate of
sickling related to reduced hemoglobin concentration within the red
blood cell. The MCV is low.
Patients who are double heterozygotes for βs and β-thalassemia
are clinically affected with sickle cell syndromes. Sickle β0-
thalassemia is clinically very similar to homozygous SS disease.
Vaso-occlusive crises may be somewhat less severe, and the spleen
is usually not infarcted. The MCV is low, in contrast to the normal
MCV of sickle cell anemia. Hemoglobin electrophoresis reveals no
hemoglobin A but will show an increase in hemoglobin A2, which is
not present in sickle cell anemia.
Sickle β+-thalassemia is a milder disorder than homozygous SS
disease, with fewer crises. The spleen is usually palpable. The
hemolytic anemia is less severe, and the hematocrit is usually 30–
38%, with reticulocytes of 5–10%. Hemoglobin electrophoresis
shows the presence of some hemoglobin A. The MCV is low.
HEMOGLOBIN C DISORDERS
Hemoglobin C is formed by a single amino acid substitution at the
same site of substitution as in sickle hemoglobin (codon 6) but with
lysine instead of valine substituted for glutamine. Hemoglobin C is
nonsickling but may participate in polymer formation in association
with hemoglobin S. Homozygous hemoglobin C disease produces a
mild hemolytic anemia with splenomegaly, mild jaundice, and
pigment (calcium bilirubinate) gallstones. The peripheral blood
smear shows generalized red cell targeting and occasional cells with
angular crystals of hemoglobin C. Persons heterozygous for
hemoglobin C are clinically normal.
Patients with hemoglobin SC disease are double heterozygotes
for βS and βC. These patients, like those with sickle β+-thalassemia,
have a milder hemolytic anemia and milder clinical course than those
with homozygous SS disease. There are fewer vaso-occlusive
events, and the spleen remains palpable in adult life. However,
persons with hemoglobin SC disease have more retinopathy, more
ischemic necrosis of bone, and more priapism than those with SS
disease. The hematocrit is usually 30–38%, with 5–10%
reticulocytes, and compared to SS, fewer irreversibly sickled cells
on the blood smear. Target cells are more numerous than in SS
disease. Hemoglobin electrophoresis will show approximately 50%
hemoglobin C, 50% hemoglobin S, and no increase in hemoglobin
F levels.
Nagel RL et al. The paradox of hemoglobin SC disease. Blood
Rev. 2003 Sep;17(3):167–78. [PMID: 12818227]
 
Old JM. Screening and genetic diagnosis of haemoglobinopathies.
Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2007 67(1):71–86. [PMID: 17365985]
 
UNSTABLE HEMOGLOBINS
Unstable hemoglobins are prone to oxidative denaturation even in
the presence of a normal G6PD system. The disorder is autosomal
dominant and of variable severity. Most patients have a mild chronic
hemolytic anemia with splenomegaly, mild jaundice, and pigment
(calcium bilirubinate) gallstones. Less severely affected patients are
not anemic except under conditions of oxidative stress.
The diagnosis is suspected by the finding of Heinz bodies
combined with a normal G6PD level. Hemoglobin electrophoresis is
usually normal, since these hemoglobins characteristically do not
have a change in their migration pattern. These hemoglobins
precipitate in isopropanol. Usually no treatment is necessary.
Patients with chronic hemolytic anemia should receive folic acid
supplementation (1 mg orally) and avoid known oxidative drugs. In
rare cases, splenectomy may be required.
Kutlar F. Diagnostic approach to hemoglobinopathies.
Hemoglobin. 2007;31(2):243–50. [PMID: 17486507]
 
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acquired anemia caused by igg autoantibody.
 Spherocytes and reticulocytosis on peripheral blood smear.
 Positive antiglobulin (Coombs) test.
 
 General Considerations
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is an acquired disorder in which an
IgG autoantibody is formed that binds to the red blood cell
membrane and does so most avidly at body temperature (ie, a
“warm” autoantibody). The antibody is most commonly directed
against a basic component of the Rh system present on most human
red blood cells. When IgG antibodies coat the red blood cell, the
Fc portion of the antibody is recognized by macrophages present in
the spleen and other portions of the reticuloendothelial system. The
interaction between splenic macrophage and the antibody-coated
red blood cell results in removal of red blood cell membrane and
the formation of a spherocyte because of the decrease in surface-
to-volume ratio of the surviving red blood cell. These spherocytic
cells have decreased deformability and become trapped in the red
pulp of the spleen because of their inability to squeeze through the
2-mcm fenestrations of splenic sinusoids. When large amounts of
IgG are present on red blood cells, complement may be fixed.
Direct lysis of cells is rare, but the presence of C3b on the surface
of red blood cells allows Kupffer cells in the liver to participate in
the hemolytic process because of the presence of C3b receptors on
Kupffer cells. The destruction of red blood cells in the spleen and
liver designates this as extravascular hemolysis.
Approximately 50% of all cases of autoimmune hemolytic anemia
are idiopathic. The disorder may also be seen in association with
systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or
lymphomas. It must be distinguished from drug-induced hemolytic
anemia. When penicillin (or other drugs) coats the red blood cell
membrane, the antibody is directed against the membrane–drug
complex.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia typically produces an anemia of
rapid onset that may be life-threatening in severity. Patients
complain of fatigue and may present with angina or congestive heart
failure. On examination, jaundice and splenomegaly are usually
present.
B. Laboratory Findings
The anemia is of variable severity but may be severe, with
hematocrit of <10%. Reticulocytosis is present, and spherocytes
are seen on the peripheral blood smear. In cases of severe
hemolysis, the stressed bone marrow may also release nucleated
red blood cells. As with other hemolytic disorders, indirect bilirubin
is increased. Approximately 10% of patients with autoimmune
hemolytic anemia have coincident immune thrombocytopenia (Evans
syndrome).
The antiglobulin (Coombs) test forms the basis for diagnosis. The
Coombs reagent is a rabbit IgM antibody raised against human IgG
or human complement. The direct anti-globulin (Coombs) test is
performed by mixing the patient's red blood cells with the Coombs
reagent and looking for agglutination, which indicates the presence
of antibody on the red blood cell surface. The indirect antiglobulin
(Coombs) test is performed by mixing the patient's serum with a
panel of type O red blood cells. After incubation of the test serum
and panel red blood cells, the Coombs reagent is added.
Agglutination in this system indicates the presence of free antibody
in the patient's serum.
The direct antiglobulin test is positive (for IgG, complement, or
both) in autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and the indirect antiglobluin
test may or may not be positive. In approximately 10% of cases,
the direct antiglobulin test is negative. A positive indirect antiglobluin
test indicates the presence of a large amount of autoantibody that
has saturated binding sites in the red blood cell and consequently
appears in the serum. Because the patient's serum usually contains
the autoantibody, it may be difficult to obtain a compatible cross-
match with homologous red blood cells to be used for transfusion.
 Treatment
Initial treatment consists of prednisone, 1–2 mg/kg/d in divided
doses. Most transfused red blood cells will survive similarly to the
patient's own red blood cells. Because of difficulty in performing the
cross-match, “incompatible” blood may need to be given. Decisions
regarding transfusions should be made in consultation with a
hematologist and a blood bank specialist. If prednisone is ineffective
or if the disease recurs on tapering the dose, splenectomy should be
performed. Death from cardiovascular collapse can occur in the
setting of rapid hemolysis. In patients with rapid hemolysis,
therapeutic plasmapheresis should be performed early in
management to physically unload autoantibodies. Patients with
autoimmune hemolytic anemia refractory to prednisone and
splenectomy may be treated with a variety of agents. Treatment
with rituximab, a monoclonal antibody against the B cell antigen
CD20, is effective in some cases. The suggested dose is 375 mg/m2
intravenously weekly for 4 weeks. Danazol, 600–800 mg/d, is less
often effective than in immune thrombocytopenia but is well suited
for long-term use because of its low toxicity. Immunosuppressive
agents, including cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, mycophenolate
mofetil, or cyclosporine, may also be used. High-dose intravenous
immune globulin (1 g/kg daily for 2 days) may be effective in
controlling hemolysis. The benefit is short-lived (1–3 weeks), and
the drug is very expensive. The long-term prognosis for patients
with this disorder is good, especially if there is no underlying
autoimmune disorder or lymphoma. Splenectomy may cure the
disorder.
 When to Refer
Patients with autoimmune hemolytic anemia should be referred to a
hematologist for confirmation of the diagnosis and subsequent care.
 When to Admit
Patients should be hospitalized for symptomatic anemia or rapidly
falling hematocrit levels.
Barros MM et al. Warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia: recent
progress in understanding the immunobiology and the treatment.
Transfus Med Rev. 2010 Jul;24(3):195–210. [PMID: 20656187]
 
Hoffman PC. Immune hemolytic anemia—selected topics.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:80–6.
[PMID: 20008185]
 
Lambert JF et al. Geoepidemiology of autoimmune hemolytic
anemia. Autoimmun Rev. 2010 Mar;9(5):A350–4. [PMID:
19932202]
 
Packman CH. Hemolytic anemia due to warm autoantibodies.
Blood Rev. 2008 Jan;22(1):17–31. [PMID: 17904259]
 
Stasi R. Rituximab in autoimmune hematologic diseases: not just a
matter of B cells. Semin Hematol. 2010 Apr;47(2):170–9. [PMID:
20350664]
 
Tai P et al. A review of autoimmune diseases associated with
cancer. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2010 Jan 1;2:122–6. [PMID:
20036861]
 
COLD AGGLUTININ DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Increased reticulocytes on peripheral blood smear.
 Antiglobulin (Coombs) test positive only for complement.
 Positive cold agglutinin test.
 
 General Considerations
Cold agglutinin disease is an acquired hemolytic anemia due to an
IgM autoantibody usually directed against the I antigen on red
blood cells. These IgM autoantibodies characteristically will not
react with cells at 37°C but only at lower temperatures (ie, “cold”
autoantibody). Since the blood temperature (even in the most
peripheral parts of the body) rarely goes lower than 20°C, only
antibodies active at relatively higher temperatures will produce
clinical effects. Hemolysis results indirectly from attachment of IgM,
which in the cooler parts of the circulation (fingers, nose, ears) binds
and fixes complement. When the red blood cell returns to a warmer
temperature, the IgM antibody dissociates, leaving complement on
the cell. Lysis of red blood cells rarely occurs. Rather, C3b present
on the red cells is recognized by Kupffer cells (which have
receptors for C3b), and red blood cell sequestration ensues. In
some cases, the complement membrane attack complex forms,
lysing the red blood cells (intravascular hemolysis).
Most cases of chronic cold agglutinin disease are idiopathic.
Others occur in association with Waldenström macroglobulinemia,
in which a monoclonal IgM paraprotein is produced. Acute
postinfectious cold agglutinin disease occurs following mycoplasmal
pneumonia or infectious mononucleosis (with antibody directed
against antigen i rather than I).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In chronic cold agglutinin disease, symptoms related to red blood
cell agglutination occur on exposure to cold, and patients may
complain of mottled or numb fingers or toes and episodic low back
pain and dark colored urine. Hemolytic anemia is rarely severe, but
episodic hemoglobinuria may occur on exposure to cold. The
hemolytic anemia in acute postinfectious syndromes is rarely severe.
B. Laboratory Findings
Mild anemia is present with reticulocytosis and rarely spherocytes.
The blood smear made at room temperature shows agglutinated red
blood cells. The direct anti-globulin (Coombs) test will be positive
for complement only. Serum cold agglutinin titer will semi-quantitate
the autoantibody.
 Treatment
Treatment is largely symptomatic, based on avoiding exposure to
cold. Splenectomy and prednisone are usually ineffective since
hemolysis takes place in the liver and blood stream. Rituximab, a
monoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 antigen on B
lymphocytes, is the treatment of choice. The dose is 375 mg/m2
intravenously weekly for 4 weeks. Relapses may be effectively re-
treated. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (2 g/kg) may be
effective temporarily, but it is rarely used because of the high cost
and short duration of benefit. Patients with severe disease may be
treated with alkylating agents, such as cyclophosph-amide, or with
immunosuppressive agents, such as cyclosporine. As in warm IgG-
mediated autoimmune hemolysis, it may be difficult to find
compatible blood for transfusion. Red blood cells should be
transfused through an in-line blood warmer.
Berentsen S et al. Primary chronic cold agglutinin disease: an
update on pathogenesis, clinical features and therapy. Hematology.
2007 Oct;12(5):361–70. [PMID: 17891600]
 
Lechner K et al. How I treat autoimmune hemolytic anemias in
adults. Blood. 2010 Sep 16;116(11):1831–8. [PMID: 20548093]
 
Petz LD. Cold antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemias. Blood
Rev. 2008 Jan;22(1):1–15. [PMID: 17904258]
 
MICROANGIOPATHIC HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS
The microangiopathic hemolytic anemias are a group of disorders in
which red blood cell fragmentation takes place. The anemia is
intravascular, producing hemoglobin-emia, hemoglobinuria and, in
severe cases, methemalbuminemia. The hallmark of the disorder is
the finding of fragmented red blood cells (schistocytes, helmet cells)
on the peripheral blood smear.
These fragmentation syndromes can be caused by a variety of
disorders (Table 13–8). Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is
the most important of these and is discussed in Chapter 14. Clinical
features are variable and depend on the underlying disorder.
Coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia are variably present.
Chronic microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (such as is present
with a malfunctioning cardiac valve prosthesis) may cause iron
deficiency anemia because of continuous low-grade hemoglobinuria.
APLASTIC ANEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pancytopenia.
 No abnormal hematopoietic cells seen.
 Hypocellular bone marrow.
 
 General Considerations
Aplastic anemia is a condition of bone marrow failure that arises
from injury to or abnormal expression of the hematopoietic stem
cell. The bone marrow becomes hypoplastic, and pancytopenia
develops.
There are a number of causes of aplastic anemia (Table 13–10).
Direct hematopoietic stem cell injury may be caused by radiation,
chemotherapy, toxins, or pharmacologic agents. Systemic lupus
erythematosus may rarely cause suppression of the hematopoietic
stem cell by an IgG autoantibody directed against the stem cell.
However, the most common pathogenesis of aplastic anemia
appears to be autoimmune suppression of hematopoiesis by a T
cell-mediated cellular mechanism. In some cases of idiopathic
aplastic anemia, defects in maintenance of the hematopoietic stem
cell telomere length have been identified and are likely linked to
both the initiation of bone marrow failure and the propensity to later
progress to myelodysplasia, PNH, or AML.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients come to medical attention because of the consequences of
bone marrow failure. Anemia leads to symptoms of weakness and
fatigue, neutropenia causes vulnerability to bacterial or fungal
infections, and thrombocytopenia results in mucosal and skin
bleeding. Physical examination may reveal signs of pallor, purpura,
and petechiae. Other abnormalities such as hepatosplenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy, or bone tenderness should not be present, and
their presence should lead to questioning the diagnosis.
 
Table 13–10. Causes of aplastic anemia.
 
Congenital—defects in telomere length maintenance
(rare)
“Idiopathic” (probably autoimmune)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Chemotherapy, radiotherapy
Toxins: benzene, toluene, insecticides
Drugs: chloramphenicol, phenylbutazone, gold salts,
sulfonamides, phenytoin, carbamazepine, quinacrine,
tolbutamide
Posthepatitis
Pregnancy
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
B. Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of aplastic anemia is pancytopenia. However, early in
the evolution of aplastic anemia, only one or two cell lines may be
reduced.
Anemia may be severe and is always associated with
reticulocytopenia. Red blood cell morphology is unremarkable, but
there may be mild macrocytosis. Neutrophils and platelets are
reduced in number, and no immature or abnormal forms are seen on
the blood smear. The bone marrow aspirate and the bone marrow
biopsy appear hypocellular, with only scant amounts of
morphologically normal hematopoietic progenitors. The bone
marrow karyotype should be normal (or germline if normal variant).
 Differential Diagnosis
Aplastic anemia must be differentiated from other causes of
pancytopenia (Table 13–11). Hypocellular forms of myelodysplasia
or acute leukemia may occasionally be confused with aplastic
anemia. These are differentiated by the presence of morphologic
abnormalities or increased blasts, or by the presence of an
abnormal karyotype in bone marrow cells. Hairy cell leukemia has
been misdiagnosed as aplastic anemia and should be recognized by
the presence of splenomegaly and by abnormal lymphoid cells in a
hypocellular bone marrow biopsy. Pancytopenia with a
normocellular bone marrow may be due to systemic lupus
erythematosus, disseminated infection, or hypersplenism. Isolated
thrombocytopenia may occur early as aplastic anemia develops and
may be confused with immune thrombocytopenia.
 Treatment
Mild cases of aplastic anemia may be treated with supportive care.
Red blood cell transfusions and platelet transfusions are given as
necessary, and antibiotics are used to treat infections.
 
Table 13–11. Causes of pancytopenia.
 
Bone marrow disorders
     Aplastic anemia
     Myelodysplasia
     Acute leukemia
     Myelofibrosis
     Infiltrative disease: lymphoma, myeloma, carcinoma,
hairy cell leukemia, etc.
Nonmarrow disorders
     Hypersplenism
     Systemic lupus erythematosus
     Infection: tuberculosis, HIV infection, leishmaniasis,
brucellosis, CMV, parvovirus B19
     Nutritional deficiency (megaloblastic anemia)
     Medications
     Cytotoxic chemotherapy
     Ionizing radiation
     Portal hypertension with hypersplenism
     
 
Severe aplastic anemia is defined by a neutrophil count of <
500/mcL, platelets < 20,000/mcL, reticulocytes < 1%, and bone
marrow cellularity < 20%. When this constellation of features is
present (or three of the four), the median survival without treatment
is approximately 3 months, and only 20% of patients survive for 1
year. The treatment of choice for young adults (under age 40 years)
who have HLA-matched siblings is allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. Children or young adults may also benefit from
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation using an unrelated
donor. Because of the increased risks associated with unrelated-
donor allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, this treatment is
usually reserved for patients who have not benefited from
immunosuppressive therapy.
For adults over age 40 years or those without HLA-matched
donors, the treatment of choice for severe aplastic anemia is
immunosuppression with antithymocyte globulin (ATG) plus
cyclosporine (or tacrolimus). ATG is given in the hospital in
conjunction with transfusion and antibiotic support. A useful regimen
is equine ATG 40 mg/kg/d intravenously for 4 days in combination
with cyclosporine, 6 mg/kg orally twice daily. Rabbit ATG is more
immunosuppressive than equine ATG and may also be used in a
dose of 3.5 mg/kg intravenously for 4 days. ATG must be used in
combination with corticosteroids (prednisone 1–2 mg/kg/d for 1
week, followed by a taper over 2 weeks) to avoid ATG infusion
reactions and serum sickness. Responses usually occur in 1–3
months and are usually only partial, but the blood counts rise high
enough to give patients a safe and transfusion-free life. The
concurrent use of the myeloid growth factor G-CSF (filgrastim) is
controversial; it does not clearly speed granulocyte recovery and
perhaps increases the risk of progression later to myelodysplastic
syndrome or to AML.
High-dose 
immunosuppression 
with 
intravenous
cyclophosphamide, 200 mg/kg (ideal weight), has produced
remissions in refractory cases and should be considered for patients
without suitable bone marrow donors. Androgens have been widely
used in the past, with a low response rate. However, a few patients
can be maintained successfully with this form of treatment. One
regimen is oxymetholone, 2–3 mg/kg orally daily.
 Course & Prognosis
Patients with severe aplastic anemia have a rapidly fatal illness if left
untreated. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is
highly successful in children and young adults, especially with HLA-
matched siblings. For this group of patients, the durable complete
response rate exceeds 80%. Advances in the field of unrelated
donor transplantation have made this a more attractive option than
in the past, with durable responses in more than 50% of cases.
ATG treatment leads to partial response in approximately 75% of
adults, and the long-term prognosis of responders appears to be
good. Clonal hematologic disorders, such as PNH, AML, or
myelodysplasia, may develop in one-quarter of these
nontransplanted patients after many years of follow-up.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred to a hematologist.
 When to Admit
Admission is necessary for treatment of neutropenic infection or the
administration of ATG.
Armand P et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for aplastic
anemia. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2007 May;13(5): 505–
16. [PMID: 17448909]
 
Bacigalupo A. Aplastic anemia: pathogenesis and treatment.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2007:23–28.
[PMID: 18024605]
 
Bacigalupo A et al. Diagnosis and treatment of acquired aplastic
anemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2009 Apr;23(2): 159–70.
[PMID: 19327577]
 
Young NS et al. Aplastic anemia: pathophysiology and treatment.
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2010 Jan;16(1 Suppl):S119–25.
[PMID: 19782144]
 
Young NS et al. Current concepts in the pathophysiology and
treatment of aplastic anemia. Blood. 2006 Oct 15;108(8): 2509–
19. [PMID: 16778145]
 
NEUTROPENIA
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Neutrophils < 1800/mcL.
 Severe neutropenia if neutrophils < 500/mcL.
 
 General Considerations
Neutropenia is present when the neutrophil count is below
1800/mcL, although blacks, Asians, and other specific population
groups may normally have neutrophil counts as low as 1200/mcL.
The neutropenic patient is increasingly vulnerable to infection by
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and by fungi. The risk of
infection is related to the severity of neutropenia. The risk of serious
infection rises sharply with neutrophil counts below 500/mcL, and
neutrophil counts < 100/mcL (“profound neutropenia”) are
associated with a high risk of infection within days. Patients with
“chronic benign neutropenia” are free of infection for years despite
very low stable neutrophil levels. In contrast, the neutrophil count of
patients with cyclic neutropenia alternates between normal and low,
and the period during which there is a risk of infection is during the
nadirs.
A variety of bone marrow disorders and nonmarrow conditions
may cause neutropenia (Table 13–12). All the causes of aplastic
anemia (Table 13–10) and pancytopenia (Table 13–11) may cause
neutropenia. Isolated neutropenia is often due to an idiosyncratic
reaction to a drug, and agranulocytosis (complete absence of
neutrophils in the peripheral blood) is almost always due to a drug
reaction. In these cases, examination of the bone marrow shows an
almost complete absence of granulocyte precursors, with other cell
lines undisturbed. Neutropenia in the presence of a normal bone
marrow may be due to immunologic peripheral destruction
(autoimmune neutropenia), sepsis, or hypersplenism. The presence
in the serum of antineutrophil antibodies supports the diagnosis of
autoimmune neutropenia. Felty syndrome—immune neutropenia
associated with seropositive nodular rheumatoid arthritis and
splenomegaly—is another cause. Severe neutropenia may be
associated with clonal disorders of T lymphocytes, often with the
morphology of large granular lymphocytes, referred to as CD3-
positive T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia.
 
Table 13–12. Causes of neutropenia.
 
Bone marrow disorders
     Aplastic anemia
     Pure white cell aplasia
     Congenital
     Cyclic neutropenia
     Drugs: sulfonamides, chlorpromazine, procainamide,
penicillin,
        cephalosporins, cimetidine, methimazole, phenytoin,
chlorpropamide,
        antiretroviral medications, rituximab
     Benign chronic
     Large granular lymphocytic leukemia
     Hairy cell leukemia
     Myelodysplasia
Peripheral disorders
     Hypersplenism
     Sepsis
     Immune
     Felty syndrome
     HIV infection
 Clinical Findings
Neutropenia results in stomatitis and in infections due to gram-
positive or gram-negative aerobic bacteria or to fungi such as
Candida 
or Aspergillus. The most common infections are
septicemia, cellulitis, and pneumonia. In the presence of severe
neutropenia, the usual signs of inflammatory response to infection
may be reduced or absent. Nevertheless, fever in the neutropenic
patient should always be initially assumed to be of infectious origin.
 Treatment
Potential causative drugs should be discontinued. Infections are
treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, but particular attention
should be paid to enteric gram-negative bacteria. Effective
antibiotics include the quinolones such as levofloxacin, 500 mg
orally or intravenously daily, or new cephalosporins such as
cefepime, 2 g intravenously every 8 hours. The antifungal agent
voriconazole (oral or intravenous) provides both better efficacy and
reduced toxicity compared with amphotericin.
Many cases of idiopathic or autoimmune neutropenia respond to
myeloid growth factors such as granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (G-CSF). Once-weekly or twice-weekly dosage will often
be sufficient to produce a protective neutrophil count.
When Felty syndrome leads to repeated bacterial infections,
splenectomy has been the treatment of choice, but it now appears
that sustained use of G-CSF is effective and provides a nonsurgical
alternative. The prognosis of patients with neutropenia depends on
the underlying cause. Most patients with drug-induced
agranulocytosis can be supported with broad-spectrum antibiotics
and will recover completely. The myeloid growth factor G-CSF
(filgrastim) may be useful in shortening the duration of neutropenia
associated with chemotherapy. The neutropenia associated with
large granular lymphocytes may respond to therapy with either
cyclosporine or low-dose methotrexate.
 When to Refer
Refer to a hematologist if neutrophils are persistently and
unexplainably < 1000/mcL.
 When to Admit
Neutropenia by itself is not an indication for hospitalization.
However, most patients with severe neutropenia have a serious
underlying disease that may require inpatient treatment. Most
patients with febrile neutropenia require hospitalization to treat
infection.
Akhtari M et al. Autoimmune neutropenia in adults. Autoimmun
Rev. 2009 Sep;9(1):62–6. [PMID: 19293004]
 
Dale DC. Advances in the treatment of neutropenia. Curr Opin
Support Palliat Care. 2009 Sep;3(3):207–12. [PMID: 19550332]
 
Klein C. Congenital neutropenia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol
Educ Program. 2009:344–50. [PMID: 20008220]
 
Mebis J et al. Antibiotic management of febrile neutropenia: current
developments and future directions. J Chemother. 2010
Feb;22(1):5–12. [PMID: 20227985]
 
Rezaei N et al. Neutropenia and primary immunodeficiency
diseases. Int Rev Immunol. 2009;28(5):335–66. [PMID:
19811314]
 
Tesfa D et al. Idiosyncratic drug-induced agranulocytosis: possible
mechanisms and management. Am J Hematol. 2009
Jul;84(7):428–34. [PMID: 19459150]
 
LEUKEMIAS & OTHER
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE
DISORDERS
 
Myeloproliferative disorders are due to acquired clonal
abnormalities of the hematopoietic stem cell. Since the stem cell
gives rise to myeloid, erythroid, and platelet cells, qualitative and
quantitative changes are seen in all these cell lines. In some
disorders (chronic myeloid leukemia), specific chromosomal
changes are seen. In others, no characteristic cytogenetic
abnormalities are seen.
Classically, 
the 
myeloproliferative 
disorders 
produce
characteristic syndromes with well-defined clinical and laboratory
features (Tables 13–13 and 13–14). However, these disorders are
grouped together because the disease may evolve from one form
into another and because hybrid disorders are commonly seen. In
addition, mutations of the JAK2 gene appear to play a role in the
genesis of all the disorders. All of the myeloproliferative disorders
may progress to AML.
 
Table 13–13. Classification of myeloproliferative disorders.
 
Myeloproliferative syndromes
     Polycythemia vera
     Myelofibrosis
     Essential thrombocytosis
     Chronic myeloid leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Acute myeloid leukemia
POLYCYTHEMIA VERA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 JAK2 mutation.
 Increased red blood cell mass.
 Splenomegaly.
 Normal arterial oxygen saturation.
 Usually elevated white blood count and platelet count.
 
 General Considerations
Polycythemia vera is an acquired myeloproliferative disorder that
causes overproduction of all three hematopoietic cell lines, most
prominently the red blood cells. Erythroid production is independent
of erythropoietin, and the serum erythropoietin level is low. A
mutation in JAK2, a signaling molecule, has been demonstrated in
95% of cases and is almost certainly involved in the pathogenesis.
True erythrocytosis, with an elevated red blood cell mass, is
distinguished from spurious erythrocytosis caused by a constricted
plasma volume. Primary polycythemia (polycythemia vera) is a bone
marrow disorder characterized by autonomous overproduction of
erythroid cells.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Common complaints related to expanded blood volume and
increased blood viscosity are headache, dizziness, tinnitus, blurred
vision, and fatigue. Generalized pruritus, especially following a warm
shower or bath, is related to histamine release from the basophilia.
Epistaxis is probably related to engorgement of mucosal blood
vessels in combination with abnormal hemostasis due to qualitative
abnormalities in platelet function. Sixty percent of patients are men,
and the median age at presentation is 60 years. Polycythemia rarely
occurs in persons under age 40 years.
Physical examination reveals plethora and engorged retinal veins.
The spleen is palpable in 75% of cases but is nearly always
enlarged when imaged.
Thrombosis is the most common complication of polycythemia
vera and the major cause of morbidity and death in this disorder.
Thrombosis appears to be related both to increased blood viscosity
and abnormal platelet function. Uncontrolled polycythemia leads to
a very high incidence of thrombotic complications of surgery, and
elective surgery should be deferred until the condition has been
treated. Paradoxically, in addition to thrombosis, increased bleeding
also occurs. There is a high incidence of peptic ulcer disease.
B. Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of polycythemia vera is a hematocrit (at sea level) that
exceeds 54% in males or 51% in females and, at times, exceeds
60%. Red blood cell morphology is normal (Table 13–14). By
definition, the red blood cell mass is elevated, but this is now rarely
measured. The white blood count is usually elevated to 10,000–
20,000/mcL and the platelet count is variably increased, sometimes
to counts exceeding 1,000,000/mcL. Platelet morphology is usually
normal. White blood cells are usually normal, but basophilia and
eosinophilia are frequently present. Erythropoietin levels are
suppressed and are usually low. The diagnosis should be confirmed
with the finding of the JAK2 mutation (JAK2V617F), and the
absence of this finding should lead the clinician to question the
diagnosis.
The bone marrow is hypercellular, with panhyperplasia of all
hematopoietic elements, but bone marrow examination is not
necessary to establish the diagnosis. Iron stores are usually absent
from the bone marrow, having been transferred to the increased
circulating red blood cell mass. Iron deficiency may also result from
chronic gastrointestinal blood loss. Bleeding may lower the
hematocrit to the normal range (or lower), creating diagnostic
confusion, and may lead to a situation with significant microcytosis
with a normal hematocrit.
 
Table 13–14. Laboratory features of myeloproliferative disorders.
 
Abn, abnormal; N, normal.
 
Vitamin B12 levels are strikingly elevated because of increased
levels of transcobalamin III (secreted by white blood cells).
Overproduction of uric acid may lead to hyperuricemia.
Although red blood cell morphology is usually normal at
presentation, microcytosis, hypochromia, and poikilocytosis may
result from iron deficiency following treatment by phlebotomy (see
below). Progressive hypersplenism may also lead to elliptocytosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Spurious polycythemia, in which an elevated hematocrit is due to
contracted plasma volume rather than increased red cell mass, may
be related to diuretic use or may occur without obvious cause.
A secondary cause of polycythemia should be suspected if
splenomegaly is absent and the high hematocrit is not accompanied
by increases in other cell lines. Secondary causes of polycythemia
include hypoxia and smoking; carboxyhemo globin levels may be
elevated in smokers (Table 13–15). A renal CT scan or sonogram
may be considered to look for an erythropoietin-secreting cyst or
tumor. A positive family history should lead to investigation for
congenital high-oxygen-affinity hemoglobin. An absence of a
mutation in JAK2 suggests a different diagnosis. However, JAK2
mutations are also commonly found in the myeloproliferative
disorders essential thrombocytosis and myelofibrosis.
Polycythemia vera should be differentiated from other
myeloproliferative disorders (Table 13–14). Marked elevation of
the white blood count (above 30,000/mcL) suggests chronic
myeloid leukemia. Abnormal red blood cell morphology and
nucleated red blood cells in the peripheral blood are seen in
myelofibrosis. Essential thrombocytosis is suggested when the
platelet count is strikingly elevated.
 Treatment
The treatment of choice is phlebotomy. One unit of blood
(approximately 500 mL) is removed weekly until the hematocrit is <
45%; the hematocrit is maintained at < 45% by repeated
phlebotomy as necessary. Patients for whom phlebotomy is
problematic (because of poor venous access or logistical reasons)
may be managed primarily with hydroxyurea (see below). Because
repeated phlebotomy intentionally produces iron deficiency, the
requirement for phlebotomy should gradually decrease. It is
important to avoid medicinal iron supplementation, as this can
thwart the goals of a phlebotomy program. Maintaining the
hematocrit at normal levels has been shown to decrease the
incidence of thrombotic complications. A diet low in iron also is not
necessary but will increase the intervals between phlebotomies.
 
Table 13–15. Causes of polycythemia.
 
Spurious polycythemia
Secondary polycythemia
     Hypoxia: cardiac disease, pulmonary disease, high
altitude
     Carboxyhemoglobin: smoking
     Kidney lesions
     Erythropoietin-secreting tumors (rare)
     Abnormal hemoglobins (rare)
Polycythemia vera
 
Occasionally, myelosuppressive therapy is indicated. Indications
include a high phlebotomy requirement, thrombocytosis, and
intractable pruritus. There is evidence that reduction of the platelet
count to < 600,000/mcL will reduce the risk of thrombotic
complications. Alkylating agents have been shown to increase the
risk of conversion of this disease to acute leukemia and should be
avoided. Hydroxyurea is widely used when myelosuppressive
therapy is indicated. The usual dose is 500–1500 mg/d orally,
adjusted to keep platelets < 500,000/mcL without reducing the
neutrophil count to < 2000/mcL. Anagrelide may be substituted or
added when hydroxyurea is not well tolerated, but it is not the
preferred initial agent. Low-dose aspirin (75–81 mg daily) has been
shown to reduce the risk of thrombosis without excessive bleeding,
and should be part of therapy for all patients without
contraindications to aspirin.
Studies of pegylated alfa-2 interferon have demonstrated
considerable efficacy, with hematologic response rates > 80%, as
well as reductions in the abnormal clones (as measured by JAK2
mutations). Side effects were generally acceptable and much less
significant than with nonpegylated forms of interferon. Clinical trials
are underway to define the role of this therapy in polycythemia.
Although there is great interest in the development of specific
inhibitors of JAK2, none currently appear clinically useful.
Allopurinol 300 mg orally daily may be indicated for
hyperuricemia. Antihistamine therapy with diphenhydramine or other
H1-blockers may be helpful for control of pruritus, and some
reports suggest the efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
in refractory cases.
 Prognosis
Polycythemia is an indolent disease with median survival of 11–15
years. The major cause of morbidity and mortality is arterial
thrombosis. Over time, polycythemia vera may convert to
myelofibrosis or to chronic myeloid leukemia. In approximately 5%
of cases, the disorder progresses to AML, which is usually
refractory to therapy.
 When to Refer
Patients with polycythemia vera should be referred to a
hematologist.
 When to Admit
Inpatient care is not required.
Chen AT et al. JAK2 kinase inhibitors and myeloproliferative
disorders. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010 Mar;17(2):110–6. [PMID:
20087176]
 
Quintás-Cardama A et al. Pegylated interferon alfa-2a yields high
rates of hematologic and molecular response in patients with
advanced essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera. J Clin
Oncol. 2009 Nov 10;27(32):5418–24. [PMID: 19826111]
 
Spivak JL. Narrative review: thrombocytosis, polycythemia vera,
and JAK2 mutations: the phenotypic mimicry of chronic
myeloproliferation. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Mar 2;152(5):300–6.
[PMID: 20194236]
 
ESSENTIAL THROMBOCYTOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Elevated platelet count in absence of other causes.
 Normal red blood cell mass.
 Absence of bcr/abl gene (Philadelphia chromosome).
 
 General Considerations
Essential thrombocytosis is an uncommon myeloproliferative
disorder of unknown cause in which marked proliferation of the
megakaryocytes in the bone marrow leads to elevation of the
platelet count. As with polycythemia vera, the finding of a high
frequency of mutations of JAK2 in these patients promises to
advance the understanding of this disorder.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The median age at presentation is 50–60 years, and there is a
slightly increased incidence in women. The disorder is often
suspected when an elevated platelet count is found. Less frequently,
the first sign is thrombosis, which is the most common clinical
problem. The risk of thrombosis rises with age. Venous thromboses
may occur in unusual sites such as the mesenteric, hepatic, or portal
vein. Some patients experience erythromelalgia, painful burning of
the hands accompanied by erythema; this symptom is reliably
relieved by aspirin. Bleeding, typically mucosal, is less common and
is related to a concomitant qualitative platelet defect. Splenomegaly
is present in at least 25% of patients.
B. Laboratory Findings
An elevated platelet count is the hallmark of this disorder, and may
be over 2,000,000/mcL (Table 13–14). The white blood cell count
is often mildly elevated, usually not above 30,000/mcL, but with
some immature myeloid forms. The hematocrit is normal. The
peripheral blood smear reveals large platelets, but giant
degranulated forms seen in myelofibrosis are not observed. Red
blood cell morphology is normal.
The bone marrow shows increased numbers of megakaryocytes
but no other morphologic abnormalities. The Philadelphia
chromosome is absent but should be assayed by molecular testing
of peripheral blood for the bcr/abl fusion gene in all suspected
cases to differentiate the disorder from chronic myeloid leukemia.
 Differential Diagnosis
Essential thrombocytosis must be distinguished from secondary
causes of an elevated platelet count. In reactive thrombocytosis, the
platelet count seldom exceeds 1,000,000/mcL. Inflammatory
disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and ulcerative colitis cause
significant elevations of the platelet count, as may chronic infection.
The thrombocytosis of iron deficiency is observed only when
anemia is significant. The platelet count is temporarily elevated after
splenectomy. JAK2 mutations are found in 50% of cases.
Regarding other myeloproliferative disorders, the lack of
erythrocytosis distinguishes it from polycythemia vera. Unlike
myelofibrosis, red blood cell morphology is normal, nucleated red
blood cells are absent, and giant degranulated platelets are not seen.
In chronic myeloid leukemia, the Philadelphia chromosome (or
bcr/abl by molecular testing) establishes the diagnosis.
 Treatment
The risk of thrombosis can be reduced by control of the platelet
count, which should be kept at < 500,000/mcL. The treatment of
choice is oral hydroxyurea in a dose of 0.5–2 g/d. Hydroxyurea has
been shown to be more effective than oral anagrelide in preventing
thrombotic events, with no increase in toxicity. In cases in which
hydroxyurea is not well tolerated because of anemia, low doses of
anagrelide, 1–2 mg/d, may be added. Higher doses of anagrelide
are often complicated by headache, peripheral edema, and
congestive heart failure. As with polycythemia vera, trials of
pegylated interferon alfa-2 have demonstrated significant
hematologic responses, but its role in management has not yet been
established.
Vasomotor symptoms such as erythromelalgia and paresthesias
respond rapidly to aspirin, and long-term low-dose (81 mg/d) oral
aspirin may reduce the risk of thrombotic complications. In the
unusual event of severe bleeding, the platelet count can be lowered
rapidly with plateletpheresis.
 Course & Prognosis
Essential thrombocytosis is an indolent disorder and allows long-
term survival. Average survival is longer than 15 years from
diagnosis, and the survival of patients younger than 50 years does
not appear different from matched controls. The major source of
morbidity—thrombosis—can be reduced by appropriate platelet
control. Late in the course of the disease, the bone marrow may
become fibrotic, and massive splenomegaly may occur, sometimes
with splenic infarction. There is a 10–15% risk of progression to
myelofibrosis after 15 years, and a 1–5% risk of transformation to
acute leukemia over 20 years.
 When to Refer
Patients with essential thrombocytosis should be referred to a
hematologist.
Beer PA et al. Pathogenesis and management of essential
thrombocythemia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2009:621–8. [PMID: 20008247]
 
Tefferi A et al. Essential thrombocythemia and pregnancy:
observations from recent studies and management
recommendations. Am J Hematol. 2009 Oct;84(10):629–30.
[PMID: 19731306]
 
Vannucchi AM. Insights into the pathogenesis and management of
thrombosis in polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia.
Intern Emerg Med. 2010 Jun;5(3):177–84. [PMID: 19789961]
 
MYELOFIBROSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Striking splenomegaly.
 Teardrop poikilocytosis on peripheral smear.
 Leukoerythroblastic blood picture; giant abnormal platelets.
 Hypercellular bone marrow with reticulin or collagen fibrosis.
 
 General Considerations
Myelofibrosis (myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia, agnogenic
myeloid metaplasia) is a myeloproliferative disorder characterized
by fibrosis of the bone marrow, splenomegaly, and a
leukoerythroblastic peripheral blood picture with teardrop
poikilocytosis. It is believed that fibrosis occurs in response to
increased secretion of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and
possibly other cytokines. In response to bone marrow fibrosis,
extramedullary hematopoiesis takes place in the liver, spleen, and
lymph nodes. In these sites, mesenchymal cells responsible for fetal
hematopoiesis can be reactivated. As with other myeloproliferative
diseases, abnormalities of JAK2 signaling pathways may be
involved in the pathogenesis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Myelofibrosis develops in adults over age 50 years and is usually
insidious in onset. Patients most commonly present with fatigue due
to anemia or abdominal fullness related to splenomegaly.
Uncommon presentations include bleeding and bone pain. On
examination, splenomegaly is almost invariably present and is
commonly massive. The liver is enlarged in more than 50% of
cases.
Later in the course of the disease, progressive bone marrow
failure takes place as it becomes increasingly more fibrotic.
Progressive thrombocytopenia leads to bleeding. The spleen
continues to enlarge, which leads to early satiety. Painful episodes
of splenic infarction may occur. The patient becomes cachectic and
may experience severe bone pain, especially in the upper legs.
Hematopoiesis in the liver leads to portal hypertension with ascites,
esophageal varices, and occasionally transverse myelitis caused by
myelopoiesis in the epidural space.
B. Laboratory Findings
Patients are almost invariably anemic at presentation. The white
blood count is variable—either low, normal, or elevated—and may
be increased to 50,000/mcL. The platelet count is variable. The
peripheral blood smear is dramatic, with significant poikilocytosis
and numerous teardrop forms in the red cell line. Nucleated red
blood cells are present and the myeloid series is shifted, with
immature forms including a small percentage of promyelocytes or
myeloblasts. Platelet morphology may be bizarre, and giant
degranulated platelet forms (megakaryocyte fragments) may be
seen. The triad of teardrop poikilocytosis, leukoerythroblastic
blood, and giant abnormal platelets is highly suggestive of
myelofibrosis.
The bone marrow usually cannot be aspirated (dry tap), though
early in the course of the disease it is hypercellular, with a marked
increase in megakaryocytes. Fibrosis at this stage is detected by a
silver stain demonstrating increased reticulin fibers. Later, biopsy
reveals more severe fibrosis, with eventual replacement of
hematopoietic precursors by collagen. There is no characteristic
chromosomal abnormality.
 Differential Diagnosis
A leukoerythroblastic blood picture from other causes may be seen
in response to severe infection, inflammation, or infiltrative bone
marrow processes. However, teardrop poikilocytosis and giant
abnormal platelet forms will not be present. Bone marrow fibrosis
may be seen in metastatic carcinoma, Hodgkin disease, and hairy
cell leukemia. These disorders are diagnosed by characteristic
morphology of involved tissues.
Of the other myeloproliferative disorders, chronic myeloid
leukemia is diagnosed when there is marked leukocytosis, normal
red blood cell morphology, and the presence of the bcr/abl fusion
gene. Polycythemia vera is characterized by an elevated hematocrit.
Essential thrombocytosis shows predominant platelet count
elevations.
 Treatment
Patients with mild forms of the disease may require no therapy or
occasional transfusion support. Biologic agents have shown some
benefit. Lenalidomide has produced definite responses with
acceptable toxicity. Clinical trials testing the effect of JAK2
inhibitors are being performed, but none appear promising.
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been performed
successfully with 50% long-term survival and should be considered
in younger patients. The use of less toxic, nonmyeloablative
regimens for allogeneic transplantation has produced encouraging
results. Anemic patients are supported with transfusion.
Erythropoietin may increase red blood cell production and decrease
trans-fusion requirements. Splenectomy is not routinely performed
but is indicated for splenic enlargement causing recurrent painful
episodes, severe thrombocytopenia, or an unacceptable transfusion
requirement.
 Course & Prognosis
The median survival from time of diagnosis is approximately 5
years. Therapies with biologic agents, such as thalidomide and
lenalidomide, and the application of reduced-intensity allogeneic
stem cell transplantation appear to offer the possibility of improving
the outcome for many patients. End-stage myelofibrosis is
characterized by generalized asthenia liver failure, and bleeding from
thrombocytopenia, with some cases terminating in AML.
 When to Refer
Patients in whom myelofibrosis is suspected should be referred to a
hematologist.
 When to Admit
Admission is not usually necessary.
Cervantes F et al. New prognostic scoring system for primary
myelofibrosis based on a study of the International Working Group
for Myelofibrosis Research and Treatment. Blood. 2009 Mar
26;113(13):2895–901. [PMID: 18988864]
 
Kröger N et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation after reduced-
intensity conditioning in patients with myelofibrosis: a prospective,
multicenter study of the Chronic Leukemia Working Party of the
European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Blood.
2009 Dec 17;114(26):5264–70. [PMID: 19812383]
 
Mesa RA. New drugs for the treatment of myelofibrosis. Curr
Hematol Malig Rep. 2010 Jan;5(1):15–21. [PMID: 20425392]
 
Tefferi A et al. Transfusion-dependency at presentation and its
acquisition in the first year of diagnosis are both equally detrimental
for survival in primary myelofibrosis—prognostic relevance is
independent of IPSS or karyotype. Am J Hematol. 2010
Jan;85(1):14–7. [PMID: 20029953]
 
CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Elevated white blood count.
 Markedly left-shifted myeloid series but with a low percentage of
promyelocytes and blasts.
 Presence of bcr/abl gene (Philadelphia chromosome).
 
 General Considerations
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disorder
characterized by overproduction of myeloid cells. These myeloid
cells retain the capacity for differentiation, and normal bone marrow
function is retained during the early phases.
CML is characterized by a specific chromosomal abnormality
and specific molecular abnormality. The Philadelphia chromosome
is a reciprocal translocation between the long arms of chromosomes
9 and 22. A large portion of 22q is translocated to 9q, and a
smaller piece of 9q is moved to 22q. The portion of 9q that is
translocated contains abl, a protooncogene that is the cellular
homolog of the Ableson murine leukemia virus. The abl gene is
received at a specific site on 22q, the break point cluster (bcr). The
fusion gene bcr/abl produces a novel protein that differs from the
normal transcript of the abl gene in that it possesses tyrosine kinase
activity (a characteristic activity of transforming genes). Evidence
that the bcr/abl fusion gene is pathogenic is provided by transgenic
mouse models in which introduction of the gene almost invariably
leads to leukemia, and the outstanding clinical response of the
disease to inhibitors of bcr/abl provide further compelling evidence.
Early CML (“chronic phase”) does not behave like a malignant
disease. Normal bone marrow function is retained, white blood cells
differentiate and, despite some qualitative abnormalities, the
neutrophils combat infection normally. However, untreated CML is
inherently unstable, and without treatment the disease progresses to
an accelerated and then acute blast phase, which is morphologically
indistinguishable from acute leukemia. In recent years, remarkable
advances in therapy have changed the natural history of the disease,
and the relentless progression to more advanced stages of disease is
at least greatly delayed, if not eliminated.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
CML is a disorder of middle age (median age at presentation is 55
years). Patients usually complain of fatigue, night sweats, and low-
grade fever related to the hypermetabolic state caused by
overproduction of white blood cells. Patients may also complain of
abdominal fullness related to splenomegaly. In some cases, an
elevated white blood count is discovered incidentally. Rarely, the
patient will present with a clinical syndrome related to leukostasis
with blurred vision, respiratory distress, or priapism. The white
blood count in these cases is usually > 500,000/mcL.
On examination, the spleen is enlarged (often markedly so), and
sternal tenderness may be present as a sign of marrow
overexpansion. In cases discovered during routine laboratory
monitoring, these findings are often absent.
Acceleration of the disease is often associated with fever in the
absence of infection, bone pain, and splenomegaly.
B. Laboratory Findings
CML is characterized by an elevated white blood count; the median
white blood count at diagnosis is 150,000/mcL, although in some
cases the white blood cell count is only modestly increased (Table
13–14). The peripheral blood is characteristic. The myeloid series is
left shifted, with mature forms dominating and with cells usually
present in proportion to their degree of maturation. Blasts are
usually < 5%. Basophilia and eosinophilia of granulocytes may be
present. At presentation, the patient is usually not anemic. Red
blood cell morphology is normal, and nucleated red blood cells are
rarely seen. The platelet count may be normal or elevated
(sometimes to strikingly high levels).
The bone marrow is hypercellular, with left-shifted myelopoiesis.
Myeloblasts comprise < 5% of marrow cells.
The hallmark of the disease is that the bcr/abl gene is detected
by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test in the peripheral
blood. A bone marrow examination is not necessary for diagnosis,
although it is useful for prognosis and for detecting additional
chromosomal abnormalities in addition to the Philadelphia
chromosome.
With progression to the accelerated and blast phases,
progressive anemia and thrombocytopenia occur, and the
percentage of blasts in the blood and bone marrow increases. Blast
phase CML is diagnosed when blasts comprise more than 20% of
bone marrow cells.
 Differential Diagnosis
Early CML must be differentiated from the reactive leukocytosis
associated with infection. In such cases, the white blood count is
usually < 50,000/mcL, splenomegaly is absent, and the bcr/abl
gene is not present.
CML must be distinguished from other myeloproliferative disease
(Table 13–14). The hematocrit should not be elevated, the red
blood cell morphology is normal, and nucleated red blood cells are
rare or absent. Definitive diagnosis is made by finding the bcr/abl
gene.
 Treatment
Treatment is usually not emergent even with white blood counts
over 200,000/mcL, since the majority of circulating cells are mature
myeloid cells that are smaller and more deformable than primitive
leukemic blasts. In the rare instances in which symptoms result from
extreme hyper-leukocytosis (priapism, respiratory distress, visual
blurring, altered mental status), emergent leukapheresis is performed
in conjunction with myelosuppressive therapy.
The treatment of choice is imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor that inhibits the tyrosine kinase activity of the bcr/abl
oncogene. It is well tolerated and results in nearly universal (98%)
hematologic control of chronic phase disease. For patients with the
chronic phase of CML, the standard dose is 400 mg orally daily.
Higher doses such as 600–800 mg daily may produce more rapid
initial responses, but side effects are more prominent with these
doses, and there is no evidence that long-term outcomes are
improved compared with using the standard dose. The most
common toxicities are nausea, periorbital swelling, edema, rash, and
myalgia, but most of these are modest. Less than 5% of patients
discontinue the drug due to unacceptable side effects. Second-
generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as dasatinib and nilotinib,
have been approved for use as front-line therapy, and clinical trials
are in progress comparing dasatinib and nilotinib with imatinib to
determine which therapy results in the best outcome.
Response is assessed in several ways. First, the patient should
enter hematologic complete remission, with normalization of blood
counts and splenomegaly. This usually occurs within several weeks,
but should occur within 3 months. Second, cytogenetic responses
should be achieved, ideally within 6 months but certainly within 12
months. A “major cytogenetic response” is identified when < 35%
of metaphases contain the Philadelphia chromosome, and a
“complete cytogenetic response” indicates the absence of the
abnormal chromosome by standard cytogenetic testing. Quantitative
assessment of the bcr/abl gene using PCR assays is the standard
method of assessment. The current goal of therapy is to achieve a
“good molecular response,” with at least a 3-log reduction in
bcr/abl level. This roughly corresponds to a bcr/abl ratio
(compared to abl) of < 0.01. Patients who achieve this level of
molecular response have an excellent prognosis, with 100% of such
patients remaining free of progression at 8 years. Furthermore, in
this favorable group, the depth of molecular remission appears to
increase over time, leading to the hope that this can actually be a
curative treatment. Patients with suboptimal molecular responses
are best treated by switching from imatinib to an alternative tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, such as dasatinib or nilotinib. Both of these agents
can overcome approximately 90% of the mutations that can form in
bcr/abl and limit the effectiveness of imatinib. Dasatinib can be
given in an oral dose of 100 mg/d but is dependent on an acid
environment for absorption and cannot be used concurrently with
drugs that decrease stomach acidity. Patients who cannot achieve a
good molecular response to any of these agents are at increased
risk for disease progression and should be considered for treatment
with allogeneic transplantation.
Patients with an accelerated phase of CML should initially be
treated with imatinib, 600 mg/d, or dasatinib, 100 mg/d, but should
be considered for allogeneic transplantation.
The only proven curative therapy for CML is allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation, and before the development of imatinib, it
was the front-line treatment of choice. This has now dramatically
changed. The best results (80% cure rate) were obtained in patients
younger than 40 years and who received the transplant from HLA-
matched siblings within 1 year after diagnosis. Allogeneic
transplantation is now reserved for patients in whom disease is not
well controlled, in whom disease progresses after initial control, or
for those who have accelerated phase disease. It is too early to
judge whether the curative potential from transplantation in patients
who are initially treated with imatinib will be compromised
compared to using transplantation as initial therapy.
 Course & Prognosis
Since the introduction of imatinib therapy in 2001, and with the
development of molecular targeted agents, more than 80% of
patients remain alive and without disease progression at 9 years.
Patients with good molecular responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitor
therapy have an excellent prognosis, with essentially 100% survival
at 9 years, and it is likely that some fraction of these patients will be
cured. Small studies suggest that some patients with complete
molecular responses (undetectable bcr/abl) lasting more than 2
years can stop drug therapy without disease recurrence, but these
findings need confirmation and longer follow-up.
 When to Refer
All patients with CML should be referred to a hematologist.
 When to Admit
Hospitalization is rarely necessary and should be reserved for
symptoms of leukostasis at diagnosis or for transformation to acute
leukemia.
Cortes JE et al. Phase III, randomized, open-label study of daily
imatinib mesylate 400 mg versus 800 mg in patients with newly
diagnosed, previously untreated chronic myeloid leukemia in
chronic phase using molecular end points: tyrosine kinase inhibitor
optimization and selectivity study. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan
20;28(3):424–30. [PMID: 20008622]
 
Goldman JM. Initial treatment for patients with CML. Hematology
Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:453–60. [PMID:
20008231]
 
Hughes TP et al. Monitoring disease response to tyrosine inhibitor
therapy in CML. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2009:477–87. [PMID: 20008233]
 
Traer E et al. How much and how long: tyrosine kinase inhibitor
therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma
Leuk. 2010 Jun;10(Suppl 1):S20–6. [PMID: 20529804]
 
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cytopenias with a hypercellular bone marrow.
 Morphologic abnormalities in two or more hemato poietic cell
lines.
 
 General Considerations
The myelodysplastic syndromes are a group of acquired clonal
disorders of the hematopoietic stem cell. They are characterized by
the constellation of cytopenias, a usually hypercellular marrow, and
a number of morphologic and cytogenetic abnormalities. The
disorders are usually idiopathic but may be caused by cytotoxic
chemotherapy. Ultimately, the disorder may evolve into AML, and
the term “preleukemia” has been used in the past to describe these
disorders, although this progression is by no means inevitable.
Although no single specific chromosomal abnormality is seen in
myelodysplasia, there are frequently abnormalities involving the long
arm of chromosome 5 (which contains a number of genes encoding
both growth factors and receptors involved in myelopoiesis) as well
as deletions of chromosomes 5 and 7.
Myelodysplasia encompasses several heterogeneous syndromes.
Those without excess bone marrow blasts are termed “refractory
anemia,” with or without ringed sidero-blasts. One important
subgroup of the refractory anemia patients are those with the 5q–
syndrome, characterized by the cytogenetic finding of loss of part of
the long arm of chromosome 5. Those with excess blasts are
diagnosed as “refractory anemia with excess blasts” (RAEB 5–19%
blasts). Those with a proliferative syndrome including peripheral
blood monocytosis > 1000/mcL are termed “chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia” (CMML), a disorder that shares
features of myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative disorders. An
International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) classifies patients
by risk status based on the percentage of bone marrow blasts,
cytogenetics, and the severity of cytopenias.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients are usually over age 60 years. Many are diagnosed while
asymptomatic because of the finding of abnormal blood counts.
Patients usually present with fatigue, infection, or bleeding related to
bone marrow failure. The course may be indolent, and the disease
may present as a wasting illness with fever, weight loss, and general
debility. On examination, splenomegaly may be present in
combination with pallor, bleeding, and various signs of infection.
B. Laboratory Findings
Anemia may be marked and may require transfusion support. The
MCV is normal or increased, and macro- ovalocytes may be seen
on the peripheral blood smear. The white blood cell count is usually
normal or reduced, and neutropenia is common. The neutrophils
may exhibit morphologic abnormalities, including deficient numbers
of granules or deficient segmentation of the nucleus, especially a
bilobed nucleus (Pelger–Huet abnormality). The myeloid series may
be left shifted, and small numbers of promyelocytes or blasts may
be seen. The platelet count is normal or reduced, and hypogranular
platelets may be present.
The bone marrow is characteristically hypercellular, but may be
hypocellular. Erythroid hyperplasia is common, and signs of
abnormal erythropoiesis include megaloblastic features, nuclear
budding, or multinucleated erythroid precursors. The Prussian blue
stain may demonstrate ringed sideroblasts. The myeloid series is
often left shifted, with variable increases in blasts. Deficient or
abnormal granules may be seen. A characteristic abnormality is the
presence of dwarf megakaryocytes with a unilobed nucleus. A
variety of cytogenetic abnormalities in the bone marrow are
characteristic of myelodysplasia. Some patients with an indolent
form of the disease have an isolated partial deletion of chromosome
5 (5q–syndrome). The presence of other abnormalities such as
monosomy 7 or complex abnormalities is associated with more
aggressive disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
In subtle cases, cytogenetic evaluation of the bone marrow may
help distinguish this clonal disorder from other causes of cytopenias.
As the number of blasts increases in the bone marrow,
myelodysplasia is arbitrarily separated from AML by the presence
of < 20% blasts.
 Treatment
Myelodysplasia is a very heterogeneous disease, and the
appropriate treatment depends on a number of factors. For patients
in whom the primary problem is anemia, erythropoietin (epoetin
alfa), 30,000 units subcutaneously weekly, may raise the hematocrit
and reduce the red cell transfusion requirement. The overall
response rate is 20%, but a 4-week trial of epoetin alfa is
reasonable since it will be cost-effective for the subgroup of
responders. Patients with low serum erythropoietin (< 100 mU/mL)
levels are the most likely to respond to erythropoietin treatment,
whereas those with levels > 500 mU/mL almost never respond.
Unfortunately, the patients with the highest transfusion requirements
are the least likely to respond. Lenalidomide is approved for the
treatment of transfusion-dependent anemia due to myelodysplasia.
It is the treatment of choice in patients with the 5q–syndrome, with
significant responses in 70% of patients, and with responses
typically lasting longer than 2 years. In addition, nearly half of these
patients enter a cytogenetic remission with clearing of the abnormal
5q–clone, leading to the hope that lenalidomide may change the
natural history of the disease. The response rate in patients with
transfusion-dependent myelodysplasia lacking 5q–is only 25% and
responses usually last < 1 year, but it is still worth trying. The
recommended initial dose is 10 mg orally daily. The most common
side effects are neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, but venous
thrombosis is also seen and warrants prophylaxis with aspirin, 325
mg/d orally. In addition, the cost of lenalidomide is extremely high,
approximately $5000/month, and it is not usually effective either for
cell lines other than red blood cells or for patients with increased
blasts. Patients who remain dependent on red blood cell transfusion
and who do not have immediately life-threatening disease should
receive iron chelation in order to prevent serious iron overload; the
dose of oral agent deferasirox is 20 mg/kg/d. Patients affected
primarily with severe neutropenia may benefit from the use of
myeloid growth factors such as G-CSF. Oral agents such as
romiplostim and eltrombopag that stimulate platelet production by
mimicking the effect of thrombopoietin on the thrombopoietin
receptor have shown some effectiveness in raising the platelet count
in myelodysplasia.
Azacitidine is the current treatment of choice for patients with
high-risk myelodysplasia and can improve both symptoms and
blood counts and prolong both overall survival and the time to
conversion to acute leukemia. A related agent, decitabine, can
produce similar responses. Occasional patients can benefit from
immunosuppressive therapy including antithymocyte globulin (ATG).
Predictors of response to ATG include age < 60 years, absence of
5q–, and presence of HLA DR15. Allogeneic stem cell
transplantation is the only curative therapy for myelodysplasia, but
its role is limited by the advanced age of many patients and the
indolent course of disease in some subsets of patients. The optimal
use and timing of allogeneic transplantation are controversial, but the
use of reduced-intensity preparative regimens for transplantation has
expanded the role of this therapy, using both family and matched
unrelated donors.
 Course & Prognosis
Myelodysplasia is an ultimately fatal disease, and allogeneic
transplantation is the only curative therapy, with cure rates of 30–
60% depending primarily on the risk status of the disease. Patients
most commonly succumb to infections or bleeding. The risk of
transformation to AML depends on the percentage of blasts in the
bone marrow. Patients with 5q- syndrome have a favorable
prognosis, with 5-year survival over 90%. Other patients with low-
risk disease (with absence of both excess blasts and adverse
cytogenetics) may also do well, with similar survival. Those with
excess blasts or CMML have a higher (30–50%) risk of developing
acute leukemia, and short survival (< 2 years) without allogeneic
transplantation.
 When to Refer
All patients with myelodysplasia should be referred to a
hematologist.
 When to Admit
Hospitalization is needed only for specific complications, such as
severe infection.
Cazzola M et al. Prognostic classification and risk assessment in
myelodysplastic syndromes. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2010
Apr;24(2):459–68. [PMID: 20359637]
 
Cutler C. Patient selection for transplantation in the myelodys-
plastic syndromes. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2010 Apr;
24(2):469–76. [PMID: 20359638]
 
Greenberg PL. Current therapeutic approaches for patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes. Br J Haematol. 2010 Jul;150(2):
131–43. [PMID: 20507314]
 
Gurion R et al. 5-azacitidine prolongs overall survival in patients
with myelodysplastic syndrome–a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Haematologica. 2010 Feb;95(2):303–10. [PMID:
19773261]
 
ACUTE LEUKEMIA
 
 Short duration of symptoms, including fatigue, fever, and
bleeding.
 Cytopenias or pancytopenia.
 More than 20% blasts in the bone marrow.
 Blasts in peripheral blood in 90% of patients.
 Classify as AML or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
 
 General Considerations
Acute leukemia is a malignancy of the hematopoietic progenitor cell.
These cells proliferate in an uncontrolled fashion and replace normal
bone marrow elements. Most cases arise with no clear cause.
However, radiation and some toxins (benzene) are leukemogenic.
In addition, a number of chemotherapeutic agents (especially
cyclophosphamide, melphalan, other alkylating agents, and etopo-
side) may cause leukemia. The leukemias seen after toxin or
chemotherapy exposure often develop from a myelodys-plastic
prodrome and are often associated with abnormalities in
chromosomes 5 and 7, and those related to etoposide may have
abnormalities in chromosome 11q23.
Much has been learned about the molecular biology of the
leukemias. One subtype, acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), is
characterized by chromosomal translocation t(15;17), which
produces the fusion gene PML-RARα which interacts with the
retinoic acid receptor to produce a block in differentiation that can
be overcome with pharmacologic doses of retinoic acid (see
below).
Most of the clinical findings in acute leukemia are due to
replacement of normal bone marrow elements by the malignant cell.
Less common manifestations result from organ infiltration (skin,
gastrointestinal tract, meninges). Acute leukemia is potentially
curable with combination chemotherapy.
ALL comprises 80% of the acute leukemias of childhood. The
peak incidence is between 3 and 7 years of age. It is also seen in
adults, causing approximately 20% of adult acute leukemias. AML
is primarily an adult disease with a median age at presentation of 60
years and an increasing incidence with advanced age.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients have been ill only for days or weeks. Bleeding
(usually due to thrombocytopenia) occurs in the skin and mucosal
surfaces, with gingival bleeding, epistaxis, or menorrhagia. Less
commonly, widespread bleeding is seen in patients with
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) (in APL and
monocytic leukemia). Infection is due to neutropenia, with the risk
of infection rising as the neutrophil count falls below 500/mcL; with
neutrophil counts < 100/mcL, infection within days is the rule. The
most common pathogens are gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia
coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas) or fungi (Candida, Aspergillus).
Common pre sentations include cellulitis, pneumonia, and perirectal
infections; death within a few hours may occur if treatment with
appropriate antibiotics is delayed.
Patients may also seek medical attention because of gum
hypertrophy and bone and joint pain. The most dramatic
presentation is hyperleukocytosis, in which a markedly elevated
circulating blast count (usually > 200,000/mcL) leads to impaired
circulation, presenting as headache, confusion, and dyspnea. Such
patients require emergent leukapheresis and chemotherapy.
On examination, patients appear pale and have purpura and
petechiae; signs of infection may not be present. Stomatitis and gum
hypertrophy may be seen in patients with monocytic leukemia, as
may rectal fissures. There is variable enlargement of the liver,
spleen, and lymph nodes. Bone tenderness may be present,
particularly in the sternum, tibia, and femur.
 B. Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of acute leukemia is the combination of pancytopenia
with circulating blasts. However, blasts may be absent from the
peripheral smear in as many as 10% of cases (“aleukemic
leukemia”). The bone marrow is usually hypercellular and
dominated by blasts. More than 20% blasts are required to make a
diagnosis of acute leukemia.
Hyperuricemia may be seen. If DIC is present, the fibrinogen
level will be reduced, the prothrombin time prolonged, and fibrin
degradation products or fibrin D-dimers present. Patients with ALL
(especially T cell) may have a mediastinal mass visible on chest
radiograph. Meningeal leukemia will have blasts present in the spinal
fluid, seen in approximately 5% of cases at diagnosis; it is more
common in monocytic types of AML.
The Auer rod, an eosinophilic needle-like inclusion in the
cytoplasm, is pathognomonic of AML and, if seen, secures the
diagnosis. Leukemia cells retain properties of the lineages from
which they are derived. Thus, histochemistry will demonstrate
peroxidase in myeloid cells and butyrate esterase in monocytic cells,
whereas ALL cells will not contain either of these enzymes. The
phenotype of leukemia cells is usually demonstrated by flow
cytometry. AML cells usually express myeloid antigens such as CD
13 or CD 33. ALL cells of B lineage will express CD19, common
to all B cells, and most cases will express CD10, formerly known
as the “common ALL antigen.” ALL cells of T lineage will usually
not express mature T-cell markers, such as CD 3, 4, or 8, but will
express some combination of CD 2, 5, and 7 and do not express
surface immunoglobulin. Almost all ALL cells express terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT). The uncommon Burkitt type of
ALL has a “lymphoma” phenotype, expressing CD19, CD20 and
surface immunoglobulin but not TdT.
AML has been characterized in several ways. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has sponsored a classification of the
leukemias and other hematologic malignancies that incorporates
cytogenetic, molecular, and immunopheno-type information. The
most important prognostic factor is cytogenetics. For the large
group of patients with normal cytogenetics, molecular markers (such
as NPM1 and FLT3) have been shown to have prognostic import
that can be used to guide therapy. ALL is most usefully classified by
immunologic phenotype as follows: common, early B lineage, and T
cell. The cytogenetic subtype of ALL with bcr/abl (Philadelphia
chromosome) is an important subgroup that should be treated
differently.
In considering the various types of AML, APL is now
considered separately because of its unique biologic features and
unique response to non-chemotherapy treatments. APL is
characterized by the cytogenetic finding of t(15;17) and the fusion
gene PML-RARα. Among the other types of AML, cytogenetic
studies are the most powerful prognostic factors. Favorable
cytogenetics such as t(8;21) and inv(16)(p13;q22) are seen in 15%
of cases and are termed the “core-binding factor” leukemias
because of common genetic lesions affecting DNA-binding
elements. These patients have a higher chance of achieving both
short- and long-term disease control. The majority of cases of
AML are of intermediate risk and have either normal cytogenetics
or abnormalities that do not confer strong prognostic significance.
Within this large subgroup, a relatively favorable group of patients
has been defined based on a molecular signature that includes
mutations of nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1) and lacks the internal
tandem duplication of the FLT3 gene. A poor prognosis is
conferred by the cytogenetics finding of monosomy 5 or 7, or
complex cytogenetics with more than three separate abnormalities.
In ALL, the hyperdiploidy (with more than 50 chromosomes) is
associated with a better prognosis, but is seldom seen in adults.
Unfavorable cytogenetics in ALL are the Philadelphia chromosome
t(9;22) and t(4;11), which has fusion genes involving the MLL gene
at 11q23.
 Differential Diagnosis
AML must be distinguished from other myeloproliferative disorders,
chronic myeloid leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndromes. Acute
leukemia may also resemble a left-shifted bone marrow recovering
from a previous toxic insult. If the question is in doubt, a bone
marrow study should be repeated in several days to see if
maturation has taken place. ALL must be separated from other
lymphoproliferative disease such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
lymphomas, and hairy cell leukemia. It may also be confused with
the atypical lymphocytosis of mononucleosis and pertussis.
 Treatment
Most patients up to age 60 with acute leukemia are treated with the
objective of effecting a cure. The first step in treatment is to obtain
complete remission, defined as normal peripheral blood with
resolution of cytopenias, normal bone marrow with no excess
blasts, and normal clinical status. The type of initial chemotherapy
depends on the subtype of leukemia.
1. AML—Most patients with AML are treated with a combination
of an anthracycline (daunorubicin or idarubicin) plus cytarabine,
either alone or in combination with other agents. This therapy will
produce complete remissions in 80–90% of patients under age 60
years and in 50–60% of older patients (see Tables 39–3 and 39–
4). APL is treated differently from other forms of AML. Induction
therapy should include an anthracycline plus all-trans-retinoic acid.
With this approach 90–95% of patients will achieve complete
remission. For patients with high-risk APL based on an initial white
blood cell count > 10,000/mcL, arsenic trioxide should be added
and improves outcomes.
Once a patient has entered remission, postremission therapy
should be given with curative intent whenever possible. Options
include standard chemotherapy and autologous and allogeneic
transplantation. The optimal treatment strategy depends on the
patient's age and clinical status, and the risk factor profile of the
leukemia. Significant advances have been made in the treatment of
APL. With the use of all-trans retinoic acid, arsenic trioxide, and
chemotherapy, 90% of patients remain in long-term remission. Only
the uncommon group of high-risk patients (based on initial white
blood cell count > 10,000/mcL) have not shared in this favorable
outcome, but studies of the potentially synergistic combination of
retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide may improve results here. For
intermediate-risk patients with AML, cure rates for postremission
therapy are 35–40% for chemotherapy, 40–50% for autologous
transplantation, and 50–60% for allogeneic transplantation. Some
types of AML whose cytogenetics involved core-binding factors
have a more favorable prognosis, with cure rates of 50–60% with
chemotherapy and 70–80% with autologous transplantation.
Patients who do not enter remission or who have high-risk
cytogenetics (such as monosomy 7 and complex cytogenetics) do
far more poorly and are rarely cured with chemotherapy. Allogeneic
transplantation is the treatment of choice for these very high-risk
cases, but cure rates are only 20–30%. Patients over age 60 have
had a poor prognosis, even in first remission, when treated with
standard chemotherapy approaches, and only 10% become long-
term survivors. The use of reduced-intensity allogeneic transplant
appears to be improving the outcome for such patients, with initial
studies suggesting that up to 40% of selected patients may be
cured.
Once leukemia has recurred after initial chemotherapy, the
prognosis is much more guarded. For patients in second remission,
transplantation (autologous or allogeneic) offers a 20–30% chance
of cure. For those patients with APL who relapse, arsenic trioxide
can produce second remissions in 90% of cases.
2. ALL—Adults with ALL are treated with combination
chemotherapy, including daunorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and
asparaginase. This treatment produces complete remissions in 90%
of patients. Those patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive
ALL (or bcr-abl plus ALL) should have dasatinib added to their
initial chemotherapy. Older patients (over age 60) may be treated
with dasatinib plus prednisone, without chemotherapy, and 90%
can enter initial remission.
Remission induction therapy for ALL is less myelosuppressive
than treatment for AML and does not necessarily produce marrow
aplasia. After achieving complete remission, patients receive central
nervous system prophylaxis so that meningeal sequestration of
leukemic cells does not develop. As with AML, patients may be
treated with either chemotherapy or high-dose chemotherapy plus
bone marrow transplantation. Treatment decisions are made based
on patient age and risk factors of the disease. Low-risk patients
with ALL may be treated with chemotherapy with a 70% chance of
cure. Intermediate-risk patients have a 30–50% chance of cure with
chemotherapy, and high-risk patients are rarely cured with
chemotherapy alone. High-risk patients with adverse cytogenetics
or poor responses to chemotherapy are best treated with allogeneic
transplantation. Autologous transplantation is a possibility in high-
risk patients who lack a suitable donor.
 Prognosis
Approximately 70–80% of adults with AML under age 60 years
achieve 
complete 
remission. 
High-dose 
postremission
chemotherapy leads to cure in 35–40% of these patients, and high-
dose cytarabine has been shown to be superior to therapy with
lower doses. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (for younger
adults with HLA-matched siblings) is curative in 50–60% of cases.
Older adults with AML achieve complete remission in up to 50% of
instances. The cure rates for older patients with AML have been
very low (approximately 10–15%) even if they achieve remission
and are able to receive postremission chemotherapy. The use of
reduced-intensity allogeneic transplantation is being explored in
order to improve on these outcomes.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred to a hematologist.
 When to Admit
Most patients with acute leukemia will be admitted for treatment.
Ferrara F. Acute promyelocytic leukemia: what are the treatment
options? Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 Mar;11(4):587–96.
[PMID: 20163270]
 
Forman SJ. What is the role of reduced-intensity transplantation in
the treatment of older patients with AML? Hematology Am Soc
Hematol Educ Program. 2009:406–13. [PMID: 20008226]
 
Kantarjian H et al. Intensive chemotherapy does not benefit most
older patients (age 70 years or older) with acute myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2010 Nov 25;116(22):4422-9. [PMID: 20668231]
 
Rowe JM et al. How I treat acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2010
Oct 28;116(17):3147–56. [PMID: 20558611]
 
Whitman SP et al. FLT3 internal tandem duplication associates
with adverse outcome and gene- and microRNA-expression
signatures in patients 60 years of age or older with primary
cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: a Cancer and
Leukemia Group B study. Blood. 2010 Nov 4;116(18):3622–6.
[PMID: 20656931]
 
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
 
 Lymphocytosis > 5000/mcL.
 Coexpression of CD19, CD5 on lymphocytes.
 
 General Considerations
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a clonal malignancy of B
lymphocytes. The disease is usually indolent, with slowly
progressive accumulation of long-lived small lymphocytes. These
cells are immunoincompetent and respond poorly to antigenic
stimulation.
CLL is manifested clinically by immunosuppression, bone
marrow failure, and organ infiltration with lymphocytes.
Immunodeficiency is also related to inadequate antibody production
by the abnormal B cells. With advanced disease, CLL may cause
damage by direct tissue infiltration.
Information about CLL is evolving rapidly, with new findings in
biology and new treatment options, and outcomes are improving
significantly.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
CLL is a disease of older patients, with 90% of cases occurring
after age 50 years and a median age at presentation of 70 years.
Many patients will be incidentally discovered to have
lymphocytosis. Others present with fatigue or lymph-adenopathy.
On examination, 80% of patients will have lymphadenopathy and
50% will have enlargement of the liver or spleen.
The long-standing Rai classification system remains prognostically
useful today: stage 0, lymphocytosis only; stage I, lymphocytosis
plus lymphadenopathy; stage II, organomegaly; stage III, anemia;
stage IV, thrombocytopenia. These stages can be collapsed in to
low-risk (stages 0–I), intermediate risk (stage II) and high-risk
(stages III–IV).
CLL usually pursues an indolent course, but some sub-types
behave more aggressively; a variant, prolymphocytic leukemia, is
more aggressive. The morphology of the latter is different,
characterized by larger and more immature cells. In 5–10% of
cases, CLL may be complicated by autoimmune hemolytic anemia
or autoimmune thrombocytopenia. In approximately 5% of cases,
while the systemic disease remains stable, an isolated lymph node
transforms into an aggressive large cell lymphoma (Richter
syndrome).
B. Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of CLL is isolated lymphocytosis. The white blood
count is usually > 20,000/mcL and may be markedly elevated to
several hundred thousand. Usually 75–98% of the circulating cells
are lymphocytes. Lymphocytes appear small and mature, with
condensed 
nuclear 
chromatin, 
and 
are 
morphologically
indistinguishable from normal small lymphocytes, but smaller
numbers of larger and activated lymphocytes may be seen. The
hematocrit and platelet count are usually normal at presentation. The
bone marrow is variably infiltrated with small lymphocytes. The
immunophenotype of CLL demonstrates coexpression of the B
lymphocyte lineage marker CD19 with the T lymphocyte marker
CD5; this finding is commonly observed only in CLL and mantle
cell lymphoma. CLL is distinguished from mantle cell lymphoma by
the expression of CD23, low expression of surface immunoglobulin
and CD20, and the absence of overexpression of cyclin D1.
Patients whose CLL cells have mutated forms of the
immunoglobulin gene (which can currently be tested only in research
laboratories) have a more indolent form of disease; these cells
typically express low levels of the surface antigen CD38 and do not
express the zeta-associated protein (ZAP-70). Conversely, patients
whose cells have unmutated IgV genes and high levels of ZAP-70
expression do less well and require treatment sooner. The
assessment of genomic changes by fluorescence in-situ hybridization
(FISH) provides important prognostic information. The finding of
deletions of chromosome 17p or 11q confers a poor prognosis,
whereas those whose only genomic change is deletion of 13q have
a very favorable outcome.
Hypogammaglobulinemia is present in 50% of patients and
becomes more common with advanced disease. In some, a small
amount of IgM paraprotein is present in the serum.
 Differential Diagnosis
Few syndromes can be confused with CLL. Viral infections
producing lymphocytosis should be obvious from the presence of
fever and other clinical findings; however, fever may occur in CLL
from concomitant bacterial infection. Pertussis may cause a
particularly high total lymphocyte count. Other lymphoproliferative
diseases such as Waldenström macro-globulinemia, hairy cell
leukemia, or lymphoma (especially mantle cell) in the leukemic
phase are distinguished on the basis of the morphology and
immunophenotype of circulating lymphocytes and bone marrow.
 Treatment
Most cases of early indolent CLL require no specific therapy, and
the standard of care for early stage disease has been observation.
Indications for treatment include progressive fatigue, symptomatic
lymphadenopathy, or anemia or thrombocytopenia. These patients
have either symptomatic and progressive Rai stage II disease or
stage III/IV disease. The initial treatment of choice is the
combination of the chemotherapeutic agent fludarabine plus the
monoclonal antibody rituximab, with or without the addition of the
chemotherapeutic drug cyclophosphamide. The addition of
cyclophosphamide appears to have greater anti-leukemic
effectiveness, especially in patients with deletions of 11q, but also
increases the risk of treatment-related infection. The question of
whether this increase in toxicity is warranted by improved anti-
leukemic effectiveness is currently being studied. Chlorambucil,
0.6–1 mg/kg orally every 3 weeks for approximately 6 months, was
the standard treatment prior to the development of fludarabine. This
treatment is convenient, well tolerated, and remains a reasonable
first choice for elderly patients for whom frequent trips to the
clinician's office is a hardship. The combination of rituximab and the
oral alkylating agent bendamustine is another reasonable choice of
therapy for the elderly patient. The monoclonal antibody
alemtuzumab is approved for treatment of refractory CLL and can
be especially useful in clearing the blood and bone marrow of
disease. However, it produces significant immunosuppression, and
its role in primary therapy has been limited due to the risk of severe
and fatal infections. Lenalidomide has been shown to have
effectiveness in refractory cases of CLL, and its role in primary
therapy is being studied. This agent must be used carefully, since it
can induce a “flare” reaction with marked swelling of involved
lymph nodes that appears to be caused by an infiltration of reactive
T cells. The investigational agent flavopiridol has produced
encouraging results in types of CLL (such as those with deletions of
17p) that have not responded to other treatments.
Associated autoimmune hemolytic anemia or immune
thrombocytopenia may require treatment with rituximab,
prednisone, or splenectomy. Fludarabine should be avoided in
patients with autoimmune hemolytic anemia since it may exacerbate
this condition, but the concurrent use of rituximab helps reduce this
risk. 
Patients 
with 
recurrent 
bacterial 
infections 
and
hypogammaglobulinemia benefit from prophylactic infusions of
gamma globulin 0.4 g/kg/month), but this treatment is very
expensive and can be justified only when these infections are
severe.
Allogeneic transplantation offers potentially curative treatment for
patients with CLL, but it should be used only in patients whose
disease 
cannot 
be 
controlled 
by 
standard 
therapies.
Nonmyeloablative allogeneic transplant has produced encouraging
results and may expand the role of transplant in CLL. Some
subtypes of CLL with genomic abnormalities such as 17p deletions
have a sufficiently poor prognosis with standard therapies that early
intervention with allogeneic transplant is being studied to assess
whether it can improve outcomes.
 Prognosis
New therapies are changing the prognosis of CLL. In the past,
median survival was approximately 6 years, and only 25% of
patients lived more than 10 years. Patients with stage 0 or stage I
disease have a median survival of 10–15 years, and these patients
may be reassured that they can live a normal life for many years.
Patients with stage III or stage IV disease had a median survival of
< 2 years in the past, but with fludarabine-based combination
therapies, 2-year survival is now > 90% and the long-term outlook
appears to be substantially changed. For patients with high-risk and
resistant forms of CLL, there is evidence that allogeneic
transplantation can overcome risk factors and lead to long-term
disease control.
 When to Refer
All patients with CLL should be referred to a hematologist.
 When to Admit
Hospitalization is rarely needed.
Del Giudice I et al. Identification of monoclonal B-cell
lymphocytosis among sibling transplant donors for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia patients. Blood. 2009 Sep
24;114(13):2848–9. [PMID: 19779049]
 
Dreger P et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation provides
durable disease control in poor-risk chronic lymphocytic leukemia:
long-term clinical and MRD results of the German CLL Study
Group CLL 3XX trial. Blood. 2010 Oct 7;116(14): 2438–47.
[PMID: 20595516]
 
Glode AE et al. Bendamustine: a new treatment option for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Pharmacotherapy. 2009 Nov;
29(11):1375–84. [PMID: 19857152]
 
Gribben JG. How I treat CLL up front. Blood. 2010 Jan
14;115(2):187–97. [PMID: 19850738]
 
Hallek M et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a report from the International
Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia updating the
National Cancer Center Institute-Working Group 1996 guidelines.
Blood. 2008 Jun 15;111(12):5446–56. [PMID: 18216293]
 
Jaglowski SM et al. The clinical application of monoclonal
antibodies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2010 Nov
11;116(19):3705–14. [PMID: 20610811]
 
Lin TS. New agents in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Curr
g
y p
y
Hematol Malig Rep. 2010 Jan;5(1):29–34. [PMID: 20425394]
 
Lin TS et al. Phase II study of flavopiridol in relapsed chronic
lymphocytic leukemia demonstrating high response rates in
genetically high-risk disease. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Dec 10;27(35):
6012–8. [PMID: 19826119]
 
Morrison VA. Infectious complications in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia: pathogenesis, spectrum of infection, and
approaches to prophylaxis. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma. 2009
Oct;9(5):365–70. [PMID: 19858055]
 
HAIRY CELL LEUKEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pancytopenia.
 Splenomegaly, often massive.
 Hairy cells present on blood smear and especially in bone
marrow biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
Hairy cell leukemia is a rare malignancy of hematopoietic stem cells
differentiated as mature B-lymphocytes with hairy cytoplasmic
projections.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The disease characteristically presents in middle-aged men. The
median age at presentation is 55 years, and there is a striking 5:1
male predominance. Most patients present with gradual onset of
fatigue, others complain of symptoms related to markedly enlarged
spleen, and some come to attention because of infection.
Splenomegaly is almost invariably present and may be massive.
The liver is enlarged in 50% of cases; lymphadenopathy is
uncommon.
Hairy cell leukemia is usually an indolent disorder whose course
is dominated by pancytopenia and recurrent infections, including
mycobacterial infections.
B. Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of hairy cell leukemia is pancytopenia. Anemia is
nearly universal, and 75% of patients have thrombocytopenia and
neutropenia. The “hairy cells” are usually present in small numbers
on the peripheral blood smear and have a characteristic appearance
with numerous cytoplasmic projections. The bone marrow is usually
inaspirable (dry tap), and the diagnosis is made by characteristic
morphology on bone marrow biopsy. The hairy cells have a
characteristic histochemical staining pattern with tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase (TRAP). On immunophenotyping, the cells
coexpress the antigens CD11c, CD20, CD22, CD25, CD103, and
CD123. Pathologic examination of the spleen shows marked
infiltration of the red pulp with hairy cells. This is in contrast to the
usual predilection of lymphomas to involve the white pulp of the
spleen.
 Differential Diagnosis
Hairy cell leukemia should be distinguished from other
lymphoproliferative diseases such as Waldenström macro-
globulinemia and non-Hodgkin lymphomas. It also may be confused
with other causes of pancytopenia, including hypersplenism due to
any cause, aplastic anemia, and paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria.
 Treatment
The treatment of choice is intravenous cladribine (2-
chlorodeoxyadenosine; CdA), 0.1 mg/kg daily for 7 days. This is a
relatively nontoxic drug that produces benefit in 95% of cases and
complete remission in more than 80%. Responses are long lasting,
with few patients relapsing in the first few years. Treatment with
intravenous pentostatin produces similar results, but that drug is
more cumbersome to administer. The anti-CD20 monoclonal
antibody rituximab is sometimes given for minimal residual disease
after cladribine or pentostatin.
 Course & Prognosis
The development of new therapies has changed the prognosis of
this disease. Formerly, median survival was 6 years, and only one-
third of patients survived longer than 10 years. More than 95% of
patients with hairy cell leukemia now live longer than 10 years.
Cawley JC et al. The biology of hairy-cell leukaemia. Curr Opin
Hematol. 2010 Jul;17(4):341–9. [PMID: 20375887]
 
Grever MR. How I treat hairy cell leukemia. Blood. 2010 Jan
7;115(1):21–8. [PMID: 19843881]
 
Grever MR et al. Long-term follow-up studies in hairy cell
leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Oct;50(Suppl 1):23–6. [PMID:
19814694]
 
Ravandi F et al. Eradication of minimal residual disease in hairy cell
leukemia. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4658–62. [PMID:
16497968]
 
LYMPHOMAS
 
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMAS
 
 Often presents with painless lymphadenopathy.
 Pathologic diagnosis of lymphoma is made by pathologic
examination of tissue.
 
 General Considerations
The non-Hodgkin lymphomas are a heterogeneous group of
cancers of lymphocytes usually presenting as enlarged lymph nodes.
The disorders vary in clinical presentation and course from indolent
to rapidly progressive.
Molecular biology has provided clues to the pathogenesis of
these disorders, often a matter of balanced chromosomal
translocations whereby an oncogene becomes juxtaposed next to
either an immunoglobulin gene (B-cell lymphoma) or the T-cell
receptor gene or related gene (T-cell lymphoma). The net result is
oncogene overexpression and the development of lymphoma. The
best-studied example is Burkitt lymphoma, in which a characteristic
cytogenetic abnormality of translocation between the long arms of
chromosomes 8 and 14 has been identified. The protooncogene
c-myc is translocated from its normal position on chromosome 8 to
the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus on chromosome 14.
Overexpression of c-myc is related to malignant transformation
through excess B-cell proliferation. In the follicular lymphomas, the
t(14;18) translocation is characteristic and bcl-2 is overexpressed,
resulting in protection against apoptosis, the usual mechanism of B-
cell death.
 
Table 13–16. World Health organization proposed classification of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas.
 
Precursor B-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
Mature B
     Diffuse large B cell lymphoma
     Mediastinal large B cell lymphoma
     Follicular center cell lymphoma
     Small lymphocytic lymphoma
     Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (Waldenstrom
macroglobulinemia)
     Mantle cell lymphoma
     Burkitt lymphoma
     Marginal zone lymphoma
        MALT type
        Nodal type
        Splenic type
Precursor T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
Mature T (and NK cell)
     Anaplastic T cell lymphoma
     Peripheral T cell lymphoma
     utaneous T-cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)
     T/NK-cell lymphoma
 
Classification of the lymphomas is a dynamic area still undergoing
evolution. The most recent grouping (Table 13–16) separates
diseases based on both clinical and pathologic features. Eighty-five
percent of non-Hodgkin lymphomas are B-cell, 15% are T-cell,
and the remainder NK-cell in origin. These lymphomas are either
indolent (low grade) and incurable or aggressive (intermediate and
high grade) and potentially curable.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with non-Hodgkin lymphomas usually present with painless
lymphadenopathy, which may be isolated or widespread. Involved
lymph nodes may be present peripherally or centrally (in the
retroperitoneum, mesentery, and pelvis). The indolent lymphomas
are usually disseminated at the time of diagnosis, and bone marrow
involvement is frequent. Many patients with lymphoma have
constitutional symptoms such as fever, drenching night sweats, and
weight loss (referred to as “B” symptoms).
On examination, lymphadenopathy may be isolated or diffuse,
and extranodal sites of disease (such as the skin, gastrointestinal
tract, liver, and bone marrow) may be found. Patients with Burkitt
lymphoma are noted to have abdominal pain or abdominal fullness
because of the predilection of the disease for the abdomen.
Once a pathologic diagnosis is established, staging is done using
a whole body PET/CT scan, a bone marrow biopsy and, in patients
with high-grade lymphoma or intermediate-grade lymphoma with
high-risk features, a lumbar puncture.
B. Laboratory Findings
The peripheral blood is usually normal even with extensive bone
marrow involvement by lymphoma. Circulating lymphoma cells in
the blood is uncommon.
Bone marrow involvement is manifested as paratrabecular
monoclonal lymphoid aggregates. In some high-grade lymphomas,
the meninges are involved and malignant cells are found with
cerebrospinal fluid cytology. The chest radiograph may show a
mediastinal mass in some lymphomas. The serum LDH has been
shown to be a useful prognostic marker and is now incorporated in
risk stratification of treatment.
The diagnosis of lymphoma is made by tissue biopsy. Needle
aspiration may yield evidence for non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but a
lymph node biopsy (or biopsy of involved extranodal tissue) is
required for accurate diagnosis and classification.
 Treatment
The treatment of indolent lymphoma depends on the stage of
disease and the clinical status of the patient. A small number of
patients have limited disease with only one abnormal lymph node
group and may be treated with localized irradiation with curative
intent. Most patients with indolent lymphoma have disseminated
disease at the time of diagnosis and are not curable. When the
disease is not bulky and the patient not symptomatic, no initial
therapy is required. Some patients will have temporary spontaneous
remissions. There are an increasing number of reasonable treatment
options for indolent lymphomas, but no clear consensus has
emerged on the best strategy. Treatment with the anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody rituximab (intravenous) is a commonly used
treatment because of its very low toxicity and avoidance of
chemotherapy. Combinations of rituximab with chemotherapy may
also be used. Common rituximab-chemotherapy regimens include
fludarabine; bendamustine; cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and
prednisone (R-CVP); and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, prednisone (R-CHOP). Radioimmunoconjugates that
fuse anti-B cell monoclonal antibodies with radioactive nuclides may
produce improved results with modest increases in toxicity
compared with antibody alone, and two such agents (yttrium-90
ibritumomab tiuxetan and iodine-131 tositumomab) are in use.
Some patients with clinically aggressive low-grade lymphomas may
be appropriate candidates for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation with curative intent. As in other hematologic
malignancies, the use of less toxic nonmyeloablative regimens for
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant may expand the role of
transplant in this disease. The role of autologous hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation for follicular lymphoma remains uncertain, but
some patients with recurrent disease appear to have prolonged
remissions without the expectation of cure.
Patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (inter-mediate grade;
aggressive) are treated with curative intent. Those with localized
disease receive short-course immunochemotherapy (such as three
to four courses of R-CHOP) plus localized radiation or six to eight
cycles of immunochemotherapy without radiation. Most patients
who have more advanced disease are treated with six to eight
cycles of chemotherapy such as R-CHOP. Patients with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma who relapse after initial chemotherapy may
still be cured by autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
if their disease remains responsive to chemotherapy.
Patients with high-grade lymphomas (Burkitt or lymphoblastic)
require intense, cyclic chemotherapy in the hospital similar to that
given for ALL, and they also require intrathecal chemotherapy as
central nervous system prophylaxis.
Persons with special forms of lymphoma require individualized
therapy. Mantle cell lymphoma is not effectively treated with
standard 
immunochemotherapy 
regimens. 
Intensive 
initial
immunochemotherapy including autologous hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation has been shown to improve outcomes for mantle cell
lymphoma. Reduced-intensity allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation offers curative potential in mantle cell lymphoma.
Patients with mucosal associated lymphoid tumors (MALT
lymphomas) of the stomach may be appropriately treated with
combination antibiotics directed against Helicobacter pylori and
with acid blockade but require frequent endoscopic monitoring.
Alternatively, MALT confined to the stomach can also be cured
with whole-stomach radiotherapy. For primary central nervous
system lymphoma, repetitive cycles of high-dose intravenous
methotrexate with rituximab early in the treatment course produces
better results than whole brain radiotherapy and with less cognitive
impairment.
 Prognosis
The median survival of patients with indolent lymphomas is 10–15
years. These diseases ultimately become refractory to
chemotherapy. This often occurs at the time of histo-logic
progression of the disease to a more aggressive form of lymphoma.
The International Prognostic Index is widely used to categorize
patients with intermediate-grade lymphoma into risk groups.
Factors that confer adverse prognosis are age over 60 years,
elevated serum LDH, stage III or stage IV disease, and poor
performance status. Patients with no risk factors or one risk factor
have high complete response rates (80%) to standard
immunochemotherapy, and most responses (80%) are durable.
Patients with two risk factors have a 70% complete response rate,
70% of which are long-lasting. Patients with higher-risk disease
have lower response rates and poor survival with standard
treatment regimens, and alternative treatments are needed.
For patients who relapse after initial chemotherapy, the prognosis
depends on whether the lymphoma is still responsive to
chemotherapy. If the lymphoma is still responsive to chemotherapy,
autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation offers a 50%
chance of long-term lymphoma-free survival.
The treatment of older patients with lymphoma has been difficult
because of poorer tolerance of aggressive chemotherapy. The use
of myeloid growth factors and prophylactic antibiotics to reduce
neutropenic complications may improve outcomes.
Molecular profiling techniques using gene array technology are
being studied to better define subsets of lymphomas with different
biologic features and prognoses.
 When to Refer
All patients with lymphoma should be referred to a hematologist or
an oncologist.
 When to Admit
Admission is necessary only for specific complications of lymphoma
or its treatment and for the treatment of all high-grade lymphomas.
Bellan C et al. Burkitt lymphoma versus diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a practical approach. Hematol Oncol. 2010 Jun;
28(2):53–6. [PMID: 19844983]
 
Betancourt-García RD et al. Diffuse large-cell lymphoma. Part I:
clinical features, histology and prognosis. P R Health Sci J. 2009
Mar;28(1):5–11. [PMID: 19266733]
 
Flowers CR et al. Improving outcomes for patients with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010 Nov–Dec;60(6):
393–408. [PMID: 21030533]
 
García-Pallas MV et al. Diffuse large-cell lymphoma. Part II:
management. P R Health Sci J. 2009 Mar;28(1):12–7. [PMID:
19266734]
 
Jaffe ES et al. Classification of lymphoid neoplasms: the
microscope as a tool for disease discovery. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;
112(12):4384–99. [PMID: 19029456]
 
Mounier N et al. Stem cell transplantation for diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma patients in the rituximab era. Curr Opin Oncol. 2010
Dec 21 [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21169834]
 
Tan D et al. Follicular lymphoma: clinical features and treatment.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2008 Oct;22(5):863-82. [PMID:
18954741]
 
Vidal L et al. Immunotherapy for patients with follicular lymphoma:
the contribution of systematic reviews. Acta Haematol.
2011;125(1-2):23–31. [PMID: 21150184]
 
HODGKIN DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painless lymphadenopathy.
 Constitutional symptoms may or may not be present.
 Pathologic diagnosis by lymph node biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
Hodgkin disease is a group of cancers characterized by Reed–
Sternberg cells in an appropriate reactive cellular background. The
malignant cell is derived from B lymphocytes of germinal center
origin.
 Clinical Findings
There is a bimodal age distribution, with one peak in the 20s and a
second over age 50 years. Most patients seek medical attention
because of a painless mass, commonly in the neck. Others may
seek medical attention because of constitutional symptoms such as
fever, weight loss, or drenching night sweats, or because of
generalized pruritus. An unusual symptom of Hodgkin disease is
pain in an involved lymph node following alcohol ingestion.
An important feature of Hodgkin disease is its tendency to arise
within single lymph node areas and spread in an orderly fashion to
contiguous areas of lymph nodes. Late in the course of the disease,
vascular invasion leads to widespread hematogenous dissemination.
Hodgkin disease is divided into several subtypes: classic Hodgkin
(nodular sclerosis, mixed cellularity, lymphocyte rich, and
lymphocyte depleted) and non-classic Hodgkin (nodular
lymphocyte predominant). Hodgkin disease should be distinguished
pathologically from other malignant lymphomas and may
occasionally be confused with reactive lymph nodes seen in
infectious mononucleosis, cat-scratch disease, or drug reactions (eg,
phenytoin).
Patients undergo a staging evaluation to determine the extent of
disease, including serum chemistries, whole body PET/CT scan
and, for suspected advanced disease, bone marrow biopsy. The
staging nomenclature (Ann Arbor) is as follows: stage I, one lymph
node region involved; stage II, involvement of two or more lymph
node regions on one side of the diaphragm; stage III, lymph node
regions involved on both sides of the diaphragm; and stage IV,
disseminated disease with extranodal involvement. Disease staging
is further categorized as “A” if patients lack constitutional symptoms
or as “B” if patients have 10% weight loss over 6 months, fever, or
drenching night sweats (or some combination thereof). If symptoms
are present, careful evaluation for higher numerical stage is
warranted, as clinical stage IB (for example) is highly likely to
emerge as stage IIB or stage IIIB.
 Treatment
The treatment of Hodgkin disease has evolved, with radiation
therapy only used as initial treatment for stage IA patients with a
high cervical lymph node and a low erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Most patients with stage I and II disease receive a combination of
short course chemotherapy (ABVD: doxorubicin, bleomycin,
vinblastine, dacarbazine; or Stanford V: doxorubicin, vinblastine,
bleomycin, vincristine, nitrogen mustard, prednisone, etoposide)
with involved-field radio-therapy. Patients with stage III or IV
disease receive a full course of ABVD (no radiotherapy) or
Stanford V chemo-therapy (with radiotherapy to masses > 5 cm).
Patients with stage II disease and a large mediastinal mass need a
full course of ABVD or Stanford V plus mediastinal radiotherapy.
 Prognosis
All patients should be treated with curative intent. Prognosis in
Hodgkin disease is influenced by seven features: stage, age, gender,
hemoglobin, albumin, white blood count, and lymphocyte count.
The cure rate is 75% if zero to two risk features are present and
55% when three or more risk features are present. The prognosis of
patients with stage IA or IIA disease is excellent, with 10-year
survival rates in excess of 90%. Patients with advanced disease
(stage III or IV) have 10-year survival rates of 50–60%. Poorer
results are seen in patients who are older, those who have bulky
disease, and those with lymphocyte depletion or mixed cellularity on
histologic examination. Non-classic Hodgkin disease (nodular
lymphocyte predominant) is highly curable with radio-therapy alone
for low-stage disease; however, for high-stage disease, it is
characterized by long survival with repetitive relapses after
chemotherapy. Classic Hodgkin disease relapsing after initial
radiotherapy only treatment may still be curable with chemotherapy.
The treatment of choice for patients who relapse after initial
chemotherapy is high-dose chemotherapy with autologous
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. This offers a 35–50%
chance of cure when disease is still chemotherapy responsive.
 When to Refer
• All patients with Hodgkin disease should be sent to an oncologist
or hematologist.
 
• Secondary referral to a radiation oncologist might be appropriate.
 
 When to Admit
Patients with Hodgkin disease should be admitted for complications
of the disease or its treatment.
Bartlett NL. The present: optimizing therapy–too much or too
little? Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2010;
2010:108–14. [PMID: 21239779]
 
Borchmann P et al. The past: what have we learned in the last
decade? Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2010;2010:101–7. [PMID: 21239778]
 
Byrne BJ et al. Salvage therapy in Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Oncologist. 2007 Feb;12(2):156–67. [PMID: 17296811]
 
Herbst C et al. Combined modality treatment improves tumor
control and overall survival in patients with early stage Hodgkin's
lymphoma: a systematic review. Haematologica. 2010
Mar;95(3):494–500. [PMID: 19951972]
 
Schnitzer B. Hodgkin lymphoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am.
2009 Aug;23(4):747–68. [PMID: 19577168]
 
MULTIPLE MYELOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bone pain, often in the spine, ribs, or proximal long bones.
 Monoclonal paraprotein by serum or urine protein
electrophoresis or immunofixation.
 Clonal plasma cells in the bone marrow or in a tissue biopsy, or
both.
 Organ damage due to plasma cells (eg, bones, kidneys,
hypercalcemia, anemia).
 
 General Considerations
Multiple myeloma is a malignancy of hematopoietic stem cells
terminally differentiated as plasma cells characterized by
replacement of the bone marrow, bone destruction, and paraprotein
formation. The diagnosis is established when clonal plasma cells
(either kappa or lambda light chain restricted) in the bone marrow
or as a tumor (plasmacytoma), or both, are associated with end
organ damage (such as bone disease, anemia, hypercalcemia, or
renal failure) with or without paraprotein elaboration.
Malignant plasma cells can form tumors (plasmacytomas) that
may cause spinal cord compression or other soft-tissue problems.
Bone disease (eg, osteoporosis and osteolysis) is common and a
consequence of excessive osteoclast activation mediated by the
osteoprotegerin ligand.
The paraproteins (monoclonal immunoglobulins) secreted by the
malignant plasma cells may cause problems in their own right. Very
high paraprotein levels (either IgG or IgA) may cause
hyperviscosity, though this is more often caused by IgM in
Waldenström macroglobulinemia. The light chain component of the
immunoglobulin often leads to kidney failure (often aggravated by
hypercalcemia or hyperuricemia, or both). Light chain components
may be deposited in tissues as amyloid, worsening kidney failure
with albuminuria and causing a vast array of systemic symptoms.
Myeloma patients are prone to recurrent infections for a number
of reasons, including neutropenia and the immunosuppressive effects
of chemotherapy. More often, there is a failure of normal antibody
production in response to antigen challenge, and myeloma patients
are especially prone to infections with encapsulated organisms such
as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Myeloma is a disease of older adults (median age at presentation,
65 years). The most common presenting complaints are those
related to anemia, bone pain, and infection. Bone pain is most
common in the back, hips, or ribs or may present as a pathologic
fracture, especially of the femoral neck or vertebrae. Patients may
also come to medical attention because of kidney failure, spinal
cord compression, or the hyperviscosity syndrome (mucosal
bleeding, vertigo, nausea, visual disturbances, alterations in mental
status). Equally as often, patients are diagnosed because of
laboratory findings of hypercalcemia, proteinuria, elevated
sedimentation rate, or abnormalities on serum protein
electrophoresis obtained for symptoms or in routine screening
studies. A few patients come to medical attention because of organ
dysfunction due to amyloidosis.
Examination may reveal pallor, bone tenderness, and soft tissue
masses. Patients may have neurologic signs related to neuropathy or
spinal cord compression. Patients with primary amyloidosis may
have an enlarged tongue, peripheral or autonomic neuropathy,
congestive heart failure, or hepatomegaly. Splenomegaly is absent
unless amyloidosis is present. Fever occurs mainly with infection.
Acute oliguric or nonoliguric renal failure may be present due to
hypercalcemia, hyperuricemia, light-chain cast injury, or primary
amyloidosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Anemia is nearly universal. Red blood cell morphology is normal,
but rouleaux formation is common and may be marked. The
absence of rouleaux formation, however, excludes neither multiple
myeloma nor the presence of a serum paraprotein. The neutrophil
and platelet counts are usually normal at presentation. Only rarely
will plasma cells be visible on peripheral blood smear (plasma cell
leukemia).
The hallmark of myeloma is the finding of a paraprotein on serum
or urine protein electrophoresis (PEP). The majority of patients will
have a monoclonal spike visible in the β-or γ-globulin region.
Immunofixation electropheresis (IFE) will reveal this to be a
monoclonal immunoglobulin. Approximately 15% of patients will
have no demonstrable paraprotein in the serum because their
myeloma cells produce only light chains and not intact
immunoglobulin, and the light chains pass through the glomerulus
into the urine. The para-protein will be demonstrated by urine PEP
or IFE, or both. A recently developed assay for free light chains will
often demonstrate excess monoclonal light chains in serum and
urine, and in a small proportion of patients, will be the only means to
identify and quantify the paraprotein being produced. Overall,
approximately 60% of patients with myeloma will have an IgG
paraprotein, 25% an IgA, and 15% light chains only. In sporadic
cases, no paraprotein is present (“nonsecretory myeloma”); these
patients have particularly aggressive disease.
The bone marrow will be infiltrated by variable numbers of
plasma cells. The plasma cells are usually morphologically
abnormal. The plasma cells will display marked skewing of the
kappa to lambda light chain ratio, which will indicate their clonality.
Many benign processes can result in bone marrow plasmacytosis,
but the presence of atypical plasma cells, light chain restriction, and
effacement of normal bone marrow elements helps distinguish
myeloma. The International Staging System for myeloma relies
on two factors, β2-microglobulin and albumin. Stage 1 patients have
both β2-microglobulin < 3.5 mg/L and albumin ≥ 3.5 g/dL; Stage 3
is diagnosed when β2-microglobulin > 5.5 mg/L, and stage 2 is
diagnosed with values in between. The other laboratory finding of
important adverse prognostic significance is genetic abnormalities
diagnosed by FISH involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus
at chromosome 14q32. The translocations involved are usually
t(4;14) and less commonly t(14;16). The previous finding of the
adverse prognostic effect of deletions of chromosome 13 now
appear to be due to the linkage between 13q deletions and 14q32
abnormalities. Abnormalities of chromosome 17p also appear to
confer a poor prognosis.
C. Imaging
Bone radiographs are important in establishing the diagnosis of
myeloma. Lytic lesions are most commonly seen in the axial
skeleton: skull, spine, proximal long bones, and ribs. At other times,
only generalized osteoporosis is seen. The radio-nuclide bone scan
is not useful in detecting bone lesions in myeloma, since there is
usually no osteoblastic component. Positron emission tomography
(PET) scans will demonstrate significantly more disease than is
shown in plain radiographs, but their use has not yet become
standard.
 Differential Diagnosis
When a patient is discovered to have a monoclonal paraprotein, the
distinction between myeloma or another lymphoproliferative
malignancy and monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance
(MGUS) must be made. MGUS is present in 1% of all adults and
3% of adults over age 70 years. Thus, among all patients with
paraproteins, MGUS is far more common than myeloma. Most
commonly, patients with MGUS will have a monoclonal IgG spike
< 2.5 g/dL, and the height of the spike remains stable over time. In
approximately one-quarter of cases, MGUS progresses to overt
malignant disease in a median of one decade.
Myeloma is distinguished from MGUS by findings of replacement
of the bone marrow with monoclonal plasma cells, bone disease,
and progression. Although the height of the paraprotein spike
should not be used by itself to distinguish benign from malignant
disease, nearly all patients with IgG spikes > 3.5 g/dL prove to
have myeloma; an IgA spike of > 2 g/dL is similarly suggestive. If
there is doubt about whether paraproteinemia is benign or
malignant, the patient should be observed without therapy, since
there is little advantage to early treatment of asymptomatic multiple
myeloma.
Myeloma must be distinguished from reactive polyclonal
hypergammaglobulinemia. Myeloma may also have features seen in
other malignant lymphoproliferative diseases such as Waldenström
macroglobulinemia, lymphomas, and primary amyloidosis (with
which it is commonly associated).
 Treatment
Patients with minimal disease without symptoms or complications
may be closely observed without treatment. Most commonly,
patients require treatment at diagnosis because of bone pain or
other symptoms related to the disease. The initial step in treatment,
referred to as “induction,” has changed from being based on
cytotoxic chemotherapy to being based predominantly on biologic
agents. The immunomodulatory agents (IMIDs) have significant
activity in myeloma; the second-generation agent lenalidomide is
both more active and less toxic than thalidomide and has replaced
the older drug in treatment. It is given orally and is generally well
tolerated. The major side effects of lenalidomide are cumulative
myelosuppression, 
venothromboembolism, 
and 
peripheral
neuropathy. Bortezomib, a proteosome inhibitor, is also highly
active and has the advantages of producing rapid responses and of
being effective in poor-prognosis myeloma. The major side effect of
bortezomib is neuropathy (both peripheral and autonomic), and it
has the disadvantage of requiring frequent intravenous
administration. At the present time, induction therapy should include
oral dexamethasone and either lenalidomide or bortezomib or both.
The combination of bortezomib, dexamethasone, and the
chemotherapeutic agent liposomal doxorubicin is also effective.
After induction therapy, the optimal consolidation therapy for
patients under age 76 years with myeloma is autologous
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Autologous hematopoietic
stem cell transplant prolongs both duration of remission and overall
survival, and has the advantage of providing long treatment-free
intervals. Clinical trials have shown that lenalidomide or thalidomide
prolong remissions when given as posttransplant maintenance
therapy.
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is potentially
curative in myeloma, but its role has been limited because of the
unusually high treatment-related mortality rate (40–50%) in
myeloma patients. Newer and less toxic forms of allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation using nonmyeloablative
regimens have produced encouraging results.
Localized radiotherapy may be useful for palliation of bone pain
or for eradicating tumor at the site of pathologic fracture. Vertebral
collapse with its attendant pain and mechanical disturbance can be
treated with vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty. Hypercalcemia and
hyperuricemia should be treated aggressively and immobilization
and dehydration avoided. The bisphosphonates (pamidronate 90
mg or zoledronic acid 4 mg intravenously monthly) reduce
pathologic fractures in patients with bone disease and are an
important adjunct in this subset of patients. The bisphosphonates
are also used to treat malignant hypercalcemia. However, long-term
bisphosphonates, especially zoledronate, have been associated with
a risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw, and patients must be monitored
for this complication.
 Prognosis
The outlook for patients with myeloma has been steadily improving
for the past decade. The median survival of patients is now between
4 and 6 years, and it is possible that the use of newly approved
agents will result in further survival gains. Patients with low-stage
disease who lack high-risk genomic changes respond very well to
treatment and derive significant benefit from autologous
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation as part of initial therapy.
With current treatment, expected survivals for such patients are in
excess of 6 years.
 When to Refer
All patients with myeloma should be referred to a hematologist or
an oncologist.
 When to Admit
Hospitalization is indicated for treatment of acute kidney failure,
hypercalcemia, or suspicion of spinal cord compression, certain
chemotherapy regimens, or for hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.
Berenson JR. Therapeutic options in the management of myeloma
bone disease. Semin Oncol. 2010 Jun;37(Suppl 1): S20–9.
[PMID: 20682368]
 
Collins CD. Multiple myeloma. Cancer Imaging. 2010 Feb 11;
10(1):20–31. [PMID: 20159661]
 
Harousseau JL. Optimising patient outcomes in myeloma. Cancer
Treat Rev. 2010 May;36(Suppl 2):S33–5. [PMID: 20472187]
 
Jagannath S et al. The current status and future of multiple
myeloma in the clinic. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma. 2010
Feb;10(1):E1–16. [PMID: 20031526]
 
Koreth J et al. High-dose therapy with single autologous
transplantation versus chemotherapy for newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2007
Feb;13(2):183–96. [PMID: 17241924]
 
Kumar S. Treatment of newly diagnosed multiple myeloma:
advances in current therapy. Med Oncol. 2010 Jun;27(Suppl 1):
S14–24. [PMID: 20035387]
 
WALDENSTRÖM MACROGLOBULINEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Monoclonal igM paraprotein.
 Infiltration of bone marrow by plasmacytic lymphocytes.
 Absence of lytic bone disease.
 
 General Considerations
Waldenström macroglobulinemia is a malignant disease of
hematopoietic stem cells differentiated as pre-plasma B-cells that
are morphologically a hybrid of lymphocytes and plasma cells.
These cells characteristically secrete an IgM paraprotein, and many
clinical manifestations of the disease are related to this
macroglobulin. 
This 
disease 
is 
also 
referred 
to 
as
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma with IgM gammopathy.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
This disease characteristically develops insidiously in patients in their
60s or 70s. Patients usually present with fatigue related to anemia.
Hyperviscosity of serum may be manifested in a number of ways.
Mucosal and gastrointestinal bleeding is related to engorged blood
vessels and platelet dysfunction. Other complaints include nausea,
vertigo, and visual disturbances. Alterations in consciousness vary
from mild lethargy to stupor and coma. The IgM paraprotein may
also cause symptoms of cold agglutinin disease (hemolysis) or
chronic demyelinating peripheral neuropathy.
On examination, there may be hepatosplenomegaly or
lymphadenopathy. The retinal veins are engorged. Purpura may be
present. There should be no bone tenderness.
B. Laboratory Findings
Anemia is nearly universal, and rouleaux formation is common
although the red blood cells are agglutinated when the blood smear
is prepared at room temperature. The anemia is related in part to
expansion of the plasma volume by 50–100% due to the presence
of the paraprotein. Other blood counts are usually normal. The
abnormal plasmacytic lymphocytes may appear in small numbers on
the peripheral blood smear. The bone marrow is characteristically
infiltrated by the plasmacytic lymphocytes.
The hallmark of macroglobulinemia is the presence of a
monoclonal IgM spike seen on serum PEP in the β-globulin region.
The serum viscosity is usually increased above the normal of 1.4–
1.8 times that of water. Symptoms of hyperviscosity usually develop
when the serum viscosity is over four times that of water, and
marked symptoms usually arise when the viscosity is over six times
that of water. Because paraproteins vary in their physicochemical
properties, there is no strict correlation between the concentration
of paraprotein and serum viscosity.
The IgM paraprotein may cause a positive antiglobulin (Coombs)
test for complement and have cold agglutinin or cryoglobulin
properties. If macroglobulinemia is suspected but the serum PEP
shows only hypogammaglobulinemia, the test should be repeated
while taking special measures to maintain the blood at 37°C, since
the paraprotein may precipitate out at room temperature. Bone
radiographs are normal, and there is no evidence of kidney failure.
 Differential Diagnosis
Waldenström macroglobulinemia is differentiated from MGUS by
the finding of bone marrow infiltration with monoclonal malignant
cells. It is distinguished from chronic lymphocytic leukemia by bone
marrow morphology, the absence of CD5 expression and the
absence of lymphocytosis and from multiple myeloma by bone
marrow morphology and the finding of the characteristic IgM
paraprotein and the absence of bone disease.
 Treatment
Patients with marked hyperviscosity syndrome (stupor, coma,
pulmonary edema) should be treated on an emergency basis with
plasmapheresis. On a chronic basis, some patients can be managed
with periodic plasmapheresis alone. As with other indolent
malignant lymphoid diseases, the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody
rituximab has activity. However, a word of caution: the IgM often
rises first after rituximab therapy before it falls. Combination therapy
with dexamethasone, rituximab, and cyclophosphamide is
recommended for advanced disease. The proteosome inhibitor
bortezomib and the purine analog fludarabine are also active.
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is reserved for
relapsed disease.
 Prognosis
Waldenström macroglobulinemia is an indolent disease with a
median survival rate of 5 years, and 10% of patients are alive at 15
years.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred to a hematologist or an oncologist.
 When to Admit
Patients should be admitted for treatment of hyperviscosity
syndrome.
Ansell SM et al. Diagnosis and management of Waldenström
macroglobulinemia: Mayo stratification of macroglobulinemia and
risk-adapted therapy (mSMART) guidelines. Mayo Clin Proc.
2010 Sep;85(9):824–33. [PMID: 20702770]
 
Stone MJ. Waldenström's macroglobulinemia: hyperviscosity
syndrome and cryoglobulinemia. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma. 2009
Mar;9(1):97–9. [PMID: 19362986]
Treon SP. How I treat Waldenström macroglobulinemia. Blood.
2009 Sep 17;114(12):2375–85. [PMID: 19617573]
 
PRIMARY AMYLOIDOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Congo red positive amyloid protein on tissue biopsy.
 Amyloid protein is kappa or lambda immunoglobulin light chain.
 Serum or urine (or both) light chain paraprotein.
 
 General Considerations
Amyloidosis is an uncommon condition whereby a protein
abnormally deposits in tissue resulting in organ dysfunction. The
propensity of a protein to be amyloidogenic is a consequence of
disturbed translational or posttranslational protein folding. The input
of amyloid protein into tissues far exceeds its output, so amyloid
build up inexorably proceeds to organ dysfunction and ultimately
organ failure and premature death.
Amyloidosis is classified according to the type of amyloid protein
deposited. The four categories are primary (immunoglobulin light
chain 
[AL]), secondary (serum protein A, produced in
inflammatory conditions [AA]), hereditary (transthyretin [TTR];
senile amyloid [atrial natriuretic peptide]), and renal failure type
(β2-microglobulin, not filtered out by dialysis membranes [Aβ2M]).
Amyloidosis is further classified as localized (amyloid deposits only
in a single tissue type or organ) or, most common, systemic
(widespread amyloid deposition).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with localized amyloidosis have symptoms and signs
related to the affected single organ, such as hoarseness (vocal
cords) or proptosis and visual disturbance (orbits). Patients with
systemic amyloidosis have symptoms and signs of unexplained
medical syndromes, including heart failure (infiltrative/restrictive
cardiomyopathy), nephrotic syndrome, malabsorption and weight
loss, hepatic dysfunction, autonomic insufficiency, carpal tunnel
syndrome (often bilateral), and sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy.
Other symptoms and signs include an enlarged tongue; waxy, rough
plaques on skin; contusions (including the periorbital areas); cough
or dyspnea; and disturbed deglutition. These symptoms and signs
arise insidiously, and the diagnosis of amyloidosis is generally made
late in the disease process.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of amyloid protein requires a tissue biopsy that
demonstrates deposition of a pink substance in the tissue with the
H&E stain. This protein stains red with Congo Red and becomes an
apple-green color when the light is polarized. Amyloid is a triple-
stranded fibril composed of the amyloid protein, amyloid protein P,
and glycosaminoglycan. The amyloid fibrils form beta-pleated
sheets as demonstrated by electron microscopy. In primary
amyloidosis, the amyloid protein is either the kappa or lambda
immunoglobulin light chain.
When systemic amyloidosis is suspected, a blind aspiration of the
abdominal fat pad will reveal amyloid two-thirds of the time. If the
fat pad aspiration is unrevealing, then the affected organ needs
biopsy. In 90% of patients with primary amyloidosis, analysis of the
serum and urine will reveal a kappa or lambda light chain
paraprotein by PEP, IFE, or free light chain assay. Lambda amyloid
is more common than kappa amyloid, a relative proportion opposite
from normal B-cell stoichiometry. Most patients with primary
amyloidosis have a small excess of kappa or lambda restricted
plasma cells in the bone marrow that may show interstitial amyloid
deposition or amyloid in the blood vessels of the marrow.
Patients with cardiac amyloidosis have an infiltrative
cardiomyopathy with thick ventricular walls on echocardiogram that
sometimes shows a unique speckling pattern. Paradoxically, QRS
voltages are low on ECG. With renal amyloid, albuminuria is
present, which can be in the nephrotic range. Late in renal
involvement, kidney function decreases.
 Differential Diagnosis
Primary amyloidosis must be distinguished from MGUS and
multiple myeloma or other malignant lymphoproliferative syndromes.
Of note, 12% of patients with MGUS will convert to primary
amyloidosis in a median of 9 years. One-fifth of patients who have
primary amyloidosis will meet the diagnostic criteria for multiple
myeloma; conversely, 5% of patients with multiple myeloma will
have amyloid deposition of the paraprotein.
 Treatment
The treatment approach to primary amyloidosis closely resembles
that of multiple myeloma. Prospective, randomized trials of multiple
myeloma chemotherapy versus colchicine have demonstrated a
survival benefit to chemotherapy. The concept is reduction of light
chain production and a reduction of light chain deposition as a
means to arrest progressive end-organ dysfunction. Active agents in
primary 
amyloidosis 
include 
melphalan, 
dexamethasone,
lenalidomide, and bortezomib (see Table 39–10). As in multiple
myeloma, autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation after
high-dose melphalan is used in patients with reasonable organ
function and a good performance status. The treatment-related
mortality, however, is higher in patients with primary amyloidosis
than in myeloma (15% vs 1%). Some patients will demonstrate
end-organ improvement after therapy. Research to develop agents
that facilitate amyloid dissolution have not yielded good results thus
far.
 Prognosis
Untreated primary amyloidosis is associated with progressive end-
organ failure and premature death. There is no known cure for
primary amyloidosis. Although virtually every tissue examined at
autopsy will contain amyloid, patients with primary amyloidosis will
have one or two primary organs failing that clinically drive the
presentation and prognosis. The cardiac biomarkers B-type
natriuretic peptides and troponins T and I are prognostic in this
disease regardless of overt clinical cardiac involvement. Historically,
patients with predominantly cardiac or autonomic nerve
presentations had survivals of 3–9 months, and those with carpal
tunnel syndrome or nephrosis, 1.5–3 years, and those with
peripheral neuropathy, 5 years. These survivals are roughly doubled
with multiple myeloma-like therapy. In those patients able to
undergo autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, the
median survival now approaches 5 years.
 When to Refer
• All patients who have primary amyloidosis or in whom it is
suspected should be referred to a hematologist or oncologist.
 
• All patients with hereditary amyloidosis should be referred to a
hepatologist for consideration of liver transplantation.
 
 When to Admit
• Patients with systemic amyloidosis require hospitalization to treat
exacerbations of end-organ failure, such as heart failure to liver
failure.
 
• Patients with primary amyloidosis require hospitalization to
undergo autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
 
Cohen AD et al. Systemic light-chain amyloidosis: advances in
diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy. Hematology Am Soc Hematol
Educ Program. 2010;2010:287–94. [PMID: 21239808]
 
Landgren O. Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance and smoldering myeloma: new insights into
pathophysiology and epidemiology. Hematology Am Soc Hematol
Educ Program. 2010;2010:295–302. [PMID: 21239809]
 
Mhaskar R et al. Role of high-dose chemotherapy and autologous
hematopoietic cell transplantation in primary systemic amyloidosis:
a systematic review. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2009
Aug;15(8):893–902. [PMID: 19589478]
 
STEM CELL
TRANSPLANTATION
 
Stem cell transplantation using hematopoietic stem cells is an
extremely valuable treatment for a variety of hematologic
malignancies and is also used in a few non- hematologic cancers
and some nonmalignant conditions. In many cases, stem cell
transplantation offers the only curative option for some types of
cancer and can be a life-saving procedure.
The basis of treatment with stem cell transplantation is the ability
of the hematopoietic stem cell to completely restore bone marrow
function and formation of all blood components, as well as the
ability to reform the immune system. These hematopoietic stem cells
were formerly collected from the bone marrow but are now more
commonly collected from the peripheral blood after maneuvers,
usually involving the administration of filgrastim (G-CSF) to mobilize
them from the bone marrow into the blood.
In the field of cancer chemotherapy, the dose-limiting toxicity of
almost all chemotherapy has been myelosuppression, that is,
damage to the bone marrow. It is typical during the administration
of chemotherapy for blood counts to be transiently suppressed and
to have to wait for recovery of the blood in order to safely give the
next treatment. However, if too high a dose of chemotherapy is
given, it is possible to damage the bone marrow beyond recovery,
and for the blood counts to never return to within normal ranges.
For cancers for which there is a dose-response relationship, that is,
a relationship between the dose of chemotherapy administered and
the number of cancer cells killed, the limits placed on the allowable
dose of chemotherapy can make the difference between cure and
failure to cure. In stem cell transplantation, the limit placed on the
allowable dose of chemotherapy by the risks of permanent bone
marrow damage is eliminated and much higher doses of
chemotherapy can be given, since re-infusion of hematopoietic stem
cells can completely restore the bone marrow.
AUTOLOGOUS STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Autologous stem cell transplantion is a treatment in which
hematopoietic stem cells are collected from the patient and then re-
infused after chemotherapy. Therefore, autologous stem cell
transplantation relies solely for its effectiveness on the ability to give
much higher doses of chemotherapy than would otherwise be
possible. In this procedure, the hematopoietic stem cells are usually
collected from the patient's peripheral blood. First, the
hematopoietic stem cells are mobilized from the bone marrow into
the blood. This can be accomplished by a variety of techniques,
most commonly the use of myeloid growth factors such as filgrastim
either alone or in combination with chemotherapy. The
investigational agent plerixafor can also mobilize these cells into the
blood. During the process of leukopheresis the patient's blood is
centrifuged into layers of different densities; the hematopoietic stem
cells are collected from the appropriate layer while the remainder of
the blood elements are returned unchanged to the patient. After
collection, these autologous hematopoietic stem cells are frozen and
cryopre-served for later use. Treatment with autologous stem cell
transplantation involves administration of high-dose chemotherapy
(referred to as the “preparative regimen”) followed, after clearance
of the chemotherapy out of the patient's system, by intravenous re-
infusion of the thawed autologous hematopoietic stem cells. The
hematopoietic stem cells home to the bone marrow and grow into
new bone marrow cells.
With the autologous stem cell transplantation treatment, there is a
period of severe pancytopenia during the gap between
myelosuppression caused by the chemotherapy and the recovery
produced from the new bone marrow derived from the infused
hematopoietic stem cells. This period of pancytopenia typically lasts
7–10 days and requires support with transfusions of red blood cells
and platelets as well as antibiotics. Hospitalization to receive such
treatment usually lasts 2–3 weeks. The morbidity of such a
treatment varies according to the type of chemo-therapy used, and
the chance of fatal treatment-related complications is between 1%
and 4%.
Autologous stem cell transplantation has the potential to cure
cancers that would otherwise be fatal. Autologous stem cell
transplantation is the treatment of choice for lymphomas such as
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas that have recurred after initial
chemotherapy but are still responsive to chemotherapy. It is
similarly also the treatment of choice for relapsed Hodgkin
lymphoma that still responds to chemotherapy, and for testicular
germ cell cancers that have recurred. Autologous stem cell
transplantation is also the treatment of choice for mantle cell
lymphomas in first remission. Autologous stem cell transplantation
also plays an important role in the treatment of AML in both first
and second remission and is potentially curative in these settings.
Autologous stem cell transplantation is currently part of the standard
of care for the treatment of multiple myeloma, based not on curative
potential, but the prolongation of remission.
ALLOGENEIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is a treatment in which the
source of hematopoietic stem cells to restore bone marrow and
immune function are derived, not from the patient, but from a
different donor. Initially allogeneic stem cell transplantation was
thought to derive its effectiveness from the high-dose chemotherapy
(or radiation plus chemotherapy) that forms the “preparative
regimen” in a manner similar to autologous stem cell transplantation.
However, it is now known that there is a second type of effector
mechanism in allogeneic stem cell transplantation, the alloimmune
graft-versus-malignancy (GVM) effect derived from the donor
immune system. In some cases, this GVM effect can be more
important than the chemotherapy in producing a cure of disease.
In order to perform an allogeneic stem cell transplantation, an
appropriate donor of hematopoietic stem cells must be located. At
the present time, it is important that the donor be matched with the
patient (recipient) at the HLA loci (HLA A, B, C, DR) that specify
major histocompatibility antigens. These donors may be full siblings
or unrelated donors recruited from a large panel of anonymous
volunteer donors through the National Marrow Donor Program
(NMDP). Cells derived from umbilical cord blood units may also
be used. The hematopoietic stem cells are collected from the donor
either from the bone marrow, or, more commonly through
leukopheresis of the blood after mobilizing hematopoietic stem cells
from the bone marrow with filgrastim (G-CSF). They are infused
intravenously into the recipient and may be given either fresh or after
cryopreservation and thawing. The hematopoietic stem cells home
to the bone marrow and start to grow.
In the allogeneic stem cell transplantation procedure, the patient
is treated with the “preparative regimen” with two purposes: to treat
the underlying cancer and to sufficiently suppress the patient's
immune system so that the hematopoietic stem cells from the donor
will not be rejected. As with autologous stem cell transplantation,
the hematopoietic stem cells are infused after the preparative
chemotherapy has been given and has had a chance to clear from
the body. There is a period of pancytopenia in the gap between the
effect of the chemotherapy given to the patient and the time it takes
the infused hematopoietic stem cells to grow into bone marrow,
usually 10–14 days.
A major difference between autologous and allogeneic SCT is
that in the allogeneic setting, the patient becomes a “chimera”, that
is, a mixture of self and non-self. In allogeneic stem cell
transplantation, the infused cells contain mature cells of the donor
immune system, and the infused hematopoietic stem cells will grow
into bone marrow and blood cells as well as cells of the new
immune system. Unless the donor is an identical twin (called a
“syngeneic transplant”), the donor's immune system will recognize
the patient's tissues as foreign and initiate the “graft- versus-host”
(GVH) reaction, the graft from the donor reacting against the patient
(host). This GVH is the major cause of morbidity and mortality
during an allogeneic SCT. Immunosuppression must be given during
allogeneic stem cell transplantation to reduce the incidence and
severity of GVH reaction. The most common regimen used for
GVH prophylaxis is a combination of a calcineurin inhibitor
(cyclosporine or tacrolimus) plus methotrexate. In contrast to the
experience with solid organ transplant in which life-long
immunosuppression is required to prevent rejection of the
transplanted organ, in most cases of allogeneic stem cell
transplantation, the immunosuppression can be tapered and
discontinued 6 or more months after transplantation.
However, there is an important and positive side to the allo-
immune reaction of the donor against the host. If there are residual
cancer cells present in the patient that have survived the high-dose
chemoradiotherapy of the preparative regimen, these residual
cancer cells can be recognized as foreign by the donor immune
system and killed in the GVM effect. Even cells that are resistant to
chemo-therapy may not be resistant to killing through the immune
system. Depending on the type of cancer cell, this can be a highly
effective mechanism of long-term cancer control. Based on the
understanding of how important GVM can be, the allogeneic stem
cell transplantation procedure can be modified by reducing the
intensity of the preparative regimen, relying for cure more on the
GVM effect and less on the high-dose chemotherapy. In these
“reduced-intensity” allogeneic stem cell transplantation procedures,
the preparative regimen still has to suppress the patient's immune
system enough to avoid rejection of the donor hematopoietic stem
cells, but these types of transplants can be far less toxic than full-
dose transplants. Based on this greatly reduced short-term toxicity,
the potential benefits of allogeneic stem cell transplantation have
been extended to older adults (age 60–75) and to those with
comorbid conditions that would have been a contraindication to
standard full-dose stem cell transplantation.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is the treatment of choice for
high-risk acute leukemias, and in many cases will be the only
potentially curative treatment. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is
the only curative treatment for myelodysplasia and for CML,
although its use in CML has been greatly curtailed based on the
effectiveness of imatinib and related tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation is also the only definitive
treatment for most cases of severe aplastic anemia. The use of
reduced-intensity allogeneic stem cell transplantation has led to its
exploration in the management of difficult cases of CLL and
follicular lymphoma, and it will likely play a major role in these
diseases. Given the age of many patients with AML and
myelodysplasia, this procedure will likely play an important role in
these diseases as well.
Deeg HJ et al. Who is fit for allogeneic transplantation? Blood.
2010 Dec 2;116(23):4762–70. [PMID: 20702782]
 
Dreger P. Allotransplantation for chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:602–9.
[PMID: 20008245]
 
Hsieh MM et al. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation for sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec
10; 361(24):2309–17. [PMID: 20007560]
 
Sorror ML. Comorbidities and hematopoietic cell transplantation
outcomes. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2010;2010:237–47. [PMID: 21239800]
 
BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS
 
RED BLOOD CELL TRANSFUSIONS
Red blood cell transfusions are given to raise the hematocrit levels in
patients with anemia or to replace losses after acute bleeding
episodes.
 
Preparations 
of 
Red 
Cells 
for
Transfusion
Several types of preparations containing red blood cells are
available.
A. Fresh Whole Blood
The advantage of whole blood for transfusion is the simultaneous
presence of red blood cells, plasma, and fresh platelets. Fresh
whole blood is never absolutely necessary, since all the above
components are available separately. The major indications for use
of whole blood are cardiac surgery or massive hemorrhage when
more than 10 units of blood is required in a 24-hour period.
B. Packed Red Blood Cells
Packed red cells are the component most commonly used to raise
the hematocrit. Each unit has a volume of about 300 mL, of which
approximately 200 mL consists of red blood cells. One unit of
packed red cells will usually raise the hematocrit by approximately
4%. The expected rise in hematocrit can be calculated using an
estimated red blood cell volume of 200 mL/unit and a total blood
volume of about 70 mL/kg. For example, a 70-kg man will have a
total blood volume of 4900 mL, and each unit of packed red blood
cells will raise the hematocrit by 200 ÷ 4900, or 4%.
C. Leukocyte-Poor Blood
Patients with severe leukoagglutinin reactions to packed red blood
cells may require depletion of white blood cells and platelets from
transfused units. White blood cells can be removed either by
centrifugation or by washing. Preparation of leukocyte-poor blood
is expensive and leads to some loss of red cells. Most blood
products now are leukoreduced in-line during acquisition and are
thus prospectively leukocyte-poor.
D. Frozen Packed Red Blood Cells
Packed red blood cells can be frozen and stored for up to 3 years,
but the technique is cumbersome and expensive, and frozen blood
should be used sparingly. The major application is for the purpose
of maintaining a supply of rare blood types. Patients with such types
may donate units for autologous transfusion should the need arise.
Frozen red cells are also occasionally needed for patients with
severe leukoagglutinin reactions or anaphylactic reactions to plasma
proteins, since frozen blood has essentially all white blood cells and
plasma components removed.
E. Autologous Packed Red Blood Cells
Patients scheduled for elective surgery may donate blood for
autologous transfusion. These units may be stored for up to 35 days
before freezing is necessary.
 Compatibility Testing
Before transfusion, the recipient's and the donor's blood are typed
and cross-matched to avoid hemolytic transfusion reactions.
Although many antigen systems are present on red blood cells, only
the ABO and Rh systems are specifically tested prior to all
transfusions. The A and B antigens are the most important, because
everyone who lacks one or both red cell antigens has IgM
isoantibodies (called isoagglutinins) against the missing antigen or
antigens in his or her plasma. The isoagglutinins activate complement
and can cause rapid intravascular lysis of the incompatible red
blood cells. In emergencies, type O/Rh-negative blood can be given
to any recipient, but only packed cells should be given to avoid
transfusion of donor plasma containing anti-A or anti-B antibodies.
The other important antigen routinely tested for is the D antigen
of the Rh system. Approximately 15% of the population lack this
antigen. In patients lacking the antigen, anti-D antibodies are not
naturally present, but the antigen is highly immunogenic. A recipient
whose red cells lack D and who receives D-positive blood may
develop anti-D antibodies that can cause severe lysis of subsequent
transfusions of D-positive red cells.
Blood typing includes a crossmatch assay of recipient serum for
unusual alloantibodies directed against donor red blood cells by
mixing recipient serum with panels of red blood cells representing
commonly occurring minor antigens. The screening is particularly
important if the recipient has had previous transfusions or
pregnancy.
 Hemolytic Transfusion Reactions
The most severe hemolytic transfusion reactions are acute
(temporally related to the transfusion), involving mismatches in the
ABO system and are isoagglutinin-mediated. Most of these cases
are due to clerical errors and mislabeled specimens. With current
compatibility testing and double check clerical systems, the risk of
an acute hemolytic reaction is 1 in 76,000 transfused units of red
blood cells. Death from acute hemolytic reaction occurs in 1 in 1.8
million transfused units. Hemolysis is rapid and intravascular,
releasing free hemoglobin into the plasma. The severity of these
reactions depends on the dose of red blood cells given. The most
severe reactions are those seen in surgical patients under anesthesia.
Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions are caused by minor red
blood cell antigen discrepancies and are typically less severe. The
hemolysis usually takes place at a slower rate and is mediated by
IgG alloantibodies causing extravascular red blood cell destruction.
These transfusion reactions may be delayed for 5–10 days after
transfusion. In such cases, the recipient has received red blood cells
containing an immunogenic antigen, and in the time since transfusion,
a new alloantibody has been formed. The most common antigens
involved in such reactions are Duffy, Kidd, Kell, and C and E loci
of the Rh system. The current risk of a delayed hemolytic
transfusion reaction is 1 in 6000 transfused units of red blood cells.
A. Symptoms and Signs
Major acute hemolytic transfusion reactions cause fever and chills,
with backache and headache. In severe cases, there may be
apprehension, dyspnea, hypotension, and cardiovascular collapse.
Patients under general anesthesia will not manifest such signs, and
the first indication may be generalized bleeding and oliguria. The
transfusion must be stopped immediately. In severe cases, acute
DIC, acute kidney failure from tubular necrosis, or both can occur.
Death occurs in 4% of acute hemolytic reactions due to ABO
incompatibility.
Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions are usually without
symptoms or signs.
B. Laboratory Findings
When an acute hemolytic transfusion episode is suspected, the
identification of the recipient and of the transfusion product bag
should be rechecked. The transfusion product bag with its pilot tube
must be returned to the blood bank, and a fresh sample of the
recipient's blood must accompany the bag for retyping and re–
cross-matching of donor and recipient blood samples.
The hematocrit will fail to rise by the expected amount.
Coagulation studies may reveal evidence of acute kidney injury or
DIC. The plasma free hemoglobin in the recipient will be elevated
resulting in hemoglobinuria.
In cases of delayed hemolytic reactions, the hematocrit will fall
and the indirect bilirubin will rise. In these cases, the new offending
alloantibody is easily detected in the patient's serum.
C. Treatment
If an acute hemolytic transfusion reaction is suspected, the
transfusion should be stopped at once. The patient should be
vigorously hydrated to prevent acute tubular necrosis. Forced
diuresis with mannitol may help prevent kidney damage.
 Leukoagglutinin Reactions
Most transfusion reactions are not hemolytic but represent reactions
to antigens present on transfused passenger leukocytes in patients
who have been sensitized to leukocyte antigens through previous
transfusions or pregnancy. Transfusion products relatively rich in
leukocyte-rich plasma, especially platelets, are most likely to cause
this. Moderate to severe leukoagglutinin reactions occur in 1% of
red blood cell transfusions and 2% of platelet transfusions. Most
commonly, patients will develop fever and chills within 12 hours
after transfusion. In severe cases, cough and dyspnea may occur
and the chest radiograph may show transient pulmonary infiltrates.
Because no hemolysis is involved, the hematocrit rises by the
expected amount despite the reaction.
Leukoagglutinin reactions may respond to acetaminophen and
diphenhydramine; corticosteroids are also of value. Overall,
leukoagglutination reactions are diminishing through the routine use
of in-line leukotrapping during blood donation (ie, leukoreduced
blood). Patients experiencing severe leukoagglutination episodes
despite receiving leukoreduced blood transfusions should receive
leukopoor or washed blood products.
 Hypersensitivity Reactions
Rarely, urticaria or bronchospasm will develop during or soon after
a transfusion. These reactions are almost always due to exposure to
allogeneic plasma proteins rather than to leukocytes. The risk is low
enough that the routine use of antihistamine premedications has been
eliminated before packed red blood cell transfusions. A
hypersensitivity reaction, including anaphylactic shock, may develop
in patients who are IgA deficient because of antibodies to IgA
within the plasma component of the transfused blood product.
Patients with such reactions may require transfusion of washed or
even frozen red blood cells to avoid future severe reactions.
 Contaminated Blood
Blood products can be contaminated with bacteria. Platelets are
especially prone to bacterial contamination because they cannot be
refrigerated. Bacterial contamination occurs in 1 of every 2000 to
5000 platelet donations. Receipt of a blood product contaminated
with gram-positive bacteria will cause fever and bacteremia but
rarely causes a sepsis syndrome. Receipt of a blood product
contaminated with gram-negative bacteria often causes septic
shock, acute DIC, and acute kidney injury due to the transfused
endotoxin and is usually fatal. Strategies to reduce bacterial
contamination include better venipuncture site skin cleansing,
diverting of the first few milliliters of donated blood, and point of
care rapid bacterial screening in order to discard questionable units.
The current risk of a septic transfusion reaction from a culture-
negative unit of single-donor blood is 1 in 50,000. In any patient
who may have received contaminated blood, the recipient and the
donor blood bag should both be cultured, and antibiotics should be
given immediately to the recipient.
 
Infectious 
Diseases 
Transmitted
Through Transfusion
Despite the use of only volunteer blood donors and the routine
screening of blood, transfusion-associated viral diseases remain a
problem. All blood products (red blood cells, platelets, plasma,
cryoprecipitate) can transmit viral diseases. All blood donors are
screened with questionnaires designed to detect (and therefore
reject) donors at high risk for transmitting infectious diseases. All
blood is now screened for hepatitis B surface antigen, antibody to
hepatitis B core antigen, syphilis, p24 antigen and antibody to HIV,
antibody to hepatitis C virus (HCV), antibody to human T cell
lymphotropic/leukemia virus (HTLV), and nucleic acid testing for
West Nile virus. Clinical trials are examining the value of screening
blood donors for Trypanosoma cruzi, the infectious agent that
causes Chagas disease.
With improved screening, the risk of posttransfusion hepatitis has
steadily decreased after the receipt of screened ‘negative’ blood
products. The risk of acquiring hepatitis B is now so low that it is
difficult to measure. The risk of hepatitis C acquisition is 1 in 1.5 to
2 million transfused units. The risk of HIV acquisition is 1 in 2
million transfused units.
 
Transfusion 
Graft-Versus-Host
Disease
Allogeneic passenger lymphocytes within transfused blood products
will engraft in some recipients and mount an alloimmune attack
against tissues expressing discrepant HLA-antigens, so called graft-
versus-host disease (GVHD). The symptoms and signs of
transfusion-associated GVHD include fever, rash, diarrhea,
hepatitis, lymphadenopathy, and severe pancytopenia. The outcome
is usually fatal. Transfusion-associated GVHD most likely occurs in
recipients with immune defects, malignant lymphoproliferative
disorders, solid tumors being treated with chemotherapy or
immunotherapy, treatment with immunosuppressive medications
(especially purine analogs such as fludarabine), or older patients
undergoing cardiac surgery. HIV infection alone does not seem to
increase the risk. The use of leukoreduced blood products is
inadequate to prevent transfusion-associated GVHD. This
complication can be avoided by irradiating blood products (25 Gy
or more) to prevent lymphocyte proliferation in recipients at high
risk for transfusion-associated GVHD.
 
Transfusion-Related Acute 
Lung
Injury
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) occurs in 1 in every
5000 transfused units of blood products. It has been associated
with allogeneic antibodies in the donor plasma component that bind
to recipient leukocyte antigens, including HLA antigens and other
granulocyte- and monocyte-specific antigens. In 20% of cases, no
antileukocyte antibodies are identified raising the concern that
bioactive lipids or other substances that accumulate while the blood
product is in storage can also mediate TRALI in susceptible
recipients. TRALI is clinically defined as noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema after a blood product trans-fusion without other explanation,
and transfused surgical and critically ill patients seem most
susceptible. Ten to 20% of female blood donors and 1–5% of male
blood donors have antileukocyte antibodies in their serum. The risk
of TRALI is reduced through the use of male only plasma donors,
when possible. There is no specific treatment for TRALI, only
supportive care.
PLATELET TRANSFUSION
Platelet transfusions are indicated in cases of thrombocytopenia due
to decreased platelet production. They are of some use in immune
thrombocytopenia when active bleeding is evident, but the clearance
of transfused platelets is rapid as they are exposed to the same
pathophysiologic forces as the recipient's endogenous platelets. The
risk of spontaneous bleeding rises when the platelet count falls to <
80,000/mcL, and the risk of life-threatening bleeding increases
when the platelet count is < 5000/mcL. Because of this,
prophylactic platelet transfusions are often given at these very low
levels, usually when < 10,000/mcL. Platelet transfusions are also
given prior to invasive procedures or surgery in thrombocytopenic
patients, and the goal is often to raise the platelet count to
50,000/mcL or more.
Platelets for transfusion are most commonly derived from single
donor apheresis collections (roughly the equivalent to the platelets
recovered from six donations of whole blood). A single donor unit
of platelets should raise the platelet count by 50,000 to 60,000
platelets per mcL in a transfusion-naïve recipient without
hypersplenism or ongoing platelet consumptive disorder. Transfused
platelets typically last for 2 or 3 days. Platelet transfusion responses
may be suboptimal with poor platelet increments and short platelet
survival times. This may be due to one of several causes, including
fever, sepsis, splenomegaly, DIC, large body habitus, or platelet
alloimmunization (from prior transfusions, prior pregnancy or prior
organ transplantation). Many, but not all, alloantibodies causing
platelet destruction are directed at HLA antigens. Patients requiring
long periods of platelet transfusion support should be monitored to
document adequate responses to transfusions so that the most
appropriate product can be used. Patients requiring ongoing platelet
transfusions who become alloimmunized may benefit from HLA-
matched platelets derived from either volunteer donors or family
members. Techniques of cross-matching platelets have been
developed and appear to identify suitable volunteer platelet donors
(nonreactive with the patient's serum) without the need for HLA
typing. Leukocyte reduction of platelets has been shown to delay
the onset of alloimmunization in multiply transfused recipients.
GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSIONS
Granulocyte transfusions are seldom indicated and have largely
been replaced by the use of myeloid growth factors (G-CSF and
GM-CSF) that speed neutrophil recovery after myelosuppressive
chemotherapy. However, they may be beneficial in patients with
profound neutropenia (<100/mcL) who have gram-negative sepsis,
progressive soft tissue infection, or invasive fungal infection despite
optimal antibiotic therapy. In these cases, it is clear that progressive
infection is due to failure of host defenses, generally neutropenia
combined with disruption of natural barriers (such as the oral or
gastrointestinal mucosa or the skin). In such situations, daily
granulocyte transfusions may be considered and continued until the
neutrophil count rises to above 500/mcL. Such granulocytes must
be derived from ABO-matched donors. Although HLA matching is
not necessary, it is preferred, since patients with alloantibodies to
donor white blood cells will have severe reactions and no benefit.
About two-thirds of appropriately selected recipients benefit from
granulocyte transfusions.
The donor cells usually contain lymphocytes capable of
producing 
GVHD 
in 
HLA-incompatible 
hosts 
whose
immunocompetence may be impaired. Irradiation of the granulocyte
products will prevent lymphocyte proliferation and thus prevent
GVHD without functional harm to the granulocytes or platelets
contained within.
TRANSFUSION OF PLASMA COMPONENTS
Fresh-frozen plasma is available in units of approximately 200 mL.
Fresh frozen plasma contains normal levels of all coagulation factors
(about 1 unit/mL). Fresh frozen plasma is used to correct
coagulation factor deficiencies and to treat thrombotic
thrombocytopenia purpura or hemolyticuremic syndrome.
Cryoprecipitate is made from fresh plasma by cooling the plasma
to 4°C and collecting the precipitate. One unit of cryoprecipitate
has a volume of approximately 20 mL and contains approximately
250 mg of fibrinogen and between 80 and 100 units of factor VIII
and vWF. Cryoprecipitate is used to supplement fibrinogen in cases
of congenital hypofibrinogenemia or, more commonly, acute DIC.
One unit of cryoprecipitate will raise the fibrinogen level by about 8
mg/dL. Cryoprecipitate is sometimes used to temporarily correct
the acquired platelet dysfunction associated with kidney disease.
Allain JP et al. Transfusion-transmitted infectious diseases.
Biologicals. 2009 Apr;37(2):71–7. [PMID: 19231236]
 
Al-Tanbal H et al. The value and practicality of granulocyte
transfusion: a single oncology centre experience. Transfus Med.
2010 Jan 12. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20070613]
 
Alter HJ et al. The hazards of blood transfusion in historical
perspective. Blood. 2008 Oct 1;112(7):2617–26. [PMID:
18809775]
 
Benson AB et al. Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI): a
clinical review with emphasis on the critically ill. Br J Haematol.
2009 Nov;147(4):431–43. [PMID: 19663827]
 
Blajchman MA et al. New strategies for the optimal use of platelet
transfusions. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2008:198–204. [PMID: 19074082]
 
Roback JD et al; American Association for the Study of Liver;
American Academy of Pediatrics; United States Army; American
Society of Anesthesiology; American Society of Hematology.
Evidence-based practice guidelines for plasma transfusion.
Transfusion. 2010 Jun;50(6):1227–39. [PMID: 20345562]
 
Slichter SJ et al. Dose of prophylactic platelet transfusions and
prevention of hemorrhage. N Engl J Med. 2010 Feb 18;362(7):
600–13. [PMID: 20164484]
 
Sokolovic M et al. Transfusion therapy and acute lung injury.
Expert Rev Respir Med. 2010 Jun;4(3):387–93. [PMID:
20524921]
 
 
 
Disorders of hemostasis,
Thrombosis, &
Antithrombotic Therapy
Patrick F. Fogarty, MD
Tracy Minichiello, MD
In assessing patients for defects of hemostasis, the clinical context
must be considered carefully (Table 14–1). Heritable defects are
suggested by bleeding that begins in infancy or childhood, is
recurrent, and occurs at multiple anatomic sites, although many
other patterns of presentation are possible. Acquired disorders of
hemostasis more typically are associated with bleeding that begins
later in life and may be relatable to introduction of medications (eg,
agents that affect platelet activity) or to onset of underlying medical
conditions (such as renal failure or myelodysplasia), or may be
idiopathic. Importantly, however, a sufficient hemostatic challenge
(such as major trauma) may produce excessive bleeding even in
individuals with completely normal hemostasis.
Fogarty PF et al. Disorders of Hemostasis I: Coagulation. In:
Rodgers GP et al (editors). The Bethesda Handbook of Clinical
Hematology. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2010.
 
PLATELET DISORDERS
 
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
The causes of thrombocytopenia are shown in Table 14–2. The age
of the patient and presence of any comorbid conditions may help
direct the diagnostic work-up.
The risk of spontaneous bleeding (including petechial hemorrhage
and bruising) does not typically increase appreciably until the
platelet count falls below 10,000–20,000/mcL, although patients
with dysfunctional platelets may bleed with higher platelet counts.
Suggested platelet counts to prevent spontaneous bleeding or to
provide adequate hemostasis around the time of invasive
procedures are found in Table 14–3.
DECREASED PLATELET PRODUCTION
1. Bone Marrow Failure
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bone marrow failure states may be congenital or acquired.
 Most congenital marrow failure disorders present in childhood.
 
 General Considerations
Congenital conditions that cause thrombocytopenia include
amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia, the thrombocytopenia-absent
radius (TAR) syndrome, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome; these
disorders usually feature isolated thrombocytopenia, whereas
patients with Fanconi anemia and dyskeratosis congenita typically
have depressions in other blood cell counts as well.
Acquired causes of bone marrow failure leading to
thrombocytopenia include acquired aplastic anemia, mye
lodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and acquired amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia. Unlike aplastic anemia, MDS is more common
among older patients.
 Clinical Findings
Acquired aplastic anemia typically presents with reductions in
multiple blood cell lines; a bone marrow biopsy subsequently
reveals hypocellularity. Myelodysplasia may also present as
cytopenias with variable marrow cellularity, at times mimicking
aplastic anemia; however, the presence of macrocytosis, ringed
sideroblasts on iron staining of the bone marrow aspirate, dysplasia
of hematopoietic elements, or cytogenetic abnormalities (especially
monosomy 5 or 7, and trisomy 8) are more suggestive of MDS.
Thrombocytopenia in patients with MDS is usually mild to
moderate, rather than severe.
 
Table 14–1. Evaluation of the bleeding patient.
 
 
 
Necessary
Component of
Evaluation
 
Diagnostic Correlate
 
Location
 
 
 
Mucocutaneous
(bruises, petechiae,
gingival, nosebleeds)
 
Likely qualitative/quantitative platelet
defects
 
Joints, soft tissue
 
Likely disorders of coagulation
factors
 
Onset
 
 
 
Infancy/childhood
 
Suggests heritable condition
 
Adulthood
 
Suggests milder heritable condition
or acquired defect of hemostasis
(eg, ITP, medication-related)
 
Clinical context
 
 
 
Postsurgical
 
Anatomic/surgical defect must be
ruled out
 
Pregnancy
 
vWD, HELLP syndrome, ITP,
acquired factor VIII inhibitor
 
Sepsis
 
May indicate DIC
 
Patient taking
anticoagulants
 
Rule out excessive anticoagulation
 
Personal history1
 
 
 
Absent
 
Suggests acquired rather than
congenital defect, or
anatomic/surgical defect (if
applicable)
 
Present
 
Suggests established acquired
defect or congenital disorder
 
Family history
 
 
 
Absent
 
Suggests acquired defect or no
defect of hemostasis
 
Present
 
May signify hemophilia A or B, vWD,
other heritable bleeding disorders
 
1Includes evaluation of prior spontaneous bleeding, as well as excessive
bleeding with circumcision, menses, dental extractions, trauma, minor
procedures (eg, endoscopy, biopsies) and major procedures (surgery).
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; HELLP, hemolysis, elevated
liver enzymes, low platelets; ITP, immune thrombocytopenia; vWD, von
Willebrand disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
Adult patients with acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
have isolated thrombocytopenia and reduced or absent
megakaryocytes in the bone marrow, which (along with failure to
respond to immunomodulatory regimens typically administered in
immune thrombocytopenia [ITP]) distinguishes them from patients
with ITP.
 
Table 14–2. Causes of thrombocytopenia.
 
Decreased production of platelets     Congenital bone
marrow failure (eg, Fanconi anemia, Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome)
     Acquired bone marrow failure (eg, aplastic anemia,
myelodysplasia)
     Exposure to chemotherapy, irradiation
     Marrow infiltration (neoplastic, infectious)
     Nutritional (deficiency of vitamin B12, folate, iron;
alcohol)
Increased destruction of platelets     Immune
thrombocytopenia (including hepatitis C virus- and HIV-
related,1 and drug-induced)
     Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
     Thrombotic microangiopathy
     Disseminated intravascular coagulation
     Posttransfusion purpura
     Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
     Mechanical (aortic valvular dysfunction; extracorporeal
bypass)
     von Willebrand disease, type 2B
     Hemophagocytosis
Increased sequestration of platelets     Hypersplenism (eg,
related to cirrhosis, myeloproliferative disorders,
lymphoma)
Other conditions causing thrombocytopenia      Gestational
thrombocy topenia
     Bernard-Soulier syndrome, gray platelet syndrome,
May-Hegglin anomaly
     Pseudothrombocytopenia
1HIV-related thrombocytopenia as well as disorders such as some cases
of immune thrombocytopenia and cyclic thrombocytopenia may feature
both decreased production and increased clearance of platelets.
 Treatment
A. Congenital Conditions
Treatment is varied but may include blood product support, blood
cell growth factors, androgens, and (some cases) allogeneic
hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation.
Alter BP. Diagnosis, genetics, and management of inherited bone
marrow failure syndromes. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
Program. 2007:29–39. [PMID: 18024606]
 
 
Table 14–3. Desired platelet count ranges.
 
 
 
Clinical Scenario
Platelet count
(/mcL)
Prevention of spontaneous
mucocutaneous bleeding
> 10,000–20,000
Insertion of central venous catheters
> 20,000–
50,0001
Administration of therapeutic
anticoagulation
> 30,000–50,000
Minor surgery and selected invasive
procedures2
> 50,000–80,000
Major surgery
> 80,000–
100,000
1A platelet target within the higher range of the reference is required for
tunneled catheters.
2Such as endoscopy with biopsy.
B. Acquired Conditions
Patients with severe aplastic anemia are treated with allogeneic
hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation, which is the preferred
therapy for patients younger than age 40 who have an HLA-
matched 
sibling 
donor 
(see Chapter 
13), 
or 
with
immunosuppression, which is the preferred therapy for older
patients and those who lack an HLA-matched sibling donor.
Treatments of thrombocytopenia due to MDS, if clinically
significant bleeding is present or if the risk of bleeding is high, is
limited to chronic transfusion of platelets in most instances (Table
14–3). Newer immunomodulatory agents such as lenalidomide do
not produce increases in the platelet count in most patients.
Kantarjian H et al. The incidence and impact of thrombocytopenia
in myelodysplastic syndromes. Cancer. 2007 May
1;109(9):1705–14. [PMID: 17366593]
 
2. Bone Marrow Infiltration
Massive replacement of the bone marrow by leukemic cells,
myeloma, 
lymphoma, 
or 
other 
tumors 
may 
cause
thrombocytopenia; however, abnormalities in other blood cell lines
are also usually present. The same is true for infectious causes
leading to marrow infiltration (mycobacterial disease, ehrlichiosis).
These entities are easily diagnosed after examining the bone marrow
biopsy and aspirate or determining the infecting organism from an
aspirate specimen. Treatment of thrombocytopenia is directed at
eradication of the underlying infiltrative disorder, but platelet
transfusion may be required if clinically significant bleeding is
present.
3. Chemotherapy & Irradiation
Chemotherapeutic agents and irradiation may lead to
thrombocytopenia by direct toxicity to megakaryocytes,
hematopoietic progenitor cells, or both. The severity and duration of
chemotherapy-induced depressions in the platelet count are
determined by the specific regimen used, although the platelet count
typically resolves more slowly following a chemotherapeutic insult
than does neutropenia or anemia, especially if multiple cycles of
treatment have been given. Until recovery occurs, patients may be
supported with transfused platelets if bleeding is present or the risk
of bleeding is high (Table 14–3). Drug applications of novel platelet
growth factors (eltrombopag, romiplostim) are underway for the
treatment of chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia, whereas
use of an existing recombinant IL-11-like cytokine (oprelvekin) has
been limited by significant drug-related toxicities.
4. Nutritional Deficiencies
Thrombocytopenia, typically in concert with anemia, may be
y p
, yp
y
,
y
observed when a deficiency of folate (that may accompany
alcoholism) or vitamin B12 is present (concomitant neurologic
findings are common). In addition, thrombocytopenia rarely can
occur in very severe iron deficiency. Replacing the deficient vitamin
or mineral results in improvement in the platelet count.
5. Cyclic Thrombocytopenia
Cyclic thrombocytopenia is a very rare disorder that produces
cyclic oscillations of the platelet count, usually with a periodicity of
3–6 weeks. The exact pathophysiologic mechanisms responsible for
the condition may vary from patient to patient. Severe
thrombocytopenia and bleeding typically occur at the platelet nadir.
Identification of the endogenous cyclic phenomenon may be difficult
because of the usual practice of providing treatment (platelet trans-
fusion or otherwise) at times of very low platelet counts. Oral
contraceptive 
medications, 
androgens, 
azathioprine, 
and
thrombopoietic growth factors have been used successfully in the
management of cyclic thrombocytopenia.
Alter BP. Diagnosis, genetics, and management of inherited bone
marrow failure syndromes. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ
Program. 2007:29–39. [PMID: 18024606]
 
INCREASED PLATELET DESTRUCTION
1. Immune Thrombocytopenia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Isolated thrombocytopenia.
 Assess for any new causative medications and HIV and hepatitis
C infections.
 ITP is a diagnosis of exclusion.
 
 General Considerations
ITP is an autoimmune condition in which pathogenic antibodies bind
platelets, resulting in accelerated platelet clearance. Contrary to the
historical view of the disorder, it is now recognized that many
patients with ITP also lack appropriate compensatory platelet
production. The disorder is primary and idiopathic in most adult
patients, although it can be associated with connective tissue disease
(such as lupus), lymphoproliferative disease (such as lymphoma),
medications (see below), and infections (such as hepatitis C virus
and HIV infections). Targets of antiplatelet antibodies include
glycoproteins IIb/IIIa and Ib/IX on the platelet membrane, although
antibodies are demonstrable in only two-thirds of patients. In
addition to production of antiplatelet antibodies, HIV and hepatitis
C virus may lead to thrombocytopenia through additional
mechanisms (for instance, by direct suppression of platelet
production [HIV] and cirrhosis-related splenomegaly [hepatitis C
virus]).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Mucocutaneous bleeding manifestations may be present, depending
on the platelet count. Spontaneous bruising, nosebleeds, gingival
bleeding, or other types of hemorrhage generally do not occur until
the platelet count has fallen below 20,000–30,000/mcL. Individuals
with secondary ITP (such as due to collagen vascular disease, HIV
or HCV infection, or lymphoproliferative malignancy) may have
additional disease-specific findings.
B. Laboratory Findings
Typically, patients have isolated thrombocytopenia. If bleeding has
occurred, anemia may also be present. Hepatitis virus B and C and
HIV infections should be excluded by serologic testing. Bone
marrow should be examined in patients with unexplained
cytopenias, in patients older than 60 years, or in those who did not
respond to primary ITP-specific therapy. Megakaryocyte
abnormalities and hypocellularity or hypercellularity are not
characteristic of ITP. If there are clinical findings suggestive of a
lymphoproliferative malignancy, a CT scan should be performed. In
the absence of such findings, otherwise asymptomatic patients with
unexplained isolated thrombocytopenia of recent onset may be
considered to have ITP.
 Treatment
Only individuals with platelet counts <20,000–30,000/mcL or those
with significant bleeding should be treated; the remainder may be
monitored serially for progression. The mainstay of initial treatment
of new-onset primary ITP is a short course of corticosteroids with
or without intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or anti-D (WinRho)
(Figure 14–1). Responses are generally seen within 3–5 days of
initiating treatment. Platelet transfusions may be given concomitantly
if active bleeding is present.
Although over two-thirds of patients with ITP respond to initial
treatment, most relapse following reduction of the corticosteroid
dose. Patients with a persistent platelet count <30,000/mcL or
clinically significant bleeding are appropriate candidates for second-
line treatments (Figure 14–1). These treatments are chosen
empirically, bearing in mind potential toxicities and the patient's
preference. Anti-D (WinRho) or IVIG temporarily increases
platelet counts (duration, 3 weeks or longer), although serial anti-D
treatment (platelet counts < 30,000/mcL) may allow adult patients
to delay or avoid splenectomy. The monoclonal anti-B cell antibody
rituximab leads to initial responses in about 50% of adults with
corticosteroid-refractory chronic ITP, decreasing to 20% at 5
years. 
The thrombopoietin receptor agonists romiplostim
(administered subcutaneously weekly) and eltrombopag (taken
orally daily) are approved for use in adult patients with chronic ITP
who have not responded durably to corticosteroids, IVIG, or
splenectomy and must be taken indefinitely to maintain the platelet
response. Splenectomy has a durable response rate of over 60%,
but usually is reserved for cases of severe thrombocytopenia that is
refractory to second-line agents; patients should receive
pneumococcal, Haemophilus 
influenzae 
type 
b, 
and
meningococcal vaccination at least 2 weeks before the procedure.
If available, laparoscopic splenectomy is preferred. Additional
treatments for ITP are found in Figure 14–1.
 
Figure 14–1. Management of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
 
The goal of management of pregnancy-associated ITP is a
platelet count of 10,000–30,000/mcL in the first trimester, >
30,000/mcL during the second or third trimester, or > 50,000/mcL
prior to cesarean section or vaginal delivery. Moderate-dose oral
prednisone or intermittent infusions of IVIG are standard.
Splenectomy is reserved for failure to respond to these therapies
and may be performed in the first or second trimester.
For thrombocytopenia associated with HIV or hepatitis C virus,
treatment of either infection leads to an amelioration in the platelet
count in most cases, whereas refractory thrombocytopenia may be
treated with infusion of IVIG or anti-D (HIV and hepatitis C virus),
splenectomy (HIV), or interferon-alpha (hepatitis C virus). Clinical
trials of eltrombopag in treatment of HCV-associated
thrombocytopenia have shown promising results. Treatment with
corticosteroids is not recommended in hepatitis C virus infection.
 When to Refer
Chronic thrombocytopenia will develop in most adult patients with
newly diagnosed ITP; therefore, all patients with ITP should be
referred to a subspecialist for evaluation at the time of diagnosis.
 When to Admit
Patients with major hemorrhage or very severe thrombocytopenia
associated with bleeding should be admitted and monitored in-
hospital until the platelet count has risen to > 20,000–30,000/mcL
and hemodynamic stability has been achieved.
Arnold DM et al. Systematic review: efficacy and safety of
rituximab for adults with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Ann Intern Med. 2007 Jan 2;146(1):25–33. [PMID: 17200219]
 
Bussel JB et al. Eltrombopag for the treatment of chronic
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov
29;357(22):2237–47. [PMID: 18046028]
 
Kuter DJ et al. Efficacy of romiplostim in patients with chronic
immune thrombocytopenic purpura: a double-blind randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2008 Feb 2;371(9610): 395–403.
[PMID: 18242413]
 
Provan D et al. International consensus report on the investigation
and management of primary immune thrombocytopenia. Blood.
2010 Jan 14;115(2):168–86. [PMID: 19846889]
 
Wenzel F et al. Alteration of serum thrombopoietin levels in
patients with chronic hepatitis C under interferon therapy. Clin
Hemorheol Microcirc. 2010;44(2):137–44. [PMID: 20203368]
 
2. Thrombotic Microangiopathy
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocy- topenia, in
the absence of another plausible explanation, are sufficient for the
diagnosis of TMA.
 Fever, neurologic abnormalities, and renal insuf- ficiency may
occur concurrently but are not required for diagnosis.
 Renal insufficiency occurs in hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
 
 General Considerations
The thrombotic microangiopathies (TMAs) include thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and the hemolyticuremic
syndrome (HUS). These disorders are characterized by
thrombocytopenia, due to the incorporation of platelets into thrombi
in the microvasculature, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,
which results from shearing of erythrocytes in the microcirculation.
In idiopathic TTP, autoantibodies against the ADAMTS-13 (A
disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type 1
repeat, member 13) molecule, also known as the von Willebrand
factor cleaving protease (vWFCP), leads to accumulation of ultra-
large von Willebrand factor (vWF) multimers that bridge platelets
and facilitate excessive platelet aggregation, leading to TTP. In
some cases of pregnancy-associated TMA, an antibody to vWFCP
is present. In contrast, the activity of the vWFCP in congenital TTP
is decreased due to a mutation in the gene encoding for the
molecule. Damage to endothelial cells—such as the damage that
occurs in endemic HUS due to presence of toxins from
Escherichia coli (especially type O157:H7 or O145) or in the
setting of cancer, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, or HIV
infection—may also lead to TMA. Certain drugs (eg, cyclosporine,
quinine, ticlopidine, clopidogrel, mitomycin C, and bleomycin) have
been associated with the development of TMA, possibly by
promoting injury to endothelial cells, although inhibitory antibodies
to ADAMTS-13 also have been demonstrated in some cases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are
presenting signs in all patients with TTP and most patients with
HUS; in a subset of patients with HUS, the platelet count remains in
the normal range. Only approximately 25% of patients with TMA
manifest all components of the so-called pentad of findings
(microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, fever, renal
insufficiency, and neurologic system abnormalities) (Table 14–4).
Most patients (especially children) with HUS have a recent or
current diarrheal illness. Neurologic manifestations, including
headache, somnolence, delirium, seizures, paresis, and coma, may
result from deposition of microthrombi in the cerebral vasculature.
 
Table 14–4. Clinical features of thrombotic microangiopathy.
 
ADAMTS-13, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin
type 1 repeat, member 13 (von Willebrand factor cleaving protease).
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory features of TMA include those associated with
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (anemia, elevated lactate
dehydrogenase [LD], elevated indirect bilirubin, decreased
haptoglobin, reticulocytosis, negative direct antiglobulin test, and
schistocytes on the blood smear); thrombocytopenia; elevated
creatinine; positive stool culture for E coli O157:H7 or stool assays
for Shiga-toxin producing E coli to detect non-O157:H7 such as E
coli O145 (cases of HUS only); and reductions in vWFCP activity.
Notably, routine coagulation studies are within the normal range in
most patients with TMA.
 Treatment
Immediate administration of plasma exchange is essential in most
cases due to the mortality rate of > 95% without treatment. With
the exception of children or adults with endemic diarrhea-associated
HUS, who generally recover with supportive care only, plasma
exchange must be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of TMA is
suspected. Plasma exchange usually is administered once daily until
the platelet count and LD have returned to normal for at least 2
days, after which the frequency of treatments may be tapered
slowly while the platelet count and LD are monitored for relapse. In
cases of insufficient response to once-daily plasma exchange, twice-
daily treatments should be given. Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) may
be administered if immediate access to plasma exchange is not
available or in cases of familial TMA. Platelet transfusions are
contraindicated in the treatment of TMAs due to reports of
worsening thrombotic microangiopathy, possibly due to propagation
of platelet-rich microthrombi. In cases of documented life-
threatening bleeding, however, platelet transfusions may be given
slowly and after plasma exchange is underway. Red blood cell
transfusions may be administered in cases of clinically significant
anemia. Hemodialysis should be considered for patients with
significant renal impairment.
In cases of relapse following initial treatment, plasma exchange
should be reinstituted. If ineffective, or in cases of primary
refractoriness, second-line treatments may be considered including
rituximab, corticosteroids, IVIG, vincristine, cyclophosphamide,
and splenectomy.
 When to Refer
Consultation by a hematologist or transfusion medicine specialist
familiar with plasma exchange is required at the time of presentation.
Patients with refractory or relapsing TMA require ongoing care by a
subspecialist.
 When to Admit
All patients with newly suspected or diagnosed TMA should be
hospitalized initially.
Alvarez-Larrán A et al. Newly diagnosed versus relapsed
idiopathic thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: a comparison of
p
y p
p p
p
presenting clinical characteristics and response to treatment. Ann
Hematol. 2009 Oct;88(10):973–8. [PMID: 19205654]
 
Elliott MA et al. Rituximab for refractory and or relapsing
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura related to immune-mediated
severe ADAMTS13-deficiency: a report of four cases and a
systematic review of the literature. Eur J Haematol. 2009
Oct;83(4):365–72. [PMID: 19508684]
 
Ling HT et al. Sustained response with rituximab in patients with
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: a report of 13 cases and
review of the literature. Am J Hematol. 2009 Jul;84(7):418-21.
[PMID: 19507208]
 
Stella CL et al. The diagnostic dilemma of thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic uremic syndrome in the
obstetric triage and emergency department: lessons from 4 tertiary
hospitals. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Apr;200(4):381.e1–6.
[PMID: 19110215]
 
3. Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Thrombocytopenia within 5–10 days of exposure to heparin.
 Decline in baseline platelet count of 50% or greater.
 Thrombosis occurs in 50% of cases; bleeding is uncommon.
 
 General Considerations
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is an acquired disorder
that affects approximately 3% of patients who are exposed to
unfractionated heparin and 0.6% of patients who are exposed to
low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). The condition results from
formation of IgG antibodies to heparin-platelet factor 4 (PF4)
complexes; the antibodies then bind platelets, which activates them.
Platelet activation leads to both thrombocytopenia and a pro-
thrombotic state.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients are usually asymptomatic, and due to the pro-thrombotic
nature of HIT, bleeding usually does not occur. Thrombosis (at any
venous or arterial site), however, may be detected in up to 50% of
patients, up to 30 days post-diagnosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
A presumptive diagnosis of HIT is made when new-onset
thrombocytopenia is detected in a patient (frequently a hospitalized
patient) within 5–10 days of exposure to heparin. A decline of 50%
or more from the baseline platelet count is regarded as compatible
with the diagnosis. Occasionally, rapid-onset HIT occurs in a
patient with preexisting heparin-PF4 antibodies, due to exposure
within the past 100 days; in these cases, the platelet count decline
occurs within 1–4 days of reexposure. Confirmation of the
diagnosis can be obtained through a positive PF4-heparin antibody
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or functional assay
(such as serotonin release assay), or both.
 Treatment
Treatment should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of HIT is
suspected, before results of laboratory testing is available.
Management of HIT (Table 14–5) involves the immediate
discontinuation of all forms of heparin.
If thrombosis has not already been detected, duplex Doppler
ultrasound of the lower extremities should be performed to rule out
subclinical deep venous thrombosis. Despite thrombocytopenia,
platelet transfusions are rarely necessary. Due to the substantial
frequency of thrombosis among HIT patients, an alternative
anticoagulant, typically a direct thrombin inhibitor (DTI) such as
arga-troban or lepirudin should be administered immediately. The
DTI should be continued until the platelet count has recovered to at
least 100,000/mcL, at which point treatment with a vitamin K
antagonist (warfarin) may be initiated. The DTI should be continued
until therapeutic anticoagulation with the vitamin K antagonist has
been achieved (international normalized ratio [INR] of 2.0–3.0) due
to the warfarin effect; the infusion of arga-troban must be
temporarily discontinued for 2 hours before the INR is obtained so
that it reflects the anticoagulant effect of warfarin alone. Warfarin is
contraindi-cated as initial treatment of HIT because of its potential
to transiently worsen hypercoagulability. In all patients with HIT,
warfarin subsequently should be continued for at least 30 days, due
to a persistent risk of thrombosis even after the platelet count has
recovered, whereas in patients in whom thrombosis has been
documented, anti-coagulation with warfarin should continue for at
least 3 months.
 
Table 14–5. Management of suspected or proven HIT.
 
1 Hepatic insufficiency: initial infusion rate = 0.5 mcg/kg/min.
2 Renal insufficiency: initial bolus = 0.2 mg/kg.
3 Not approved for HIT/HITT.
ACT, activated clotting time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time;
ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HIT, heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia; 
HITT, 
heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia 
and
thrombosis; PF4, platelet factor 4.
Bivalirudin, another DTI, is not approved for the treatment of
HIT but may be considered when hepatic or renal failure prevents
use of argatroban or lepirudin.
Subsequent exposure to heparin should be avoided in all patients
with a prior history of HIT, if possible. If its use is regarded as
necessary for a procedure, it should not be given until PF4-heparin
antibodies are no longer detectable by ELISA (usually as of 100
days following an episode of HIT), and exposure should be limited
to the shortest time period possible.
 When to Refer
Due to the tremendous thrombotic potential of the disorder and the
complexity of use of the DTI, all patients with HIT should be
evaluated by a hematologist as soon as the thrombocytopenia is
detected.
 When to Admit
Most patients with HIT are hospitalized at the time of detection of
thrombocytopenia. Any outpatient in whom HIT is suspected
should be admitted because the DTIs must be administered by
continuous intravenous infusion.
Otis SA et al. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: current status
and diagnostic challenges. Am J Hematol. 2010 Sep;85(9):700–6.
[PMID: 20665476]
 
Shantsila E et al. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. A
contemporary clinical approach to diagnosis and management.
Chest. 2009 Jun;135(6):1651–64. [PMID: 19497901]
 
Warkentin TE. Agents for the treatment of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2010
Aug;24(4):755–75. [PMID: 20659659]
 
4. Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A frequent cause of thrombocytopenia in hospitalized patients.
 Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin
time.
 Thrombocytopenia and decreased fibrinogen levels.
 
 General Considerations
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) results from
uncontrolled local or systemic activation of coagulation, which leads
to depletion of coagulation factors and fibrinogen and to
thrombocytopenia as platelets are activated and consumed.
The numerous disorders that are associated with DIC include
sepsis (in which coagulation is activated by presence of
lipopolysaccharide) as well as cancer, trauma, burns, or pregnancy-
associated morbidity (in which tissue factor is released). Aortic
aneurysm and cavernous hemangiomas may promote DIC by
leading to vascular stasis, and snake bites may result in DIC due to
the introduction of exogenous toxins.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Bleeding in DIC usually occurs at multiple sites, such as intravenous
catheters or incisions, and may be widespread (purpura fulminans).
Malignancy-related DIC may manifest principally as thrombosis
(Trousseau syndrome).
B. Laboratory Findings
Frequently, there are acute and progressive prolongations in
coagulation studies or thrombocytopenia is found in a patient who is
being treated for a separate disorder. In early DIC, the platelet
count and fibrinogen levels may remain within the normal range,
albeit reduced from baseline levels. There is progressive
thrombocytopenia (rarely severe), prolongation of the activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time (PT), and
low levels of fibrinogen. D-dimer levels typically are elevated due to
the activation of coagulation and diffuse cross-linking of fibrin.
Schistocytes on the blood smear, due to shearing of red cells
through the microvasculature, are present in 10–20% of patients.
Laboratory abnormalities in the HELLP syndrome (hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes, low platelets), a severe form of DIC with a
particularly high mortality rate that occurs in peripartum women,
include elevated liver transaminases and (many cases) renal
dysfunction due to gross hemoglobinuria and pigment nephropathy.
Malignancy-related DIC may feature normal platelet counts and
coagulation studies.
 Treatment
The underlying causative disorder must be treated (eg,
antimicrobials, chemotherapy, surgery, or delivery of conceptus
[see below]). If clinically significant bleeding is present, hemostasis
must be achieved (Table 14–6).
Blood products should be administered only if clinically significant
hemorrhage has occurred or is thought likely to occur without
intervention (Table 14–6). The goal of platelet therapy for most
cases is > 20,000/mcL or > 50,000/mcL for serious bleeding, such
as intracranial bleeding. FFP should be given only to patients with a
prolonged aPTT and PT and significant bleeding; 4 units typically
are administered at a time, and the posttransfusion platelet count
should be documented. Cryoprecipitate may be given for bleeding
and fibrinogen levels < 80–100 mg/dL. The PT, aPTT, fibrinogen,
and platelet count should be monitored at least every 6 hours in
acutely ill patients with DIC.
In some cases of refractory bleeding despite replacement of
blood products, administration of low doses of heparin can be
considered; it may help interfere with thrombin generation, which
then could lead to a lessened consumption of coagulation proteins
and platelets. An infusion of 6–10 units/kg/h (no bolus) may be
used. Heparin, however, is contraindicated if the platelet count
cannot be maintained at ≥ 50,000/mcL and in cases of central
nervous system/gastrointestinal bleeding, placental abruption, and
any other condition that is likely to require imminent surgery.
Fibrinolysis inhibitors may be considered in some patients with
refractory DIC.
 
Table 14–6. Management of DIC.
 
1 Contraindicated if platelets cannot be maintained at > 50,000/mcL, in
cases of gastrointestinal or central nervous system bleeding, in conditions
that may require surgical management, or placental abruption.
aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; DIC, disseminated
intravascular coagulation; PT, prothrombin time.
 
The treatment of HELLP syndrome must include evacuation of
the uterus (eg, delivery of a term or near-term infant or removal of
retained placental or fetal fragments). Patients with Trousseau
syndrome require treatment of the underlying malignancy or
administration of unfractionated heparin or subcutaneous
therapeutic-dose LMWH as treatment of thrombosis, since warfarin
typically is ineffective at secondary prevention of thromboembolism
in the disorder. Immediate initiation of chemotherapy (usually within
24 hours of diagnosis) is required for patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL)–associated DIC, along with
administration of blood products as clinically indicated.
 When to Refer
Patients with diffuse bleeding that is unresponsive to administration
of blood products should be evaluated by a hematologist.
 When to Admit
Most patients with DIC are hospitalized when DIC is detected.
Favaloro EJ. Laboratory testing in disseminated intravascular
coagulation. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010 Jun;36(4):458–67.
[PMID: 20614398]
 
Franchini M et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in
hematologic malignancies. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010
Jun;36(4):388–403. [PMID: 20614391]
 
Levi M et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in infectious
disease. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010 Jun;36(4):367–77. [PMID:
20614389]
 
Levi M et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
disseminated intravascular coagulation. British Committee for
Standards in Haematology. Br J Haematol. 2009 Apr;145(1):24–
33. [PMID: 19222477]
 
Lippi G et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in trauma
injuries. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010 Jun;36(4):378–87. [PMID:
20614390]
 
OTHER CONDITIONS CAUSING
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
1. Drug-Induced Thrombocytopenia
The mechanisms underlying drug-induced thrombocytopenia are
thought in most cases to be immune, although exceptions exist (such
as chemotherapy). Table 14–7 lists medications associated with
thrombocytopenia. The typical presentation of drug-induced
thrombocytopenia 
is 
severe 
thrombocytopenia 
and
mucocutaneous bleeding 7–14 days after exposure to a new drug,
although a range of presentations is possible. Discontinuation of the
offending agent leads to resolution of thrombocytopenia within 7–10
days in most cases, but patients with severe thrombocytopenia
should be given platelet transfusions with (immune cases only) or
without IVIG.
2. Posttransfusion Purpura
Posttransfusion purpura (PTP) is a rare disorder that features
sudden-onset thrombocytopenia in an individual who recently has
received transfusion of red cells, platelets, or plasma within 1 week
prior to detection of thrombocytopenia. Antibodies against the
human platelet antigen PlA1 are detected in most individuals with
PTP. Patients with PTP almost universally are either multiparous
women or persons who have received transfusions previously.
Severe thrombocytopenia and bleeding is typical. Initial treatment
consists of administration of IVIG (1 g/kg/d for 2 days) which
should be administered as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.
Platelets are not indicated unless severe bleeding is present, but if
they are to be administered, HLA-matched platelets are preferred.
A second course or IVIG, plasma exchange, corticosteroids, or
splenectomy may be used in case of refractoriness. PlA1-negative or
washed blood products are preferred for subsequent transfusions.
3. von Willebrand Disease Type 2B
von Willebrand disease (vWD) type 2B leads to chronic,
characteristically mild to moderate thrombocytopenia via an
abnormal vWF molecule that binds platelets with increased affinity,
resulting in aggregation and clearance.
4. Platelet sequestration
At any given time, one-third of the platelet mass is sequestered in
the spleen. Splenomegaly, due to a variety of conditions (Table 14–
8), may lead to thrombocytopenia of variable severity. Whenever
possible, treatment of the underlying disorder should be pursued,
but splenectomy, splenic embolization, or splenic irradiation may be
considered in selected cases.
 
Table 14–7. Medications causing drug-associated
thrombocytopenia.
 
 
 
Class
Examples
Chemotherapy
Most agents
Antiplatelet agents
Anagrelide
Abciximab
Eptifibatide
Tirofiban
Ticlopidine
Antimicrobial agents
Penicillins
Isoniazid
Rifampin
Sulfa drugs
Vancomycin
Adefovir
Indinavir
Ritonavir
Fluconazole
Linezolid
Cardiovascular agents
Digoxin
Amiodarone
Captopril
Hydrochlorothiazide
Procainamide
Atorvastatin
Simvastatin
Gastrointestinal agents
Cimetidine
Ranitidine
Famotidine
Neuropsychiatric agents
Haloperidol
Carbamazepine
Methyldopa
Phenytoin
Analgesic agents
Acetaminophen
Ibuprofen
Sulindac
Diclofenac
Naproxen
Anticoagulant agents
Heparin
Low-molecular-weight heparin
Interferon-α
Immunomodulator agents
Gold
Rituximab
Immunosuppressant agents Mycophenolate mofetil
Tacrolimus
Other agents
Iodinated contrast dye
Immunizations
5. Pregnancy
Gestational thrombocytopenia results from progressive expansion of
the blood volume that typically occurs during pregnancy, leading to
hemodilution. Cytopenias result, although production of blood cells
is normal or increased. Platelet counts <100,000/mcL, however,
are observed in < 10% of pregnant women in the third trimester;
decreases to <70,000/mcL should prompt consideration of
pregnancy-related ITP (see above) as well as preeclampsia or a
pregnancy-related thrombotic microangiopathy.
 
Table 14–8. Selected causes of splenomegaly.
 
Lymphoproliferative/myeloproliferative disease
     Lymphoma
     Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
     Chronic myeloid leukemia
     Polycythemia vera
     Essential thrombocythemia
Vascular congestion
     Congestive heart failure
     Cirrhosis
Hematologic defects
     Hereditary spherocytosis
     Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
     Thalassemia
Autoimmunity
     Collagen vascular disease
     Felty syndrome, lupus
     Autoimmune lymphoproliferative disorder
Infection
     Infectious hepatitis
     Cytomegalovirus
     Malaria
     Babesiosis
Inborn errors of metabolism
     Gaucher disease
     Niemann-Pick disease
6. Infection or Sepsis
Both immune- and platelet production–mediated defects are
possible, and there may be significant overlap with concomitant
DIC (see above). In either case, the platelet count typically
improves with effective antimicrobial treatment or after the infection
has resolved. In some critically ill patients, a defect in
immunomodulation may lead to bone marrow macrophages
(histiocytes) engulfing cellular components of the marrow in a
process also called hemophagocytosis. The phenomenon typically
resolves with resolution of the infection, but with certain infections
(Epstein Barr virus) immunosuppression may be required.
Hemophagocytosis also may arise in the setting of malignancy, in
which case the disorder is usually unresponsive to treatment with
immunosuppression.
7. Pseudothrombocytopenia
Pseudothrombocytopenia results from EDTA anticoagulant-induced
platelet clumping; the phenomenon typically disappears when blood
is collected in a tube containing citrate anticoagulant.
QUALITATIVE PLATELET DISORDERS
CONGENITAL DISORDERS PLATELET FUNCTION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually diagnosed in childhood.
 Family history usually is positive.
 May be diagnosed in adulthood when there is excessive bleeding.
 
 General Considerations
Heritable qualitative platelet disorders are far less common than
acquired disorders of platelet function (see below) and lead to
variably severe bleeding, often beginning in childhood. Occasionally,
however, disorders of platelet function may go undetected until later
in life when excessive bleeding occurs following a sufficient
hemostatic insult. Thus, the true incidence of hereditary qualitative
platelet disorders is unknown.
Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS) is a rare, autosomal
recessive bleeding disorder that is due to reduced or abnormal
platelet membrane expression of glycoprotein Ib/IX (vWF
receptor).
Glanzmann thrombasthenia results from a qualitative or
quantitative abnormality in glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors on the
platelet membrane, which are required to bind fibrinogen and vWF,
both of which bridge platelets during aggregation. Inheritance is
autosomal recessive.
Under normal circumstances, activated platelets release the
contents of platelet granules to reinforce the aggregatory response.
Storage pool disease is caused by defects in release of alpha or
dense (delta) platelet granules, or both (alpha-delta storage pool
disease).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In patients with Glanzmann thrombasthenia, the onset of bleeding
is usually in infancy or childhood. The degree of deficiency in
IIb/IIIa may not correlate well with bleeding symptoms. Patients
with storage pool disease are affected by variable bleeding,
ranging from mild and trauma- related to spontaneous.
B. Laboratory Findings
I n Bernard-Soulier syndrome, there are abnormally large
platelets (approaching the size of red cells), moderate
thrombocytopenia, and a prolonged bleeding time. Platelet
aggregation studies show a marked defect in response to ristocetin,
whereas aggregation in response to other agonists is normal; the
addition of normal platelets corrects the abnormal aggregation. The
diagnosis can be confirmed by platelet flow cytometry.
I n Glanzmann thrombasthenia, platelet aggregation studies
show marked impairment of aggregation in response to stimulation
with typical agonists.
Storage pool disease describes defects in the number or
content of platelet alpha or dense granules or both. The gray
platelet syndrome comprises abnormalities of platelet alpha
granules, thrombocytopenia, and marrow fibrosis. The blood smear
shows agranular platelets, and the diagnosis is confirmed with
electron microscopy.
Albinism-associated storage pool disease involves defective
dense granules in disorders of oculocutaneous albinism, such as the
Hermansky-Pudlak and ChediakHigashi syndromes. Electron
microscopy confirms the diagnosis.
Non–albinism-associated storage pool disease results from
quantitative or qualitative defects in dense granules and is seen in
Ehlers-Danlos and Wiskott-Aldrich syndromes, among others.
T h e Quebec 
platelet 
disorder 
comprises 
mild
thrombocytopenia, an abnormal platelet factor V molecule, and a
prolonged bleeding time. Patients typically experience moderate
bleeding. Interestingly, platelet transfusion does not ameliorate the
bleeding.
Patients have a prolonged bleeding time. Platelet aggregation
studies characteristically show platelet dissociation following an
initial aggregatory response, and electron microscopy confirms the
diagnosis.
 Treatment
The mainstay of treatment (including periprocedural prophylaxis) is
transfusion of normal platelets, although desmopressin acetate
(DDAVP), antifibrinolytic agents, and recombinant human activated
factor VII also have been used successfully.
Kannan M et al. Glanzmann's thrombasthenia: an overview. Clin
Appl Thromb Hemost. 2009 Mar–Apr;15(2):152–65. [PMID:
18930954]
 
Nurden P et al. Congenital disorders associated with platelet
dysfunctions. Thromb Haemost. 2008 Feb;99(2):253–63. [PMID:
18278172]
 
ACQUIRED DISORDERS OF PLATELET FUNCTION
Platelet dysfunction is more commonly acquired than inherited; the
widespread use of platelet-active medications accounts for most of
the cases of qualitative defects (Table 14–9). In these cases,
platelet inhibition typically declines within 5–10 days following
discontinuation of the drug, and transfusion of platelets may be
required if clinically significant bleeding is present.
Laboratory manifestations of aspirin toxicity include a prolonged
epinephrine cartridge closure time in the platelet function analyzer
(PFA)-100 system, or a decreased aggregation to low-dose
collagen and thrombin (and preserved aggregation in response to
high-dose collagen and thrombin) on platelet aggregation studies.
 
Table 14–9. Causes of acquired platelet dysfunction.
 
ADP, adenosine diphosphate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate;
DDAVP, desmopressin acetate; DHA, docosahexaenoic acid; EHA,
eicosahexaenoic acid; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PM,
platelet membrane; SSRIs, selective serotonin release inhibitors; TXA2,
thromboxane A2.
DISORDERS OF
COAGULATION
 
CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF COAGULATION
1. Hemophilia A & B
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hemophilia a: congenital deficiency of coagula- tion factor VIII.
 Hemophilia B: congenital deficiency of coagula- tion factor IX.
 Recurrent hemarthroses and arthropathy.
 Risk of development of inhibitory antibodies to factor VII or
factor IX.
 In many older patients, infection with HIV or hepatitis C virus
from receipt of contaminated blood products.
 
 General Considerations
The frequency of hemophilia A is 1 per 5000 live male births,
whereas hemophilia B occurs in approximately 1 in 25,000 live
male births. Inheritance is X-linked recessive, leading to affected
males and carrier females. There is no race predilection. Testing is
indicated for asymptomatic male infants with a hemophilic pedigree,
for male infants with a family history of hemophilia who experience
excessive bleeding, or for an otherwise asymptomatic adolescent or
adult who experiences unexpected excessive bleeding with trauma
or invasion.
Inhibitors to factor VIII will develop in approximately 25% of
patients with hemophilia A, and inhibitors to factor IX will develop
in < 5% of patients with hemophilia B.
The prevalence of hepatitis C virus infection is highest among
individuals with severe disease who received plasma-derived
clotting factor concentrates or blood products in the pre-mid-
1980s, and approaches a 100% exposure rate in this population.
New infection is now rare, given current methodology for screening
of blood products, viral inactivation of plasma-derived factor, and
use of recombinant products. Many patients infected with hepatitis
C virus have undergone eradication treatment successfully. New
HIV infection related to the treatment of hemophilia, too, is rare in
the modern era, although a large number of patients with hemophilia
were exposed to HIV through contaminated blood products of
factor concentrates in the 1980s.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Severe hemophilia presents in infant males or in early childhood with
spontaneous bleeding into joints, soft tissues, or other locations.
Spontaneous bleeding is rare in patients with mild hemophilia, but
bleeding may occur with a significant hemostatic challenge (eg,
surgery, trauma). Intermediate clinical symptoms are seen in patients
with moderate hemophilia. Female carriers of hemophilia are usually
asymptomatic.
Significant hemophilic arthropathy is usually avoided in patients
who have received long-term prophylaxis with factor concentrate in
childhood, whereas severe arthritis and limited range of motion in
affected joints are common in adults who received episodic or little
treatment 
during 
childhood 
and 
experienced 
recurrent
hemarthroses.
Inhibitor development to factor VIII or factor IX is characterized
by bleeding episodes that are resistant to treatment and new or
unusual bleeding.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hemophilia is diagnosed by demonstration of an isolated
reproducibly low factor VIII or factor IX activity level, in the
absence of other conditions. If the aPTT is prolonged, it typically
corrects upon mixing with normal plasma. A variety of mutations,
including inversions, large and small deletions, insertions, missense
mutations, and nonsense mutations may be causative. Depending on
the level of residual factor VIII or factor IX activity and the
sensitivity of the thromboplastin used in the aPTT coagulation
reaction, the aPTT may or may not be prolonged (although it
typically is markedly prolonged in severe hemophilia). Hemophilia is
classified according to the level of factor activity in the plasma.
Severe hemophilia is characterized by < 1% factor activity, mild
hemophilia features > 5% factor activity, and moderate hemophilia
features 1–5% factor activity. Female carriers may become
symptomatic if significant lyonization has occurred favoring the
defective factor VIII or factor IX gene, leading to factor VIII or
factor IX activity level markedly < 50%.
In the presence of an inhibitor to factor VIII or factor IX, there is
accelerated clearance of and suboptimal or absent rise in measured
activity of infused factor, and the aPTT does not correct on mixing.
The Bethesda assay measures the potency of the inhibitor.
 Treatment
Plasma-derived or recombinant factor concentrates are the
mainstay of treatment. By the age of 4 years, children with severe
hemophilia typically receive long-term, prophylactic, twice- or
thrice-weekly infusions of factor to prevent the recurrent joint
bleeding that otherwise would characterize the disorder, leading to
severe morbidity. Adults generally do not use intensive, long-term
prophylaxis, and instead treat with factor concentrate as needed for
bleeding episodes or prior to high-risk activities (Table 14–10).
Patients with mild hemophilia A may respond to as-needed
intravenous or intranasal treatment with DDAVP. Antifibrinolytic
agents (eg, aminocaproic acid) may be useful in cases of mucosal
bleeding and are commonly used adjunctively, such as following
dental procedures. Thus far, early trials of gene therapy (delivery of
normal factor VIII or factor IX genes via viral vectors) have not
shown increases in factor activity levels of both adequate magnitude
and duration.
 
Table 14–10. Treatment of selected inherited bleeding disorders.
 
1 Mild hemophilia A and type 2A or 2B vWD patients: therapeutic trial must
have previously confirmed an adequate response (ie, elevation of factor VIII
or vWF activity level into the normal range) and (for type 2B) no
exacerbation of thrombocytopenia. DDAVP is not typically effective for type
2M vWD. A vWF-containing factor VIII concentrate is preferred for treatment
of type 2N vWD.
Notes:
DDAVP dose is 0.3 mcg/kg IV in 50 mL saline over 20 minutes, or nasal
spray 300 mcg for weight > 50 kg or 150 mcg for < 50 kg, every 12–24
hours, maximum of three doses in a 48-hour period. If more than two
doses are used in a 12–24 hour period, free water restriction and/or
monitoring for hyponatremia is essential.
EACA dose is 50 mg/kg PO four times daily for 3–5 d; maximum 24 g/d,
useful for mucosal bleeding/dental procedures.
Factor VIII concentrate dose is 50 units/kg IV initially followed by 25
units/kg every 8 hours followed by lesser doses at longer intervals once
hemostasis has been established.
Factor IX concentrate dose is 100 units/kg (120 units/kg if using Benefix)
IV initially followed by 50 units/kg (60 units/kg if using Benefix) every 8
hours followed by lesser doses at longer intervals once hemostasis has
been established.
vWF-containing factor VIII concentrate dose is 60–80 RCoF units/kg IV
every 12 hours initially followed by lesser doses at longer intervals once
hemostasis has been established.
FFP is typically administered in 4-unit boluses and may not need to be re-
bolused after the initial administration due to the long half-life of factor XI.
DDAVP, desmopressin acetate; FFP, fresh frozen plasma; vWF, von
Willebrand factor.
 
The cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 selective nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug celecoxib may be used to treat arthritis
symptoms; generally, other NSAIDs and aspirin should be avoided
due to the increased risk of bleeding from inhibition of platelet
function. Oral opioid medications are commonly used to control
pain, and surgery, including total joint replacement, is often
required.
It may be possible to overcome low-titer inhibitors (< 5
Bethesda units, BU) by giving larger doses of factor, whereas
treatment of bleeding in the presence of a high-titer inhibitor (>5
BU) requires infusion of an activated prothrombin complex
concentrate or recombinant activated factor VII. Inhibitor tolerance
induction, achieved by giving large doses (50–300 units/kg
intravenously of factor VIII daily) for 6–18 months, succeeds in
eradicating the inhibitor in 70% of patients with hemophilia A and in
30% of patients with hemophilia B; hemophilia B patients who
receive inhibitor tolerance induction, however, are at risk for
development of nephrotic syndrome and anaphylactic reactions,
making eradication of their inhibitors less feasible.
Highly active antiretroviral treatment is almost universally
administered to individuals with HIV infection.
 When to Refer
All patients with hemophilia should be seen regularly in a
comprehensive hemophilia treatment center staffed by a
hematologist.
 When to Admit
Most bleeding events can be treated as an outpatient.
•    Some invasive procedures that could otherwise be
performed as an outpatient require admission in a patient
with hemophilia due to the need for serial infusions of
clotting factor concentrate.
•    Patients with hemophilia (with or without inhibitors) who
experience bleeding that is unresponsive to out-patient
treatment typically require admission.
Chambost H. Assessing risk factors: prevention of inhibitors in
haemophilia. Haemophilia. 2010 Mar;16(Suppl 2):10–5. [PMID:
20132333]
 
Franchini M et al. Recent improvements in the clinical treatment of
coagulation factor inhibitors. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2009
Nov;35(8):806–13. [PMID: 20169517]
 
Konkle BA et al. Emerging clinical concerns in the ageing
hemophilia patient. Haemophilia 2009;15:1197–1209. [PMID:
19686466]
 
Oldenburg J et al. Haemophilia care then, now and in the future.
Haemophilia. 2009 Jan;15 (Suppl 1):2–7. [PMID: 19125934]
 
2. von Willebrand Disease
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The most common inherited bleeding disorder.
 von Willebrand factor aggregates platelets and prolongs the half-
life of factor VIII.
 
 General Considerations
Up to 1% of the population have depressed vWF levels. vWF is an
unusually large multimeric glycoprotein that binds to its receptor,
platelet glycoprotein Ib, bridging platelets together and tethering
them to the subendothelial matrix at the site of vascular injury. vWF
also has a binding site for factor VIII, prolonging its half-life in the
circulation.
Between 75% and 80% of patients with vWD have type 1. It is a
quantitative abnormality of the vWF molecule that usually does not
feature an identifiable causal mutation in the vWF gene.
Type 2 vWD is seen in 15–20% of patients with vWD. In type
2A or 2B vWD, a qualitative defect in the vWF molecule is
causative. Type 2N and 2M vWD are due to defects in vWF that
decrease binding to factor VIII or to platelets, respectively.
Importantly, type 2N vWD clinically resembles hemophilia A, with
the exception of a family history that shows affected females. Factor
VIII activity levels are markedly decreased, and vWF activity and
antigen (Ag) are normal. Type 2M vWD features a normal multimer
pattern. Type 3 vWD is rare, and mutational homozygosity or
double heterozygosity leads to undetectable levels of vWF and
severe bleeding in infancy or childhood.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with type 1 vWD usually have mild or moderate platelet-
type bleeding (especially involving the integument and mucous
membranes). Patients with type 2 vWD usually have moderate to
severe bleeding that presents in childhood or adolescence.
B. Laboratory Findings
In type 1 vWD, the vWF activity (by ristocetin co-factor assay) and
Ag are mildly depressed, whereas the vWF multi-mer pattern is
normal (Table 14–11). Laboratory testing of type 2A or 2B vWD
typically shows a ratio of vWF Ag:vWF activity of approximately
2:1 and a multimer pattern that lacks the highest molecular weight
multimers. Thrombocytopenia is common in type 2B vWD due to a
gain-of-function mutation of the vWF molecule, which leads to
increased binding to its receptor on platelets, resulting in clearance;
a ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation (RIPA) study shows an
increase in platelet aggregation in response to low concentrations of
ristocetin. Except in the more severe forms of vWD that feature a
significantly decreased factor VIII activity, the aPTT and PT in
vWD are usually normal.
 
Table 14–11. Laboratory diagnosis of von Willebrand disease.
 
Nl, normal; RIPA, ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation; vWF, von
Willebrand factor.
 Treatment
The treatment of vWD is summarized in Table 14–10. DDAVP is
useful in the treatment of mild bleeding in most cases of type 1 and
some cases of type 2 vWD. DDAVP causes release of vWF and
factor VIII from storage sites, leading to increases in vWF and
factor VIII twofold to sevenfold that of baseline levels. A
therapeutic trial to document sufficient vWF levels posttreatment is
recommended. Due to tachyphylaxis and the risk of significant
hyponatremia secondary to fluid retention, more than two doses
should not be given in a 48-hour period. Intermediate-purity vWF-
containing factor VIII concentrates are used in all other clinical
scenarios, and when bleeding is not controlled with DDAVP.
Cryoprecipitate should not be given due to lack of viral inactivation.
Antifibrinolytic agents (eg, aminocaproic acid) may be used
adjunctively for mucosal bleeding or procedures. Pregnant patients
with vWD usually do not require treatment because of the natural
physiologic increase in vWF levels (up to threefold that of baseline)
that are observed by the time of delivery; however, if excessive
bleeding is encountered, DDAVP may be given to patients with
mild disease or vWF-containing factor VIII concentrates may be
given to patients with more severe disease.
Castaman G et al. von Willebrand's disease diagnosis and
laboratory issues. Haemophilia. 2010 Jul;16(Suppl 5):67–73.
[PMID: 20590859]
 
Mannucci PM et al; Italian Association of Hemophilia Centers.
Evidence-based recommendations on the treatment of von
Willebrand disease in Italy. Blood Transfus. 2009 Apr;7(2):117–
26. [PMID: 19503633]
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Diagnosis,
Evaluation and Management of von Willebrand Disease. National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH Pub. No. 08-5832.
December, 2007. Available at:
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/vwd/index.htm
 
3. Factor XI Deficiency
Factor XI deficiency (sometimes referred to as hemophilia C) is
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, leading to heterozygous
or homozygous defects. It is most prevalent among individuals of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Levels of factor XI, while variably
reduced, do not correlate well with bleeding symptoms. Mild
bleeding is most common, and surgery or trauma may expose or
worsen the bleeding tendency. FFP is the mainstay of treatment,
since no factor XI concentrate is available in the United States.
Administration of adjunctive aminocaproic acid is regarded as
mandatory for procedures or bleeding episodes involving the
mucosa (Table 14–10).
Gomez K et al. Factor XI deficiency. Haemophilia. 2008
Nov;14(6):1183–9. [PMID: 18312365]
 
Martín-Salces M et al. Review: Factor XI deficiency: review and
management in pregnant women. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2010
Apr;16(2):209–13. [PMID: 19049995]
 
4. Less Common Heritable Disorders of Coagulation
Congenital deficiencies of clotting factors II, V, VII, and X
are rare and typically are inherited in an autosomal recessive
pattern. A prolongation in the PT (and aPTT for factor X and factor
II deficiency) that corrects upon mixing with normal plasma is
typical. The treatment of factor II deficiency is with a prothrombin
complex concentrate; factor V deficiency is treated with infusions of
FFP or platelets (which contain factor V in alpha granules); factor
VII deficiency is treated with recombinant human activated factor
VII at 15–30 mcg/kg every 4–6 hours; and infusions of FFP may
be used to treat factor X deficiency.
Deficiency of factor XIII, a transglutamase that cross-links
fibrin, characteristically leads to delayed bleeding that occurs hours
to days after a hemostatic challenge (such as surgery or trauma).
The condition is usually life-long, and spontaneous intracranial
hemorrhages as well as recurrent pregnancy loss appear to occur
with increased frequency in these patients compared with other
congenital deficiencies. Cryoprecipitate or infusion of a plasma-
derived factor XIII concentrate (available through a research study;
appropriate for patients with A-subunit deficiency only) is the
treatment of choice for bleeding or surgical prophylaxis.
α2-Antiplasmin deficiency is a rare disorder that leads to
accelerated fibrinolysis via insufficient inhibition of plasmin.
Heterozygosity for the condition usually produces a mild bleeding
tendency, while bleeding symptoms in homozygotes may be severe.
The diagnosis is made by a documented antiplasmin level below the
reference range; the aPTT and PT are normal. In some cases,
treatment of bleeding or surgical prophylaxis is with aminocaproic
acid. A congenital deficiency of plasminogen activator I (PAI-
1) is extremely rare and can lead to mild to moderate bleeding;
testing for the disorder can be difficult due to the extremely low
extension of the normal reference range for PAI-1.
Congenital afibrinogenemia is exceedingly rare and produces
mild to severe bleeding; the frequency of first-trimester miscarriage
is increased among women with the disorder. The PT is more
typically prolonged than the aPTT, and a functional fibrinogen assay
shows reduced activity. Treatment is with a fibrinogen concentrate
(RiaSTAP) (preferred and now FDA approved), cryoprecipitate,
or FFP and is aimed at increasing the plasma fibrinogen
concentration to at least > 80 mg/dL.
Congenital deficiencies of factor XII, prekallikrein, high
molecular-weight kininogen may lead to a prolonged aPTT that
corrects with extended incubation but do not lead to bleeding.
Peyvandi F et al. Rare bleeding disorders. Semin Thromb Hemost.
2009 Jun;35(4):345–7. [PMID: 19598062]
 
ACQUIRED DISORDERS OF COAGULATION
1. Acquired Antibodies to Factor VIII
Spontaneous antibodies to factor VIII occasionally occur in adults
without a prior history of hemophilia; the elderly and patients with
lymphoproliferative malignancy or connective tissue disease, who
are postpartum, or postsurgical are at highest risk. The clinical
presentation typically includes extensive soft-tissue ecchymoses,
hematomas, and mucosal bleeding, as opposed to hemarthrosis in
congenital hemophilia A. The aPTT is typically prolonged and does
not correct upon mixing; factor VIII activity is found to be low and
a Bethesda assay reveals the titer of the inhibitor. Inhibitors of low
titer (< 5 BU) may often be overcome by infusion of high doses of
factor VIII concentrates, whereas high-titer inhibitors (>5 BU) must
be treated with serial infusions of activated prothrombin complex
concentrates or recombinant human activated factor VII. Along
with establishment of hemostasis by one of these measures,
immunosuppressive treatment with corticosteroids and oral
cyclophosphamide should be instituted; treatment with IVIG,
rituximab, or plasmapheresis can be considered in refractory cases.
Bitting RL et al. The prognosis and treatment of acquired
hemophilia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood Coagul
Fibrinolysis. 2009 Oct;20(7):517–23. [PMID: 19644360]
 
Huth-Kühne A et al. International recommendations on the
diagnosis and treatment of patients with acquired hemophilia A.
Haematologica. 2009 Apr;94(4):566–75. [PMID: 19336751]
 
2. Acquired Antibodies to Factor II
Patients with antiphospholipid antibodies occasionally manifest
specificity to coagulation factor II (prothrombin), leading typically to
a severe hypoprothrombinemia and bleeding. Mixing studies may or
may not reveal presence of an inhibitor, as the antibody typically
binds a non- enzymatically active portion of the molecule that leads
to accelerated clearance, but characteristically the PT is prolonged
and levels of factor II are low. FFP should be administered for
treatment of bleeding. Treatment is immunosuppressive.
3. Acquired Antibodies to Factor V
Products containing bovine factor V (such as topical thrombin or
fibrin glue, frequently used in surgical procedures) can lead to
formation of an anti-factor V antibody that has specificity for human
factor V. Clinicopathologic manifestations range from a prolonged
PT in an otherwise asymptomatic individual to severe bleeding.
Mixing studies suggest the presence of an inhibitor, and the factor V
activity level is low. In cases of serious or life-threatening bleeding,
IVIG or platelet transfusions, or both, should be administered, and
immunosuppression (as for acquired inhibitors to factor VIII) may
be offered.
4. Vitamin K Deficiency
Vitamin K deficiency may occur as a result of deficient dietary
intake of vitamin K (from green leafy vegetables, soybeans, and
other sources), malabsorption, or decreased production by
intestinal bacteria (due to treatment with chemotherapy or
antibiotics). Vitamin K normally participates in activity of the vitamin
K epoxide reductase that assists in posttranslational gamma-
carboxylation of the coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X that is
necessary for their activity. Thus, vitamin K deficiency typically
features a prolonged PT (in which the activity of the vitamin K–
dependent factors is more reflected than in the aPTT) that corrects
upon mixing; levels of individual clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X
typically are low. Importantly, a concomitantly low factor V activity
level is not indicative of isolated vitamin K deficiency, and may
indicate an underlying defect in liver synthetic function (see below).
For treatment, vitamin K1 (phytonadione) may be administered
via intravenous or oral routes; the subcutaneous route is not
recommended due to erratic absorption. Oral absorption is typically
excellent and at least partial improvement in the PT should be
observed within 1 day of administration. Intravenous administration
(1 mg/d) results in even faster normalization of a prolonged PT than
oral administration (5–10 mg/d); due to descriptions of anaphylaxis,
parenteral doses should be administered at lower doses and slowly
(eg, over 30 minutes) with concomitant monitoring.
5. Coagulopathy of liver Disease
Impaired hepatic function due to cirrhosis or other causes leads to
decreased synthesis of clotting factors, including factors II, VII, V,
IX, and fibrinogen, whereas factor VIII levels may be elevated in
spite of depressed levels of other coagulation factors. The PT (and
with advanced disease, the aPTT) is typically prolonged and
corrects on mixing with normal plasma. A normal factor V level, in
spite of decreases in the activity of factors II, VII, IX, and X,
however, suggests vitamin K deficiency rather than liver disease
(see above). Qualitative and quantitative deficiencies of fibrinogen
also are prevalent among patients with advanced liver disease,
typically leading to a prolonged PT, thrombin time, and reptilase
time.
The coagulopathy of liver disease usually does not require
hemostatic treatment until bleeding complications occur. Infusion of
FFP may be considered if active bleeding is present and the aPTT
and PT are markedly prolonged; however, the effect is transient and
concern for volume overload may limit infusions. Patients with
bleeding and a fibrinogen level consistently below 80 mg/dL should
receive cryoprecipitate. Liver transplantation, if feasible, results in
production of coagulation factors at normal levels. The
appropriateness of use of recombinant human activated factor VII
in patients with bleeding varices is controversial, although some
patient subgroups may experience benefit.
De Gasperi A et al. Acute liver failure: managing coagulopathy and
the bleeding diathesis. Transplant Proc. 2009 May;41(4):1256–9.
[PMID: 19460532]
 
Pluta A et al. Coagulopathy in liver diseases. Adv Med Sci. 2010
Jun;55(1):16–21. [PMID: 20513645]
 
6. Warfarin Ingestion
See Antithrombotic Therapy section, below.
7. Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
The consumptive coagulopathy of DIC results in decreases in the
activity of clotting factors, leading to bleeding in most patients (see
above). The aPTT and PT are characteristically prolonged, and
platelets and fibrinogen levels are reduced from baseline.
8. Heparin/Fondaparinux Use
The thrombin time is dramatically prolonged in the presence of
heparin. Patients who are receiving heparin and who have bleeding
should be managed by discontinuation of the heparin and (some
cases) administration of protamine sulfate; 1 mg of protamine
neutralizes approximately 100 units of heparin sulfate, and the
maximum dose is 50 mg intravenously. LMWHs typically do not
prolong clotting times and are poorly reversible with protamine.
There is no reversal agent for fondaparinux, although some experts
have suggested using recombinant human activated factor VIIa for
cases of life-threatening bleeding.
Schulman S et al. Anticoagulants and their reversal. Transfus Med
Rev. 2007 Jan;21(1):37-48. [PMID: 17174219]
 
9. Lupus Anticoagulants
Lupus anticoagulants do not cause bleeding; however, because they
prolong clotting times by binding proteins associated with
phospholipid, which is a necessary component of coagulation
reactions, clinicians may be concerned about a risk of bleeding.
Lupus anticoagulants were so named because of their increased
prevalence among patients with connective tissue disease, although
they may occur with increased frequency in individuals with
underlying infection, inflammation, or malignancy, and they also can
occur in asymptomatic individuals in the general population. A
prolongation in the aPTT is observed that does not correct
completely on mixing. Specialized testing such as the hexagonal
phase phospholipid neutralization assay, the dilute Russell viper
venom time, and platelet neutralization assays can confirm the
presence of a lupus anticoagulant.
Ruiz-Irastorza G et al. Antiphospholipid syndrome. Lancet. 2010
Oct 30;376(9751):1498–509. [PMID: 20822807]
 
OTHER CAUSES OF BLEEDING
Occasionally, abnormalities of the vasculature and integument may
lead to bleeding despite normal hemostasis; congenital or acquired
disorders may be causative. These abnormalities include Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome, osteo-genesis imperfecta, Osler-Weber-Rendu
disease, and Marfan syndrome (heritable defects) and
integumentary 
thinning 
due 
to 
prolonged 
corticosteroid
administration or normal aging, amyloidosis, vasculitis, and scurvy
(acquired defects). The bleeding time often is prolonged. If
possible, treatment of the underlying condition should be pursued,
but if this is not possible or feasible (ie, congenital syndromes),
globally hemostatic agents such as DDAVP can be considered for
treatment of bleeding.
Sharathkumar AA et al. Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.
Haemophilia. 2008 Nov;14(6):1269–80. [PMID: 19141168]
 
ANTITHROMBOTIC THERAPY
 
The currently available anticoagulants include unfractionated
heparin, LMWHs, fondaparinux, dabigatran and vitamin K
antagonists. (For a discussion of the injectable DTIs, see section on
Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia, above.)
Unfractionated heparin is a repeating polymer of sulfated
glycosaminoglycans that is most commonly derived from porcine
intestinal tissue, which is rich in heparin-bearing mast cells. A
biologic product, it is extremely heterogeneous with respect to
sulfation and polymer length; individual molecules may range from
3000 to 30,000. In addition, only about one-third of the molecules
in a given preparation of unfractionated heparin contain the crucial
pentasaccharide sequence that is necessary for binding of
antithrombin and, through conversion of thrombin from a slow
inhibitor of coagulation factor activity to a rapid inhibitor, exertion of
its anticoagulant effect. Heparin is highly negatively charged, and
upon intravenous infusion, it binds to a large array of blood
components, such as endothelial cells, platelets, mast cells, and
plasma proteins. For these reasons, the pharmacokinetics of
unfractionated heparin are poorly predictable, and the degree of
anticoagulation must be monitored (by aPTT or anti-Xa level) in
patients who are receiving the drug in therapeutic doses. Only a
fraction of an infused dose of heparin is metabolized by the kidneys,
however, making it safe to use in most patients with significant renal
impairment. Due to the high degree of negatively charged moieties,
unfractionated heparin can be effectively neutralized with the
positively charged protamine sulfate (1 mg of protamine neutralizes
approximately 100 units of heparin sulfate; maximum dose, 50 mg
intravenously). Use of unfractionated heparin leads to HIT in
approximately 3% of patients, so most individuals require serial
platelet count determinations during the initial 10–14 days of
exposure and (some patients) periodically thereafter.
The LMWHs are produced from chemical depolymerization of
unfractionated heparin, resulting in products of lower molecular
weight (mean molecular weight, 4500-6500d, depending on the
LMWH). Because only heparin molecules that are at least 18
monosaccharide units long can bind anti-thrombin that is complexed
to thrombin and thus inhibit thrombin, the LMWHs are less likely to
be able to participate in antithrombin-mediated inhibition of
thrombin than unfractionated heparin. However, the antithrombin-
mediated inhibition of activated coagulation factor X is not
dependent on polymer length. The degree to which a particular
LMWH is able to inhibit factor Xa versus factor IIa (thrombin) is
called the anti-Xa/IIa ratio, and it is higher (less thrombin inhibition)
for enoxaparin than for tinzaparin or dalteparin (more thrombin
inhibition). It is not clear if this pharmacologic property affects
clinical outcomes, but the phenomenon may be of import in certain
clinical scenarios. Due to less protein and cellular binding, the
pharmacokinetics of the LMWHs are much more predictable than
those of unfractionated heparin, allowing for fixed weight-based
dosing. All LMWHs are principally renally cleared and must be
avoided or used with extreme caution in individuals with creatinine
clearance < 30 mL/min. A longer half-life permits once- or twice-
daily subcutaneous dosing, allowing for greater convenience and
outpatient therapy in selected cases. Although most patients who
receive LMWH do not require monitoring, the anti-Xa activity level
(not the aPTT) provides a reliable estimate of the anticoagulant
effect of the agent. About 30% of the molecules in a dose of
LMWH are long enough (ie, sufficiently negatively charged) to bind
protamine sulfate, allowing for some neutralization of anticoagulant
effect. LMWHs are associated with a lower frequency of HIT
(approximately 0.6%).
Fondaparinux is a synthetic molecule consisting of the highly
active pentasaccharide sequence. As such, it exerts almost no
thrombin inhibition, and works to indirectly inhibit factor Xa through
binding to antithrombin. Fondaparinux, like the LMWHs, is almost
exclusively metabolized by the kidneys, and should be avoided or
used with caution in patients with severe renal impairment.
Predictable pharmacokinetics allow for weight-based dosing. A
particularly long half-life (17–21 hours) allows for once-daily
dosing, but the absence of necessary charge characteristics leads to
a lack of binding to protamine sulfate; therefore, no effective
neutralizing agent exists.
Dabigatran etexilate is an oral DTI that was recently approved
for use in the United States for prevention of stroke and systemic
embolism in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. It prevents thrombus
formation by inhibiting both clot-bound and free thrombin and
thrombin-induced platelet aggregation. Dabigatran etexilate is a
prodrug that is converted to dabigatran with peak effect within 2
hours. Steady state is reached within 3 days. It is not metabolized
by the cytochrome P450 system. As renal excretion accounts for
about 80% of clearance, dose adjustment is required for decreased
renal function. It utilizes the p-glycoprotein transport system and so
concomitant use of strong inducers, eg, rifampin, should be avoided.
The half-life of the drug is 12–17 hours. No laboratory monitoring is
required. Neither the INR nor the aPTT may be used to monitor
drug effect. No antidote is available to reverse its effect although the
drug may be removed by dialysis.
Vitamin K antagonists such as warfarin inhibit the activity of the
vitamin K–dependent carboxylase that is important for the
posttranslational modification of coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
X. Although warfarin may be taken orally, leading to a significant
advantage over the heparins and heparin derivatives, which must be
given parenterally or subcutaneously, inter-individual differences in
response to the agent related to nutritional status, comorbid
diseases, concomitant medications, and genetic polymorphisms lead
to a poorly predictable anticoagulant response. Individuals taking
warfarin must undergo periodic monitoring to verify the intensity of
the anticoagulant effect. The intensity of anticoagulant effect is
reported as the INR, which corrects for differences in potency of
commercially available thromboplastin used to perform the PT.1
Ma TK et al. Dabigatran etexilate versus warfarin as the oral
anticoagulant of choice? A review of the clinical data. Pharmacol
Ther. 2010 Oct 12. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20920530]
 
 
Prevention 
of 
Venous
Thromboembolic Disease
The frequency of venous thromboembolic disease (VTE) among
hospitalized patients ranges widely; up to 20% of low-risk medical
patients and 80% of critical care patients and high-risk surgical
patients have been reported to experience this complication, which
includes deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism
(PE).
Avoidance of fatal PE, which occurs in up to 5% of high-risk
inpatients as a consequence of hospitalization or surgery is a major
goal of pharmacologic prophylaxis. Table 14–12 provides a risk
stratification for DVT/VTE among hospital inpatients. Standard
prophylactic regimens are listed in Table 14–13. Prophylactic
strategies should be guided by individual risk stratification, with all
moderate-and 
high-risk 
patients 
receiving 
pharmacologic
prophylaxis, unless contraindicated. Contraindications to VTE
prophylaxis for hospital inpatients at high risk for VTE are listed in
Table 14–14.
Certain high-risk patients should be considered for extended-
duration prophylaxis, including those undergoing total hip
replacement, hip fracture repair, cancer surgery, and high-risk
medical patients (such as those who are immobile or older than 75
years of age). Despite the well-established efficacy and safety of
these strategies, thromboprophylaxis continues to be underutilized,
particularly in medical patients. Implementation of risk stratification
schemas, electronic order sets, and physician alerts may increase
utilization. If bleeding is present, if the risk of bleeding is high, or if
the risk of VTE is high for the inpatient (Table 14–12) and therefore
combined prophylactic strategies are needed, some measure of
thromboprophylaxis may be provided through use of mechanical
devices, including intermittent pneumatic compression devices,
venous foot pumps, or graduated compression stockings. The
efficacy and safety of graduated compression stockings in
nonsurgical patients have recently been challenged. The CLOTS1
trial found no reduction in VTE in stroke patients randomized to
receive them; however, a statistically significant increase in rates of
skin breakdown, blisters and necrosis was found.
__________
1Importantly, because the INR is not standardized for abnormalities
of factor V and fibrinogen, the INR should be used only in
reference to anticoagulation in patients who are receiving warfarin.
 
 
Table 14–12. Risk stratification for DVT/VTE among hospital
inpatients.
 
High Risk
     Recent major orthopedic surgery/arthroplasty/or
fracture
     Abdominal/pelvic cancer undergoing surgery
     Recent spinal cord injury or major trauma within 90
days
     More than 3 of the intermediate risk factors (see below)
Intermediate Risk
     Not ambulating independently outside of room at least
twice daily
     Active infectious or inflammatory process
     Active malignancy
     Major surgery (non-orthopedic)
     History of VTE
     Stroke
     Central venous access or PICC line
     Inflammatory bowel disease
     Prior immobilization (> 72 hours) preoperatively
     Obesity (BMI > 30)
     Patient age > 50 years
     Hormone replacement or oral contraceptive therapy
     Hypercoagulable state
     Nephrotic syndrome
     Burns
     Cellulitis
     Varicose veins
     Paresis
     CHF (systolic dysfunction)
     COPD exacerbation
     
Low Risk
     Minor procedure and age < 40 years with no additional
risk factors
     Ambulatory with expected length of stay of < 24 hours
or minor surgery
BMI, body mass index; CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; DVT, deep venous thrombosis; PICC,
peripherally inserted central catheter; VTE, venous thromboembolic
disease (includes DVT and PE).
Adapted from Guidelines used at the VA Medical Center, San Francisco,
CA.
Bump GM et al. How complete is the evidence for
thromboembolism prophylaxis in general medicine patients? A
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Hosp Med. 2009
May;4(5):289–97. [PMID: 19504490]
 
CLOTS Trials Collaboration; Dennis M et al. Effectiveness of
thigh-length graduated compression stockings to reduce deep vein
thrombosis after stroke (CLOTS trial 1): a multicentre,
randomised, controlled trial. Lancet 2009 Jun 6;373(9679):1958–
65. [PMID: 19477503]
 
Geerts WH et al. Prevention of venous thromboembolism:
American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical
Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008 Jun;133(6
Suppl):381S–453S. [PMID: 18574271]
 
Hull RD et al; EXCLAIM (Extended Prophylaxis for Venous
ThromboEmbolism in Acutely Ill Medical Patients With Prolonged
Immobilization) study. Extended-duration venous
thromboembolism prophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients with
recently reduced mobility: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med.
2010 Jul 6;153(1):8–18. [PMID: 20621900]
 
Piazza G et al. Physician alerts to prevent symptomatic venous
thromboembolism in hospitalized patients. Circulation. 2009 Apr
28;119(16):2196–201. [PMID: 19364975]
 
Rasmussen MS et al. Prolonged thromboprophylaxis with low
molecular weight heparin for abdominal or pelvic surgery.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21;(1):CD004318.
[PMID: 19160234]
 
 Thromboembolic Disease
A. Anticoagulant Therapy
Treatment for VTE should be offered to patients with objectively
confirmed DVT or PE, or to those in whom the clinical suspicion is
high for the disorder yet have not yet undergone diagnostic testing
(see Chapter 9). The management of VTE primarily involves
administration of anticoagulants, which initially are given parenterally
followed by long-term oral therapy; the goal is to prevent
recurrence, extension and embolization of thrombosis and to reduce
the risk of post-thrombotic syndrome. Suggested anticoagulation
regimens are found in Table 14–15.
B. Selecting Appropriate Anticoagulant Therapy
Most patients with DVT alone may be treated as outpatients,
provided that their risk of bleeding is low, they are candidates for
injectable anticoagulants, and they have good follow-up. Table 14–
16 outlines the selection criteria for outpatient treatment of DVT.
Patients who are hospitalized for DVT should receive initial
anticoagulation with heparin or LMWH as outlined in Table 14–15.
Among patients with PE, risk stratification should be done at time
of diagnosis to direct treatment and triage. Patients with persistent
hemodynamic instability (or patients with massive PE) are classified
as high risk and have an early PE-related mortality of > 15%. These
patients should be admitted to an intensive care unit and receive
thrombolysis in addition to anticoagulation. Intermediate-risk
patients have a mortality rate of up to 15% and should be admitted
to a higher level of inpatient care, with consideration of thrombolysis
on a case-by-case basis. Those classified as low risk have a
mortality rate < 3% and are candidates for expedited discharge or
outpatient therapy. Although both intermediate- and low-risk
patients are hemodynamically stable, additional assessment is
necessary to differentiate the two. Echocardiography can be used to
identify patients with right ventricular dysfunction, which connotes
intermediate risk. However, real-time echocardiography involves
added cost and is not always immediately available. An LV/RV
ratio < 1.0 on chest CT angiogram has been shown to have good
negative predictive value for adverse outcome but suffers from
inter-observer variability. Serum biomarkers such as B-type
natriuretic peptide and troponin have been studied and are most
useful for their negative predictive value, and mainly in combination
with other predictors. The PESI (pulmonary embolism severity
index) clinical risk score, which does not require additional testing,
has been validated and accurately identifies patients at low risk for
30-day PE-related mortality (Table 14–17). A simplified version of
this risk score has been proposed and is undergoing further
validation.
 
Table 14–13. Pharmacologic prophylaxis of VTE in selected
clinical scenarios.1
 
1 All regimens administered subcutaneously, except for warfarin.
2 Includes TKA, THR, and HFS.
3 Defined as creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min.
HFS, hip fracture surgery; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; THR, total
hip 
replacement; 
TKA, 
total 
knee 
arthroplasty; 
VTE, 
venous
thromboembolic disease.
 
Table 14–14. Contraindications to VTE prophylaxis for medical or
surgical hospital inpatients at high risk for VTE.
 
Absolute contraindications
     Acute hemorrhage from wounds or drains or lesions
     Intracranial hemorrhage within prior 24 hours
     Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) considering
using fondaparinux
     Severe trauma to head or spinal cord or extremities
     Epidural anesthesia/spinal block within 12 hours of
initiation of anticoagulation (concurrent use of an epidural
catheter and LMWH thromboprophylaxis should require
approval by service who performed the epidural or spinal
procedure, eg, anesthesia/pain service)
     Currently receiving warfarin or heparin or LMWH or
direct thrombin inhibitor for other indications
Relative contraindications
     Coagulopathy (INR > 1.5)
     Intracranial lesion or neoplasm
     Severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <
50,000/mcL)
     Intracranial hemorrhage within past 6 months
     Gastrointestinal or genitourinary hemorrhage within
past 6 months
INR, international normalized ratio; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin;
VTE, venous thromboembolic disease.
Adapted from Guidelines used at the VA Medical Center, San Francisco,
CA.
1. Heparin—Selection of a parenteral anticoagulant should be
determined by patient characteristics (kidney function, immediate
bleeding risk, weight) and clinical scenario (eg, whether
thrombolysis is being considered). LMWHs are as efficacious as
unfractionated heparin in the immediate treatment of DVT and PE
and are preferred as initial treatment because of predictable
pharmacokinetics, which allow for subcutaneous, once- or twice-
daily dosing with no requirement for monitoring in most patients.
Monitoring of the therapeutic effect of LMWH may be indicated in
pregnancy, compromised kidney function, and extremes of weight.
Accumulation of LMWH and increased rates of bleeding have been
observed among patients with severe chronic kidney disease
(creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min), leading to a recommendation to
use intravenous unfractionated heparin preferentially in these
patients. If concomitant thrombolysis is being considered,
unfractionated heparin is indicated. In addition, patients with VTE
and a perceived higher risk of bleeding (ie, post-surgery) may be
better candidates for treatment with unfractionated heparin than
LMWH given its shorter half-life and reversibility.
Weight-based, fixed-dose daily subcutaneous fondaparinux (a
synthetic factor Xa inhibitor) may also be used for the initial
treatment of DVT and PE, with no increase in bleeding over that
observed with LMWH. Its lack of reversibility, long half-life, and
primarily renal clearance limits its use in patients with an increased
risk of bleeding or renal failure.
2. Warfarin—Patients with DVT with or without PE require a
minimum of 3 months of anticoagulation in order to reduce the risk
of recurrence of thrombosis. An oral vitamin K antagonist, such as
warfarin, is usually initiated along with the parenteral anticoagulant,
although patients with cancer-related thrombosis may benefit from
ongoing treatment with LMWH alone. Most patients require 5 mg
of warfarin daily for initial treatment, but lower doses (2.5 mg daily)
should be considered for patients of Asian descent, the elderly, and
those with hyperthyroidism, congestive heart failure, liver disease,
recent major surgery, malnutrition, certain polymorphisms for the
CYP2C9 or the VKORC1 genes or who are receiving concurrent
medications that increase sensitivity to warfarin (Table 14–18).
Conversely, individuals of African descent, those with larger body
mass index or hypothyroidism, and those who are receiving
medications that increase warfarin metabolism may require higher
initial doses (7.5 mg daily). Daily INR results should guide dosing
adjustments (Table 14–19). Web-based warfarin dosing calculators
that consider these clinical and genetic factors are available to help
clinicians choose the appropriate starting dose (eg, see
www.warfarindosing.org). Because an average of 5 days is
required to achieve a steady-state reduction in the activity of vitamin
K–dependent coagulation factors, the parenteral anticoagulant
should be continued for at least 5 days and until the INR is > 2.0 on
2 consecutive days. Meticulous follow-up should be arranged for all
patients taking warfarin (Table 14–19) because of the bleeding risk
that is associated with initiation of therapy. INR monitoring should
occur at least twice weekly during initiation. Once stabilized, the
INR should be checked at an interval no longer than every 4 weeks
and warfarin dosing adjusted in accordance with the guidelines
outlined in Table 14–20. Nontherapeutic INRs should be managed
according to evidence-based guidelines (Table 14–21).
3. New investigational oral anticoagulants—The vita-min K
antagonists have been the only oral anticoagulants available for
nearly 7 decades. Now, a number of novel oral anticoagulant agents
that promise more predictable dose effect and ease of
administration than warfarin are becoming available. Dabigatran, an
oral DTI, has been shown to be noninferior to warfarin for
treatment of VTE. Although not yet approved by the FDA for this
indication, it is currently available for prevention of embolization in
nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Rivaroxaban, an oral direct factor Xa
inhibitor, is already approved in Canada and Europe for DVT
prevention and is awaiting approval in the United States for VTE
treatment and stroke prevention. These new agents have
predictable dose effects, minimal drug interactions, rapid onset of
action, and no need for laboratory monitoring. Once additional
therapies are available for treatment of VTE, agent selection will
depend on renal function, concomitant medications, cost, and
adherence issues.
4. Duration of anticoagulation therapy—The clinical scenario in
which the thrombosis occurred is the strongest predictor of
recurrence and, in most cases, guides duration of anticoagulation
(Table 14–22). In the first year after discontinuation of
anticoagulation therapy, the frequency of recurrence of VTE among
individuals whose thrombosis occurred in the setting of a transient,
major, reversible risk factor (such as surgery) is approximately 3%,
compared with at least 8% for individuals whose thrombosis was
unprovoked, and > 20% in patients with cancer. Patients with
provoked VTE are generally treated with a minimum of 3 months of
anticoagulation, whereas unprovoked VTE should prompt
consideration of indefinite anticoagulation. Individual risk
stratification may help identify patients most likely to suffer recurrent
disease and thus most likely to benefit from ongoing anticoagulation
therapy. Normal D-dimer levels 1 month after cessation of
anticoagulation are associated with lower recurrence risk, although
some would argue not low enough to consider staying off therapy.
The predictive value of presence of residual vein thrombosis after
completion of 3 months of anticoagulation is unclear, with some
studies showing much lower recurrence rates in patients without
residual thrombosis while other studies show equal recurrence rates
regardless of findings on follow-up ultrasound. A risk scoring
system using BMI, age, D-dimer and post-phlebitic symptoms has
been developed to identify women at lower risk for recurrence after
unprovoked VTE. Men in the cohort were at high risk for recurrent
VTE regardless of other predictors and so were excluded from the
final model. Risk-stratification schemas have not been standardized
and remain an area of active research. The benefit of anticoagulation
must be weighed against the bleeding risks posed by this therapy
and should be assessed at the initiation of therapy and then at least
annually in any patient receiving prolonged therapy. Bleeding risk
scores have been developed to help clinicians in this process.
 
Table 14–15. Initial anticoagulation for VTE.1
 
Note: An “×” denotes appropriate use of the anticoagulant.
1Obtain baseline hemoglobin, platelet count, aPTT, PT/INR, creatinine,
urinalysis, and hemoccult prior to initiation of anticoagulation.
Anticoagulation is contraindicated in the setting of active bleeding.
2Defined as creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min.
3Body weight < 50 kg: reduce dose and monitor anti-Xa levels.
DVT, deep venous thrombosis; IV, intravenously; PE, pulmonary embolism;
SC, subcutaneously; VTE, venous thromboembolic disease (includes DVT
and PE).
 
Table 14–16. Patient selection for outpatient treatment of DVT.
 
Patients considered appropriate for outpatient treatment
     No clinical signs or symptoms of PE and pain
controlled
     Motivated and capable of self-administration of
injections
     Confirmed prescription insurance that covers injectable
medication or patient can pay out-of-pocket for injectable
agents
     Capable and willing to comply with frequent follow-up
     Initially, patients may need to be seen daily to weekly
Potential contraindications for outpatient treatment
     DVT involving inferior vena cava, iliac, common
femoral, or upper extremity vein (these patients might
benefit from vascular intervention)
     Comorbid conditions
     Active peptic ulcer disease, GI bleeding in past 14
days, liver synthetic dysfunction
     Brain metastases, current or recent CNS or spinal cord
injury/surgery in the last 10 days, CVA ≤ 4–6 weeks
     Familial bleeding diathesis
     Active bleeding from source other than GI
     Thrombocytopenia
     Creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min Patient weighs < 55
kg (male) or < 45 kg (female)
     Recent surgery, spinal or epidural anesthesia in the
past 3 days
     History of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia Inability to
inject medication at home, reliably follow medication
schedule, recognize changes in health status, understand
or follow directions
 
Table 14–17. Pulmonary Embolism severity index (PESI)
 
Adapted, with permission, from Aujesky D et al. Derivation and validation of
a prognostic model for pulmonary embolism. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2005 Oct 15;172(8):1041–6. Reprinted with permission of the American
Thoracic Society. © American Thoracic Society
 
Table 14–18. Commonly used agents and their potential effect on
the INR.
 
 
 
Tendency to Increase INR Tendency to Decrease
INR
Phenytoin
Phenytoin
Erythromycin
Rifampin/rifabutin
Metronidazole
Carbamazepine
Ketoconazole
Vitamin K
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Phenobarbital
Amiodarone
Sucralfate
Cimetidine
Ginseng
Alcohol
Alcohol
Fluconazole
 
Itraconazole
 
Statins
 
INR, international normalized ratio.
Cosmi B et al; PROLONG Investigators (on behalf of FCSA,
Italian Federation of Anticoagulation Clinics). Residual venous
obstruction, alone and in combination with D-dimer, as a risk
factor for recurrence after anticoagulation withdrawal following a
first idiopathic deep vein thrombosis in the PROLONG study. Eur
J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2010 Mar;39(3):356–65. [PMID:
20034816]
 
 
Table 14–19. Warfarin adjustment guidelines for patients newly
starting therapy.
 
1 See text
2 In general, dosage adjustments should not exceed 2.5 mg or 50%.
 
Table 14–20. Warfarin dosing adjustment guidelines for patients
receiving long-term therapy.
 
Adapted from Guidelines used at the VA Medical Center, Reno NV.
EINSTEIN Investigators; Bauersachs R et al. Oral rivaroxaban for
symptomatic venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med. 2010;Dec
23;363(26):2499–510. [PMID: 21128814]
 
Gage BF. Pharmacogenetics-based coumarin therapy.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2006:467–73.
[PMID: 17124101]
 
Jiménez D et al. Simplification of the Pulmonary Embolism Severity
Index for prognostication in patients with acute symptomatic
pulmonary embolism. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(15):1383–9.
[PMID: 20696966]
 
Kearon C et al. Antithrombotic therapy for venous
thromboembolic disease: American College of Chest Physicians
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guideline (8th Edition). Chest.
2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):454S–545S. [PMID: 18574272]
 
Palareti G et al. D-dimer testing to determine the duration of
anticoagulation therapy. N Engl J Med. 2006 Oct 26;355(17):
1780–9. [PMID: 17065639]
 
Rodger MA et al. Identifying unprovoked thromboembolism
patients at low risk for recurrence who can discontinue
anticoagulant therapy. CMAJ. 2008 Aug 26;179(5):417–26.
[PMID: 18725614]
 
 
Table 14–21. American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-
based Clinical Practice guidelines for the Management of
nontherapeutic INR.
 
1Patients at higher risk for bleeding include the elderly; conditions that
increase the risk of bleeding include renal failure, hypertension, falls, liver
disease, and history of gastrointestinal or genitourinary bleeding.
FFP, fresh frozen plasma; PCC, prothrombin complex concentrate.
Adapted, with permission, from Ansell J et al. Pharmacology and
management of the vitamin K antagonists: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition).
Chest. 2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):160S–198S.
 
Table 14–22. Duration of treatment of VTE.
 
LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; VTE, venous thromboembolic
disease.
Ruiz-Gimenez N et al. Predictive variables for major bleeding
events in patients presenting with documented acute venous
thromboembolism. Findings from the RIETE Registry. Thromb
Haemost. 2008 Jul;100(1):26–31. [PMID: 18612534]
 
Schulman S et al; RE-COVER Study Group. Dabigatran versus
warfarin in the treatment of acute venous thromboembolism. N
Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 10;361(24):2342–52. [PMID: 19966341]
 
Siragusa S et al. Residual vein thrombosis to establish duration of
anticoagulation after a first episode of deep vein thrombosis: the
Duration of Anticoagulation based on Compressive
UltraSonography (DACUS) study. Blood. 2008 Aug
1;112(3):511–5. [PMID: 18497320]
 
Torbicki A et al. Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of
acute pulmonary embolism: the Task Force for the Diagnosis and
Management of Acute Pulmonary Embolism of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2008
Sep;29(18):2276–315. [PMID: 18757870]
 
Verhovsek M et al. Systematic review: D-dimer to predict
recurrent disease after stopping anticoagulant therapy for
unprovoked venous thromboembolism. Ann Intern Med. 2008
Oct 7;149(7):481–90. [PMID: 18838728]
 
Weitz J et al. New antithrombotic drugs: American College of
Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guideline (8th
Edition). Chest. 2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):234S–256S. [PMID:
18574267]
 
Wittkowsky AK. New oral anticoagulants: a practical guide for
clinicians. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2009 Nov 4. [Epub ahead of
print] [PMID: 19888552]
 
C. Thrombolytic Therapy
Anticoagulation alone is appropriate treatment for most patients
with PE; however, those with high-risk, massive PE, defined as PE
with persistent hemodynamic instability, have an in-hospital mortality
rate that approaches 30% and require immediate thrombolysis in
combination with anticoagulation (Table 14–23). A 50% reduced
dosing regimen for tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) has recently
been proposed, offering similar efficacy with lower risk of
complications. Thrombolytic therapy also has been used in selected
patients with intermediate-risk, submassive PE, defined as PE
without hemodynamic instability but with evidence of right
ventricular compromise. This approach remains controversial,
however, given the paucity of data showing a clinically significant
benefit of thrombolysis.
Limited data suggest that patients with large proximal iliofemoral
DVT may also benefit from catheter-directed thrombolysis in
addition to treatment with anticoagulation. However, standardized
guidelines are lacking, and use of the intervention may be limited by
institutional availability and provider experience. Importantly,
thrombolytics should be considered only in patients who have a low
risk of bleeding, as rates of bleeding are increased in patients who
receive these products compared with rates of hemorrhage in those
who are treated with anticoagulation alone.
 
Table 14–23. Thrombolytic therapies for acute massive pulmonary
embolism.
 
Dong BR et al. Thrombolytic therapy for pulmonary embolism.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8;(3):CD004437. [PMID:
19588357]
 
Enden T et al; CaVenT study group. Catheter-directed
thrombolysis vs. anticoagulant therapy alone in deep vein
thrombosis: results of an open randomized, controlled trial
reporting on short-term patency. J Thromb Haemost. 2009
Aug;7(8):1268–75. [PMID: 19422443]
 
Kearon C et al. Antithrombotic therapy for venous
thromboembolic disease: American College of Chest Physicians
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guideline (8th Edition). Chest.
2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):454S–545S. [PMID: 18574272]
 
Todd JL et al. Thrombolytic therapy for acute pulmonary
embolism: a critical appraisal. Chest. 2009 May;135(5):1321–9.
[PMID: 19420199]
 
Vedantham S. Interventional approaches to acute venous
thromboembolism. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008
Feb;29(1):56–65. [PMID: 18302087]
 
Wang C et al; China Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) Study
Group. Efficacy and safety of low dose recombinant tissue-type
plasminogen activator for the treatment of acute pulmonary
thromboembolism: a randomized, multicenter, controlled trial.
Chest. 2010 Feb;137(2):254–62. [PMID: 19741062]
 
D. Nonpharmacologic Therapy
1. Graduated compression stockings—In order to reduce the
likelihood of the post-thrombotic syndrome, which is characterized
by swelling, pain, and skin ulceration, all patients with DVT should
wear a graduated compression stocking with 30–40 mm Hg
pressure at the ankle on the affected lower extremity for 1–2 years.
Stockings should be provided immediately to have the most impact
on post-thrombotic syndrome; however, they are contraindicated in
patients with peripheral vascular disease.
Kolbach DN et al. Non-pharmacologic measures for prevention of
post-thrombotic syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2004;(1):CD004174. [PMID: 14974060]
 
2. Inferior vena caval (IVC) filters—There is a paucity of data
to support the use of IVC filters for the prevention of PE in any
clinical scenario. There is only one available randomized, controlled
trial of IVC filters for prevention of PE. In this study, patients with
documented DVT received full intensity, time-limited anticoagulation
with or without placement of an IVC filter. Patients with IVC filters
had a lower rate of nonfatal PE at 12 days but an increased rate of
DVT at 2 years. Most experts agree with placement of an IVC filter
in patients with acute proximal DVT who concurrently have an
absolute contraindication to anticoagulation. The remainder of the
indications 
(submassive/intermediate-risk 
PE, 
free-floating
iliofemoral DVT, peri-operative risk reduction) are controversial. If
the contra-indication to anticoagulation is temporary (eg,
perisurgical patients), placement of a retrievable IVC filter should
be considered so that the device can be removed once
anticoagulation has been started and has been shown to be
tolerated.
Complications of IVC filters include local thrombosis, tilting,
migration, and inability to retrieve the device. When considering
placement of an IVC filter, it is best to consider both short- and
long-term complications, since devices intended for removal may
become permanent.
Barral FG. Vena cava filters: why, when, what and how? J
Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2008 Feb;49(1):35–49. [PMID:
18212686]
 
PREPIC Study Group. Eight-year follow-up of patients with
permanent vena cava filters in the prevention of pulmonary
embolism: the PREPIC (Prévention du Risque d'Embolie
Pulmonaire par Interruption Cave) randomized study. Circulation.
2005 Jul 19;112(3):416–22. [PMID: 16009794]
 
 When to Refer
 
•    Presence of large iliofemoral VTE, IVC thrombosis,
portal vein thrombosis, or Budd-Chiari syndrome for
consideration of catheter-directed thrombolysis.
•    Massive PE for urgent embolectomy.
•    History of HIT or prolonged PTT plus renal failure for
alternative anticoagulation regimens.
•    Need for IVC filter placement.
 When to Admit
 
•    Documented or suspected PE (some patients with low-
risk PE may not require admission).
•    DVT with poorly controlled pain, high bleeding risk,
contraindications to LMWH or fondaparinux.
•    Large iliofemoral DVT for consideration of thrombolysis.
•    Acute DVT and absolute contraindication to
anticoagulation for IVC filter placement.
 
 
Gastrointestinal
Disorders
Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD
SYMPTOMS & SIGNS OF
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
 
DYSPEPSIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Epigastric pain or burning, early satiety, or post-prandial fullness.
 Endoscopy is warranted in patients with alarm features or in
those older than 55 years.
 All other patients should first undergo testing for Helicobacter
pylori or a trial of empiric proton pump inhibitor.
 
 General Considerations
Dyspepsia refers to acute, chronic, or recurrent pain or discomfort
centered in the upper abdomen. An international committee of
clinical investigators (Rome III Committee) has defined dyspepsia
as epigastric pain or burning, early satiety, or postprandial fullness.
Heartburn (retrosternal burning) should be distinguished from
dyspepsia. When heartburn is the dominant complaint,
gastroesophageal reflux is nearly always present. Dyspepsia occurs
in 15% of the adult population and accounts for 3% of general
medical office visits.
 Etiology
A. Food or Drug Intolerance
Acute, self-limited “indigestion” may be caused by overeating,
eating too quickly, eating high-fat foods, eating during stressful
situations, or drinking too much alcohol or coffee. Many
medications cause dyspepsia, including aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), antibiotics (metronidazole,
macrolides), diabetes drugs (metformin, α-glucosidase inhibitors,
amylin analogs, GLP-1 receptor antagonists), antihypertensive
medications (angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors,
angiotensin-receptor blockers), cholesterol-lowering agents (niacin,
fibrates), neuropsychiatric medications (cholinesterase inhibitors
[donepezil, rivastigmine]), SSRIs (fluoxetine, sertraline), serotonin-
norepinephrine-reuptake 
inhibitors 
(venlafaxine, 
duloxetine),
Parkinson drugs (dopamine agonists, monoamine oxidase [MAO]-
B inhibitors), corticosteroids, estrogens, digoxin, iron, and opioids.
B. Functional Dyspepsia
This is the most common cause of chronic dyspepsia. Up to three-
fourths of patients have no obvious organic cause for their
symptoms after evaluation. Symptoms may arise from a complex
interaction of increased visceral afferent sensitivity, gastric delayed
emptying or impaired accommodation to food, or psychosocial
stressors. Although benign, these symptoms may be chronic and
difficult to treat.
C. Luminal Gastrointestinal Tract Dysfunction
Peptic ulcer disease is present in 5–15% of patients with dyspepsia.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is present in up to 20% of
patients with dyspepsia, even without significant heartburn. Gastric
or esophageal cancer is identified in 0.25–1% but is extremely rare
in persons under age 55 years with uncomplicated dyspepsia. Other
causes include gastroparesis (especially in diabetes mellitus), lactose
intolerance or malabsorptive conditions, and parasitic infection
(Giardia, Strongyloides, Anisakis).
D. Helicobacter pylori Infection
Although chronic gastric infection with H pylori is an important
cause of peptic ulcer disease, it is an uncommon cause of dyspepsia
in the absence of peptic ulcer disease. The prevalence of H pylori-
associated chronic gastritis in patients with dyspepsia without peptic
ulcer disease is 20–50%, the same as in the general population.
E. Pancreatic Disease
Pancreatic carcinoma and chronic pancreatitis may present with
dyspepsia.
F. Biliary Tract Disease
The abrupt onset of epigastric or right upper quadrant pain due to
cholelithiasis or choledocholithiasis should be readily distinguished
from dyspepsia.
G. Other Conditions
Diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, chronic kidney disease,
myocardial ischemia, intra-abdominal malignancy, gastric volvulus
or paraesophageal hernia, and pregnancy are sometimes
accompanied by dyspepsia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Given the nonspecific nature of dyspeptic symptoms, the history has
limited diagnostic utility. It should clarify the chronicity, location, and
quality of the discomfort, and its relationship to meals. The
discomfort may be characterized by one or more upper abdominal
symptoms including epigastric pain or burning, early satiety,
postprandial fullness, bloating, nausea, or vomiting. Concomitant
weight loss, persistent vomiting, constant or severe pain, dysphagia,
hematemesis, or melena warrants endoscopy or abdominal imaging.
Potentially offending medications and excessive alcohol use should
be identified and discontinued if possible. The patient's reason for
seeking care should be determined. Recent changes in employment,
marital discord, physical and sexual abuse, anxiety, depression, and
fear of serious disease may all contribute to the development and
reporting of symptoms. Patients with functional dyspepsia often are
younger, report a variety of abdominal and extragastrointestinal
complaints, show signs of anxiety or depression, or have a history
of use of psychotropic medications.
The symptom profile alone does not differentiate between
functional dyspepsia and organic gastrointestinal disorders. Based
on the clinical history alone, primary care clinicians misdiagnose
nearly half of patients with peptic ulcers or gastroesophageal reflux
and have < 25% accuracy in diagnosing functional dyspepsia.
The physical examination is rarely helpful. Signs of serious
organic disease such as weight loss, organomegaly, abdominal
mass, or fecal occult blood are further evaluated. In patients older
than age of 50 years, initial laboratory work should include a blood
count, electrolytes, liver enzymes, calcium, and thyroid function
tests.
B. Laboratory Findings
In patients younger than 55 years with uncomplicated dyspepsia (in
whom gastric cancer is rare), initial noninvasive strategies should be
pursued (see below). In most clinical settings, a noninvasive test for
H pylori (urea breath test, fecal antigen test, or IgG serology)
should be performed first. Although serologic tests are inexpensive,
performance characteristics are poor in low-prevalence
populations, whereas breath and fecal antigen tests have 95%
accuracy. If H pylori breath test or fecal antigen test results are
negative in a patient not taking NSAIDs, peptic ulcer disease is
virtually excluded.
C. Upper Endoscopy
Upper endoscopy is indicated to look for gastric cancer or other
serious organic disease in all patients over age 55 years with new-
onset dyspepsia and in all patients with “alarm” features, such as
weight loss, dysphagia, recurrent vomiting, evidence of bleeding, or
anemia. Upper endoscopy is the study of choice to diagnose
gastroduodenal 
ulcers, 
erosive 
esophagitis, 
and 
upper
gastrointestinal malignancy. It is also helpful for patients who are
concerned about serious underlying disease. For patients born in
regions in which there is a higher incidence of gastric cancer, an age
threshold of 45 years may be appropriate.
Endoscopic evaluation is also warranted when symptoms fail to
respond to initial empiric management strategies or when frequent
symptom relapse occurs after discontinuation of antisecretory
therapy.
D. Other Tests
Abdominal imaging (ultrasonography or CT scanning) is performed
only when pancreatic or biliary tract disease is suspected. Gastric
emptying studies are valuable only in patients with recurrent
vomiting. Ambulatory esophageal pH testing may be of value when
atypical gastroesophageal reflux is suspected.
 Treatment
Initial empiric treatment is warranted for patients who are < 55
years and who have no alarm features (defined above). All other
patients as well as patients whose symptoms fail to respond or
relapse after empiric treatment should undergo upper endoscopy
with subsequent treatment directed at the specific disorder (eg,
peptic ulcer, gastroesophageal reflux, cancer). Most patients will
have no significant findings on endoscopy and will be given a
diagnosis of functional dyspepsia.
A. Empiric Therapy
H pylori–negative patients most likely have functional dyspepsia or
atypical GERD and can be treated with an antisecretory agent
(proton pump inhibitor) for 4 weeks. For patients who have
symptom relapse after discontinuation of the proton pump inhibitor,
intermittent or long-term proton pump inhibitor therapy may be
considered.
For patients in whom test results are positive for H pylori,
antibiotic therapy proves definitive for over 90% of peptic ulcers
and may improve symptoms in a small subset (< 10%) of infected
patients with functional dyspepsia. Patients with persistent
dyspepsia after H pylori eradication can be given a trial of proton
pump inhibitor therapy. In clinical settings in which the prevalence of
H pylori infection in the population is low (< 10%), it may be more
cost-effective to initially treat all young patients with uncomplicated
dyspepsia with a 4-week trial of a proton pump inhibitor. Patients
who have symptom relapse after discontinuation of the proton pump
inhibitor should be tested for H pylori and treated if positive.
B. Treatment of Functional Dyspepsia
1. General measures—Most patients have mild, intermittent
symptoms that respond to reassurance and lifestyle changes.
Alcohol and caffeine should be reduced or discontinued. Patients
with postprandial symptoms should be instructed to consume small,
low-fat meals. A food diary, in which patients record their food
intake, symptoms, and daily events, may reveal dietary or
psychosocial precipitants of pain.
2. Pharmacologic agents—Drugs have demonstrated limited
efficacy in the treatment of functional dyspepsia. One-third of
patients derive relief from placebo. Antisecretory therapy for 4–8
weeks with oral proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole,
esomeprazole, or rabeprazole 20 mg, dexlansoprazole or
lansoprazole 30 mg, or pantoprazole 40 mg) may benefit 10–15%
of patients, particularly those with dyspepsia characterized as
epigastric pain (“ulcer-like dyspepsia”) or dyspepsia and heartburn
(“reflux-like dyspepsia”). Low doses of antidepressants (eg,
desipramine or nortriptyline, 10–50 mg orally at bedtime) are
believed to benefit some patients, possibly by moderating visceral
afferent sensitivity. However, side effects are common and response
is patient-specific. Doses should be increased slowly. The
prokinetic agent metoclopramide (5–10 mg three times daily) may
improve symptoms, but improvement does not correlate with the
presence or absence of gastric emptying delay. In 2009, the FDA
issued a black box warning that metoclopramide use for more than
3 months is associated with a high incidence of tar-dive dyskinesia
and should be avoided. The elderly, particularly elderly women, are
most at risk. In 2006, a randomized, placebo-controlled study
demonstrated efficacy of the novel prokinetic agent itopride in the
treatment of functional dyspepsia. This agent enhances the release
of gastric acetylcholine through dual inhibition of D2 receptors and
acetylcholinesterase. It is available in Canada but not yet in the
United States.
3. Anti-H pylori treatment—Meta-analyses have suggested that
a small number of patients with functional dyspepsia (< 10%) derive
benefit from H pylori eradication therapy. Therefore, patients with
functional dyspepsia should be tested and treated for H pylori.
4. Alternative therapies—Psychotherapy and hypnotherapy may
be of benefit in selected motivated patients with functional
dyspepsia. Herbal therapies (peppermint, caraway) may offer
benefit with little risk of adverse effects.
Aro P et al. Anxiety is associated with uninvestigated and
functional dyspepsia (Rome III criteria) in a Swedish population-
based study. Gastroenterology. 2009 Jul;137(1):94–100. [PMID:
19328797]
 
Ford AC et al. Meta-analysis: Helicobacter pylori ‘test and treat’
compared with empirical acid suppression for managing dyspepsia.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2008 Sep 1;28(5):534–44. [PMID:
18616641]
 
Ford AC et al. What is the prevalence of clinically significant
endoscopic findings in subjects with dyspepsia? Systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Oct;8(10):830–7. [PMID: 20541625]
 
Pilichiewicz AN et al. Relationship between symptoms and dietary
patterns in patients with functional dyspepsia. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009 Mar;7(3):317–22. [PMID: 18929687]
 
Vakil N et al. Cost of detecting malignant lesions by endoscopy in
2741 primary care dyspeptic patients without alarm symptoms.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Jul;7(7):756–61. [PMID:
19364542]
 
Zagari RM et al. Epidemiology of functional dyspepsia and
subgroups in the Italian general population: an endoscopic study.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Apr;138(4):1302–11. [PMID:
20074574]
 
NAUSEA & VOMITING
Nausea is a vague, intensely disagreeable sensation of sickness or
“queasiness” and is distinguished from anorexia. Vomiting often
follows, as does retching (spasmodic respiratory and abdominal
movements). Vomiting should be distinguished from regurgitation,
the effortless reflux of liquid or food stomach contents; and from
rumination, the chewing and swallowing of food that is regurgitated
volitionally after meals.
The brainstem vomiting center is composed of a group of
neuronal areas (area postrema, nucleus tractus solitarius, and central
pattern generator) within the medulla that coordinate emesis. It may
be stimulated by four different sources of afferent input: (1) Afferent
vagal fibers from the gastrointestinal viscera are rich in serotonin 5-
HT3 receptors; these may be stimulated by biliary or gastrointestinal
distention, mucosal or peritoneal irritation, or infections. (2) Fibers
of the vestibular system, which have high concentrations of
histamine H1 and muscarinic cholinergic receptors. (3) Higher
central nervous system centers (amygdala); here, certain sights,
smells, or emotional experiences may induce vomiting. For example,
patients receiving chemotherapy may start vomiting in anticipation of
its administration. (4) The chemoreceptor trigger zone, located
outside the blood-brain barrier in the area postrema of the medulla,
which is rich in opioid, serotonin 5-HT3, neurokinin 1 (NK1) and
dopamine D2 receptors. This region may be stimulated by drugs
and chemotherapeutic agents, toxins, hypoxia, uremia, acidosis, and
radiation therapy. Although the causes of vomiting are many, a
simplified list is provided in Table 15–1.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Acute symptoms without abdominal pain are typically caused by
food poisoning, infectious gastroenteritis, drugs, or systemic illness.
Inquiry should be made into recent changes in medications, diet,
other intestinal symptoms, or similar illnesses in family members.
The acute onset of severe pain and vomiting suggests perito-neal
irritation, acute gastric or intestinal obstruction, or pancreaticobiliary
disease. Persistent vomiting suggests pregnancy, gastric outlet
obstruction, gastroparesis, intestinal dysmotility, psychogenic
disorders, and central nervous system or systemic disorders.
Vomiting that occurs in the morning before breakfast is common
with pregnancy, uremia, alcohol intake, and increased intracranial
pressure. Vomiting immediately after meals strongly suggests bulimia
or psychogenic causes. Vomiting of undigested food one to several
hours after meals is characteristic of gastroparesis or a gastric outlet
obstruction; physical examination may reveal a succussion splash.
Patients with acute or chronic symptoms should be asked about
neurologic symptoms that suggest a central nervous system cause
such as headache, stiff neck, vertigo, and focal paresthesias or
weakness.
 
Table 15–1. Causes of nausea an
 
Infections
Mechanical obstruction
Visceral afferent
stimulation
     Gastric outlet obstruction: peptic
ulcer disease, malignancy, gastric
volvulus
     Small intestinal obstruction:
adhesions, hernias, volvulus, Crohn
disease, carcinomatosis
Dysmotility
     Gastroparesis: diabetic,
postviral, postvagotomy
     Small intestine: scleroderma,
amyloidosis, chronic intestinal
pseudo-obstruction, familial
myoneuropathies
Peritoneal irritation
     Peritonitis: perforated viscus,
appendicitis, spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis
     Viral gastroenteritis: Norwalk
agent, rotavirus
     “Food poisoning”: toxins from
Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus
aureus, Clostridium perfringens
Hepatitis A or B
     Acute systemic infections
Hepatobiliary or pancreatic
disorders
     Acute pancreatitis
     Cholecystitis or
choledocholithiasis
Topical
gastrointestinal
irritants
     Alcohol, NSAIDs,
oral antibiotics
Postoperative
Other
     Cardiac disease:
acute myocardial
infarction, congestive
heart failure
     Urologic disease:
stones,
pyelonephritis
Vestibular disorders
Vestibular disorders
     Labyrinthitis, Meniere
syndrome, motion sickness
CNS disorders
Increased intracranial pressure
     CNS tumors, subdural or
subarachnoid hemorrhage
Migraine
Infections
     Meningitis, encephalitis
Psychogenic
     Anticipatory vomiting, bulimia,
psychiatric disorders
Irritation of
chemoreceptor
trigger zone
Antitumor chemotherapy
Drugs and medications
     Opioids
     Anticonvulsants
     Antiparkinsonism drugs
     β-blockers, antiarrhythmics,
digoxin
     Nicotine
     Oral contraceptives
     Cholinesterase inhibitors
     Diabetes medications
(metformin, acarbose, pramlintide,
exenatide)
Radiation therapy
Systemic disorders
     Diabetic ketoacidosis
     Uremia
     Adrenocortical crisis
     Parathyroid disease
     Hypothyroidism
     Pregnancy
     Paraneoplastic syndrome
CNS, central nervous system; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.
B. Special Examinations
With vomiting that is severe or protracted, serum electrolytes should
be obtained to look for hypokalemia, azotemia, or metabolic
alkalosis resulting from loss of gastric contents. Flat and upright
abdominal radiographs or abdominal CT are obtained in patients
with severe pain or suspicion of mechanical obstruction to look for
free intraperitoneal air or dilated loops of small bowel. The cause of
gastric outlet obstruction is best demonstrated by upper endoscopy,
and the cause of small intestinal obstruction is best demonstrated
with abdominal CT imaging. Gastroparesis is confirmed by nuclear
scintigraphic studies or 13C-octanoic acid breath tests, which show
delayed gastric emptying and either upper endoscopy or barium
upper gastrointestinal series showing no evidence of mechanical
gastric outlet obstruction. Abnormal liver function tests or elevated
amylase or lipase suggest pancreaticobiliary disease, which may be
investigated with an abdominal sonogram or CT scan. Central
nervous system causes are best evaluated with either head CT or
MRI.
 Complications
Complications include dehydration, hypokalemia, metabolic
alkalosis, aspiration, rupture of the esophagus (Boerhaave
syndrome), and bleeding secondary to a mucosal tear at the
gastroesophageal junction (Mallory-Weiss syndrome).
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Most causes of acute vomiting are mild, self-limited, and require no
specific treatment. Patients should ingest clear liquids (broths, tea,
soups, carbonated beverages) and small quantities of dry foods
(soda crackers). For more severe acute vomiting, hospitalization
may be required. Patients unable to eat and losing gastric fluids may
become dehydrated, resulting in hypokalemia with metabolic
alkalosis. Intravenous 0.45% saline solution with 20 mEq/L of
potassium chloride is given in most cases to maintain hydration. A
nasogastric suction tube for gastric or mechanical small bowel
obstruction improves patient comfort and permits monitoring of fluid
loss.
B. Antiemetic Medications
Medications may be given either to prevent or to control vomiting
(see above). Combinations of drugs from different classes may
provide better control of symptoms with less toxicity in some
patients. Table 15–2 outlines common antiemetic dosing regimens.
1. Serotonin 5-HT3-receptor antagonists—Ondansetron,
granisetron, dolasetron, and palonosetron are effective in preventing
chemotherapy- and radiation-induced emesis when initiated prior to
treatment. Although 5-HT3-receptor antagonists are effective as
single agents for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea
and vomiting, their efficacy is enhanced by combination therapy with
a corticosteroid (dexamethasone) and NK1-receptor antagonist
(see below). Serotonin antagonists increasingly are used for the
prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting because of
increased restrictions on the use of other antiemetic agents (such as
droperidol).
 
Table 15–2. Common antiemetic dosin
 
1Neurokinin receptor antagonists are used solely for highly emetogenic
chemotherapy regimens in combination with 5-HT3 antagonists or
dexamethasone or both.
IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, orally; PR, per rectum.
2. Corticosteroids—Corticosteroids (eg, dexamethasone) have
antiemetic properties, but the basis for these effects is unknown.
These agents enhance the efficacy of serotonin receptor antagonists
for preventing acute and delayed nausea and vomiting in patients
receiving moderately to highly emetogenic chemotherapy regimens.
3. 
Neurokinin 
receptor 
antagonists—Aprepitant 
and
fosaprepitant are highly selective antagonists for NK1-receptors in
the area postrema. They are used in combination with
corticosteroids and serotonin antagonists for the prevention of acute
and delayed nausea and vomiting with highly emetogenic
chemotherapy regimens. Combined therapy with a neurokinin1
receptor antagonist prevents acute emesis in 80–90% and delayed
emesis in > 70% of patients treated with highly emetogenic
regimens.
4. Dopamine antagonists—The phenothiazines, butyrophenones,
and substituted benzamides have antiemetic properties that are due
to dopaminergic blockade as well as to their sedative effects. High
doses of these agents are associated with antidopaminergic side
effects, including extrapyramidal reactions and depression. These
agents are used in a variety of situations. Cases of QT prolongation
leading to ventricular tachycardia (torsades de pointes) have been
reported in several patients receiving droperidol, hence it is no
longer recommended as an antiemetic agent.
5. Antihistamines and anticholinergics—These drugs (eg,
meclizine, dimenhydrinate, transdermal scopolamine) may be
valuable in the prevention of vomiting arising from stimulation of the
labyrinth, ie, motion sickness, vertigo, and migraines. They may
induce drowsiness. A combination of oral vitamin B6 and
doxylamine is recommended by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists as first-line therapy for nausea and
vomiting during pregnancy.
6. Sedatives—Benzodiazepines are used in psychogenic and
anticipatory vomiting.
7. Cannabinoids—Marijuana has been used widely as an appetite
stimulant and antiemetic. Pure Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is
the major active ingredient in marijuana and is available by
prescription as dronabinol. In doses of 5–15 mg/m2, oral
dronabinol is effective in treating nausea associated with
chemotherapy, but it is associated with central nervous system side
effects in most patients.
Le TP et al. Update on the management of postoperative nausea
and vomiting and postdischarge nausea and vomiting in ambulatory
surgery. Anesthesiol Clin. 2010 Jun;28(2):225–49. [PMID:
20488392]
 
Niebyl JR. Clinical Practice. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 15;363(16):1544–50. [PMID: 20942670]
 
Roila F et al. Guideline update for MASCC and ESMO in the
prevention of chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea
and vomiting: results of the Perugia consensus conference. Ann
Oncol. 2010 May;21(Suppl 5):v232–43. [PMID: 20555089]
 
HICCUPS (SINGULTUS)
Though usually a benign and self-limited annoyance, hiccups may be
persistent and a sign of serious underlying illness. In patients on
mechanical ventilation, hiccups can trigger a full respiratory cycle
and result in respiratory alkalosis.
Causes of benign, self-limited hiccups include gastric distention
(carbonated beverages, air swallowing, overeating), sudden
temperature changes (hot then cold liquids, hot then cold shower),
alcohol ingestion, and states of heightened emotion (excitement,
stress, laughing). There are over 100 causes of recurrent or
persistent hiccups, grouped into the following categories:
Central 
nervous 
system: 
Neoplasms, 
infections,
cerebrovascular accident, trauma.
Metabolic Uremia, hypocapnia (hyperventilation).
Irritation of the vagus or phrenic nerve: (1) Head, neck:
Foreign body in ear, goiter, neoplasms. (2) Thorax: Pneumonia,
empyema, neoplasms, myocardial infarction, pericarditis, aneurysm,
esophageal obstruction, reflux esophagitis. (3) Abdomen:
Subphrenic abscess, hepatomegaly, hepatitis, cholecystitis, gastric
distention, gastric neoplasm, pancreatitis, or pancreatic malignancy.
Surgical General anesthesia, postoperative.
Psychogenic and idiopathic.
 Clinical Findings
Evaluation of the patient with persistent hiccups should include a
detailed neurologic examination, serum creatinine, liver chemistry
tests, and a chest radiograph. When the cause remains unclear, CT
of the head, chest, and abdomen, echocardiography,
bronchoscopy, and upper endoscopy may help. On occasion,
hiccups may be unilateral; chest fluoroscopy will make the
diagnosis.
 Treatment
A number of simple remedies may be helpful in patients with acute
benign hiccups. (1) Irritation of the nasopharynx by tongue traction,
lifting the uvula with a spoon, catheter stimulation of the
nasopharynx, or eating 1 tsp of dry granulated sugar. (2)
Interruption of the respiratory cycle by breath holding, Valsalva
maneuver, sneezing, gasping (fright stimulus), or rebreathing into a
bag. (3) Stimulation of the vagus by carotid massage. (4) Irritation
of the diaphragm by holding knees to chest or by continuous
positive airway pressure during mechanical ventilation. (5) Relief of
gastric distention by belching or insertion of a nasogastric tube.
A number of drugs have been promoted as being useful in the
treatment of hiccups. Chlorpromazine, 25–50 mg orally or
intramuscularly, is most commonly used. Other agents reported to
be effective include anticonvulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine),
benzodiazepines (lorazepam, diazepam), metoclopramide, baclofen,
gabapentin, and occasionally general anesthesia.
Pechlivanis I et al. A healthy man with intractable hiccups. J Clin
Neurosci. 2010 Jun;17(6):781–3. [PMID: 20359895]
 
Turkyilmaz A et al. Use of baclofen in the treatment of esophageal
stent-related hiccups. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008 Jan;85(1): 328–30.
[PMID: 18154840]
 
CONSTIPATION
Constipation occurs in 10–15% of adults and is a common reason
for seeking medical attention. It is more common in women. The
elderly are predisposed due to comorbid medical conditions,
medications, poor eating habits, decreased mobility and, in some
cases, inability to sit on a toilet (bed-bound patients). The first step
in evaluating the patient is to determine what is meant by
“constipation.” Patients may define constipation as infrequent stools
(fewer than three in a week), hard stools, excessive straining, or a
sense of incomplete evacuation. Table 15–3 summarizes the many
causes of constipation, which are discussed below.
 
Table 15–3. Causes of constipation i
 
Most common
     Inadequate fiber or fluid intake
     Poor bowel habits
Systemic disease
     Endocrine: hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism,
diabetes mellitus
     Metabolic: hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, uremia,
porphyria
     Neurologic: Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis,
sacral nerve damage (prior pelvic surgery, tumor),
paraplegia, autonomic neuropathy
Medications
     Opioids
     Diuretics
     Calcium channel blockers
     Anticholinergics
     Psychotropics
     Calcium and iron supplements
     NSAIDs
     Clonidine
     Cholestyramine
Structural abnormalities
     Anorectal: rectal prolapse, rectocele, rectal
intussusception, anorectal stricture, anal fissure, solitary
rectal ulcer syndrome
     Perineal descent
     Colonic mass with obstruction: adenocarcinoma
     Colonic stricture: radiation, ischemia, diverticulosis
     Hirschsprung disease
     Idiopathic megarectum
Slow colonic transit
     Idiopathic: isolated to colon
     Psychogenic
     Eating disorders
     Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
Pelvic floor dyssynergia
Irritable bowel syndrome
NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
 Etiology
A. Primary Constipation
Most patients have constipation that cannot be attributed to any
structural abnormalities or systemic disease. Some of these patients
have normal colonic transit time; however, a subset have slow
colonic transit or anorectal dysfunction. Normal colonic transit time
is approximately 35 hours; more than 72 hours is significantly
abnormal. Slow colonic transit is commonly idiopathic but may be
part of a generalized gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome. Patients
may complain of infrequent bowel movements and abdominal
bloating. Slow transit is more common in women, some of whom
have a history of psychosocial problems (depression, anxiety, eating
disorder, childhood trauma) or sexual abuse. Normal defecation
requires coordination between relaxation of the anal sphincter and
pelvic floor musculature while abdominal pressure is increased.
Patients with dyssynergic defecation (also known as anismus or
pelvic floor dyssynergia)—women more often than men—have
impaired relaxation or paradoxical contraction of the anal sphincter
and/or pelvic floor muscles during attempted defecation that
impedes the bowel movement. This problem may be acquired
during childhood or adulthood. Patients may complain of excessive
straining, sense of incomplete evacuation, or need for digital
manipulation. Patients with primary complaints of abdominal pain or
bloating with alterations in bowel habits (constipation, or alternating
constipation and diarrhea) may have irritable bowel syndrome (see
below).
B. Secondary Constipation
Constipation may be caused by systemic disorders, medications, or
obstructing colonic lesions. Systemic disorders can cause
constipation because of neurologic gut dysfunction, myopathies,
endocrine disorders, or electrolyte abnormalities (eg, hypercalcemia
or hypokalemia); medication side effects are sometimes responsible
(eg, anticholinergics or opioids). Colonic lesions that obstruct fecal
passage, such as neoplasms and strictures, are an uncommon cause
but important in new-onset constipation. Such lesions should be
excluded in patients older than 45–50 years, in patients with “alarm”
symptoms or signs (hematochezia, weight loss, anemia, or positive
fecal occult blood tests [FOBT] or fecal immunochemical tests
[FIT]), and in patients with a family history of colon cancer or
inflammatory bowel disease. Defecatory difficulties also can be due
to a variety of anorectal problems that impede or obstruct flow
(perineal descent, rectal prolapse, rectocele), some of which may
require surgery, and Hirschsprung disease (usually suggested by
lifelong constipation).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
All patients should undergo a history and physical examination to
distinguish primary from secondary causes of constipation. Physical
examination should include digital rectal examination with
assessment for anatomic abnormalities, such as anal stricture,
rectocele, rectal prolapse, or perineal descent during straining.
Further diagnostic tests should be performed in patients with any of
the following: age 50 years or older, severe constipation, signs of an
organic disorders, alarm symptoms (hematochezia, weight loss,
positive FOBT or FIT), or a family history of colon cancer or
inflammatory bowel disease. These tests should include laboratory
studies (complete blood count; serum electrolytes, calcium, glucose,
and thyroid-stimulating hormone); and a colonoscopy or flexible
sigmoidoscopy.
B. Special Examinations
Patients with refractory constipation not responding to routine
medical management warrant further diagnostic studies, including
colonic transit and pelvic floor function studies, in order to
distinguish slow colonic transit from anorectal dysfunction. Colon
transit time is most commonly measured by performing an
abdominal radiograph 120 hours after ingestion of 24 radiopaque
markers. Retention of > 20% of the markers indicates prolonged
transit. Dyssynergic defecation is assessed with balloon expulsion
testing, anal manometry, and defecography.
 Treatment
A. Chronic Constipation
1. Dietary and lifestyle measures—Adverse psychosocial issues
should be identified and addressed. Patients should be instructed on
normal defecatory function and optimal toileting habits, including
regular timing, proper positioning, and abdominal pressure. Proper
dietary fiber intake should be emphasized. A trial of fiber
supplements is recommended (Table 15–4). Increased dietary fiber
may cause distention or flatulence, which often diminishes over
several days. Response to fiber therapy is not immediate, and
increases in dosage should be made gradually over 7–10 days.
Fiber is most likely to benefit patients with normal colonic transit,
but it may not benefit patients with colonic inertia, anorectal
dysfunction, or irritable bowel syndrome; it may even exacerbate
symptoms in these patients. Regular exercise is associated with a
decreased risk of constipation. When possible, discontinue
medications that may be causing constipation.
2. Laxatives—Laxatives may be given on an intermittent or
chronic basis for constipation that does not respond to dietary and
lifestyle changes (Table 15–4). There is no evidence that long-term
use of these agents is harmful.
A. OSMOTIC LAXATIVES—Nonabsorbable osmotic agents increase
secretion of water into the intestinal lumen, thereby softening stools
and promoting defecation. Magnesium hydroxide, nondigestible
carbohydrates (sorbitol, lactulose), and polyethylene glycol are all
efficacious and safe for treating acute and chronic cases. The
dosages are adjusted to achieve soft to semi-liquid movements.
Magnesium-containing saline laxatives should not be given to
patients 
with 
chronic 
renal 
insufficiency. 
Nondigestible
carbohydrates may induce bloating, cramps, and flatulence.
Polyethylene glycol 3350 (Miralax) is a component of solutions
traditionally used for colonic lavage prior to colonos-copy and does
not cause flatulence. When used in conventional doses, the onset of
action of these osmotic agents is generally within 24 hours. For
more rapid treatment of acute constipation or as a purgative prior to
surgical, endoscopic, or radiographic procedures, polyethylene
glycol solutions (GoLYTELY, CoLYTE, NuLYTE, MoviPrep)
may be used. Polyethylene glycol solutions (2–4 L administered
over 2–4 hours) are balanced osmotic and electrolyte solutions that
do not cause any significant fluid or electrolyte shifts and may be
used safely in almost all patients. Alternatively, potent,
hyperosmolar saline purgatives may be administered. These
hyperosmolar agents draw significant fluid into the intestine and must
be given with substantial oral fluids (2–4 L) to minimize fluid shifts
that can result in dehydration or acute kidney injury. They should be
avoided in patients with chronic kidney disease or congestive heart
failure. Magnesium citrate may cause hyper-magnesemia. Oral
sodium phosphate preparations (Visicol, OsmoPrep, and Fleets
Phospho-soda) can cause hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia,
hypokalemia and, rarely, acute kidney injury due to acute
phosphate nephropathy. The FDA has issued a warning that sodium
phosphate should be avoided in people over age 55, people with
known kidney disease, or people taking medications that affect
kidney function (diuretics, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-
receptor blockers). Patients taking sodium phosphate should be
advised to ingest sufficient oral fluids (2–4 L).
B. STIMULANT LAXATIVES—These agents stimulate fluid secretion
and colonic contraction, resulting in a bowel movement within 6–12
hours after oral ingestion or 15–60 minutes after rectal
administration. Oral agents are usually administered once daily at
bedtime. Common preparations include bisacodyl, senna, and
cascara (Table 15–4).
Lubiprostone is an oral cyclic fatty acid that activates intestinal
chloride channels, increasing fluid secretion and secondarily
increasing peristalsis. In large, multicenter controlled trials, patients
treated with lubiprostone 24 mcg orally twice daily increased the
number of bowel movements to approximately four to five per
week, compared with two to three per week in patients treated with
placebo. Lubiprostone is associated with nausea in up to one-third
of patients and should not be given to women who may be pregnant
(category C). Because lubiprostone is expensive, it should be
reserved for patients who have suboptimal response or side effects
with less expensive agents.
C. OPIOID-RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS—Long-term use of opioids
can cause constipation by inhibiting peristalsis and increasing
intestinal fluid absorption. Methylnaltrexone is a mu-opioid receptor
antagonist that blocks peripheral opioid receptors (including the
gastrointestinal tract) without affecting central analgesia. It is
approved for the treatment of opioid-induced constipation in
patients receiving palliative care for advanced illness who have not
responded to conventional laxative regimens. In controlled trials,
methylnaltrexone subcutaneously (8 mg [38–62 kg], 12 mg [62–
114 kg], or 0.15 mg/kg [less 38 kg] every other day) achieves
laxation in 50% of patients compared with 15% of patients who
received placebo. Its role for other patients with opioid-induced
constipation is under investigation.
 
Table 15–4. Pharmacologic management o
 
B. Fecal Impaction
Severe impaction of stool in the rectal vault may result in obstruction
to further fecal flow, leading to partial or complete large bowel
obstruction. Predisposing factors include medications (eg, opioids),
severe psychiatric disease, prolonged bed rest, neurogenic
disorders of the colon, and spinal cord disorders. Clinical
presentation includes decreased appetite, nausea, and vomiting, and
abdominal pain and distention. There may be paradoxical “diarrhea”
as liquid stool leaks around the impacted feces. Firm feces are
palpable on digital examination of the rectal vault. Initial treatment is
directed at relieving the impaction with enemas (saline, mineral oil,
or diatrizoate) or digital disruption of the impacted fecal material.
Long-term care is directed at maintaining soft stools and regular
bowel movements (as above).
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with refractory constipation for anorectal
testing.
•    Patients with dyssynergic defecation may benefit from
biofeedback therapy.
•    Patients with alarm symptoms or who are over age 50
should be referred for colonoscopy.
•    Rarely, surgery (subtotal colectomy) is required for
patients with severe colonic inertia.
Bouras EP et al. Chronic constipation in the elderly. Gastroenterol
Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;38(3):463–80. [PMID: 19699408]
 
Johanson JF et al. Multicenter, 4-week, double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of lubiprostone, a locally-acting type-2
chloride channel activator, in patients with chronic constipation.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2008 Jan;103(1):170–7. [PMID: 17916109]
 
McCallum IK et al. Chronic constipation in adults. BMJ. 2009
Mar 20;338:b831. [PMID: 19304766]
 
Rao SS et al. Investigation of colonic and whole-gut transit with
wireless motility capsule and radiopaque markers in constipation.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 May;7(5):537–44. [PMID:
19418602]
 
Tack J et al. Treatment of chronic constipation: current
pharmacologic approaches and future directions. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 May;7(5):502–8. [PMID:
19138759]
 
Wald A. A 27-year-old woman with constipation: diagnosis and
treatment. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Oct;8(10):838–42.
[PMID: 20399904]
 
GASTROINTESTINAL GAS
 Belching
Belching (eructation) is the involuntary or voluntary release of gas
from the stomach or esophagus. It occurs most frequently after
meals, when gastric distention results in transient lower esophageal
sphincter (LES) relaxation. Belching is a normal reflex and does not
itself denote gastrointestinal dysfunction. Virtually all stomach gas
comes from swallowed air. With each swallow, 2–5 mL of air is
ingested, and excessive amounts may result in distention, flatulence,
and abdominal pain. This may occur with rapid eating, gum
chewing, smoking, and the ingestion of carbonated beverages.
Chronic excessive belching is almost always caused by aerophagia,
common in anxious individuals and institutionalized patients.
Evaluation should be restricted to patients with other complaints
such as dysphagia, heartburn, early satiety, or vomiting.
Once patients understand the relationship between aerophagia
and belching, most can deal with the problem by behavioral
modification. Physical defects that hamper normal swallowing (ill-
fitting dentures, nasal obstruction) should be corrected. Antacids
and simethicone are of no value.
 Flatus
The rate and volume of expulsion of flatus is highly variable. Healthy
adults pass flatus up to 20 times daily and excrete up to 1500 mL.
Flatus is derived from two sources: swallowed air (primarily
nitrogen) and bacterial fermentation of undigested carbohydrate
(which produces H2, CO2, and methane). A number of
carbohydrates are incompletely absorbed in the small intestine and
pass into the colon. These include lactose (dairy products); fructose
(fruits, corn syrups, and some sweeteners); sorbitol (stone-fruits
and some sweeteners); and the alpha galactosyl oligosaccharides
raffinose, stachyose, and verbascose (legumes, cruciferous
vegetables, pasta, and whole grains). Abnormal gas production may
be caused by increased ingestion of these carbohydrates or by
disorders of malabsorption. Foul odor may be caused by garlic,
onion, eggplant, mushrooms, and certain herbs and spices.
Determining abnormal from normal amounts of flatus is difficult.
Patients with a long-standing history of flatulence and no other
symptoms or signs of malabsorption disorders can be treated
conservatively. Gum chewing and carbonated beverages should be
avoided to reduce air swallowing. Lactose intolerance may be
assessed by a 2-week trial of a lactose-free diet or by a hydrogen
breath test. Other common gas-producing foods should be
reviewed and the patient given an elimination trial. These include
legumes (beans, peas, lentils, soy), cruciferous vegetables (brussels
sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli) leeks, onions, beer, and
coffee. Fructose is present in many fruits and as fructose corn syrup
in candy, fruit juices, and soda. For patients with persistent
complaints, complex starches, and fiber may be eliminated, but such
restrictive diets are unacceptable to most patients. Of refined flours,
only rice flour is gas-free.
The nonprescription agent Beano (α-d-galactosidase enzyme)
reduces gas caused by foods containing raffinose, stachyose, and
verbascose. Activated charcoal may afford relief. Simethicone is of
no proved benefit.
Complaints of chronic abdominal distention or bloating are
common. Some of these patients may produce excess gas.
However, many patients have impaired small bowel gas propulsion
or enhanced visceral sensitivity to gas distention. Many of these
patients have an underlying functional gastrointestinal disorder such
as irritable bowel syndrome or functional dyspepsia. Reduction of
dietary fat, which delays intestinal gas clearance, may be helpful.
Rifaximin, 400 mg twice daily, a nonabsorbable oral antibiotic with
high activity against enteric bacteria, has been shown to reduce
abdominal bloating and flatulence in approximately 40% of treated
patients compared with 20% of controls. Symptom improvement
may be attributable to suppression of gas-producing colonic
bacteria; however, relapse occurs within days after stopping the
antibiotic. Further trials are needed to clarify the role of
nonabsorbable antibiotics in symptom management. Many patients
report reduced flatus production with use of probiotics, although
there has been limited controlled study of these agents for this
purpose. Patients interested in complementary medical therapies
may be offered a trial of 4–8 ounces daily of Kefir, a commercially
available fermented milk drink containing multiple probiotics.
Gasbarrini A et al; 1st Rome H2-Breath Testing Consensus
Conference Working Group. Methodology and indications of H2-
breath testing in gastrointestinal diseases: the Rome Consensus
Conference. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Mar 30;29(suppl
1):1–49. [PMID: 19344474]
 
Grabitske HA et al. Gastrointestinal effects of low-digestible
carbohydrates. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2009 Apr;49(4):327–60.
[PMID: 19234944]
 
Kalman DS et al. A prospective, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled parallel-group dual site trial to evaluate the
effects of a Bacillus coagulans-based product on functional
intestinal gas symptoms. BMC Gastroenterol. 2009 Nov 18;9:85.
[PMID: 19922649]
 
DIARRHEA
Diarrhea can range in severity from an acute self-limited episode to
a severe, life-threatening illness. To properly evaluate the complaint,
the clinician must determine the patient's normal bowel pattern and
the nature of the current symptoms.
Approximately 10 L of fluid enter the duodenum daily, of which
all but 1.5 L are absorbed by the small intestine. The colon absorbs
most of the remaining fluid, with < 200 mL lost in the stool.
Although diarrhea sometimes is defined as a stool weight of more
than 200–300 g/24 h, quantification of stool weight is necessary
only in some patients with chronic diarrhea. In most cases, the
physician's working definition of diarrhea is increased stool
frequency (more than three bowel movements per day) or liquidity
of feces.
The causes of diarrhea are myriad. In clinical practice, it is helpful
to distinguish acute from chronic diarrhea, as the evaluation and
treatment are entirely different (Tables 15–5 and 15–6).
 
Table 15–5. Causes of acute infectiou
 
 
 
Noninflammatory
Diarrhea
Inflammatory Diarrhea
Viral
     Noroviruses
     Rotavirus
Viral
     Cytomegalovirus
Protozoal
Giardia lamblia
Cryptosporidium
Cyclospora
Protozoal
Entamoeba histolytica
Bacterial
1. 
Preformed
enterotoxin
production
Staphylococcus
aureus 
Bacillus
cereus Clostridium
Bacterial
1. 
Cytotoxin 
production
Enterohemorrhagic E coli O157:H5
(EHEC) Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Clostridium difficile
2. Mucosal invasion
Shigella
Campylobacter jejuni
perfringens
2. 
Enterotoxin
production
Enterotoxigenic
Escherichia 
coli
( E T E C ) Vibrio
cholerae
Salmonella
Enteroinvasive E coli (EIEC)
Aeromonas
Plesiomonas
Yersinia enterocolitica
Chlamydia
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Listeria monocytogenes
 
Table 15–6. Causes of chroni
 
Osmotic diarrhea
CLUES: Stool volume decreases with fasting; increased
stool osmotic gap
1. Medications: antacids, lactulose, sorbitol
2. Disaccharidase deficiency: lactose intolerance
3. Factitious diarrhea: magnesium (antacids, laxatives)
Secretory diarrhea
CLUES: Large volume (> 1 L/d); little change with fasting;
normal stool osmotic gap
1. Hormonally mediated: VIPoma, carcinoid, medullary
carcinoma 
of 
thyroid 
(calcitonin), 
Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome (gastrin)
2. Factitious diarrhea (laxative abuse); phenolphthalein,
cascara, senna
3. Villous adenoma
4. Bile salt malabsorption (idiopathic, ileal resection;
Crohn ileitis; postcholecystectomy)
5. Medications
Inflammatory conditions
CLUES: Fever, hematochezia, abdominal pain
1. Ulcerative colitis
2. Crohn disease
3. Microscopic colitis
4. 
Malignancy: 
lymphoma, 
adenocarcinoma 
(with
obstruction and pseudodiarrhea)
5. Radiation enteritis
Medications
Common offenders: SSRIs, cholinesterase inhibitors,
NSAIDs, proton pump inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
blockers, metformin, allopurinol
Malabsorption syndromes
CLUES: Weight loss, abnormal laboratory values; fecal fat
> 10 g/24h
1. Small bowel mucosal disorders: celiac sprue, tropical
sprue, Whipple disease, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, small
bowel resection (short bowel syndrome), Crohn disease
2. Lymphatic obstruction: lymphoma, carcinoid, infectious
(tuberculosis, MAI), Kaposi sarcoma, sarcoidosis,
retroperitoneal fibrosis
3. Pancreatic disease: chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic
carcinoma
4. Bacterial overgrowth: motility disorders (diabetes,
vagotomy), 
scleroderma, 
fistulas, 
small 
intestinal
diverticula
Motility disorders
CLUES: Systemic disease or prior abdominal surgery
1. Postsurgical: vagotomy, partial gastrectomy, blind loop
with bacterial overgrowth
2. Systemic disorders: scleroderma, diabetes mellitus,
hyperthyroidism
3. Irritable bowel syndrome
Chronic infections
1. Parasites: Giardia lamblia, Entamoeba histolytica,
Strongyloidiasis stercoralis, Capillaria philippinensis
2. AIDS-related: Viral: Cytomegalovirus, HIV infection (?)
Bacterial: Clostridium difficile, Mycobacterium avium
complex
Protozoal: 
Microsporida (Enterocytozoon bieneusi),
Cryptosporidium, Isospora belli
Factitious
See Osmotic and Secretory diarrhea above.
MAI, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
1. Acute Diarrhea
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Diarrhea of < 2 weeks duration is most commonly caused by
invasive or noninvasive pathogens and their enterotoxins.
Acute noninflammatory diarrhea
 Watery, nonbloody.
 Usually mild, self-limited.
 Caused by a virus or noninvasive bacteria.
 Diagnostic evaluation is limited to patients with diarrhea that is
severe or persists beyond 7 days.
Acute inflammatory diarrhea
 Blood or pus, fever.
 Usually caused by an invasive or toxin-producing bacterium.
 Diagnostic evaluation requires routine stool bacterial cultures
(including Escherichia coli o157:H7) in all and testing as
clinically indicated for Clostridium difficile toxin, and ova and
parasites.
 
 Etiology & Clinical Findings
Diarrhea acute in onset and persisting for < 2 weeks is most
commonly caused by infectious agents, bacterial toxins (either
preformed or produced in the gut), or drugs. Community outbreaks
(including nursing homes, schools, cruise ships) suggest a viral
etiology or a common food source. Similar recent illnesses in family
members suggest an infectious origin. Ingestion of improperly stored
or prepared food implicates food poisoning. Day care attendance
or exposure to unpurified water (camping, swimming) may result in
infection with Giardia or Cryptosporidium. Large Cyclospora
outbreaks have been traced to contaminated produce. Recent travel
abroad suggests “traveler's diarrhea” (see Chapter 30). Antibiotic
administration within the preceding several weeks increases the
likelihood of C difficile colitis. Finally, risk factors for HIV infection
or sexually transmitted diseases should be determined. (AIDS-
associated diarrhea is discussed in Chapter 31; infectious proctitis is
discussed in this chapter under Anorectal Disorders.) Persons
engaging in anal intercourse or oral-anal sexual activities are at risk
for a variety of infections that cause proctitis, including gonorrhea,
syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and herpes simplex.
The nature of the diarrhea helps distinguish among different
infectious causes (Table 15–5).
A. Noninflammatory Diarrhea
Watery, nonbloody diarrhea associated with periumbilical cramps,
bloating, nausea, or vomiting suggests a small bowel source caused
by either a toxin-producing bacterium (enterotoxigenic E coli
[ETEC], Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, Clostridium
perfringens) or other agents (viruses, Giardia) that disrupt normal
absorption and secretory process in the small intestine. Prominent
vomiting suggests viral enteritis or S aureus food poisoning.
Although typically mild, the diarrhea (which originates in the small
intestine) can be voluminous and result in dehydration with
hypokalemia and metabolic acidosis (eg, cholera). Because tissue
invasion does not occur, fecal leukocytes are not present.
B. Inflammatory Diarrhea
The presence of fever and bloody diarrhea (dysentery) indicates
colonic tissue damage caused by invasion (shigellosis, salmonellosis,
Campylobacter or Yersinia infection, amebiasis) or a toxin (C
difficile, E coli O157:H7). Because these organisms involve
predominantly the colon, the diarrhea is small in volume (< 1 L/d)
and associated with left lower quadrant cramps, urgency, and
tenesmus. Fecal leukocytes or lactoferrin usually are present in
infections with invasive organisms. E coli O157:H7 is a Shiga toxin-
producing noninvasive organism most commonly acquired from
contaminated meat that has resulted in several outbreaks of an
acute, often severe hemorrhagic colitis. In immunocompromised and
HIV-infected patients, cytomegalovirus (CMV) can cause intestinal
ulceration with watery or bloody diarrhea.
Infectious dysentery must be distinguished from acute ulcerative
colitis, which may also present acutely with fever, abdominal pain,
and bloody diarrhea. Diarrhea that persists for more than 14 days is
not attributable to bacterial pathogens (except for C difficile) and
should be evaluated as chronic diarrhea.
 Evaluation
In over 90% of patients with acute noninflammatory diarrhea, the
illness is mild and self-limited, responding within 5 days to simple
rehydration therapy or antidiarrheal agents; diagnostic investigation
is unnecessary.
The isolation rate of bacterial pathogens from stool cultures in
patients with acute noninflammatory diarrhea is under 3%. Thus, the
goal of initial evaluation is to distinguish patients with mild disease
from those with more serious illness. If diarrhea worsens or persists
for more than 7 days, stool should be sent for fecal leukocyte or
lactoferrin determination, ovum and parasite evaluation, and
bacterial culture.
Prompt medical evaluation is indicated in the following situations
(Figure 15–1): (1) Signs of inflammatory diarrhea manifested by any
of the following: fever (> 38.5 °C), bloody diarrhea, or abdominal
pain. (2) The passage of six or more unformed stools in 24 hours.
(3) Profuse watery diarrhea and dehydration. (4) Frail older
patients. 
(5) 
Immunocompromised 
patients 
(AIDS,
posttransplantation). (6) Hospital-acquired diarrhea (onset following
at least 3 days of hospitalization).
Physical examination pays note to the patient's level of hydration,
mental status, and the presence of abdominal tenderness or
peritonitis. Peritoneal findings may be present in infection with C
difficile or enterohemorrhagic E coli. Hospitalization is required in
patients with severe dehydration, marked abdominal pain, or altered
mental status. Stool specimens should be sent for examination for
routine bacterial cultures.
 
Figure 15–1. Evaluation of acut
 
The rate of positive bacterial cultures in such patients is 60–75%.
For bloody stools, the laboratory should be directed to perform
serotyping for Shiga-producing E coli O157:H7. Special culture
media are required for Yersinia, Vibrio, and Aeromonas. In
patients who are hospitalized or who have a history of antibiotic
exposure, a stool sample should be tested for C difficile toxin.
In patients with diarrhea that persists for more than 10 days, who
have a history of travel to areas where amebiasis is endemic, or
who engage in oral-anal sexual practices, three stool examinations
for ova and parasites should also be performed. The stool antigen
detection tests for both Giardia and Entamoeba histolytica are
more sensitive than stool microscopy for detection of these
organisms. A serum antigen detection test for E histolytica is also
available. Cyclospora and Cryptosporidium are detected by fecal
acid-fast staining.
 Treatment
A. Diet
Most mild diarrhea will not lead to dehydration provided the patient
takes adequate oral fluids containing carbohydrates and
electrolytes. Patients find it more comfortable to rest the bowel by
avoiding high-fiber foods, fats, milk products, caffeine, and alcohol.
Frequent feedings of tea, “flat” carbonated beverages, and soft,
easily digested foods (eg, soups, crackers, bananas, applesauce,
rice, toast) are encouraged.
B. Rehydration
In more severe diarrhea, dehydration can occur quickly, especially
in children, the frail, and the elderly. Oral rehydration with fluids
containing glucose, Na+, K+, Cl−, and bicarbonate or citrate is
preferred when feasible. A convenient mixture is ½ tsp salt (3.5 g),
1 tsp baking soda (2.5 g NaHCO3), 8 tsp sugar (40 g), and 8 oz
orange juice (1.5 g KCl), diluted to 1 L with water. Alternatively,
oral electrolyte solutions (eg, Pedialyte, Gatorade) are readily
available. Fluids should be given at rates of 50–200 mL/kg/24 h
depending on the hydration status. Intravenous fluids (lactated
Ringer injection) are preferred in patients with severe dehydration.
C. Antidiarrheal Agents
Antidiarrheal agents may be used safely in patients with mild to
moderate diarrheal illnesses to improve patient comfort. Opioid
agents help decrease the stool number and liquidity and control
fecal urgency. However, they should not be used in patients with
bloody diarrhea, high fever, or systemic toxicity and should be
discontinued in patients whose diarrhea is worsening despite
therapy. With these provisos, such drugs provide excellent
symptomatic relief. Loperamide is preferred, in a dosage of 4 mg
orally initially, followed by 2 mg after each loose stool (maximum:
16 mg/24 h).
Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol), two tablets or 30 mL
orally four times daily, reduces symptoms in patients with traveler's
diarrhea by virtue of its anti-inflammatory and antibacterial
properties. It also reduces vomiting associated with viral enteritis.
Anticholinergic agents (eg, diphenoxylate with atropine) are
contraindicated in acute diarrhea because of the rare precipitation of
toxic megacolon.
D. Antibiotic Therapy
1. Empiric treatment—Empiric antibiotic treatment of all patients
with acute diarrhea is not indicated. Even patients with inflammatory
diarrhea caused by invasive pathogens usually have symptoms that
will resolve within several days without antimicrobials. Empiric
treatment may be considered in patients with non–hospital-acquired
diarrhea with moderate to severe fever, tenesmus, or bloody stools
or the presence of fecal lactoferrin while the stool bacterial culture is
incubating, provided that infection with E coli O157:H7 is not
suspected. It should also be considered in patients who are
immunocompromised or who have significant dehydration. The oral
drugs of choice for empiric treatment are the fluoroquinolones (eg,
ciprofloxacin 500 mg, ofloxacin 400 mg, or norfloxacin 400 mg,
twice daily, or levofloxacin 500 mg once daily) for 5–7 days.
Alternatives include trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole, 160/800 mg
twice daily; or doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily. Macrolides and
penicillins are no longer recommended because of widespread
microbial resistance to these agents. Rifaximin, a nonabsorbed oral
antibiotic, 200 mg three times daily for 3 days, is approved for
empiric treatment of noninflammatory traveler's diarrhea (see
Chapter 30).
2. Specific antimicrobial treatment—Antibiotics are not
recommended 
in 
patients 
with 
nontyphoid Salmonella,
Campylobacter, E coli O157:H7, Aeromonas, or Yersinia,
except in severe disease, because they do not hasten recovery or
reduce the period of fecal bacterial excretion. The infectious
diarrheas for which treatment is recommended are shigellosis,
cholera, extraintestinal salmonellosis, traveler's diarrhea, C difficile
infection, giardiasis, and amebiasis. Therapy for traveler's diarrhea,
infectious (sexually transmitted) proctitis, and AIDS-related
diarrhea is presented in other chapters of this book.
 When to Admit
 
•    Severe dehydration for intravenous fluids, especially if
vomiting or unable to maintain sufficient oral fluid intake.
•    Bloody diarrhea that is severe or worsening in order to
distinguish infectious versus noninfectious cause.
•    Severe abdominal pain, worrisome for toxic colitis,
inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal ischemia, or
surgical abdomen.
•    Signs of severe infection or sepsis (temperature > 39.5
°C, leukocytosis, rash).
•    Severe or worsening diarrhea in patients who are > 70
years old or immunocompromised.
Atia AN et al. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a
review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009 Oct;104(10):2596–604.
[PMID: 19550407]
 
DuPont HL. Clinical practice. Bacterial diarrhea. N Engl J Med.
2009 Oct 15;361(1):1560–9. [PMID: 19828533]
 
Holtz LR et al. Acute bloody diarrhea: a medical emergency for
patients of all ages. Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(6): 1887–
98. [PMID: 19457417]
 
Pawlowski SW et al. Diagnosis and treatment of acute or
persistent diarrhea. Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(6):1874–
86. [PMID: 19457416]
 
2. Chronic Diarrhea
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Diarrhea present for > 4 weeks.
 Before embarking on extensive work-up, common causes should
be excluded, including medications, chronic infections, and
irritable bowel syndrome.
 
 Etiology
The causes of chronic diarrhea may be grouped into the following
major pathophysiologic categories: medications, osmotic diarrheas,
secretory conditions, inflammatory conditions, malabsorptive
conditions, motility disorders, chronic infections, and systemic
disorders (Table 15–6).
A. Medications
Numerous medications can cause diarrhea. Common offenders
include cholinesterase inhibitors, SSRIs, angiotensin II-receptor
blockers, proton pump inhibitors, NSAIDs, metformin, allopurinol,
and orlistat. All medications should be carefully reviewed, and
discontinuation of potential culprits should be considered.
B. Osmotic Diarrheas
As stool leaves the colon, fecal osmolality is equal to the serum
osmolality, ie, approximately 290 mosm/kg. Under normal
circumstances, the major osmoles are Na+, K+, Cl–, and HCO3–.
The stool osmolality may be estimated by multiplying the stool (Na+
+ K+) × 2. The osmotic gap is the difference between the
measured osmolality of the stool (or serum) and the estimated
stool osmolality and is normally < 50 mosm/kg. An increased
osmotic gap (> 125 mosm/kg) implies that the diarrhea is caused by
ingestion or malabsorption of an osmotically active substance. The
most common causes are carbohydrate malabsorption (lactose,
fructose, sorbitol), laxative abuse, and malabsorption syndromes
(see below). Osmotic diarrheas resolve during fasting. Those
caused by malabsorbed carbohydrates are characterized by
abdominal distention, bloating, and flatulence due to increased
colonic gas production.
Carbohydrate malabsorption is common and should be
considered in all patients with chronic diarrhea. Patients should be
asked about their intake of dairy products (lactose), fruits and
artificial sweeteners (fructose and sorbitol), and alcohol. The
diagnosis of carbohydrate malabsorption may be established by an
elimination trial for 2–3 weeks or by hydrogen breath tests.
Ingestion of magnesium- or phosphate-containing compounds
(laxatives, antacids) should be considered in enigmatic chronic
diarrhea. The fat substitute olestra also causes diarrhea and cramps
in occasional patients.
C. Secretory Conditions
Increased intestinal secretion or decreased absorption results in a
high-volume watery diarrhea with a normal osmotic gap. There is
little change in stool output during the fasting state, and dehydration
and electrolyte imbalance may develop. Causes include endocrine
tumors (stimulating intestinal or pancreatic secretion) and bile salt
malabsorption (stimulating colonic secretion).
D. Inflammatory Conditions
Diarrhea is present in most patients with inflammatory bowel
disease (ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease). A variety of other
symptoms may be present, including abdominal pain, fever, weight
loss, and hematochezia. Microscopic colitis is a common cause of
chronic watery diarrhea in the elderly (See Inflammatory Bowel
Disease, below.)
E. Malabsorptive Conditions
The major causes of malabsorption are small mucosal intestinal
diseases, intestinal resections, lymphatic obstruction, small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth, and pancreatic insufficiency. Its characteristics
are weight loss, osmotic diarrhea, steatorrhea, and nutritional
deficiencies. Significant diarrhea in the absence of weight loss is not
likely to be due to malabsorption. The physical and laboratory
abnormalities related to deficiencies of vitamins or minerals are
discussed in Chapter 29.
F. Motility Disorders (Including Irritable Bowel Syndrome)
Irritable bowel syndrome is the most common cause of chronic
diarrhea in young adults (see Irritable Bowel Syndrome). It should
be considered in patients with lower abdominal pain and altered
bowel habits who have no other evidence of serious organic disease
(weight loss, nocturnal diarrhea, anemia, or gastrointestinal
bleeding). Abnormal intestinal motility secondary to systemic
disorders or surgery may result in diarrhea due to rapid transit or to
stasis of intestinal contents with bacterial overgrowth, resulting in
malabsorption.
G. Chronic Infections
Chronic parasitic infections may cause diarrhea through a number of
mechanisms. Pathogens most commonly associated with diarrhea
include the protozoans Giardia, E histolytica, and Cyclospora as
well as the intestinal nematodes. Strongyloidiasis and capillariasis
should be excluded in patients from endemic regions, especially in
the presence of eosinophilia. Bacterial infections with Aeromonas
and Plesiomonas may uncommonly be a cause of chronic diarrhea.
Immunocompromised patients are susceptible to infectious
organisms that can cause acute or chronic diarrhea (see Chapter
31), including Microsporida, Cryptosporidium, CMV, Isospora
belli, Cyclospora, and Mycobacterium avium complex.
H. Systemic Conditions
Chronic systemic conditions, such as thyroid disease, diabetes, and
collagen vascular disorders, may cause diarrhea through alterations
in motility or intestinal absorption.
 Clinical Findings
The history and physical examination commonly suggest the
underlying pathophysiology that guides the subsequent diagnostic
work-up (Figure 15–2). The clinician should establish whether the
diarrhea is continuous or intermittent and whether it occurs at night
or during fasting. The stool appearance may suggest a
malabsorption disorder (greasy or malodorous), inflammatory
disorder (containing blood or pus), or a secretory process (watery).
The presence of abdominal pain suggests irritable bowel syndrome
or inflammatory bowel disease. Medications, diet, and recent
psychosocial stressors should be reviewed. Physical examination
should assess for signs of malnutrition, dehydration, and
inflammatory bowel disease.
Because chronic diarrhea is caused by so many conditions, the
subsequent diagnostic approach is guided by the relative suspicion
for the underlying cause, and no specific algorithm can be followed
in all patients. Prior to embarking on an extensive evaluation, the
most common causes of chronic diarrhea should be considered,
including medications, irritable bowel syndrome, and lactose
intolerance. The presence of nocturnal diarrhea, weight loss,
anemia, or positive results on FOBT are inconsistent with these
disorders and warrant further evaluation. AIDS-associated diarrhea
is discussed in Chapter 31.
A. Initial Diagnostic Tests
1. Routine laboratory tests—Complete blood count, serum
electrolytes, liver function tests, calcium, phosphorus, albumin,
thyroid-stimulating hormone, vitamin A and D levels, INR,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein should be
obtained in most patients. Serologic testing for celiac sprue with IgA
tissue transglutaminase (tTG) or anti-endomysial antibody tests may
be recommended in the evaluation of most patients with chronic
diarrhea and all patients with signs of malabsorption. Anemia occurs
in malabsorption syndromes (folate, iron deficiency, or vitamin B12)
as well as inflammatory conditions. Hypoalbuminemia is present in
malabsorption, protein-losing enteropathies, and inflammatory
diseases. Hyponatremia and nonanion gap metabolic acidosis occur
in secretory diarrheas. Increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate or
C-reactive protein suggests inflammatory bowel disease.
 
Figure 15–2. Decision diagram for diagnosis of causes of chroni
 
2. Routine stool studies—Stool sample should be analyzed for
ova and parasites, electrolytes (to calculate osmotic gap), qualitative
staining for fat (Sudan stain), occult blood, and leukocytes or
lactoferrin. The presence of Giardia and E histolytica may be
detected in wet mounts. However, fecal antigen detection tests for
Giardia and E histolytica are a more sensitive and specific method
of detection. Cryptosporidium and Cyclospora are found with
modified acid-fast staining. As discussed previously, an increased
osmotic gap suggests an osmotic diarrhea or disorder of
malabsorption. A positive fecal fat stain suggests a disorder of
malabsorption. The presence of fecal leukocytes or lactoferrin may
suggest inflammatory bowel disease.
3. Endoscopic examination and mucosal biopsy—Most patients
with chronic persistent diarrhea undergo colonoscopy with mucosal
biopsy to exclude inflammatory bowel disease (including Crohn
disease and ulcerative colitis), microscopic colitis, and colonic
neoplasia. Upper endoscopy with small bowel biopsy is performed
when a small intestinal malabsorptive disorder is suspected (celiac
sprue, Whipple disease) from abnormal laboratory studies or a
positive fecal fat stain. It may also be done in patients with
advanced AIDS to document Cryptosporidium, Microsporida,
and M avium-intracellulare infection.
B. Further Studies
If the cause of diarrhea is still not apparent, further studies may be
warranted.
1. 24-hour stool collection quantification of total weight and
fat—A stool weight of < 200-300 g/24 h excludes diarrhea and
suggests a functional disorder such as irritable bowel syndrome. A
weight > 1000–1500 g suggests a significant secretory process,
including neuroendocrine tumors. A fecal fat determination in excess
of 10 g/24 h confirms a malabsorptive disorder. Fecal elastase <
100 mcg/g may be caused by pancreatic insufficiency. (See Celiac
Disease and specific tests for malabsorption, below.)
2. Other imaging studies—Calcification on a plain abdominal
radiograph confirms a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, although
abdominal CT and endoscopic ultra-sonography are more sensitive
for the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis as well as pancreatic
cancer. Small intestinal imaging with barium, CT, or MRI is helpful
in the diagnosis of Crohn disease, small bowel lymphoma,
carcinoid, and jejunal diverticula. Neuroendocrine tumors may be
localized using somatostatin receptor scintigraphy. Retention of <
11% at 7 days of intravenous 75Se-homotaurocholate on
scintigraphy suggests bile salt malabsorption.
3. Laboratory tests—
A. 
SEROLOGIC 
TESTS 
FOR 
NEUROENDOCRINE
TUMORS—Secretory diarrheas due to neuroendocrine tumors are
rare but should be considered in patients with chronic, high-volume
watery diarrhea (> 1 L/d) with a normal osmotic gap that persists
during fasting. Measurements of the secretagogues of various
neuroendocrine tumors may be assayed, including serum
chromogranin A, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) (VIPoma),
calcitonin (medullary thyroid carcinoma), gastrin (Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome), and urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)
(carcinoid).
B. BREATH TEST—The diagnosis of small bowel bacterial
overgrowth is confirmed with noninvasive breath tests (d-
[14C]xylose, glucose, or lactulose) or by obtaining an aspirate of
small intestinal contents for quantitative aerobic and anaerobic
bacterial culture.
 Treatment
A number of antidiarrheal agents may be used in certain patients
with chronic diarrheal conditions and are listed below. Opioids are
safe in most patients with chronic, stable symptoms.
Loperamide 4 mg orally initially, then 2 mg after each loose
stool (maximum: 16 mg/d).
Diphenoxylate with atropine: One tablet orally three or four
times daily as needed.
Codeine and deodorized tincture of opium: Because of
potential habituation, these drugs are avoided except in cases of
chronic, intractable diarrhea. Codeine may be given in a dosage of
15–60 mg orally every 4 hours; tincture of opium, 0.3–1.2 mL
orally every 6 hours as needed.
Clonidine α2-Adrenergic agonists inhibit intestinal electrolyte
secretion. Clonidine, 0.1–0.6 mg orally twice daily, or a clonidine
patch, 0.1–0.2 mg/d, may help in some patients with secretory
diarrheas, diabetic diarrhea, or cryptosporidiosis.
Octreotide This somatostatin analog stimulates intestinal fluid
and electrolyte absorption and inhibits intestinal fluid secretion and
the release of gastrointestinal peptides. It is given for secretory
diarrheas due to neuroendocrine tumors (VIPomas, carcinoid) and
in some cases of AIDS-related diarrhea. Effective doses range from
50 to 250 mcg subcutaneously three times daily.
Cholestyramine This bile salt-binding resin may be useful in
patients with bile salt-induced diarrhea, which may be idiopathic or
secondary to intestinal resection or ileal disease. A dosage of 4 g
orally once to three times daily is recommended.
Fan X et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, bile acid mal-
absorption and gluten intolerance as possible causes of chronic
watery diarrhoea. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009 May
15;29(10):1069–77. [PMID: 19222407]
 
Gasbarrini A et al; 1st Rome H2-Breath Testing Consensus
Conference Working Group. Methodology and indications of H2-
breath testing in gastrointestinal diseases: the Rome Consensus
Conference. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Mar 30;29(suppl
1):1–49. [PMID: 19344474]
 
Pilotto A et al; SOFIA Project Investigators. The prevalence of
diarrhea and its association with drug use in elderly outpatients: a
multicenter study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2008 Nov;103(11):2816–
23. [PMID: 18721240]
 
Schiller LR. Diarrhea and malabsorption in the elderly.
Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;38(3):481–502. [PMID:
19699409]
 
GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
1. Acute Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hematemesis (bright red blood or “coffee grounds”).
 Melena in most cases; hematochezia in massive upper
gastrointestinal bleeds.
 Volume status to determine severity of blood loss; hematocrit is a
poor early indicator of blood loss.
 Endoscopy diagnostic and may be therapeutic.
 
 General Considerations
There are over 250,000 hospitalizations a year in the United States
for acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding, with a mortality rate of 4–
10%. Approximately half of patients are over 60 years of age, and
in this age group the mortality rate is even higher. Patients seldom
die of exsanguination but rather from complications of an underlying
disease.
The most common presentation of upper gastrointestinal bleeding
is hematemesis or melena. Hematemesis may be either bright red
blood or brown “coffee grounds” material. Melena develops after
as little as 50–100 mL of blood loss in the upper gastrointestinal
tract, whereas hematochezia requires a loss of more than 1000 mL.
Although hematochezia generally suggests a lower bleeding source
(eg, colonic), severe upper gastrointestinal bleeding may present
with hematochezia in 10% of cases.
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding is self-limited in 80% of patients;
urgent medical therapy and endoscopic evaluation are obligatory in
the rest. Patients with bleeding more than 48 hours prior to
presentation have a low risk of recurrent bleeding.
 Etiology
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding may originate from a number
of sources. These are listed in order of the frequency and discussed
in detail below.
A. Peptic Ulcer Disease
Peptic ulcers account for half of major upper gastrointestinal
bleeding with an overall mortality rate of 6%. However, in North
America the incidence of bleeding from ulcers is declining, perhaps
due to eradication of H pylori and prophylaxis with proton pump
inhibitors in high-risk patients.
B. Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension accounts for 10–20% of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding. Bleeding usually arises from esophageal varices and less
commonly gastric or duodenal varices or portal hypertensive
gastropathy. Approximately 25% of patients with cirrhosis have
medium to large esophageal varices, of whom 30% experience
acute variceal bleeding within a 2-year period. Due to improved
care, the hospital mortality rate has declined over the past 20 years
from 40% to 15%. Nevertheless, a mortality rate of 60–80% is
expected at 1–4 years due to recurrent bleeding or other
complications of chronic liver disease.
C. Mallory-Weiss Tears
Lacerations of the gastroesophageal junction cause 5–10% of cases
of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Many patients report a history of
heavy alcohol use or retching. Less than 10% have continued or
recurrent bleeding.
D. Vascular Anomalies
Vascular anomalies are found throughout the gastrointestinal tract
and may be the source of chronic or acute gastrointestinal bleeding.
They account for 7% of cases of acute upper tract bleeding.
Vascular ectasias (angiodysplasias) have a bright red stellate
appearance. They may be part of systemic conditions (hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia, CREST syndrome) or may occur
sporadically. There is an increased incidence in patients with chronic
kidney disease. The Dieulafoy lesion is an aberrant, large-caliber
submucosal artery, most commonly in the proximal stomach that
causes recurrent, intermittent bleeding.
E. Gastric Neoplasms
Gastric neoplasms result in 1% of upper gastrointestinal
hemorrhages.
F. Erosive Gastritis
Because this process is superficial, it is a relatively unusual cause of
severe gastrointestinal bleeding (< 5% of cases) and more
commonly results in chronic blood loss. Gastric mucosal erosions
are due to NSAIDs, alcohol, or severe medical or surgical illness
(stress-related mucosal disease).
G. Erosive Esophagitis
Severe erosive esophagitis due to chronic gastroesophageal reflux
may rarely cause significant upper gastrointestinal bleeding,
especially in patients who are bed bound long-term.
H. Others
An aortoenteric fistula complicates 2% of abdominal aortic grafts
or, rarely, can occur as the initial presentation of a previously
untreated aneurysm. Usually located between the graft or aneurysm
and the third portion of the duodenum, these fistulas
characteristically present with a herald nonexsanguinating initial
hemorrhage, with melena and hematemesis, or with chronic
intermittent bleeding. The diagnosis may be suspected by upper
endoscopy or abdominal CT. Surgery is mandatory to prevent
exsanguinating hemorrhage. Unusual causes of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding include hemobilia (from hepatic tumor, angioma,
penetrating trauma), pancreatic malignancy, and pseudoaneurysm
(hemosuccus pancreaticus).
 Initial Evaluation & Treatment
A. Stabilization
The initial step is assessment of the hemodynamic status. A systolic
blood pressure < 100 mm Hg identifies a high-risk patient with
severe acute bleeding. A heart rate over 100 beats/min with a
systolic blood pressure over 100 mm Hg signifies moderate acute
blood loss. A normal systolic blood pressure and heart rate suggest
relatively minor hemorrhage. Postural hypotension and tachycardia
are useful when present but may be due to causes other than blood
loss. Because the hematocrit may take 24–72 hours to equilibrate
with the extravascular fluid, it is not a reliable indicator of the
severity of acute bleeding.
In patients with significant bleeding, two 18-gauge or larger
intravenous lines should be started prior to further diagnostic tests.
Blood is sent for complete blood count, prothrombin time with
international normalized ratio (INR), serum creatinine, liver
enzymes, and blood typing and screening (in anticipation of need for
possible transfusion). In patients without hemodynamic compromise
or overt active bleeding, aggressive fluid repletion can be delayed
until the extent of the bleeding is further clarified. Patients with
evidence of hemodynamic compromise are given 0.9% saline or
lactated Ringer injection and cross-matched for 2–4 units of packed
red blood cells. It is rarely necessary to administer type-specific or
O-negative blood. Central venous pressure monitoring is desirable
in some cases, but line placement should not interfere with rapid
volume resuscitation.
Placement of a nasogastric tube may be helpful in the initial
assessment and triage of selected patients with suspected active
upper tract bleeding. The aspiration of red blood or “coffee
grounds” confirms an upper gastrointestinal source of bleeding,
though 10% of patients with confirmed upper tract sources of
bleeding have nonbloody aspirates—especially when bleeding
originates in the duodenum. An aspirate of bright red blood
indicates active bleeding and is associated with the highest risk of
further bleeding and complications, while a clear aspirate identifies
patients at lower initial risk. Erythromycin (250 mg) administered
intravenously 30 minutes prior to upper endoscopy promotes
gastric emptying and may improve the quality of endoscopic
evaluation when substantial amounts of blood or clot in the stomach
is suspected. Efforts to stop or slow bleeding by gastric lavage with
large volumes of fluid are of no benefit and expose the patient to an
increased risk of aspiration.
B. Blood Replacement
The amount of fluid and blood products required is based on
assessment of vital signs, evidence of active bleeding from
nasogastric aspirate, and laboratory tests. Sufficient packed red
blood cells should be given to maintain a hemoglobin of 6–10 g/dL,
based on the patient's hemodynamic status, comorbidities
(especially cardiovascular disease), and presence of continued
bleeding. In the absence of continued bleeding, the hemoglobin
should rise approximately 1 g/dL for each unit of transfused packed
red cells. Transfusion of blood should not be withheld from patients
with brisk active bleeding regardless of the hemoglobin value. It is
desirable to transfuse blood in anticipation of the nadir hematocrit.
In actively bleeding patients, platelets are transfused if the platelet
count is under 50,000/mcL and considered if there is impaired
platelet function due to aspirin or clopidogrel use (regardless of the
platelet count). Uremic patients (who also have dysfunctional
platelets) with active bleeding are given three doses of
desmopressin (DDAVP), 0.3 mcg/kg intravenously, at 12-hour
intervals. Fresh frozen plasma is administered for actively bleeding
patients with a coagulopathy and an INR > 1.8; however,
endoscopy may be performed safely if the INR is < 2.5. In the face
of massive bleeding, 1 unit of fresh frozen plasma should be given
for each 5 units of packed red blood cells transfused.
C. Initial Triage
A preliminary assessment of risk based on several clinical factors
aids in the resuscitation as well as the rational triage of the patient.
Clinical predictors of increased risk of rebleeding and death include
age > 60 years, comorbid illnesses, systolic blood pressure < 100
mm Hg, pulse > 100 beats/min, and bright red blood in the
nasogastric aspirate or on rectal examination.
1. High risk—Patients with active bleeding manifested by
hematemesis or bright red blood on nasogastric aspirate, shock,
persistent hemodynamic derangement despite fluid resuscitation,
serious comorbid medical illness, or evidence of advanced liver
disease require admission to an intensive care unit (ICU). After
adequate resuscitation, endoscopy should be performed within 2–
24 hours in most patients but may be delayed in selected patients
with serious comorbidities (eg, acute coronary syndrome) who do
not have signs of continued bleeding.
2. Low to moderate risk—All other patients are admitted to a
step-down unit or medical ward after appropriate stabilization for
further evaluation and treatment. Patients without evidence of active
bleeding undergo nonemergent endoscopy usually within 24 hours.
 Subsequent Evaluation & Treatment
Specific treatment of the various causes of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding is discussed elsewhere in this chapter. The following
general comments apply to most patients with bleeding.
The clinician's impression of the bleeding source is correct in only
40% of cases. Signs of chronic liver disease implicate bleeding due
to portal hypertension, but a different lesion is identified in 25% of
patients with cirrhosis. A history of dyspepsia, NSAID use, or
peptic ulcer disease suggests peptic ulcer. Acute bleeding preceded
by heavy alcohol ingestion or retching suggests a Mallory-Weiss
tear, though most of these patients have neither.
A. Upper Endoscopy
Virtually all patients with upper tract bleeding should undergo upper
endoscopy within 24 hours of arriving in the emergency department.
The benefits of endoscopy in this setting are threefold.
1. To identify the source of bleeding—The appropriate acute
and long-term medical therapy is determined by the cause of
bleeding. Patients with portal hypertension will be treated differently
from those with ulcer disease. If surgery or radiologic interventional
therapy is required for uncontrolled bleeding, the source of bleeding
as determined at endoscopy will determine the approach.
2. To determine the risk of rebleeding and guide triage
—Patients with a nonbleeding Mallory-Weiss tear, esophagitis,
gastritis, and ulcers that have a clean, white base have a very low
risk (< 5%) of rebleeding. Patients with one of these findings who
are < age 60 years, without hemodynamic instability or transfusion
requirement, without serious coexisting illness, and who have stable
social support may be discharged from the emergency department
or medical ward after endoscopy with outpatient follow-up. All
others with one of these low-risk lesions should be observed on a
medical ward for 24–48 hours. Patients with ulcers that are actively
bleeding or have a visible vessel or adherent clot, or who have
variceal bleeding usually require at least a 3-day hospitalization with
closer initial observation in an ICU or step down unit.
3. To render endoscopic therapy—Hemostasis can be achieved
in actively bleeding lesions with endoscopic modalities such as
cautery, injection, or endoclips. About 90% of bleeding or
nonbleeding varices can be effectively treated immediately with
injection of a sclerosant or application of rubber bands to the
varices. Similarly, 90% of bleeding ulcers, angiomas, or Mallory-
Weiss tears can be controlled with either injection of epinephrine,
direct cauterization of the vessel by a heater probe or multipolar
electrocautery probe, or application of an endoclip. Certain
nonbleeding lesions such as ulcers with visible blood vessels, and
angiomas are also treated with these therapies. Specific endoscopic
therapy of varices, peptic ulcers, and Mallory-Weiss tears is dealt
with elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Acute Pharmacologic Therapies
1. Acid inhibitory therapy—Intravenous proton pump
inhibitors (esomeprazole or pantoprazole, 80 mg bolus, followed
by 8 mg/h continuous infusion for 72 hours) reduce the risk of
rebleeding in patients with peptic ulcers with high-risk features
(active bleeding, visible vessel, or adherent clot) after endoscopic
treatment. High doses of oral proton pump inhibitors
(esomeprazole 40 mg or lansoprazole 60 mg, twice daily for 5
days) may also be effective.
Administration of continuous intravenous proton pump inhibitor
before endoscopy results in a decreased number of ulcers with
lesions that require endoscopic therapy. It therefore is standard
clinical practice at many institutions to administer either an
intravenous or a high-dose oral proton pump inhibitor prior to
endos-copy in patients with significant upper gastrointestinal
bleeding. Based on the findings during endoscopy, the intravenous
proton pump inhibitor may be continued or discontinued.
2. Octreotide—Continuous intravenous infusion of octreotide (100
mcg bolus, followed by 50–100 mcg/h) reduces splanchnic blood
flow and portal blood pressures and is effective in the initial control
of bleeding related to portal hypertension. It is administered
promptly to all patients with active upper gastrointestinal bleeding
and evidence of liver disease or portal hypertension until the source
of bleeding can be determined by endoscopy. In countries where it
is available, terlipressin may be preferred to octreotide for the
treatment of bleeding related to portal hypertension because of its
sustained reduction of portal and variceal pressures and its proven
reduction in mortality.
C. Other Treatment
1. Intra-arterial embolization—Angiographic treatment is used in
patients with persistent bleeding from ulcers, angiomas, or Mallory-
Weiss tears who have failed endoscopic therapy and are poor
operative risks.
2. Transvenous intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (Tips)
—Placement of a wire stent from the hepatic vein through the liver
to the portal vein provides effective decompression of the portal
venous system and control of acute variceal bleeding. It is indicated
in patients in whom endoscopic modalities have failed to control
acute variceal bleeding.
Barkun A et al. International consensus recommendations on the
management of patients with nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal
bleeding. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Jan 19;152(2):101–13. [PMID:
20083829]
 
Cappell MS. Therapeutic endoscopy for acute upper
gastrointestinal bleeding. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Apr;7(4):214–29. [PMID: 20212504]
 
Laine L et al. Endoscopic therapy for bleeding ulcers: an evidence-
based approach based on meta-analyses of randomized controlled
trials. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Jan;7(1):33–47. [PMID:
18986845]
 
Sung JJ et al. Causes of mortality in patients with peptic ulcer
bleeding: a prospective cohort study of 10,428 cases. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;105(1):84–9. [PMID: 19755976]
 
Wang CH et al. High-dose and non-high-dose proton pump
inhibitors after endoscopic treatment in patients with bleeding
peptic ulcer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Arch Intern Med. 2010 May;170(9):751–8.
[PMID: 20458081]
 
2. Acute Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hematochezia usually present.
 Ten percent of cases of hematochezia due to upper
gastrointestinal source.
 Evaluation with colonoscopy in stable patients.
 Massive active bleeding calls for evaluation with sigmoidoscopy,
upper endoscopy, angiography, or nuclear bleeding scan.
 
 General Considerations
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding is defined as that arising below the
ligament of Treitz, ie, the small intestine or colon; however, up to
95% of cases arise from the colon. The severity of lower
gastrointestinal bleeding ranges from mild anorectal bleeding to
massive, large-volume hematochezia. Bright red blood that drips
into the bowl after a bowel movement or is mixed with solid brown
stool signifies mild bleeding, usually from an anorectosigmoid
source, and can be evaluated in the outpatient setting. Serious lower
gastrointestinal bleeding is more common in older men. In patients
hospitalized with gastrointestinal bleeding, lower tract bleeding is
one-third as common as upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage and
tends to have a more benign course. Patients hospitalized with
lower gastrointestinal tract bleeding are less likely to present with
shock or orthostasis (< 20%) or to require transfusions (< 40%).
Spontaneous cessation of bleeding occurs in over 85% of cases,
and hospital mortality is < 4%.
 Etiology
The cause of these lesions depends on both the age of the patient
and the severity of the bleeding. In patients under 50 years of age,
the most common causes are infectious colitis, anorectal disease,
and inflammatory bowel disease. In older patients, significant
hematochezia is most often seen with diverticulosis, vascular
ectasias, malignancy, or ischemia. In 20% of acute bleeding
episodes, no source of bleeding can be identified.
A. Diverticulosis
Hemorrhage occurs in 3–5% of all patients with diverticulosis and is
the most common cause of major lower tract bleeding, accounting
for 50% of cases. A significant percentage of cases are associated
with the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. Although
diverticula are more prevalent on the left side of the colon, bleeding
more commonly originates on the right side. Diverticular bleeding
usually presents as acute, painless, large-volume maroon or bright
red hematochezia in patients over age 50 years. More than 95% of
cases require < 4 units of blood transfusion. Bleeding subsides
spontaneously in 80% but may recur in up to 25% of patients.
B. Vascular Ectasias
Vascular ectasias (or angiodysplasias) occur throughout the upper
and lower intestinal tracts and cause painless bleeding ranging from
melena or hematochezia to occult blood loss. They are responsible
for 4% of cases of lower gastrointestinal bleeding, where they are
most often seen in the cecum and ascending colon. They are flat,
red lesions (2–10 mm) with ectatic peripheral vessels radiating from
a central vessel, and are most common in patients over 70 years
and in those with chronic renal failure. Bleeding in younger patients
more commonly arises from the small intestine.
Most colonic ectasias are degenerative lesions that are believed
to arise from chronic colonic mucosal contraction obstructing
venous mucosal drainage. The cause of gastric and small intestinal
ectasias is unknown. Some are congenital, part of an inherited
syndrome such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, or related
to autoimmune disorders, typically scleroderma. Ectasias can be
identified in up to 6% of subjects over age 60 years, so their mere
presence does not prove that the lesion is the source of bleeding, as
active bleeding is seldom seen.
C. Neoplasms
Benign polyps and carcinoma are associated with chronic occult
blood loss or intermittent anorectal hematochezia. Furthermore,
they may cause up to 7% of acute lower gastrointestinal
hemorrhage. After endoscopic removal of colonic polyps, important
bleeding may occur up to 2 weeks later in 0.3% of patients. In
general, prompt colonoscopy is recommended to treat
postpolypectomy hemorrhage and minimize the need for
transfusions.
D. Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (especially ulcerative
colitis) often have diarrhea with variable amounts of hematochezia.
Bleeding varies from occult blood loss to recurrent hematochezia
usually mixed with stool. Symptoms of abdominal pain, tenesmus,
and urgency are often present.
E. Anorectal Disease
Anorectal disease (hemorrhoids, fissures) usually results in small
amounts of bright red blood noted on the toilet paper, streaking of
the stool, or dripping into the toilet bowl; clinically significant blood
loss can sometimes occur. Hemorrhoids are the source in 10% of
patients admitted with lower bleeding. Rectal ulcers may account
for up to 8% of lower bleeding, usually in elderly or debilitated
patients with constipation.
F. Ischemic Colitis
This condition is seen commonly in older patients, most of whom
have atherosclerotic disease. Most cases occur spontaneously due
to transient episodes of nonocclusive ischemia. Ischemic colitis may
also occur in 5% of patients after surgery for ileoaortic or
abdominal aortic aneurysm. In young patients, colonic ischemia may
develop due to vasculitis, coagulation disorders, estrogen therapy,
and long distance running. Ischemic colitis results in hematochezia or
bloody diarrhea associated with mild cramps. In most patients, the
bleeding is mild and self-limited.
G. Others
Radiation-induced proctitis causes anorectal bleeding that may
develop months to years after pelvic radiation. Endoscopy reveals
multiple rectal telangiectasias. Acute infectious colitis (see Acute
Diarrhea, above) commonly causes bloody diarrhea. Rare causes of
lower tract bleeding include vasculitic ischemia, solitary rectal ulcer,
NSAID-induced ulcers in the small bowel or right colon, small
bowel diverticula, and colonic varices.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The color of the stool helps distinguish upper from lower
gastrointestinal bleeding, especially when observed by the clinician.
Brown stools mixed or streaked with blood predict a source in the
rectosigmoid or anus. Large volumes of bright red blood suggest a
colonic source; maroon stools imply a lesion in the right colon or
small intestine; and black stools (melena) predict a source proximal
to the ligament of Treitz. Although 10% of patients admitted with
self-reported hematochezia have an upper gastrointestinal source of
bleeding (eg, peptic ulcer), this almost always occurs in the setting
of massive hemorrhage with hemodynamic instability. Painless large-
volume bleeding usually suggests diverticular bleeding. Bloody
diarrhea associated with cramping abdominal pain, urgency, or
tenesmus is characteristic of inflammatory bowel disease, infectious
colitis, or ischemic colitis.
B. Diagnostic Tests
Important considerations in management include exclusion of an
upper tract source, anoscopy and sigmoidos-copy, colonoscopy,
nuclear bleeding scans and angiography, and small intestine push
enteroscopy or capsule imaging.
1. Exclusion of an upper tract source—A nasogastric tube with
aspiration should be considered, especially in patients with
hemodynamic compromise. Aspiration of red blood or dark brown
(“coffee grounds”) guaiac-positive material strongly implicates an
upper gastrointestinal source of bleeding. Upper endoscopy should
be performed in most patients presenting with hematochezia and
hemo-dynamic instability to exclude an upper gastrointestinal source
before proceeding with evaluation of the lower gastrointestinal tract.
2. Anoscopy and sigmoidoscopy—In otherwise healthy patients
without anemia under age 45 years with small-volume bleeding,
anoscopy and sigmoidoscopy are performed to look for evidence
of anorectal disease, inflammatory bowel disease, or infectious
colitis. If a lesion is found, no further evaluation is needed
immediately unless the bleeding persists or is recurrent. In patients
over age 45 years with small-volume hematochezia, the entire colon
must be evaluated with colonoscopy to exclude tumor.
3. Colonoscopy—In patients with acute, large-volume bleeding
requiring hospitalization, colonoscopy is the preferred initial study in
most cases. The bowel first is purged rapidly by administration of a
high-volume colonic lavage solution, given until the effluent is clear
of blood and clots (4–10 L of GoLYTELY, CoLYTE, NuLYTE
given orally or 1 L every 30 minutes over 2–5 hours by nasogastric
tube). For patients with stable vital signs and whose lower
gastrointestinal bleeding appears to have stopped, colonoscopy can
be performed electively within 24 hours of admission. For patients
with signs of hemodynamically significant bleeding (unstable vital
signs) or who have signs of continued active bleeding during bowel
preparation, urgent colonoscopy should be performed within 1–2
hours of completing the bowel purgative, when the bowel discharge
is without clots. The probable site of bleeding can be identified in
70–85% of patients, and a high-risk lesion can be identified and
treated in up to 20%.
4. Nuclear bleeding scans and angiography—Technetium-
labeled red blood cell scanning can detect significant active bleeding
and, in some cases, can localize the source to the small intestine,
right colon, or left colon. Thus, some physicians obtain a nuclear
bleeding scan to guide initial decision-making. If no bleeding is
detected on scintigraphy, an “elective” colonoscopy is performed
within 24 hours after conventional bowel preparation. If bleeding is
detected on scintigraphy, urgent angiography is performed instead
of colonoscopy. Nuclear studies are more apt to be positive in
patients who are passing bright red or maroon stools at the time of
the scan. Because most bleeding is slow or intermittent, less than
half of nuclear studies are diagnostic and the accuracy of localization
is poor. Thus, the main utility of scintigraphy is to determine whether
bleeding is ongoing in order to determine whether angiography
should be pursued. Less than half of patients with a positive nuclear
study have positive angiography. Accordingly, angiograms are
performed only in patients with positive technetium scans believed
to have significant, ongoing bleeding.
In patients with massive lower gastrointestinal bleeding
manifested by continued hemodynamic instability and hematochezia,
urgent angiography should be performed without attempt at
colonoscopy or scintigraphy.
5. Small intestine push enteroscopy or capsule imaging—Up
to 5% of acute episodes of lower gastrointestinal bleeding arise
from the small intestine, eluding diagnostic evaluation with upper
endoscopy and colonoscopy. Because of the difficulty of examining
the small intestine and its relative rarity as a source of acute
bleeding, evaluation of the small bowel is not usually pursued in
patients during the initial episode of acute lower gastrointestinal
bleeding. However, the small intestine is investigated in patients with
unexplained recurrent hemorrhage of obscure origin. (See Obscure
Gastrointestinal Bleeding below.)
 Treatment
Initial stabilization, blood replacement, and triage are managed in
the same manner as described above for Acute Upper
Gastrointestinal Bleeding.
A. Therapeutic Colonoscopy
High-risk lesions (eg, angioectasias or diverticulum, rectal ulcer with
active bleeding, or a visible vessel) may be treated endoscopically
with epinephrine injection, cautery (bipolar or heater probe), or
application of metallic endo-clips or bands. In diverticular
hemorrhage with high-risk lesions identified at colonoscopy,
rebleeding occurs in half of untreated patients compared with
virtually no rebleeding in patients treated endoscopically. Radiation
proctitis is effectively treated with applications of cautery therapy to
the rectal telangiectasias, preferably with an argon plasma
coagulator.
B. Intra-Arterial Embolization
When a bleeding lesion is identified, angiography with selective
embolization achieves immediate hemostasis in more than 95% of
patients. Major complications occur in 5% (mainly ischemic colitis)
and rebleeding occurs in up to 25%.
C. Surgical Treatment
Emergency surgery is required in < 5% of patients with acute lower
gastrointestinal bleeding due to the efficacy of colonoscopic and
angiographic therapies. It is indicated in patients with ongoing
bleeding that requires more than 6 units of blood within 24 hours or
more than 10 total units in whom attempts at endoscopic or
angiographic therapy failed. Most such hemorrhages are caused by
a bleeding diverticulum or vascular ectasia. Preoperative localization
of the bleeding site by nuclear scan or angiography allows limited
resection of the bleeding segment of small intestine or colon. When
accurate localization is not possible or when emergency surgery is
required for massive hemorrhage, total abdominal colectomy with
ileorectal anastomosis is required—with significantly higher
morbidity and mortality than limited resections.
Surgery may also be indicated in patients with two or more
hospitalizations for diverticular hemorrhage depending on the
severity of bleeding and the patient's other comorbid conditions.
Laine L et al. Randomized trial of urgent vs. elective colonoscopy
in patients hospitalized with lower GI bleeding. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2010 Dec;105(12):2636–41. [PMID: 20648004]
 
Lanas A et al. Time trends and impact of upper and lower
gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation in clinical practice. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2009 Jul;104(7):1633–41. [PMID: 19574968]
 
Strate LL et al. The role of colonoscopy and radiologic
procedures in the management of acute lower intestinal bleeding.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Apr;8(4):333–43. [PMID:
20036757]
 
3. Obscure Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding refers to bleeding of unknown
origin that persists or recurs after initial endoscopic evaluation with
upper endoscopy and colonoscopy. Obscure-overt bleeding is
manifested by persistent or recurrent visible evidence of
gastrointestinal bleeding (hematemesis, hematochezia, or melena).
Up to 5% of patients admitted to hospitals with clinically overt
gastrointestinal bleeding do not have a cause identified on upper
endos-copy or colonoscopy (and therefore have obscure-overt
bleeding). Obscure-occult bleeding (discussed below) refers to
bleeding that is not apparent to the patient. It is manifested by
recurrent positive FOBTs or FITs or recurrent iron deficiency
anemia, or both in the absence of visible blood loss (as described
below).
Obscure bleeding (either occult or overt) most commonly arises
from lesions in the small intestine. In up to one-third of cases,
however, a source of bleeding has been overlooked in the upper or
lower tract on prior endoscopic studies. Hematemesis or melena
suggest an overlooked source proximal to the ligament of Treitz (ie,
within the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum): erosions in a hiatal
hernia (“Cameron erosions”), peptic ulcer, vascular ectasias,
Dieulafoy vascular malformation, portal hypertensive gastropathy,
gastroduodenal varices, duodenal neoplasms, aortoenteric fistula, or
hepatic and pancreatic lesions. In the colon, the most commonly
overlooked lesions are vascular ectasias and neoplasms. The
etiology of obscure bleeding that arises from the small intestine
depends on the age of the patient. The most common causes of
small intestinal bleeding in patients younger than 40 years are
neoplasms (stromal tumors, lymphomas, adenocarcinomas,
carcinoids), Crohn disease, celiac disease, and Meckel
diverticulum. These disorders also occur in patients over age 40;
however, vascular ectasias and NSAID-induced ulcers are far more
common.
Evaluation of Obscure Bleeding
The evaluation of obscure bleeding depends on the age and overall
health status of the patient, associated symptoms, and severity of
the bleeding. In an older patient with significant comorbid illnesses,
no gastrointestinal symptoms, and occult or obscure bleeding in
whom the suspected source of bleeding is vascular ectasias, it may
be reasonable to limit diagnostic evaluations, provided the anemia
can be managed with long-term iron therapy or occasional
transfusions. On the other hand, aggressive diagnostic evaluation is
warranted in younger patients with obscure bleeding (in whom small
bowel tumors are the most common cause) and symptomatic older
patients with overt or obscure bleeding. Upper endoscopy and
colonoscopy should be repeated to ascertain that a lesion in these
regions has not been overlooked. If these studies are unrevealing,
capsule endoscopy should be performed to evaluate the small
intestine. Capsule endoscopy is superior to radiographic studies
(standard small bowel follow through, enteroclysis, or CT
enterography) and standard push enteroscopy for the detection of
small bowel abnormalities, demonstrating possible sources of occult
bleeding in 60% of patients, most commonly vascular abnormalities
(30%), ulcers (25%), and neoplasms (< 1–5%). Further
management depends on the capsule endoscopic findings.
Laparotomy is warranted if a small bowel tumor is identified by
capsule endoscopy or radiographic studies. Most other lesions
identified by capsule imaging can be further evaluated with one of
several new enteroscopes that use balloons or spiral overtubes to
advance the scope through most of the small intestine in a forward
and retrograde direction. Neoplasms can be biopsied or resected,
and vascular ectasias may be cauterized. For massive or
hemodynamically significant acute bleeding, angiography may be
superior to enteroscopy for localization and embolization of a
bleeding vascular abnormality. Abdominal CT may be considered
to exclude a hepatic or pancreatic source of bleeding. A nuclear
scan for Meckel diverticulum should be obtained in patients under
age 30. With the advent of capsule imaging and advanced
endoscopic technologies for evaluating and treating bleeding lesions
in the small intestine, intraoperative enteroscopy of the small bowel
is seldom required.
4. Occult Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Occult gastrointestinal bleeding refers to bleeding that is not
apparent to the patient. Chronic gastrointestinal blood loss of < 100
mL/d may cause no appreciable change in stool appearance. Thus,
occult bleeding in an adult is identified by a positive FOBT, FIT, or
iron deficiency anemia in the absence of visible blood loss. FOBT
or FIT may be performed in patients with gastrointestinal symptoms
or as a screening test for colorectal neoplasia (see Chapter 39).
From 2% to 6% of patients in screening programs have a positive
FOBT or FIT.
In the United States, 2% of men and 5% of women have iron
deficiency anemia (serum ferritin < 30–45 mcg/L). In
premenopausal women, iron deficiency anemia is most commonly
attributable to menstrual and pregnancy-associated iron loss;
however, a gastrointestinal source of chronic blood loss is present in
10%. Occult blood loss may arise from anywhere in the
gastrointestinal tract. Among men and postmenopausal women, a
potential gastrointestinal cause of blood loss can be identified in the
colon in 15–30% and in the upper gastrointestinal tract in 35–55%;
a malignancy is present in 10%. Iron deficiency on rare occasions is
caused by malabsorption (especially celiac disease) or malnutrition.
The most common causes are (1) neoplasms; (2) vascular
abnormalities (vascular ectasias); (3) acid-peptic lesions
(esophagitis, peptic ulcer disease, erosions in hiatal hernia); (4)
infections (nematodes, especially hookworm; tuberculosis); (5)
medications (especially NSAIDs or aspirin); and (6) other causes
such as inflammatory bowel disease.
 Evaluation of Occult Bleeding
Asymptomatic adults with positive FOBTs or FITs that are
performed for routine colorectal cancer screening should undergo
colonoscopy (see Chapter 39). All symptomatic adults with positive
FOBTs or FITs or iron deficiency anemia should undergo
evaluation of the lower and upper gastrointestinal tract with
colonoscopy and upper endoscopy, unless the anemia can be
definitively ascribed to a nongastrointestinal source (eg,
menstruation, blood donation, or recent surgery). Patients with iron
deficiency anemia should be evaluated for possible celiac disease
with either IgA anti-tissue transglutaminase or duodenal biopsy.
After evaluation of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract with
upper endoscopy and colonoscopy, the origin of occult bleeding
remains unexplained in 30–50% of patients.
In younger patients (age < 60) with unexplained occult bleeding
or iron deficiency, it is recommended to pursue further evaluation of
the small intestine for a source of obscure-occult bleeding (as
described above) in order to exclude a small intestinal neoplasm or
inflammatory bowel disease. Patients over age 60 with occult
bleeding who have a normal initial endoscopic evaluation and no
other worrisome symptoms or signs (eg, abdominal pain, weight
loss) most commonly have blood loss from vascular ectasias, which
may be clinically unimportant. Therefore, it is reasonable to give an
empiric trial of iron supplementation and observe the patient for
evidence of clinically significant bleeding. For anemia that responds
poorly to iron supplementation or recurrent or persistent chronic
occult gastrointestinal blood loss, further evaluation is pursued for a
source of obscure-occult bleeding (as described above). When
possible, antiplatelet agents (aspirin, NSAIDs, clopidogrel) should
be discontinued.
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee; Fisher L et al. The role
of endoscopy in the management of obscure GI bleeding.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Sep;72(3):471–9. [PMID: 20801285]
 
Gerson LB et al. Long-term outcomes after double-balloon
enteroscopy for obscure gastrointestinal bleeding. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Jun;7(6):664–9. [PMID: 19558981]
 
Liao Z et al. Indications and detection, completion, and retention
rates of small-bowel capsule endoscopy: a systematic review.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Feb;71(2):280–6. [PMID: 20152309]
 
Rockey DC. Occult and obscure gastrointestinal bleeding: causes
and clinical management. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
May;7(5):265–79. [PMID: 20351759]
 
DISEASES OF THE
PERITONEUM
 
ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH ASCITES
 Etiology of Ascites
The term “ascites” denotes the pathologic accumulation of fluid in
the peritoneal cavity. Healthy men have little or no intraperitoneal
fluid, but women normally may have up to 20 mL depending on the
phase of the menstrual cycle. The causes of ascites may be
classified into two broad pathophysiologic categories: that which is
associated with a normal peritoneum and that which occurs due to a
diseased peritoneum (Table 15–7). The most common cause of
ascites is portal hypertension secondary to chronic liver disease,
which accounts for over 80% of patients with ascites. The
management of portal hypertensive ascites is discussed in Chapter
16. The most common causes of nonportal hyper-tensive ascites
include infections (tuberculous peritonitis), intra-abdominal
malignancy, inflammatory disorders of the peritoneum, and ductal
disruptions (chylous, pancreatic, biliary).
 
Table 15–7. Causes o
 
Normal Peritoneum
Portal hypertension (SAAG ≥ 1.1 g/dL)
     1. Hepatic congestion1
         Congestive heart failure
         Constrictive pericarditis
         Tricuspid insufficiency
         Budd-Chiari syndrome
         Veno-occlusive disease
     2. Liver disease2
         Cirrhosis
         Alcoholic hepatitis
         Fulminant hepatic failure
         Massive hepatic metastases
         Hepatic fibrosis
         Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
     3. Portal vein occlusion
Hypoalbuminemia (SAAG < 1.1 g/dL)
     Nephrotic syndrome
     Protein-losing enteropathy
     Severe malnutrition with anasarca
Miscellaneous conditions (SAAG < 1.1 g/dL)
     Chylous ascites
     Pancreatic ascites
     Bile ascites
     Nephrogenic ascites
     Urine ascites
     Myxedema (SAAG ≥ 1.1 g/dL)
     Ovarian disease
Diseased Peritoneum (SAAG < 1.1 g/dL)2
Infections
     Bacterial peritonitis
     Tuberculous peritonitis
     Fungal peritonitis
     HIV-associated peritonitis
Malignant conditions
     Peritoneal carcinomatosis
     Primary mesothelioma
     Pseudomyxoma peritonei
     Massive hepatic metastases
     Hepatocellular carcinoma
Other conditions
     Familial Mediterranean fever
     Vasculitis
     Granulomatous peritonitis
     Eosinophilic peritonitis
1Hepatic congestion usually associated with SAAG ≥ 1.1 g/dL and ascitic
fluid total protein > 2.5 g/dL.
2There may be cases of “mixed ascites” in which portal hypertensive
ascites is complicated by a secondary process such as infection. In these
cases, the SAAG is ≥ 1.1 g/dL.
SAAG, serum-ascites albumin gradient.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The history usually is one of increasing abdominal girth, with the
presence of abdominal pain depending on the cause. Because most
ascites is secondary to chronic liver disease with portal
hypertension, patients should be asked about risk factors for liver
disease, especially alcohol consumption, transfusions, tattoos,
injection drug use, a history of viral hepatitis or jaundice, and birth in
an area endemic for hepatitis. A history of cancer or marked weight
loss arouses suspicion of malignant ascites. Fevers may suggest
infected peritoneal fluid, including bacterial peritonitis (spontaneous
or secondary). Patients with chronic liver disease and ascites are at
greatest risk for developing spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. In
immigrants, immunocompromised hosts, or severely malnourished
alcoholics, tuberculous peritonitis should be considered.
Physical examination should emphasize signs of portal
hypertension and chronic liver disease. Elevated jugular venous
pressure may suggest right-sided congestive heart failure or
constrictive pericarditis. A large tender liver is characteristic of
acute alcoholic hepatitis or Budd-Chiari syndrome. The presence of
large abdominal wall veins with cephalad flow also suggests portal
hypertension; inferiorly directed flow implies hepatic vein
obstruction. Signs of chronic liver disease include palmar erythema,
cutaneous spider angiomas, gynecomastia, and muscle wasting.
Asterixis secondary to hepatic encephalopathy may be present.
Anasarca results from cardiac failure or nephrotic syndrome with
hypoalbuminemia. Finally, firm lymph nodes in the left
supraclavicular region or umbilicus may suggest intra-abdominal
malignancy.
The physical examination is relatively insensitive for detecting
ascitic fluid. In general, patients must have at least 1500 mL of fluid
to be detected reliably by this method. Even the experienced
clinician may find it difficult to distinguish between obesity and
small-volume ascites. Abdominal ultrasound establishes the
presence of fluid.
B. Laboratory Testing
1. Abdominal paracentesis—Abdominal paracentesis is
performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation in all patients with
new onset of ascites to help determine the cause. It also is
recommended for patients admitted to the hospital with cirrhosis
and ascites (in whom the prevalence of bacterial peritonitis is 10–
20%) and when patients with known ascites deteriorate clinically
(development of fever, abdominal pain, rapid worsening of renal
function, or worsened hepatic encephalopathy) to exclude bacterial
peritonitis.
A. INSPECTION—Cloudy fluid suggests infection. Milky fluid is
seen with chylous ascites due to high triglyceride levels. Bloody fluid
is most commonly attributable to a traumatic paracentesis, but up to
20% of cases of malignant ascites are bloody.
B. ROUTINE STUDIES
(1) Cell count—A white blood cell count with differential is the
most important test. Normal ascitic fluid contains < 500
leukocytes/mcL and < 250 polymorphonuclear neutrophils
(PMNs)/mcL. Any inflammatory condition can cause an elevated
ascitic white blood cell count. A PMN count of > 250/mcL
(neutrocytic ascites) with a percentage of > 75% of all white cells is
highly suggestive of bacterial peritonitis, either spontaneous primary
peritonitis or secondary peritonitis (ie, caused by an intra-abdominal
source of infection, such as a perforated viscus or appendicitis). An
elevated white count with a predominance of lymphocytes arouses
suspicion of tuberculosis or peritoneal carcinomatosis.
(2) Albumin and total protein—The serum-ascites albumin
gradient (SAAG) is the best single test for the classification of
ascites into portal hypertensive and nonportal hypertensive causes
(Table 15–7). Calculated by subtracting the ascitic fluid albumin
from the serum albumin, the gradient correlates directly with the
portal pressure. An SAAG ≥ 1.1 g/dL suggests underlying portal
hypertension, while gradients < 1.1 g/dL implicate nonportal
hypertensive causes.
The accuracy of the SAAG exceeds 95% in classifying ascites. It
should be recognized, however, that approximately 4% of patients
have “mixed ascites,” ie, underlying cirrhosis with portal
hypertension complicated by a second cause for ascites formation
(such as malignancy or tuberculosis). Thus, a high SAAG is
indicative of portal hyper-tension but does not exclude concomitant
malignancy.
The ascitic fluid total protein provides some additional clues to
the cause. An elevated SAAG and a high protein level (> 2.5 g/dL)
are seen in most cases of hepatic congestion secondary to cardiac
disease or Budd-Chiari syndrome. However, an increased ascitic
fluid protein is also found in up to 20% of cases of uncomplicated
cirrhosis. Two-thirds of patients with malignant ascites have a total
protein level > 2.5 g/dL.
(3) Culture and Gram stain—The best technique consists of
the inoculation of aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottles with
5–10 mL of ascitic fluid at the patient's bedside, which increases the
sensitivity for detecting bacterial peritonitis to over 85% in patients
with neutrocytic ascites (> 250 PMNs/mcL), compared with
approximately 50% sensitivity by conventional agar plate or broth
cultures.
C. OPTIONAL STUDIES—Other laboratory tests are of utility in
some specific clinical situations. Glucose and lactate dehydrogenase
(LD) may be helpful in distinguishing spontaneous from secondary
bacterial peritonitis (see below). An elevated amylase may suggest
pancreatic ascites or a perforation of the gastrointestinal tract with
leakage of pancreatic secretions into the ascitic fluid. Perforation of
the biliary tree is suspected with an ascitic bilirubin concentration
that is greater than the serum bilirubin. An elevated ascitic creatinine
suggests leakage of urine from the bladder or ureters. Ascitic fluid
cytologic examination is ordered if peritoneal carcinomatosis is
suspected. Adenosine deaminase may be useful for the diagnosis of
tuberculous peritonitis.
C. Imaging
Abdominal ultrasound is useful in confirming the presence of ascites
and in the guidance of paracentesis. Both ultra-sound and CT
imaging are useful in distinguishing between causes of portal and
nonportal hypertensive ascites. Doppler ultrasound and CT can
detect thrombosis of the hepatic veins (Budd-Chiari syndrome) or
portal veins. In patients with nonportal hypertensive ascites, these
studies are useful in detecting lymphadenopathy and masses of the
mesentery and of solid organs such as the liver, ovaries, and
pancreas. Furthermore, they permit directed percutaneous needle
biopsies of these lesions. Ultrasound and CT are poor procedures
for the detection of peritoneal carcinomatosis; the role of positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging is unclear.
D. Laparoscopy
Laparoscopy is an important test in the evaluation of some patients
with nonportal hypertensive ascites (low SAAG) or mixed ascites.
It permits direct visualization and biopsy of the peritoneum, liver,
and some intra-abdominal lymph nodes. Cases of suspected
peritoneal tuberculosis or suspected malignancy with nondiagnostic
CT imaging and ascitic fluid cytology are best evaluated by this
method.
Hou W et al. Ascites: diagnosis and management. Med Clin North
Am. 2009 Jul;9394:801–17. [PMID: 19577115]
 
Wong CL et al. Does this patient have bacterial peritonitis or
portal hypertension? How do I perform a paracentesis and analyze
the results? JAMA. 2008 Mar 12;299(10):1166–78. [PMID:
18334692]
 
Zeller JL et al. JAMA patient page. Abdominal paracentesis.
JAMA. 2008 Mar 12;299(10):1216. [PMID: 18334698]
 
SPONTANEOUS BACTERIAL PERITONITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A history of chronic liver disease and ascites.
 Fever and abdominal pain.
 Peritoneal signs uncommonly encountered on examination.
 Ascitic fluid neutrophil count > 250 white blood cells/mcl.
 
 General Considerations
“Spontaneous” bacterial infection of ascitic fluid occurs in the
absence of an apparent intra-abdominal source of infection. It is
seen with few exceptions in patients with ascites caused by chronic
liver disease. Translocation of enteric bacteria across the gut wall or
mesenteric lymphatics leads to seeding of the ascitic fluid, as may
bacteremia from other sites. Approximately 20–30% of cirrhotic
patients with ascites develop spontaneous peritonitis; however, the
incidence is > 40% in patients with ascitic fluid total protein < 1
g/dL, probably due to decreased ascitic fluid opsonic activity.
Virtually all cases of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis are caused
by a monomicrobial infection. The most common pathogens are
enteric gram-negative bacteria (E coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae) or
gram-positive bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, viridans
streptococci, Enterococcus species). Anaerobic bacteria are not
associated with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Eighty to ninety percent of patients with spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis are symptomatic; in many cases the presentation is subtle.
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis may be present in 10-20% of
patients hospitalized with chronic liver disease, sometimes in the
absence of any suggestive symptoms or signs.
The most common symptoms are fever and abdominal pain,
present in two-thirds of patients. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
may also present with a change in mental status due to exacerbation
or precipitation of hepatic encephalopathy, or sudden worsening of
renal function. Physical examination typically demonstrates signs of
chronic liver disease with ascites. Abdominal tenderness is present
in < 50% of patients, and its presence suggests other processes.
B. Laboratory Findings
The most important diagnostic test is abdominal paracentesis.
Ascitic fluid should be sent for cell count with differential, and blood
culture bottles should be inoculated at the bedside; Gram stain and
reagent strips are insensitive.
In the proper clinical setting, an ascitic fluid PMN count of > 250
cells/mcL (neutrocytic ascites) is presumptive evidence of bacterial
peritonitis. The percentage of PMNs is > 50–70% of the ascitic
fluid white blood cells and commonly approximates 100%. Patients
with neutrocytic ascites are presumed to be infected and should be
started—regardless of symptoms—on antibiotics. Although 10–
30% of patients with neutrocytic ascites have negative ascitic
bacterial cultures (“culture-negative neutrocytic ascites”), it is
presumed that these patients have bacterial peritonitis and should be
treated empirically. Occasionally, a positive blood culture identifies
the organism when ascitic fluid is sterile.
 Differential Diagnosis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis must be distinguished from
secondary bacterial peritonitis, in which ascitic fluid has become
secondarily infected by an intra-abdominal infection. Even in the
presence of perforation, clinical symptoms and signs of peritonitis
may be lacking owing to the separation of the visceral and parietal
peritoneum by the ascitic fluid. Causes of secondary bacterial
peritonitis include appendicitis, diverticulitis, perforated peptic ulcer,
and perforated gallbladder. Secondary bacterial infection accounts
for 3% of cases of infected ascitic fluid.
Ascitic fluid total protein, LD, and glucose are useful in
distinguishing spontaneous bacterial peritonitis from secondary
infection. Up to two-thirds of patients with secondary bacterial
peritonitis have at least two of the following: decreased glucose level
(< 50 mg/dL), an elevated LD level (greater than serum), and total
protein > 1 g/dL. Ascitic neutrophil counts > 10,000/mcL also are
suspicious; however, most patients with secondary peritonitis have
neutro-phil counts within the range of spontaneous peritonitis. The
presence of multiple organisms on ascitic fluid Gram stain or culture
is diagnostic of secondary peritonitis.
If secondary bacterial peritonitis is suspected, abdominal CT
imaging of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts should be
obtained to look for evidence of an intra-abdominal source of
infection. If these studies are negative and secondary peritonitis still
is suspected, repeat paracentesis should be performed after 48
hours of antibiotic therapy to confirm that the PMN count is
decreasing. Secondary bacterial peritonitis should be suspected in
patients in whom the PMN count is not below the pretreatment
value at 48 hours.
Neutrocytic ascites may also be seen in some patients with
peritoneal carcinomatosis, pancreatic ascites, or tuber-culous
ascites. In these circumstances, however, PMNs account for <
50% of the ascitic white blood cells.
 Prevention
Up to 70% of patients who survive an episode of spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis will have another episode within 1 year. Oral
once-daily prophylactic therapy—with norfloxacin, 400 mg,
ciprofloxacin, 250–500 mg, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one
double-strength tablet—has been shown to reduce the rate of
recurrent infections to < 20% and is recommended. Prophylaxis
should be considered also in patients who have not had prior
bacterial peritonitis but are at increased risk of infection due to low-
protein ascites (total ascitic protein < 1 g/dL). Although
improvement in survival in cirrhotic patients with ascites treated with
prophylactic antibiotics has not been shown, decision analytic
modeling suggests that in patients with prior bacterial peritonitis or
low ascitic fluid protein, the use of prophylactic antibiotics is a cost-
effective strategy.
 Treatment
Empiric therapy for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis should be
initiated with a third-generation cephalosporin (such as cefotaxime,
2 g intravenously every 8–12 hours, or ceftriaxone, 1-2 g
intravenously every 24 hours) or a combination β-lactam/β-
lactamase agent (such as ampicillin/sulbactam, 2 g/1 g intravenously
every 6 hours). Because of a high risk of nephrotoxicity in patients
with chronic liver disease, aminoglycosides should not be used. A
repeat paracentesis is recommended after 48 hours of treatment,
especially in patients without clinical improvement. If the ascitic
neutrophil count has not decreased by 25%, antibiotic coverage
should be adjusted (guided by culture and sensitivity results, if
available) and secondary causes of peritonitis excluded. Although
the optimal duration of therapy is unknown, a course of 5–10 days
is sufficient in most patients, or until the ascites fluid PMN count
decreases to < 250 cells/mcL.
Kidney injury develops in up to 40% of patients and is a major
cause of death. Intravenous albumin increases effective arterial
circulating volume and renal perfusion, decreasing the incidence of
kidney injury and mortality. Intravenous albumin, 1.5 g/kg on day 1
and 1 g/kg on day 3, should be administered to patients at high risk
for hepatorenal failure (ie, patients with baseline creatinine > 1
mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) > 30 mg/dL, or bilirubin > 4
mg/dL). Patients with suspected secondary bacterial peritonitis
should be given broad-spectrum coverage for enteric aerobic and
anaerobic flora with a third-generation cephalosporin and
metronidazole pending identification and definitive (usually surgical)
treatment of the cause.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis exceeds 30%.
However, if the disease is recognized and treated early, the rate is <
10%. As the majority of patients have underlying severe liver
disease, many may die of liver failure, hepatorenal syndrome, or
bleeding complications from portal hypertension. The most effective
treatment for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis is liver transplant.
Chavez-Tapia NC et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis for cirrhotic
patients with upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2010 Sep 8;(9):CD002907. [PMID: 20824832]
 
European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL clinical
practice guidelines on the management of ascites, spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis, and hepatorenal syndrome in cirrhosis. J
Hepatol. 2010 Sep;53(3):397–417. [PMID: 20633946]
 
Garcia-Tsao G et al. Management and treatment of patients with
cirrhosis and portal hypertension: recommendations from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Hepatitis C Resource Center
Program and the National Hepatitis C Program. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2009 Jul;104(7):1802–29. [PMID: 19455106]
 
Saab S et al. Oral antibiotic prophylaxis reduces spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis occurrence and improves short-term survival in
cirrhosis: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009
Apr;104(4):993–1001. [PMID: 19277033]
 
TUBERCULOUS PERITONITIS
Tuberculosis occurs in extrapulmonary sites in 20% of non–HIV-
infected people and up to 70% of those infected with HIV.
Although tuberculous involvement of the peritoneum accounts for <
2% of all causes of ascites in the United States, it remains a
significant problem in the developing world. In Western countries,
its incidence is higher among those with uncontrolled HIV disease,
immigrants from underdeveloped countries, the urban poor, patients
with cirrhosis, and nursing home residents.
The presenting symptoms include low-grade fever, abdominal
pain, anorexia, and weight loss. Most patients have symptoms for
months before the diagnosis is established. On physical examination,
patients may have generalized abdominal tenderness and distention.
There may be clinically evident ascites or suggestion of an
abdominal mass. Ultrasonography or CT imaging of the abdomen
reveals free or loculated ascites in > 80% of patients and also may
demonstrate lymphadenopathy or peritoneal, mesenteric, or omental
thickening.
The diagnosis thus can be difficult to establish, particularly in
patients with underlying cirrhosis with ascites and in patients without
ascites (in whom the diagnosis may not be suspected). Chest
radiographs are abnormal in over 70%, but active tuberculous
pulmonary disease is evident in < 20% of patients. Skin tests are
positive in 50%. Smears of ascitic fluid for acid-fast bacilli are
usually negative, and cultures are positive in only 35%. Other
findings are an ascitic fluid total protein > 3 g/dL, LD > 90 units/L,
or mononuclear cell-predominant leukocytosis > 500/mcL—each
has a sensitivity of 70–80% but limited specificity. Meta-analysis of
four international studies reports that ascites adenosine deaminase
activity ≥ 36–40 international unit/L has a sensitivity of 100% and a
specificity of 97% for the diagnosis of tuberculous peritonitis;
however, the accuracy of this method may be lower in patients in
the United States who have cirrhotic ascites or HIV disease.
In patients with suspected tuberculous peritonitis, laparoscopy
establishes the diagnosis. In over 90% of patients, characteristic
peritoneal nodules are visible, and granulomas are seen on
peritoneal biopsy. Peritoneal cultures require at least 4–6 weeks
and are positive in less than two-thirds of patients.
Treatment of tuberculosis is discussed in Chapter 9.
Jacob JT et al. Acute forms of tuberculosis in adults. Am J Med.
2009 Jan;122(1):12–7. [PMID: 19114163]
 
Kim NJ et al. Tuberculous peritonitis in cirrhotic patients:
comparison of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis caused by
Escherichia coli with tuberculous peritonitis. Scand J Infect Dis.
2009;41(11–12):852–6. [PMID: 19922068]
 
MALIGNANT ASCITES
Two-thirds of cases of malignant ascites are caused by perito-neal
carcinomatosis. The most common tumors causing carcinomatosis
are primary adenocarcinomas of the ovary, uterus, pancreas,
stomach, colon, lung, or breast. The remaining one-third is due to
lymphatic obstruction or portal hypertension due to hepatocellular
carcinoma or diffuse hepatic metastases. Patients present with
nonspecific abdominal discomfort and weight loss associated with
increased abdominal girth. Nausea or vomiting may be caused by
partial or complete intestinal obstruction. Abdominal CT may be
useful to demonstrate the primary malignancy or hepatic metastases
but seldom confirms the diagnosis of peritoneal carcinomatosis. In
patients with carcinomatosis, paracentesis demonstrates a low
serum ascites-albumin gradient (< 1.1 mg/dL), an increased total
protein (> 2.5 g/dL), and an elevated white cell count (often both
neutrophils and mononuclear cells) but with a lymphocyte
predominance. Cytology is positive in over 95%, but laparoscopy
may be required in patients with negative cytology to confirm the
diagnosis and to exclude tuberculous peritonitis, with which it may
be confused. Malignant ascites attributable to portal hypertension
usually is associated with an increased serum ascites-albumin
gradient (> 1.1 g/dL), a variable total protein, and negative ascitic
cytology. Ascites caused by peritoneal carcinomatosis does not
respond to diuretics.
Patients may be treated with periodic large-volume paracentesis
for symptomatic relief. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy is sometimes
used to shrink the tumor, but the overall prognosis is extremely
poor, with only 10% survival at 6 months. Ovarian cancers
represent an exception to this rule. With newer treatments consisting
of surgical debulking and intraperitoneal chemotherapy, long-term
survival from ovarian cancer is possible.
FAMILIAL MEDITERRANEAN FEVER
This is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of unknown
pathogenesis that almost exclusively affects people of
Mediterranean ancestry, especially Sephardic Jews, Armenians,
Turks, and Arabs. Patients lack a protease in serosal fluids that
normally inactivates interleukin-8 and the chemotactic complement
factor 5A. Symptoms present in most patients before the age of 20
years. It is characterized by episodic bouts of acute peritonitis that
may be associated with serositis involving the joints and pleura.
Peritoneal attacks are marked by the sudden onset of fever, severe
abdominal pain, and abdominal tenderness with guarding or
rebound tenderness. If left untreated, attacks resolve within 24–48
hours. Because symptoms resemble those of surgical peritonitis,
patients may undergo unnecessary exploratory laparotomy.
Colchicine, 0.6 mg orally two or three times daily, has been shown
to decrease the frequency and severity of attacks. Secondary
amyloidosis (AA protein) with renal or hepatic involvement may
occur in 25% of cases and is the main cause of death. Colchicine
prevents or arrests further progression of amyloidosis development.
In the absence of amyloidosis, the prognosis is excellent. The
diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever still is based on clinical
criteria. Although the gene responsible for familial Mediterranean
fever (MEFV) has been identified, commercial genetic tests fail to
identify one of the known gene mutations in up to one-third of
patients. Genetic testing is most useful to confirm the diagnosis in
patients with atypical symptoms.
Manna R et al. Clinical features of familial Mediterranean fever: an
Italian overview. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2009 Mar;
13(Suppl 1):51–3. [PMID: 19530512]
 
MESOTHELIOMA
Primary abdominal malignant mesothelioma is a rare tumor. Over
70% of cases have a history of asbestos exposure. Presenting
symptoms and signs include abdominal pain or bowel obstruction,
increased abdominal girth, and small to moderate ascites. The chest
radiograph reveals pulmonary asbestosis in over 50%. The ascitic
fluid is hemorrhagic, with a low serum-ascites albumin gradient.
Cytology is often negative. Abdominal CT or PET-CT may reveal
sheet-like masses involving the mesentery and omentum. Diagnosis
is made at laparotomy or laparoscopy. The prognosis is extremely
poor, but long-term survivors have been described with a
combination of surgical debulking of tumor followed by heated
intraoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy and early postoperative
intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Postoperative radiotherapy or
combination chemotherapy may be helpful. Multicystic and well-
differentiated papillary mesotheliomas are associated with a long
survival with surgical treatment alone. (See Chapter 39 for
Mesothelioma.)
De Pangher M et al. Malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: a
multicenter study on 81 cases. Ann Oncol. 2010 Feb;21(2): 348–
53. [PMID: 19635740]
 
MISCELLANEOUS PERITONEAL DISEASES
Chylous ascites is the accumulation of lipid-rich lymph in the
peritoneal cavity. The ascitic fluid is characterized by a milky
appearance with a triglyceride level > 1000 mg/dL. The usual cause
in adults is lymphatic obstruction or leakage caused by malignancy,
especially lymphoma. Nonmalignant causes include postoperative
trauma, cirrhosis, tuberculosis, pancreatitis, and filariasis.
Pancreatic ascites is the intraperitoneal accumulation of
massive amounts of pancreatic secretions due either to disruption of
the pancreatic duct or to a pancreatic pseudocyst. It is most
commonly seen in patients with chronic pancreatitis and complicates
up to 3% of cases of acute pancreatitis. Because the pancreatic
enzymes are not activated, pain often is absent. The ascitic fluid is
characterized by a high protein level (> 2.5 g/dL) but a low SAAG.
Ascitic fluid amylase levels are in excess of 1000 units/L. In
nonsurgical cases, initial treatment consists of bowel rest, total
parenteral nutrition (TPN), and octreotide to decrease pancreatic
secretion. Persistent leakage requires treatment with either
endoscopic placement of stents into the pancreatic duct or surgical
drainage.
Bile ascites is caused most commonly by complications of
biliary tract surgery, percutaneous liver biopsy, or abdominal
trauma. Unless the bile is infected, bile ascites usually does not
cause abdominal pain, fever, or leukocytosis. Paracentesis reveals
yellow fluid with a ratio of ascites bilirubin to serum bilirubin > 1.0.
Treatment depends on the location and rate of bile leakage.
Postcholecystectomy cystic duct leaks may be treated with
endoscopic sphincterotomy or biliary stent placement to facilitate
bile flow across the sphincter of Oddi. Other leaks may be treated
with percutaneous drainage by interventional radiologists or with
surgical closure.
Voermans RP et al. Endoscopic treatment of pancreatic fluid
collections in 2008 and beyond. Gastrointest Endosc. 2009
Feb;69(2 Suppl):S186–91. [PMID: 19179154]
 
DISEASES OF THE
ESOPHAGUS
 
 Symptoms
Heartburn, dysphagia, and odynophagia almost always indicate a
primary esophageal disorder.
A. Heartburn
Heartburn (pyrosis) is the feeling of substernal burning, often
radiating to the neck. Caused by the reflux of acidic (or, rarely,
alkaline) material into the esophagus, it is highly specific for GERD.
B. Dysphagia
Difficulties in swallowing may arise from problems in transferring the
food bolus from the oropharynx to the upper esophagus
(oropharyngeal dysphagia) or from impaired transport of the bolus
through the body of the esophagus (esophageal dysphagia). The
history usually leads to the correct diagnosis.
 
Table 15–8. Causes of oropharyngea
 
Neurologic disorders
     Brainstem cerebrovascular accident, mass lesion
     Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis,
pseudobulbar palsy, post-polio syndrome, Guillain-Barré
syndrome
     Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, dementia
     Tardive dyskinesia
Muscular and rheumatologic disorders
     Myopathies, polymyositis
     Oculopharyngeal dystrophy
p
y g
y
p y
     Sjögren syndrome
Metabolic disorders
     Thyrotoxicosis, amyloidosis, Cushing disease, Wilson
disease
     Medication side effects: anticholinergics,
phenothiazines
Infectious disease
     Polio, diphtheria, botulism, Lyme disease, syphilis,
mucositis (Candida, herpes)
Structural disorders
     Zenker diverticulum
     Cervical osteophytes, cricopharyngeal bar, proximal
esophageal webs
     Oropharyngeal tumors
     Postsurgical or radiation changes
     Pill-induced injury
Motility disorders
     Upper esophageal sphincter dysfunction
1. Oropharyngeal dysphagia—The oropharyngeal phase of
swallowing is a complex process requiring elevation of the tongue,
closure of the nasopharynx, relaxation of the upper esophageal
sphincter, closure of the airway, and pharyngeal peristalsis. A
variety of mechanical and neuromuscular conditions can disrupt this
process (Table 15–8). Problems with the oral phase of swallowing
cause drooling or spillage of food from the mouth, inability to chew
or initiate swallowing, or dry mouth. Pharyngeal dysphagia is
characterized by an immediate sense of the bolus catching in the
neck, the need to swallow repeatedly to clear food from the
pharynx, or coughing or choking during meals. There may be
associated dysphonia, dysarthria, or other neurologic symptoms.
2. Esophageal dysphagia—Esophageal dysphagia may be caused
by mechanical lesions obstructing the esophagus or by motility
disorders (Table 15–9). Patients with mechanical obstruction
experience dysphagia, primarily for solids. This is recurrent,
predictable, and, if the lesion progresses, will worsen as the lumen
narrows. Patients with motility disorders have dysphagia for both
solids and liquids. It is episodic, unpredictable, and can be
progressive.
C. Odynophagia
Odynophagia is sharp substernal pain on swallowing that may limit
oral intake. It usually reflects severe erosive disease. It is most
commonly associated with infectious esophagitis due to Candida,
herpesviruses, or CMV, especially in immunocompromised
patients. It may also be caused by corrosive injury due to caustic
ingestions and by pill-induced ulcers.
 
Table 15–9. Causes of esophagea
 
 
 
Cause
Clues
Mechanical
obstruction
Solid foods worse than liquids
Schatzki ring Intermittent dysphagia; not progressive
Peptic
stricture
Chronic heartburn; progressive dysphagia
Esophageal
cancer
Progressive dysphagia; age over 50 years
Eosinophilic
esophagitis
Young adults; small-caliber lumen, proximal
stricture, corrugated rings, or white papules
Motility
disorder
Solid and liquid foods
Achalasia
Progressive dysphagia
Diffuse
esophageal
spasm
Intermittent; not progressive; may have
chest pain
Scleroderma Chronic heartburn; Raynaud phenomenon
 Diagnostic Studies
A. Upper Endoscopy
Endoscopy is the study of choice for evaluating persistent heartburn,
dysphagia, odynophagia, and structural abnormalities detected on
barium esophagography. In addition to direct visualization, it allows
biopsy of mucosal abnormalities and of normal mucosa (to evaluate
for eosinophilic esophagitis) as well as dilation of strictures.
B. Videoesophagography
Oropharyngeal dysphagia is best evaluated with rapid-sequence
videoesophagography.
C. Barium Esophagography
Patients with esophageal dysphagia often are evaluated first with a
radiographic barium study to differentiate between mechanical
lesions and motility disorders, providing important information about
the latter in particular. In patients with esophageal dysphagia and a
suspected motility disorder, barium esophagoscopy should be
obtained first. In patients in whom there is a high suspicion of a
mechanical lesion, many clinicians will proceed first to endoscopic
evaluation because it better identifies mucosa lesions (eg, erosions)
and permits mucosal biopsy and dilation. However, barium study is
more sensitive for detecting subtle esophageal narrowing due to
rings, achalasia, and proximal esophageal lesions.
D. Esophageal Manometry
Esophageal motility may be assessed using manometric techniques.
They are indicated: (1) to determine the location of the LES to
allow precise placement of a conventional electrode pH probe; (2)
to establish the etiology of dysphagia in patients in whom a
mechanical obstruction cannot be found, especially if a diagnosis of
achalasia is suspected by endoscopy or barium study; (3) for the
pre-operative assessment of patients being considered for anti-
reflux surgery to exclude an alternative diagnosis (eg, achalasia) or
possibly to assess peristaltic function in the esophageal body. High-
resolution manometry may be superior to conventional manometry
for distinguishing motility disorders.
E. Esophageal pH Recording and Impedance Testing
The pH within the esophageal lumen may be monitored continuously
for 24–48 hours. There are two kinds of systems in use: catheter-
based and wireless. Traditional systems use a long transnasal
catheter that is connected directly to the recording device. Wireless
systems are increasingly used; in these systems, a capsule is
attached directly to the esophageal mucosa under endoscopic
visualization and data are transmitted by radiotelemetry to the
recording device. The recording provides information about the
amount of esophageal acid reflux and the temporal correlations
between symptoms and reflux.
Esophageal pH monitoring devices provide information about the
amount of esophageal acid reflux but not nonacid reflux. Techniques
using combined pH and multi-channel intraluminal impedance allow
assessment of acid and nonacid liquid reflux. They may be useful in
evaluation of patients with atypical reflux symptoms or persistent
symptoms despite therapy with proton pump inhibitors to diagnose
hypersensitivity, functional symptoms, and symptoms caused by
nonacid reflux.
Lacy BE et al. The clinical utility of esophageal manometry. J Clin
Gastroenterol. 2009 Oct;43(9):809–15. [PMID: 19295447]
 
Levine MS et al. Barium esophagography: a study for all seasons.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Jan;6(1):11–25. [PMID:
18083069]
 
Pandolfino JE et al. Esophageal-reflux monitoring. Gastrointest
Endosc. 2009 Apr;69(4):917–30. [PMID: 19249037]
 
Vela MF. Non-acid reflux: detection by multichannel intraluminal
impedance and pH, clinical significance and management. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2009 Feb;104(2):277–80. [PMID: 19190606]
 
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Heartburn; may be exacerbated by meals, bending, or
recumbency.
 Typical uncomplicated cases do not require diag-nostic studies.
 Endoscopy demonstrates abnormalities in one-third of patients.
 
 General Considerations
GERD is a condition that develops when the reflux of stomach
contents causes troublesome symptoms or complications. GERD
affects 20% of adults, who report at least weekly episodes of
heartburn, and up to 10% complain of daily symptoms. Although
most patients have mild disease, esophageal mucosal damage
(reflux esophagitis) develops in up to one-third and more serious
complications develop in a few others. Several factors may
contribute to GERD.
A. Impaired Lower Esophageal Sphincter Function
The antireflux barrier at the gastroesophageal junction depends on
LES pressure, the intra-abdominal location of the sphincter, and the
extrinsic compression of the sphincter by the crural diaphragm. In
most patients with GERD, baseline LES pressures are normal (10–
30 mm Hg). Most reflux episodes occur during transient relaxations
of the LES that are triggered by gastric distention by a vagovagal
reflex. A subset of patients with GERD have an incompetent (< 10
mm Hg) LES that results in increased acid reflux, especially when
supine or when intra-abdominal pressures are increased by lifting or
bending. A hypotensive sphincter is present in up to 50% of patients
with severe erosive GERD.
B. Hiatal Hernia
Hiatal hernias are common and usually cause no symptoms. In
patients with gastroesophageal reflux, however, they are associated
with higher amounts of acid reflux and delayed esophageal acid
clearance leading to more severe esophagitis, especially Barrett
esophagus. Increased reflux episodes occur during normal
swallowing-induced relaxation, transient LES relaxations, and
straining due to reflux of acid from the hiatal hernia sac into the
esophagus. Hiatal hernias are found in one-fourth of patients with
nonerosive GERD, three-fourths of patients with severe erosive
esophagitis, and over 90% of patients with Barrett esophagus.
C. Irritant Effects of Refluxate
Esophageal mucosal damage is related to the potency of the
refluxate and the amount of time it is in contact with the mucosa.
Acidic gastric fluid (pH < 4.0) is extremely caustic to the
esophageal mucosa and is the major injurious agent in the majority
of cases. In some patients, reflux of bile or alkaline pancreatic
secretions may be contributory.
D. Abnormal Esophageal Clearance
Acid refluxate normally is cleared and neutralized by esophageal
peristalsis and salivary bicarbonate. During sleep, swallowing-
induced peristalsis is infrequent, prolonging acid exposure to the
esophagus. One-half of patients with severe GERD also have
diminished peristaltic clearance. Certain medical conditions such as
scleroderma are associated with diminished peristalsis. Sjögren
syndrome, anticholinergic medications, and oral radiation therapy
may exacerbate GERD due to impaired salivation.
E. Delayed Gastric Emptying
Impaired gastric emptying due to gastroparesis or partial gastric
outlet obstruction potentiates GERD.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The typical symptom is heartburn. This most often occurs 30–60
minutes after meals and upon reclining. Patients often report relief
from taking antacids or baking soda. When this symptom is
dominant, the diagnosis is established with a high degree of
reliability. Many patients, however, have less specific dyspeptic
symptoms with or without heartburn. Overall, a clinical diagnosis of
gastroesophageal reflux has a sensitivity of 80% but a specificity of
only 70%. Severity is not correlated with the degree of tissue
damage. In fact, some patients with severe esophagitis are only
mildly symptomatic. Patients may complain of regurgitation—the
spontaneous reflux of sour or bitter gastric contents into the mouth.
Dysphagia occurs in one-third of patients and may be due to
erosive esophagitis, abnormal esophageal peristalsis, or the
development of an esophageal stricture.
“Atypical” 
or 
“extraesophageal” 
manifestations 
of
gastroesophageal disease may occur, including asthma, chronic
cough, chronic laryngitis, sore throat, and noncardiac chest pain.
Gastroesophageal reflux may be either a causative or an
exacerbating factor in up to 50% of these patients, especially those
with refractory symptoms. In the absence of heartburn or
regurgitation, atypical symptoms are unlikely to be related to
gastroesophageal reflux.
Physical examination and laboratory data are normal in
uncomplicated disease.
B. Special Examinations
Initial diagnostic studies are not warranted for patients with typical
GERD symptoms suggesting uncomplicated reflux disease. Patients
with typical symptoms of heartburn and regurgitation should be
treated empirically with a once- or twice-daily proton pump
inhibitor for 4–8 weeks. Further investigation is required in patients
with “alarm features” (troublesome dysphagia, odynophagia, weight
loss, iron deficiency anemia) and in patients with troublesome
symptoms that persist despite empiric proton pump inhibitor therapy
in order to identify complications of reflux disease and to diagnose
other conditions with similar symptoms.
1. Upper endoscopy—Upper endoscopy with biopsy is excellent
for documenting the type and extent of tissue damage in
gastroesophageal reflux; for detecting other gastroesophageal
lesions that may mimic GERD; and for detecting GERD
complications, including esophageal stricture, Barrett metaplasia,
and esophageal adenocarcinoma. In the absence of prior
antisecretory therapy, up to one-third of patients with GERD have
visible mucosal damage (known as reflux esophagitis), characterized
by single or multiple erosions or ulcers in the distal esophagus at the
squamocolumnar junction. In patients treated with a proton pump
inhibitor prior to endoscopy, preexisting reflux esophagitis may be
partially or completely healed. The Los Angeles classification
grades reflux esophagitis on a scale of A (one or more isolated
mucosal breaks ≤ 5 mm that do not extend between the tops of two
mucosal folds) to D (one or more mucosal breaks that involve at
least 75% of the esophageal circumference).
2. Barium esophagography—This study plays a limited role. In
patients with severe dysphagia, it is sometimes obtained prior to
endoscopy to identify a stricture.
3. Esophageal pH or combined esophageal pH-impedance
testing—Esophageal pH monitoring is unnecessary in most patients
but may be indicated to document abnormal esophageal acid
exposure in patients who have atypical or extraesophageal
symptoms or who are being considered for antireflux surgery.
Combined impedance-pH monitoring is indicated in patients with
persistent symptoms despite proton pump inhibitor therapy to
determine whether symptoms are caused by acid or nonacid reflux
(40%) or are unrelated to reflux and indicative of a functional
disorder.
 Differential Diagnosis
Symptoms of GERD may be similar to those of other diseases such
as esophageal motility disorders, peptic ulcer, angina pectoris, or
functional disorders. Reflux erosive esophagitis may be confused
with pill-induced damage, eosinophilic esophagitis, or infections
(CMV, herpes, Candida).
 Complications
A. Barrett Esophagus
This is a condition in which the squamous epithelium of the
esophagus is replaced by metaplastic columnar epithelium
containing goblet and columnar cells (specialized intestinal
metaplasia). Present in up to 10% of patients with chronic reflux, it
arises from chronic reflux-induced injury to the esophageal
squamous epithelium. Barrett esophagus is suspected at endoscopy
from the presence of orange, gastric type epithelium that extends
upward from the stomach into the distal tubular esophagus in a
tongue-like or circumferential fashion. Biopsies obtained at endos-
copy confirm the diagnosis. Three types of columnar epithelium may
be identified: gastric cardiac, gastric fundic, and specialized intestinal
metaplasia. Only the latter is believed to carry an increased risk of
neoplasia.
Barrett esophagus does not provoke specific symptoms but
gastroesophageal reflux does. Most patients have a long history of
reflux symptoms, such as heartburn and regurgitation. Barrett
esophagus should be treated with long-term proton pump inhibitors
once or twice daily to control reflux symptoms. Although these
medications do not appear to cause regression of Barrett
esophagus, they may reduce the risk of cancer. Paradoxically, one-
third of patients report minimal or no symptoms of GERD,
suggesting decreased acid sensitivity of Barrett epithelium. Indeed,
over 90% of individuals with Barrett esophagus in the general
population do not seek medical attention.
The most serious complication of Barrett esophagus is
esophageal 
adenocarcinoma. 
It 
is 
believed 
that 
most
adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and many such tumors of the
gastric cardia arise from dysplastic epithelium in Barrett esophagus.
The incidence of adenocarcinoma in patients with Barrett esophagus
is 0.5%/year. Although this is a 40-fold increased risk compared
with patients without Barrett esophagus, adenocarcinoma of the
esophagus remains a relatively uncommon malignancy in the United
States (7000 cases/year). Some clinical guidelines recommend
endoscopic screening for Barrett esophagus and dysplasia in adults
50 years or older with more than 5–10 years of heartburn.
However, given the large number of adults with chronic GERD
relative to the small number in whom adenocarcinoma develops, it is
unclear whether screening for Barrett esophagus is cost-effective.
In patients known to have Barrett esophagus, surveillance
endoscopy every 3 years is recommended to look for low- or high-
grade dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. Patients with low-grade
dysplasia have 1.5% risk/year of esophageal cancer. Patients with
low-grade dysplasia require repeat endoscopic surveillance in 6
months to exclude coexisting high-grade dysplasia or cancer and, if
low-grade dysplasia persists, endoscopic surveillance should be
repeated yearly.
Approximately 13% of patient with high-grade dysplasia may
harbor an unrecognized invasive esophageal cancer. Therefore,
patients with high-grade dysplasia should undergo repeat staging
endoscopy with mucosal biopsy, resection of visible mucosal
nodules, and ultrasonography in order to exclude invasive cancer
(for which esophagectomy is recommended). The subsequent
management of patients with intramucosal cancer or high-grade
dysplasia is evolving rapidly. Until recently, esophagectomy was
recommended for patients deemed to have a low operative risk;
however, this procedure is associated with high morbidity and
mortality rates (40% and 1–5%, respectively). For intramucosal
cancer, the risk of esophagectomy may exceed the risk of
developing metastatic disease (≤ 3%).
Endoscopic therapies are now available to remove or ablate
Barrett columnar epithelium in patients with dysplasia, including
radiofrequency wave electrocautery (HALO), laser photodynamic
therapy, and mucosal snare resection. When high-dose proton
pump inhibitors are administered to normalize intraesophageal pH,
eradication of Barrett columnar epithelium is followed by complete
healing with normal squamous epithelium in > 75% of patients. The
efficacy of endoscopic ablation therapies in patients with Barrett
dysplasia is supported by several uncontrolled and two controlled
studies. In a 2009 randomized, sham-controlled trial in 127 patients
with Barrett dysplasia, eradication of high-grade dysplasia at 1 year
occurred in 81% after radiofrequency ablation (HALO) compared
with 19% in controls, and progression to cancer was significantly
reduced (2.4% vs 19%). Although more long-term data are
needed, endoscopic eradication therapy—with removal of visible
neoplastic mucosal nodules followed by ablation or removal of
Barrett epithelium—may be preferred over esophagectomy for
most patients with high-grade dysplasia or intramucosal cancers.
Alternatively, patients with high-grade dysplasia without visible
lesions may undergo close endoscopic surveillance with biopsy
every 3–6 months; surgery or endoscopic therapies are reserved for
patients in whom adenocarcinoma develops (approximately 7% of
patients per year during follow-up).
Endoscopic ablation techniques have a risk of complications
(bleeding, 
perforation, 
strictures). 
Therefore, 
endoscopic
eradication therapy currently is not recommended for patients with
nondysplastic Barrett esophagus for whom the risk of developing
esophageal cancer is low and treatment does not appear to be cost-
effective.
B. Peptic Stricture
Stricture formation occurs in about 5% of patients with esophagitis.
It is manifested by the gradual development of solid food dysphagia
progressive over months to years. Often there is a reduction in
heartburn because the stricture acts as a barrier to reflux. Most
strictures are located at the gastroesophageal junction. Endoscopy
with biopsy is mandatory in all cases to differentiate peptic stricture
from stricture by esophageal carcinoma. Active erosive esophagitis
is often present. Up to 90% of symptomatic patients are effectively
treated with dilation with graduated polyvinyl catheters passed over
a wire placed at the time of endos-copy or fluoroscopically, or
balloons passed fluoroscopically or through an endoscope. Dilation
is continued over one to several sessions. A luminal diameter of 13–
17 mm is usually sufficient to relieve dysphagia. Long-term therapy
with a proton pump inhibitor is required to decrease the likelihood
of stricture recurrence. Some patients require intermittent dilation to
maintain luminal patency, but operative management for strictures
that do not respond to dilation is seldom required. Refractory
strictures may benefit from endoscopic injection of triamcinolone
into the stricture.
 Treatment
A. Medical Treatment
The goal of treatment is to provide symptomatic relief, to heal
esophagitis (if present), and to prevent complications. In the
majority of patients with uncomplicated disease, empiric treatment is
initiated based on a compatible history without the need for further
confirmatory studies. Patients not responding and those with
suspected complications undergo further evaluation with upper
endoscopy or esophageal manometry and pH recording (see
above).
1. Mild, intermittent symptoms—Patients with mild or
intermittent symptoms that do not impact adversely on quality of life
may benefit from lifestyle modifications with medical interventions
taken as needed. Patients may find that eating smaller meals and
elimination of acidic foods (citrus, tomatoes, coffee, spicy foods)
and foods that precipitate reflux (fatty foods, chocolate,
peppermint, alcohol, cigarettes) may reduce symptoms. Weight loss
should be recommended for overweight patients. Patients with
nocturnal symptoms should be advised to avoid lying down within 3
hours after meals, the period of greatest reflux, and to elevate the
head of the bed on 6-inch blocks or a foam wedge to reduce reflux
and enhance esophageal clearance.
Antacids are the mainstay for rapid relief of occasional heartburn;
however, their duration of action is < 2 hours. Many are available
over the counter. Those containing magnesium should not be used in
renal failure, and patients with this condition should be cautioned
appropriately.
All oral H2-receptor antagonists are available in over-the-counter
formulations: cimetidine 200 mg, ranitidine and nizatidine 75 mg,
famotidine 10 mg—all of which are half of the typical prescription
strength. When taken for active heart-burn, these agents have a
delay in onset of at least 30 minutes; antacids provide more
immediate relief. However, once these agents take effect, they
provide heartburn relief for up to 8 hours. When taken before meals
known to provoke heart-burn, these agents reduce the symptom. A
combination agent containing famotidine 10 mg and antacid (calcium
carbonate and magnesium hydroxide) is available.
2. Troublesome symptoms
A. INITIAL THERAPY—Patients with troublesome reflux symptoms
and patients with known complications of GERD should be treated
with a once-daily oral proton pump inhibitor (omeprazole or
rabeprazole, 20 mg; omeprazole, 40 mg with sodium bicarbonate;
lansoprazole, 30 mg; dexlansoprazole, 60 mg; esomeprazole or
pantoprazole, 40 mg) taken 30 minutes before breakfast for 4–8
weeks. Because there appears to be little difference between these
agents in efficacy or side effect profiles, the choice of agent is
determined by cost. Omeprazole, 20 mg, is available both as an
over-the-counter formulation and as a generic formulation available
by prescription. Once-daily proton pump inhibitors achieve
adequate control of heartburn in 80–90% of patients, complete
heart-burn resolution in over 50%, and healing of erosive
esophagitis (when present) in over 80%. Because of their superior
efficacy and ease of use, proton pump inhibitors are preferred to
H2-receptor antagonists for the treatment of acute and chronic
GERD. Approximately 10–20% of patients do not achieve
symptom relief with a once-daily dose within 2–4 weeks and
require a twice-daily proton pump inhibitor (taken 30 minutes
before breakfast and dinner). Patients with inadequate symptom
relief with empiric twice-daily proton pump inhibitor therapy should
undergo evaluation with upper endoscopy. Many providers prefer
to prescribe initial twice-daily proton pump inhibitor therapy for
patients who have documented severe erosive esophagitis (LA
Grade C or D), Barrett esophagus, or peptic stricture.
B. LONG-TERM 
THERAPY—In those who achieve good
symptomatic relief with a course of empiric once-daily proton pump
inhibitor, therapy may be discontinued after 8–12 weeks. Most
patients (over 80%) will experience relapse of GERD symptoms,
usually within 3 months. Patients whose symptoms relapse may be
treated with either continuous proton pump inhibitor therapy,
intermittent 2–4 week courses, or “on demand” therapy (ie, drug
taken until symptoms abate) depending on symptom frequency and
patient preference. Patients who required twice-daily proton pump
inhibitor therapy for initial symptom control and patients with
complications of GERD, including severe erosive esophagitis,
Barrett esophagus, or peptic stricture, should be maintained on
long-term therapy with a once- or twice-daily proton pump inhibitor
titrated to the lowest effective dose to achieve satisfactory symptom
control.
Side effects of proton pump inhibitors are uncommon. Headache,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain may occur with any of the agents but
generally resolve when another formulation is tried. Potential risks of
long-term use of proton pump inhibitors include an increased risk of
infectious gastroenteritis (including C difficile), iron and vitamin B12
deficiency, pneumonia, hip fractures (possibly due to impaired
calcium absorption), and fundic gland polyps (which appear to be
of no clinical significance).
3. Extraesophageal reflux manifestations—Establishing a
causal relationship between gastroesophageal reflux and
extraesophageal symptoms (eg, asthma, hoarseness, cough) is
difficult. Gastroesophageal reflux seldom is the sole cause of
extraesophageal disorders but may be a contributory factor.
Although ambulatory esophageal pH testing can document the
presence of increased acid esophageal reflux, it does not prove a
causative connection. A 2009 randomized controlled study in
patients with poorly controlled asthma without GERD symptoms
found no improvement in patients treated with a high-dose proton
pump inhibitor (esomeprazole, 40 mg twice daily) versus placebo.
Current guidelines recommend that a trial of a twice-daily proton
pump inhibitor be administered for 3 months in patients with
suspected extraesophageal GERD syndromes who also have typical
GERD symptoms. Improvement of extraesophageal symptoms
suggests but does not prove that acid reflux is the causative factor.
Esophageal pH testing may be performed in patients whose
symptoms persist after 3 months of twice-daily proton pump
inhibitor therapy. The pH study is performed on therapy if the
suspicion for GERD is high (to determine whether therapy has
adequately suppressed acid esophageal reflux) and off therapy if the
suspicion for GERD is low (to determine whether the patient has
reflux disease). Combined esophageal pH monitoring with
impedance monitoring is preferred over pH testing alone because of
its ability to detect both acid and nonacid reflux events.
4. Unresponsive disease—Approximately 5% do not respond to
twice-daily proton pump inhibitors or a change to a different proton
pump inhibitor. These patients should undergo endoscopy for
detection of severe, inadequately treated reflux esophagitis and for
other gastroesophageal lesions (including eosinophilic esophagitis)
that may mimic GERD. The presence of active erosive esophagitis
usually is indicative of inadequate acid suppression and can almost
always be treated successfully with higher proton pump inhibitor
doses (eg, omeprazole 40 mg twice daily). Truly refractory
esophagitis may be caused by gastrinoma with gastric acid
hypersecretion 
(Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome), 
pill-induced
esophagitis, resistance to proton pump inhibitors, and medical
noncompliance. Patients without endoscopically visible esophagitis
should undergo ambulatory impedance-pH monitoring while taking
a twice-daily proton pump inhibitor to determine whether the
symptoms are correlated with acid or nonacid reflux episodes.
Approximately 60% of patients with unresponsive symptoms do not
have increased reflux and may be presumed to have a functional
disorder. Treatment with a low-dose tricyclic antidepressant (eg,
imipramine or nortriptyline 25 mg at bedtime) may be beneficial.
B. Surgical Treatment
Surgical fundoplication affords good to excellent relief of symptoms
and healing of esophagitis in over 85% of properly selected patients
and can be performed laparoscopically with low complication rates
in most instances. Cost-effectiveness studies suggest that aggregate
medical costs exceed surgical costs after 10 years. Although patient
satisfaction is high, over 50% of patients require intermittent or
continuous acid-suppression medication after fundoplication.
Furthermore, new symptoms of dysphagia, bloating, increased
flatulence, dyspepsia, or diarrhea develop in over 30% of patients.
Within 5–10 years after surgery, typical reflux symptoms occur in
10–30% of patients. Surgical treatment is not recommended for
patients who are well controlled with medical therapies but should
be considered for: (1) otherwise healthy, carefully selected patients
with extraesophageal manifestations of reflux, as these symptoms
often require high doses of proton pump inhibitors and may be more
effectively controlled with antireflux surgery; (2) those with severe
reflux disease who are unwilling to accept lifelong medical therapy
due to its expense, inconvenience, or theoretical risks; and (3)
patients with large hiatal hernias and persistent regurgitation despite
proton pump inhibitor therapy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with typical GERD whose symptoms do not
resolve with empiric management with a twice-daily proton
pump inhibitor.
•    Patients with suspected extraesophageal GERD
symptoms that do not resolve with 3 months of twice-daily
proton pump inhibitor therapy.
•    Patients with significant dysphagia or other alarm
symptoms for upper endoscopy.
•    Patients with Barrett esophagus for endoscopic
surveillance.
•    Patients who have Barrett esophagus with dysplasia or
early mucosal cancer.
•    Surgical fundoplication is considered.
Badreddine RJ et al. Barrett esophagus: an update. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jul;7(7):369–78. [PMID:
20517288]
 
Corley DA et al. Proton pump inhibitors and histamine-2 receptor
antagonists are associated with hip fractures among at-risk
patients. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):93–101. [PMID:
20353792]
 
Crockett SD et al. A 52-year-old man with heartburn: should he
undergo screening for Barrett's esophagus? Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2010 Jul;8(7):565–71. [PMID: 19948248]
 
Dellon ES et al. Persistent reflux symptoms in the proton pump
inhibitor era: the changing face of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):7–13.e3. [PMID: 20493864]
 
Johnstone J et al. Meta-analysis: proton pump inhibitor use and the
risk of community-acquired pneumonia. Aliment Pharmacol Ther.
2010 Jun;31(11):1165–77. [PMID: 20222914]
 
Kahrilas PJ et al. American Gastroenterological Association
Medical Position Statement on the management of
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Gastroenterology. 2008
Oct;135(4): 1383–91. [PMID: 18789939]
 
Lundell L et al. Comparison of outcomes twelve years after
antireflux surgery or omeprazole maintenance therapy for reflux
esophagitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Jul; 7(12): 1292–8.
[PMID: 19490952]
 
Namasivayam V et al. Endoscopic mucosal resection in the
management of esophageal neoplasia: current status and future
directions. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Sep;8(9):743–54.
[PMID: 20541628]
 
Prassad G et al. Endoscopic and surgical treatment of mucosal
(T1a) esophageal adenocarcinoma in Barrett's esophagus.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Sep;137(3):815–23. [PMID: 19524578]
 
Pritchett JM et al. Efficacy of esophageal impedance/pH
monitoring in patients with refractory gastroesophageal reflux
disease, on and off therapy. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009
Jul;7(7):743–8. [PMID: 19281866]
 
Savarino E et al. Characteristics of reflux episodes and symptom
association in patients with erosive esophagitis and nonerosive
reflux disease: study using combined impedance-pH off therapy.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 May;105(5):1053–61. [PMID:
19997095]
 
Shaheen NJ et al. Radiofrequency ablation of Barrett's esophagus
with dysplasia. N Engl J Med. 2009 May;360(22):2277–88.
[PMID: 19474425]
 
Sharma P. Barrett's esophagus. N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec
24;361(26):2548–56. [PMID: 20032324]
 
Siersema PD et al. Dilation of refractory benign esophageal
strictures. Gastrointest Endosc. 2009 Nov;70(5):1000–12.
[PMID: 19879408]
 
Sikkema M et al. Risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma and
mortality in patients with Barrett's esophagus: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Mar;8(3):235–44. [PMID: 19850156]
 
Wani S et al. Endoscopic eradication of Barrett's esophagus.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Jan;71(1):147–66. [PMID: 19879565]
 
INFECTIOUS ESOPHAGITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Immunosuppressed patient.
 Odynophagia, dysphagia, and chest pain.
 Endoscopy with biopsy establishes diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Infectious esophagitis occurs most commonly in immuno-
suppressed patients. Patients with AIDS, solid organ transplants,
leukemia, lymphoma, and those receiving immunosuppressive drugs
are at particular risk for opportunistic infections. Candida albicans,
herpes simplex, and CMV are the most common pathogens.
Candida infection may occur also in patients who have uncontrolled
diabetes and those being treated with systemic corticosteroids,
radiation therapy, or systemic antibiotic therapy. Herpes simplex
can affect normal hosts, in which case the infection is generally self-
limited.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The most common symptoms are odynophagia and dysphagia.
Substernal chest pain occurs in some patients. Patients with
candidal esophagitis are sometimes asymptomatic. Oral thrush is
present in only 75% of patients with candidal esophagitis and 25–
50% of patients with viral esophagitis and is therefore an unreliable
indicator of the cause of esophageal infection. Patients with
esophageal CMV infection may have infection at other sites such as
the colon and retina. Oral ulcers (herpes labialis) are often
associated with herpes simplex esophagitis.
B. Special Examinations
Treatment may be empiric. For diagnostic certainty, endos-copy
with biopsy and brushings (for microbiologic and histopathologic
analysis) is preferred because of its high diagnostic accuracy. The
endoscopic signs of candidal esophagitis are diffuse, linear, yellow-
white plaques adherent to the mucosa. CMV esophagitis is
characterized by one to several large, shallow, superficial
ulcerations. Herpes esophagitis results in multiple small, deep
ulcerations.
 Treatment
A. Candidal Esophagitis
Systemic therapy is required for esophageal candidiasis. An empiric
trial of antifungal therapy is often administered without performing
diagnostic endoscopy. Initial therapy is generally with fluconazole,
100 mg/d orally for 14–21 days. Patients not responding to empiric
therapy within 7–14 days should undergo endoscopy with
brushings, biopsy, and culture to distinguish resistant fungal infection
from other infections (eg, CMV, herpes). Esophageal candidiasis
not responding to fluconazole therapy may be treated with
itraconazole suspension (not capsules), 200 mg/d orally, or
voriconazole, 200 mg orally twice daily. Refractory infection may
be treated intravenously with caspofungin, 50 mg daily or
amphotericin B, 0.3–0.7 mg/kg/d.
B. Cytomegalovirus Esophagitis
In patients with HIV infection, immune restoration with highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is the most effective means of
controlling CMV disease. Initial therapy is with ganciclovir, 5 mg/kg
intravenously every 12 hours for 3–6 weeks. Neutropenia is a
frequent dose-limiting side effect. Once resolution of symptoms
occurs, it may be possible to complete the course of therapy with
oral valganciclovir, 900 mg once daily. Patients who either do not
respond to or cannot tolerate ganciclovir are treated acutely with
foscarnet, 90 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for 3–6 weeks.
The principal toxicity is renal failure, hypocalcemia, and
hypomagnesemia.
C. Herpetic Esophagitis
Immunocompetent patients may be treated symptomatically and
generally 
do 
not 
require 
specific 
antiviral 
therapy.
Immunosuppressed patients may be treated with oral acyclovir, 400
mg orally five times daily, or 250 mg/m2 intravenously every 8–12
hours, usually for 7–10 days. Oral famciclovir or valacyclovir, 500
mg orally twice daily, also is effective but significantly more
expensive than generic acyclovir. Nonresponders require therapy
with foscarnet, 40 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours for 21 days.
 Prognosis
Most patients with infectious esophagitis can be effectively treated
with complete symptom resolution. Depending on the patient's
underlying immunodeficiency, relapse of symptoms off therapy can
raise difficulties. Long-term suppressive therapy is sometimes
required.
Lavery EA et al. Herpes simplex virus and the alimentary tract.
Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2008 Aug;10(4):417–23. [PMID:
18627656]
 
Weerasuriya N et al. Oesophageal candidiasis in elderly patients:
risk factors, prevention and management. Drugs Aging.
2008;25(2):119–30. [PMID: 18257599]
 
PILL-INDUCED ESOPHAGITIS
A number of different medications may injure the esophagus,
presumably through direct, prolonged mucosal contact. The most
commonly implicated are the NSAIDs, potassium chloride pills,
quinidine, zalcitabine, zidovudine, alendronate and risedronate,
emepronium bromide, iron, vitamin C, and antibiotics (doxycycline,
tetracycline, clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole). Because
injury is most likely to occur if pills are swallowed without water or
while supine, hospitalized or bed-bound patients are at greater risk.
Symptoms include severe retrosternal chest pain, odynophagia, and
dysphagia, often beginning several hours after taking a pill. These
may occur suddenly and persist for days. Some patients (especially
the elderly) have relatively little pain, presenting with dysphagia.
Endoscopy may reveal one to several discrete ulcers that may be
shallow or deep. Chronic injury may result in severe esophagitis
with stricture, hemorrhage, or perforation. Healing occurs rapidly
when the offending agent is eliminated. To prevent pill-induced
damage, patients should take pills with 4 oz of water and remain
upright for 30 minutes after ingestion. Known offending agents
should not be given to patients with esophageal dysmotility,
dysphagia, or strictures.
Pace F et al. What is new in esophageal injury (infection, drug-
induced, caustic, stricture, perforation)? Curr Opin Gastroenterol.
2009 Jul;25(4):372–9. [PMID: 19530274]
 
CAUSTIC ESOPHAGEAL INJURY
Caustic esophageal injury occurs from accidental (usually children)
or deliberate (suicidal) ingestion of liquid or crystalline alkali (drain
cleaners, etc) or acid. Ingestion is followed almost immediately by
severe burning and varying degrees of chest pain, gagging,
dysphagia, and drooling. Aspiration results in stridor and wheezing.
Initial examination should be directed to circulatory status as well as
assessment of airway patency and the oropharyngeal mucosa,
including laryngos-copy. Patients without major symptoms
(dyspnea, dysphagia, drooling, hematemesis) or oropharyngeal
lesions have a very low likelihood of having severe
gastroesophageal injury. Subsequently, chest and abdominal
radiographs are obtained looking for pneumonitis or free
perforation. Initial treatment is supportive, with intravenous fluids
and analgesics. Nasogastric lavage and oral antidotes may be
dangerous and should generally not be administered. Most patients
may be managed medically. Endoscopy is usually performed within
the first 12–24 hours to assess the extent of injury, especially in
patients with significant symptoms or oropharyngeal lesions. Many
patients are discovered to have no mucosal injury to the esophagus
or stomach, allowing prompt discharge and psychiatric referral.
Patients with evidence of mild damage (edema, erythema, exudates
or superficial ulcers) recover quickly, have low risk of developing
stricture, and may be advanced from liquids to a regular diet over
24–48 hours. Patients with signs of severe injury—deep or
circumferential ulcers or necrosis (black discoloration) have a high
risk (up to 65%) of acute complications, including perforation with
mediastinitis or peritonitis, bleeding, stricture, or esophagealtracheal
fistulas. These patients must be kept fasting and monitored closely
for signs of deterioration that warrant emergency surgery with
possible esophagectomy and colonic or jejunal interposition. A
nasoenteric feeding tube is placed after 24 hours. Oral feedings of
liquids may be initiated after 2–3 days if the patient is able to
tolerate secretions. Neither corticosteroids nor antibiotics are
recommended. Esophageal strictures develop in up to 70% of
patients with serious esophageal injury weeks to months after the
initial injury, requiring recurrent dilations. Endoscopic injection of
intralesional corticosteroids (triamcinolone 40 mg) increases the
interval between dilations. The risk of esophageal squamous
carcinoma is 2–3%, warranting endoscopic surveillance 15–20
years after the caustic ingestion.
Atiq M et al. Corrosive injury to the GI tract in adults: a practical
approach. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Dec;3(6):
701–9. [PMID: 19929589]
 
Betalli P et al. Caustic ingestion in children: is endoscopy always
indicated? The results of an Italian multicenter observational study.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2008 Sept;68(3):434–9. [PMID: 18448103]
 
BENIGN ESOPHAGEAL LESIONS
1. Mallory-Weiss syndrome (Mucosal Laceration of
Gastroesophageal Junction)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hematemesis; usually self-limited.
 Prior history of vomiting, retching in 50%.
 Endoscopy establishes diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Mallory-Weiss syndrome is characterized by a nonpenetrating
mucosal tear at the gastroesophageal junction that is hypothesized
to arise from events that suddenly raise transabdominal pressure,
such as lifting, retching, or vomiting. Alcoholism is a strong
predisposing factor. Mallory-Weiss tears are responsible for
approximately 5% of cases of upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients usually present with hematemesis with or without melena. A
history of retching, vomiting, or straining is obtained in about 50%
of cases.
B. Special Examinations
As with other causes of upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, upper
endoscopy should be performed after the patient has been
appropriately resuscitated. The diagnosis is established by
identification of a 0.5-to 4-cm linear mucosal tear usually located
either at the gastroesophageal junction or, more commonly, just
below the junction in the gastric mucosa.
 Differential Diagnosis
At endoscopy, other potential causes of upper gastrointestinal
hemorrhage are found in over 35% of patients with Mallory-Weiss
tears, including peptic ulcer disease, erosive gastritis, arteriovenous
malformations, and esophageal varices. Patients with underlying
portal hypertension are at higher risk of continued or recurrent
bleeding.
 Treatment
Patients are initially treated as needed with fluid resuscitation and
blood transfusions. Most patients stop bleeding spontaneously and
require no therapy. Endoscopic hemostatic therapy is employed in
patients who have continuing active bleeding. Injection with
epinephrine (1:10,000), cautery with a bipolar or heater probe
coagulation device, or mechanical compression of the artery by
application of an endoclip or band is effective in 90–95% of cases.
Angiographic arterial embolization or operative intervention is
required in patients who fail endoscopic therapy.
Cho YS et al. Endoscopic band ligation and endoscopic hemoclip
placement for patients with Mallory-Weiss syndrome and active
bleeding. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Apr 7;14(13): 2080–4.
[PMID: 18395910]
 
2. Eosinophilic Esophagitis
 General Considerations
Eosinophilic esophagitis is an entity that previously was recognized
in children but is increasingly identified in young or middle-aged
adults, predominantly men (75%). A history of allergies or atopic
conditions (asthma, eczema, hayfever) is present in over half of
patients.
 Clinical Findings
Most adults have a long history of dysphagia for solid-foods or an
episode of food impaction. Heartburn may be present. Children
may have abdominal pain, vomiting, chest pain, or failure to thrive.
On laboratory tests, a few have eosinophilia or elevated IgE levels.
Barium swallow studies may demonstrate a small-caliber
esophagus; focal or long, tapered strictures; or multiple concentric
rings. However, endoscopy with esophageal biopsy and histologic
evaluation is required to establish the diagnosis. Endoscopic
appearances include white exudates or papules, red furrows,
corrugated concentric rings, and strictures; however, the esophagus
is grossly normal in one-third of patients. Multiple biopsies (at least
5) from the proximal and distal esophagus should be obtained to
demonstrate multiple (> 15/high-powered field) eosinophils in the
mucosa. GERD may cause increased eosinophils in the distal
esophageal mucosa and must be excluded. Most children have
other coexisting atopic disorders. Skin testing for food allergies may
be helpful to identify causative factors, especially in children.
 Treatment
The optimal treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis is uncertain.
Referral to an allergist for evaluation of coexisting atopic disorders
and for skin prick and patch testing for food and environmental
allergens is recommended. In children, food elimination or elemental
diets lead to clinical and histologic improvement in 75%; however,
the effectiveness of dietary therapy in adults is not established. The
most common allergenic foods are dairy, eggs, wheat, soy, peanuts,
and shellfish. To exclude GERD, all patients should be given an
empiric trial of a proton pump inhibitor (eg, omeprazole,
lansoprazole, pantoprazole, esomeprazole, rabeprazole) orally
twice daily or undergo esophageal pH testing. Topical
corticosteroids (eg, use of fluticasone 220 mcg/puff inhaler without
a spacer, swallowing two to four puffs after inspiration, twice daily
after meals or budesonide suspension 1 mg twice daily) led to
symptom resolution in 70% of adults. Symptomatic relapse is
common after discontinuation of therapy. Graduated dilation of
strictures should be conducted cautiously because there is an
increased risk of perforation and postprocedural chest pain.
Penfield JD et al. The role of allergy evaluation in adults with
eosinophilic esophagitis. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan; 44(1):22–
7. [PMID: 19564792]
 
Rothenberg ME. Biology and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Oct;137(4):1238–49. [PMID:
19596009]
 
Schoepfer AM et al. Esophageal dilation in eosinophilic
esophagitis: effectiveness, safety, and impact on underlying
inflammation. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 May;105(5):1062–70.
[PMID: 19935783]
 
Straumann A et al. Budesonide is effective in adolescent and adult
patients with active eosinophilic esophagitis. Gastroenterology.
2010 Nov;139(5):1526–37. [PMID: 20682320]
 
3. Esophageal Webs & Rings
Esophageal webs are thin, diaphragm-like membranes of squamous
mucosa that typically occur in the mid or upper esophagus and may
be multiple. They may be congenital but also occur with eosinophilic
esophagitis, graft-versus-host disease, pemphigoid, epidermolysis
bullosa, pemphigus vulgaris, and, rarely, in association with iron
deficiency anemia (Plummer-Vinson syndrome). Esophageal
“Schatzki” rings are smooth, circumferential, thin (< 4 mm in
thickness) mucosal structures located in the distal esophagus at the
squamocolumnar junction. Their pathogenesis is controversial. They
are associated in nearly all cases with a hiatal hernia, and reflux
symptoms are common, suggesting that acid gastroesophageal
reflux may be contributory in many cases. Most webs and rings are
over 20 mm in diameter and are asymptomatic. Solid food
dysphagia most often occurs with rings < 13 mm in diameter.
Characteristically, dysphagia is intermittent and not progressive.
Large poorly chewed food boluses such as beefsteak are most
likely to cause symptoms. Obstructing boluses may pass by drinking
extra liquids or after regurgitation. In some cases, an impacted bolus
must be extracted endoscopically. Esophageal webs and rings are
best visualized using a barium esophagogram with full esophageal
distention. Endoscopy is less sensitive than barium esophagography.
The majority of symptomatic patients with a single ring or web
can be effectively treated with the passage of a large (> 16-mm-
diameter) bougie dilator to disrupt the lesion or endoscopic
electrosurgical incision of the ring. A single dilation may suffice, but
repeat dilations are required in many patients. Patients who have
heartburn or who require repeated dilation should receive long-term
acid suppressive therapy with a proton pump inhibitor.
Rajagopalan J et al. Ring(s)-related esophageal meat bolus
impaction: biopsy first, dilate later. Dis Esophagus.
2009;22(5):E14–6. [PMID: 19018847]
 
Wills JC et al. A randomized, prospective trial of electrosurgical
incision followed by rabeprazole versus bougie dilation followed by
rabeprazole of symptomatic esophageal (Schatzki's) rings.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2008 May;67(6):808–13. [PMID:
18313671]
 
4. Esophageal Diverticula
Diverticula may occur in the proximal, mid, or distal esophagus.
These may arise secondary to motility disorders (diffuse esophageal
spasm, achalasia) or may develop above esophageal strictures.
Diverticula are seldom symptomatic. For patients with severe
symptoms or pulmonary complications, surgical myotomy with or
without diverticulectomy is the optimal treatment.
 Zenker Diverticulum
Zenker diverticulum is a protrusion of pharyngeal mucosa that
develops at the pharyngoesophageal junction between the inferior
pharyngeal constrictor and the cricopharyngeus. The cause is
believed to be loss of elasticity of the upper esophageal sphincter,
resulting in restricted opening during swallowing. Symptoms of
dysphagia and regurgitation tend to develop insidiously over years in
older patients. Initial symptoms include vague oropharyngeal
dysphagia with coughing or throat discomfort. As the diverticulum
enlarges and retains food, patients may note halitosis, spontaneous
regurgitation of undigested food, nocturnal choking, gurgling in the
throat, or a protrusion in the neck. Complications include aspiration
pneumonia, bronchiectasis, and lung abscess. The diagnosis is best
established by a barium esophagogram.
Symptomatic patients require upper esophageal myotomy and, in
most cases, surgical diverticulectomy. An intraluminal approach has
been developed in which the septum between the esophagus and
diverticulum is incised using a rigid or flexible endoscope. Significant
improvement occurs in over 90% of patients treated surgically.
Small asymptomatic diverticula may be observed.
Ferreira LE et al. Zenker's diverticula: pathophysiology, clinical
presentation, and flexible endoscopic management. Dis Esophagus.
2008;21(1):1–8. [PMID: 18197932]
 
Seaman DL et al. A new device to simplify flexible endoscopic
treatment of Zenker's diverticulum. Gastrointest Endosc. 2008
Jan;67(1):112–5. [PMID: 18155432]
 
5. Benign Esophageal Neoplasms
Benign tumors of the esophagus are quite rare. They are
submucosal, the most common being leiomyoma. Most are
asymptomatic and picked up incidentally on endoscopy or barium
esophagography. Larger lesions can cause dysphagia, pain, and
rarely ulceration with bleeding. The risk of malignant transformation
is low. Therefore, the major clinical importance of these lesions is to
distinguish them from malignant neoplasms. At endoscopy, a
smooth, sessile nodule is observed with normal overlying mucosa.
Because the lesion is submucosal, endoscopic biopsies are generally
nonrevealing. Endoscopic ultrasonography is extremely helpful to
confirm the submucosal origin of the tumor and to help distinguish
benign leiomyomas from malignant leiomyosarcomas. Surgical (or in
selected cases endoscopic) resection is indicated for lesions that are
symptomatic, ulcerated, or increasing in size. (See Chapter 39 for
Esophageal Cancer.)
Jiang G et al. Thoracoscopic enucleation of esophageal leiomyoma:
a retrospective study on 40 cases. Dis Esophagus.
2009;22(3):279–83. [PMID: 19021682]
 
6. Esophageal Varices
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Develop secondary to portal hypertension.
 Found in 50% of patients with cirrhosis.
 One-third of patients with varices develop upper gastrointestinal
bleeding.
 Diagnosis established by upper endoscopy.
 
 General Considerations
Esophageal varices are dilated submucosal veins that develop in
patients with underlying portal hypertension and may result in
serious upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The causes of portal
hypertension are discussed in Chapter 16. Under normal
circumstances, there is a 2–6 mm Hg pressure gradient between the
portal vein and the inferior vena cava. When the gradient exceeds
10–12 mm Hg, significant portal hypertension exists. Esophageal
varices are the most common cause of important gastrointestinal
bleeding due to portal hypertension, though gastric varices and,
rarely, intestinal varices may also bleed. Bleeding from esophageal
varices most commonly occurs in the distal 5 cm of the esophagus.
The most common cause of portal hypertension is cirrhosis.
Approximately 50% of patients with cirrhosis have esophageal
varices. Bleeding from varices occurs in 30% of patients with
esophageal varices. In the absence of any treatment, variceal
bleeding spontaneously stops in about 50% of patients. Patients
surviving this bleeding episode have a 60% chance of recurrent
variceal bleeding, usually within the first 6 weeks. With current
therapies, the inhospital mortality rate associated with bleeding
esophageal varices is 15%.
A number of factors have been identified that may portend an
increased risk of bleeding from esophageal varices. The most
important are: (1) the size of the varices; (2) the presence at
endoscopy of red wale markings (longitudinal dilated venules on the
varix surface); (3) the severity of liver disease (as assessed by Child
scoring); and (4) active alcohol abuse—patients with cirrhosis who
continue to drink have an extremely high risk of bleeding.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with bleeding esophageal varices present with symptoms
and signs of acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage. (See Acute Upper
Gastrointestinal Bleeding, above.) In some cases, there may be
preceding retching or dyspepsia attributable to alcoholic gastritis or
withdrawal. Varices per se do not cause symptoms of dyspepsia,
dysphagia, or retching. Variceal bleeding usually is severe, resulting
in hypovolemia manifested by postural vital signs or shock. Twenty
percent of patients with chronic liver disease in whom bleeding
develops have a nonvariceal source of bleeding.
B. Laboratory Findings
These are identical to those listed above in the section on acute
upper gastrointestinal tract bleeding.
 Initial Management
A. Acute Resuscitation
The initial management of patients with acute upper gastrointestinal
bleeding is also discussed in the section on acute upper
gastrointestinal bleeding (see above). Variceal hemorrhage is life-
threatening; rapid assessment and resuscitation with fluids or blood
products are essential. Overtransfusion should be avoided as it
leads to increased central and portal venous pressures, increasing
the risk of rebleeding. Many patients with bleeding esophageal
varices have coagulopathy due to underlying cirrhosis; fresh frozen
plasma (20 mL/kg loading dose, then 10 mg/kg every 6 hours) or
platelets should be administered to patients with INRs > 1.8–2.0 or
with platelet counts < 50,000/mcL in the presence of active
bleeding. Recombinant factor VIIa has not demonstrated efficacy in
controlled studies and is not recommended. Patients with advanced
liver disease are at high risk for poor outcome regardless of the
bleeding source and should be transferred to an ICU.
B. Pharmacologic Therapy
1. Antibiotic prophylaxis—Cirrhotic patients admitted with upper
gastrointestinal bleeding have a > 50% chance of developing a
severe bacterial infection during hospitalization—such as bacterial
peritonitis, pneumonia, or urinary tract infection. Most infections are
caused by gram-negative organisms of gut origin. Prophylactic
administration of oral or intravenous fluoroquinolones (eg,
norfloxacin, 400 mg orally twice daily) or intravenous third-
generation cephalosporins (eg, ceftriaxone, 1 g/d) for 5–7 days
reduces the risk of serious infection to 10–20% as well as hospital
mortality. Because of a rising incidence of infections caused by
gram-positive organisms as well as fluoroquinolone-resistant
organisms, intravenous third-generation cephalosporins may be
preferred.
2. Vasoactive drugs—Somatostatin and octreotide infusions
reduce portal pressures in ways that are poorly understood.
Somatostatin (250 mcg/h)—not available in the United States—or
octreotide (50 mcg intravenous bolus followed by 50 mcg/h)
reduces splanchnic and hepatic blood flow and portal pressures in
cirrhotic patients. Both agents appear to provide acute control of
variceal bleeding in up to 80% of patients although neither has been
shown to reduce mortality. Data about the absolute efficacy of both
are conflicting, but they may be comparable in efficacy to
endoscopic therapy. Combined treatment with octreotide or
somatostatin infusion and endoscopic therapy (band ligation or
sclerotherapy) is superior to either modality alone in controlling
acute bleeding and early rebleeding, and it may improve survival. In
patients with advanced liver disease and upper gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, it is reasonable to initiate therapy with octreotide or
somatostatin on admission and continue for 3–5 days if varices are
confirmed by endos-copy. If bleeding is determined by endoscopy
not to be secondary to portal hypertension, the infusion can be
discontinued.
Terlipressin, 1–2 mg intravenous every 4 hours, (not available in
the United States) is a synthetic vasopressin analog that causes a
significant and sustained reduction in portal and variceal pressures
while preserving renal perfusion. Where available, terlipressin may
be preferred to somatostatin or octreotide. Terlipressin is
contraindicated in patients with significant coronary, cerebral, or
peripheral vascular disease.
3. Vitamin K—In cirrhotic patients with an abnormal prothrombin
time, vitamin K (10 mg) should be administered subcutaneously.
4. Lactulose—Encephalopathy may complicate an episode of
gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with severe liver disease. In
patients with encephalopathy, lactulose should be administered in a
dosage of 30–45 mL/h orally until evacuation occurs, then reduced
to 15–45 mL/h every 8–12 hours as needed to promote two or
three bowel movements daily. (See Chapter 16.)
C. Emergent Endoscopy
Emergent endoscopy is performed after the patient's hemo-dynamic
status has been appropriately stabilized (usually within 2–12 hours).
In patients with active bleeding, endotracheal intubation is
commonly performed to protect against aspiration during
endoscopy. An endoscopic examination is performed to exclude
other or associated causes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding such as
Mallory-Weiss tears, peptic ulcer disease, and portal hypertensive
gastropathy. In many patients, variceal bleeding has stopped
spontaneously by the time of endoscopy, and the diagnosis of
variceal bleeding is made presumptively. Acute endoscopic
treatment of the varices is performed with either banding or
sclerotherapy. These techniques arrest active bleeding in 80–90%
of patients and reduce the chance of in-hospital recurrent bleeding
to about 20%.
If banding is chosen, repeat sessions are scheduled at intervals of
2–4 weeks until the varices are obliterated or reduced to a small
size. Banding achieves lower rates of rebleeding, complications, and
death than sclerotherapy and should be considered the endoscopic
treatment of choice.
Sclerotherapy is still preferred by some endoscopists in the
actively bleeding patient (in whom visualization for banding may be
difficult). Sclerotherapy is performed by injecting the variceal trunks
with a sclerosing agent (eg, ethanolamine, tetradecyl sulfate).
Complications occur in 20–30% of patients and include chest pain,
fever, bacteremia, esophageal ulceration, stricture, and perforation.
After initial treatment, band ligation therapy should be performed.
D. Balloon Tube Tamponade
Mechanical tamponade with specially designed nasogastric tubes
containing large gastric and esophageal balloons (Minnesota or
Sengstaken-Blakemore tubes) provides initial control of active
variceal hemorrhage in 60–90% of patients; rebleeding occurs in
50%. The gastric balloon is inflated first, followed by the
esophageal balloon if bleeding continues. After balloon inflation,
tension is applied to the tube to directly tamponade the varices.
Complications of prolonged balloon inflation include esophageal and
oral ulcerations, perforation, aspiration, and airway obstruction (due
to a misplaced balloon). Endotracheal intubation is recommended
before placement. Given its high rate of complications, mechanical
tamponade is used as a temporizing measure only in patients with
bleeding that cannot be controlled with pharmacologic or
endoscopic techniques until more definitive decompressive therapy
(eg, TIPS; see below) can be provided.
E. Portal Decompressive Procedures
In the 10–20% of patients with variceal bleeding that cannot be
controlled with pharmacologic or endoscopic therapy, emergency
portal decompression may be considered.
1. Transvenous intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (Tips)
—Over a wire that is passed through a catheter inserted in the
jugular vein, an expandable wire mesh stent (8–12 mm in diameter)
is passed through the liver parenchyma, creating a portosystemic
shunt from the portal vein to the hepatic vein. TIPS can control
acute hemorrhage in over 90% of patients actively bleeding from
gastric or esophageal varices. However, when TIPS is performed in
the actively bleeding patient, the mortality approaches 40%,
especially in patients requiring ventilatory support or blood pressure
support and patients with renal insufficiency, bilirubin > 3 mg/dL, or
encephalopathy. Therefore, TIPS should be considered in the 10–
20% of patients with acute variceal bleeding that cannot be
controlled with pharmacologic and endoscopic therapy, but it may
not be warranted in patients with a particularly poor prognosis.
2. Emergency portosystemic shunt surgery—Emergency
portosystemic shunt surgery is associated with a 40–60% mortality
rate. At centers where TIPS is available, that procedure has
become the preferred means of providing emergency portal
decompression.
 Prevention of Rebleeding
Once the initial bleeding episode has been controlled, therapy is
warranted to reduce the high risk (60%) of rebleeding.
A. Combination β-Blockers and Variceal Band Ligation
Nonselective β-adrenergic blockers (propranolol, nadolol) reduce
the risk of rebleeding from esophageal varices to about 40%.
Likewise, long-term treatment with band ligation reduces the
incidence of rebleeding to about 30%. In most patients, two to six
treatment sessions (performed at 2- to 4-week intervals) are
needed to eradicate the varices.
Meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials suggest that a
combination of band ligation plus β-blockers is superior to either
variceal band ligation alone (RR 0.68) or β-blockers alone (RR
0.71). Therefore, combination therapy is recommended for patients
without contraindications to β-blockers. Recommended starting
doses of β-blockers are propranolol, 20 mg orally twice daily, long-
acting propranolol, 60 mg orally once daily, or nadolol, 20-40 mg
orally once daily, with gradual increases in the dosage every 1–2
weeks until the heart rate falls by 25% or reaches 55 beats/min,
provided the systolic blood pressure remains above 90 mm Hg and
the patient has no side effects. The average dosage of long-acting
propranolol is 120 mg once daily and for nadolol, 80 mg once daily.
One-third of patients with cirrhosis are intolerant of β-blockers,
experiencing fatigue or hypotension. Drug administration at bedtime
may reduce the frequency and severity of side effects. For patients
who cannot undergo endoscopic variceal banding, combination
therapy with a nonselective β-blocker and isosorbide mononitrate
(starting dose 10 mg at bedtime; increasing as tolerated to 20 mg
twice daily) is recommended to maximize portal pressure reduction.
B. Transvenous Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt
TIPS has resulted in a significant reduction in recurrent bleeding
compared with endoscopic sclerotherapy or band ligation—either
alone or in combination with β-blocker therapy. At 1 year,
rebleeding rates in patients treated with TIPS versus various
endoscopic therapies average 20% and 40%, respectively.
However, TIPS was also associated with a higher incidence of
encephalopathy (35% vs 15%) and did not result in a decrease in
mortality. Another limitation of TIPS is that stenosis and thrombosis
of the stents occur in the majority of patients over time with a
consequent risk of rebleeding. Therefore, periodic monitoring with
Doppler ultrasonography or hepatic venography is required. Stent
patency usually can be maintained by balloon angioplasty or
additional stent placement. Given these problems, TIPS should be
reserved for patients who have recurrent (two or more) episodes of
variceal bleeding that have failed endoscopic or pharmacologic
therapies. TIPS is also useful in patients with recurrent bleeding
from gastric varices or portal hypertensive gastropathy (for which
endoscopic therapies cannot be used). TIPS is likewise considered
in patients who are noncompliant with other therapies or who live in
remote locations (without access to emergency care).
C. Surgical Portosystemic Shunts
Shunt surgery has a significantly lower rate of rebleeding compared
with endoscopic therapy but also a higher incidence of
encephalopathy. With the advent and widespread adoption of
TIPS, surgical shunts are seldom performed.
D. Liver Transplantation
Candidacy for orthotopic liver transplantation should be assessed in
all patients with chronic liver disease and bleeding due to portal
hypertension. Transplant candidates should be treated with band
ligation or TIPS to control bleeding pretransplant.
 Prevention of First Episodes of
Variceal Bleeding
Among patients with varices that have not previously bled, bleeding
occurs in 12% of patients each year, with a lifetime risk of 30%.
Because of the high mortality rate associated with variceal
hemorrhage, prevention of the initial bleeding episode is desirable.
Therefore, patients with cirrhosis should undergo diagnostic
endoscopy or capsule endoscopy to determine whether varices are
present. Varices are present in 40% of patients with Child-
Turcotte-Pugh class A cirrhosis and in 85% with Child-Turcotte-
Pugh class C cirrhosis. In patients without varices on screening
endoscopy, a repeat endoscopy is recommended in 3 years, since
varices develop in 8% of patients per year. Patients with varices
have a higher risk of bleeding if they have large varices (> 5 mm),
varices with red wale markings, or Child-Turcotte-Pugh class B or
C cirrhosis. The risk of bleeding in patients with small varices (< 5
mm) is 5% per year and with large varices is 15–20% per year.
Patients with small varices without red wale marks and
compensated (Child-Turcotte-Pugh class A) cirrhosis have a low-
risk of bleeding; hence, prophylaxis is unnecessary, but endoscopy
should be repeated in 1–2 years to reassess size.
Nonselective β-adrenergic blockers are recommended to reduce
the risk of first variceal hemorrhage in patients with medium/large
varices and patients with small varices who either have variceal red
wale marks or advanced cirrhosis (Child-Turcotte-Pugh class B or
C). (See Combination β-Blockers and Variceal Band Ligation,
above.) Band ligation is not recommended for small varices due to
technical difficulties in band application. Prophylactic band ligation
may be preferred for higher risk patients with medium/large varices
(Child-Turcotte-Pugh class B/C or varices with red wale markings)
as well as patients with contraindications to or intolerance of β-
blockers. In a recent controlled trial, patients treated with carvedilol
12.5 mg once daily had lower rates of first variceal hemorrhage than
patients treated with endoscopic band ligation. Further studies are
warranted before carvedilol can be recommended for primary
prophylaxis.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients with upper gastrointestinal bleeding and
suspected varices should be evaluated by a physician
skilled in therapeutic endoscopy.
•    Patients being considered for TIPS procedures or liver
transplantation.
 When to Admit
All patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding and suspected
cirrhosis should be admitted to an ICU.
Garcia-Tsao G et al. Management and treatment of patients with
cirrhosis and portal hypertension: recommendations from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Hepatitis C Resource Center
Program and the National Hepatitis C Program. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2009 Jul;104(7):1802–29. [PMID: 19455106]
 
Garcia-Tsao G et al. Management of varices and variceal
hemorrhage in cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2010 Mar 4;362(9):823–
32. [PMID: 20200386]
 
Kumar A et al. Addition of propranolol and isosorbide
mononitrate to endoscopic variceal ligation does not reduce
variceal rebleeding incidence. Gastroenterology. 2009 Sep;137(3):
892–901. [PMID: 19481079]
 
Ravipati M et al. Pharmacotherapy plus endoscopic intervention is
more effective than pharmacotherapy or endoscopy alone in the
secondary prevention of esophageal variceal bleeding: a meta-
analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Gastrointest Endosc.
2009 Oct;70(4):658–64. [PMID: 19643407]
 
Tripathi D et al. Randomized controlled trial of carvedilol versus
variceal band ligation for the prevention of first variceal bleed.
Hepatology. 2009 Sep;50(3):825–33. [PMID: 19610055]
 
ESOPHAGEAL MOTILITY DISORDERS
1. Achalasia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Gradual, progressive dysphagia for solids and liquids.
 Regurgitation of undigested food.
 Barium esophagogram with “bird's beak” distal esophagus.
 Esophageal manometry confirms diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Achalasia is an idiopathic motility disorder characterized by loss of
peristalsis in the distal two-thirds (smooth muscle) of the esophagus
and impaired relaxation of the LES. There appears to be
denervation of the esophagus resulting primarily from loss of nitric
oxide-producing inhibitory neurons in the myenteric plexus. The
cause of the neuronal degeneration is unknown.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
There is a steady increase in the incidence of achalasia with age;
however, it can be seen in individuals as young as 25 years. Patients
complain of the gradual onset of dysphagia for solid foods and, in
the majority, of liquids also. Symptoms at presentation may have
persisted for months to years. Substernal discomfort or fullness may
be noted after eating. Many patients eat more slowly and adopt
specific maneuvers such as lifting the neck or throwing the shoulders
back to enhance esophageal emptying. Regurgitation of undigested
food is common and may occur during meals or up to several hours
later. Nocturnal regurgitation can provoke coughing or aspiration.
Up to 50% of patients report substernal chest pain that is unrelated
to meals or exercise and may last up to hours. Weight loss is
common. Physical examination is unhelpful.
B. Imaging
Chest radiographs may show an air-fluid level in the enlarged, fluid-
filled esophagus. Barium esophagography discloses characteristic
findings, including esophageal dilation, loss of esophageal peristalsis,
poor esophageal emptying, and a smooth, symmetric “bird's beak”
tapering of the distal esophagus. Without treatment, the esophagus
may become markedly dilated (“sigmoid esophagus”).
C. Special Examinations
After esophagography, endoscopy is always performed to evaluate
the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction to exclude a
distal stricture or a submucosal infiltrating carcinoma. The diagnosis
is confirmed by esophageal manometry. The typical manometric
features are as follows: (1) Complete absence of peristalsis;
swallowing results in simultaneous waves that are usually of low
amplitude. (2) Incomplete lower esophageal sphincteric relaxation
with swallowing. Whereas the normal sphincter relaxes by over
90%, relaxation with most swallows in patients with achalasia is <
50%. In many patients, the baseline lower esophageal sphincteric
pressure is quite elevated. (3) Intraesophageal pressures are greater
than gastric pressures due to a fluid- and food-filled esophagus.
 Differential Diagnosis
Chagas disease is associated with esophageal dysfunction that is
indistinguishable from idiopathic achalasia and should be considered
in patients from endemic regions (Central and South America); it is
becoming more common in the southern United States. Primary or
metastatic tumors can invade the gastroesophageal junction,
resulting in a picture resembling that of achalasia, called
“pseudoachalasia.” Endoscopic ultrasonography and chest CT may
be required to examine the distal esophagus in suspicious cases.
Tumors such as small cell lung cancer can cause a paraneoplastic
syndrome resembling achalasia due to secretion of antineuronal
nuclear antibodies (ANNA-1 or Anti-Hu) that affect the myenteric
plexus. Achalasia must be distinguished from other motility
disorders such as diffuse esophageal spasm and scleroderma
esophagus with a peptic stricture.
 Treatment
A. Botulinum Toxin Injection
Endoscopically guided injection of botulinum toxin directly into the
LES results in a marked reduction in LES pressure with initial
improvement in symptoms in 65–85% of patients. However,
symptom relapse occurs in over 50% of patients within 6–9 months
and in all patients within 2 years. Three-fourths of initial responders
who relapse have improvement with repeated injections. Because it
is inferior to pneumatic dilation therapy and surgery in producing
sustained symptomatic relief, this therapy is most appropriate for
patients with comorbidities who are poor candidates for more
invasive procedures. Botulinum injection may cause submucosal
scarring that may make subsequent surgical myotomy more difficult.
B. Pneumatic Dilation
Approximately 70% of patients derive good to excellent relief of
dysphagia after one to three sessions of pneumatic dilation of the
LES. Approximately 30% of patients respond poorly to dilation and
require surgical myotomy. Dilation is less effective in patients who
are younger than age 50 or have spastic esophageal contractions
(“vigorous achalasia”). Symptoms recur in up to 60% within 10
years but usually respond to repeated dilation. Perforations occur in
< 3% of dilations and may require operative repair. The success of
laparoscopic myotomy is not compromised by prior pneumatic
dilation.
C. Surgical Myotomy
A modified Heller cardiomyotomy of the LES and cardia results in
good to excellent symptomatic improvement in over 85% of
patients. Because gastroesophageal reflux develops in up to 20% of
patients after myotomy, most surgeons also perform an antireflux
procedure (fundoplication), and all patients are prescribed a once-
daily proton pump inhibitor. Myotomy is performed with a
laparoscopic approach and is preferred to the open surgical
approach. The low morbidity of laparoscopic surgery has led some
experts to recommend it for initial treatment, especially for young
patients. In experienced hands, however, the initial efficacies of
pneumatic dilation and laparoscopic myotomy are nearly equivalent.
Hulselmans M et al. Long-term outcome of pneumatic dilation in
the treatment of achalasia. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Jan;8(1):30–5. [PMID: 19782766]
 
Pandolfino JE et al. Achalasia: a new clinically relevant
classification by high-resolution manometry. Gastroenterology.
2008 Nov;135(5):1526–33. [PMID: 18722376]
 
2. Other primary esophageal Motility Disorders
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Abnormalities in esophageal motility may cause dysphagia or chest
pain. Dysphagia for liquids as well as solids tends to be intermittent
and nonprogressive. Periods of normal swallowing may alternate
with periods of dysphagia, which usually is mild though bothersome
—rarely severe enough to result in significant alterations in lifestyle
or weight loss. Dysphagia may be provoked by stress, large boluses
of food, or hot or cold liquids. Some patients may experience
anterior chest pain that may be confused with angina pectoris but
usually is nonexertional. The pain generally is unrelated to eating.
(See Chest Pain of Undetermined Origin, below.)
B. Diagnostic Tests
The evaluation of suspected esophageal motility disorders includes
barium esophagography, upper endoscopy, and, in some cases,
esophageal manometry. Barium esophagography is useful to
exclude mechanical obstruction and to evaluate esophageal motility.
The presence of simultaneous contractions (spasm), disordered
peristalsis, or failed peristalsis supports a diagnosis of esophageal
dysmotility. Upper endoscopy also is performed to exclude a
mechanical obstruction (as a cause of dysphagia) and to look for
evidence of erosive reflux esophagitis (a common cause of chest
pain) or eosinophilic esophagitis (confirmed by esophageal biopsy).
Manometry is not routinely used for mild to moderate symptoms
because the findings seldom influence further medical management,
but it may be useful in patients with persistent, disabling dysphagia
to exclude achalasia and to look for other disorders of esophageal
motility. These include spastic disorders (diffuse esophageal spasm,
nutcracker esophagus, and hypertensive LES) and findings of
ineffective esophageal peristalsis (failed or low-amplitude
esophageal contractions). The further evaluation of noncardiac chest
pain is discussed in a subsequent section.
 Treatment
For patients with mild symptoms of dysphagia, therapy is directed
at symptom reduction and reassurance. Patients should be
instructed to eat more slowly and take smaller bites of food. In
some cases, a warm liquid at the start of a meal may facilitate
swallowing. Because unrecognized gastroesophageal reflux may
cause dysphagia, a trial of a proton pump inhibitor (esomeprazole
40 mg, lansoprazole 30 mg) orally twice daily should be
administered for 4–8 weeks. Treatment of patients with severe
dysphagia is empiric. Suspected spastic disorders may be treated
with nitrates (isosorbide, 10–20 mg four times daily) or nitroglycerin
(0.4 mg sublingually as needed) and calcium channel blockers
(nifedipine 10 mg or diltiazem 60–90 mg, 30–45 minutes before
meals) may be tried; their efficacy is unproved. Phosphodiesterase
type 5 inhibitors (eg, sildenafil) promote smooth muscle relaxation
and improve esophageal motility in small numbers of patients with
spastic disorders but require further clinical study before they can
be recommended. Injection of botulinum toxin into the lower
esophagus may improve chest pain and dysphagia in some patients
for a limited time. For unclear reasons, esophageal dilation provides
symptomatic relief in some cases. Debilitated patients with severe
dysphagia and proven esophageal spasm may be treated with a long
surgical myotomy.
Grubel C et al. Diffuse esophageal spasm. Am J Gastroenterol.
2008 Feb;103(2):450–7. [PMID: 18005367]
 
Konturek T et al. Spasm, nutcracker, and IEM: real or
manommanometry findings? J Clin Gastroenterol. 2008 May–
Jun;42(5): 647–51. [PMID: 18364582]
 
Lacy BE et al. Esophageal motility disorders: medical therapy. J
Clin Gastroenterol. 2008 May–Jun;42(5):652–8. [PMID:
18364589]
 
CHEST PAIN OF UNDETERMINED ORIGIN
One-third of patients with chest pain undergo negative cardiac
evaluation. Patients with recurrent noncardiac chest pain thus pose a
difficult clinical problem. Because coronary artery disease is
common and can present atypically, it must be excluded prior to
evaluation for other causes.
Causes of noncardiac chest pain may include the following.
A. Chest Wall and Thoracic Spine Disease
These are easily diagnosed by history and physical examination.
B. Gastroesophageal Reflux
Up to 50% of patients have increased amounts of gastroesophageal
acid reflux or a correlation between acid reflux episodes and chest
pain demonstrated on esophageal pH testing. An empiric 4-week
trial of acid-suppressive therapy with a high-dose proton pump
inhibitor is recommended (eg, omeprazole or rabeprazole, 40 mg
orally twice daily; lansoprazole, 30–60 mg orally twice daily; or
esomeprazole or pantoprazole, 40 mg orally twice daily), especially
in patients with reflux symptoms. In patients with persistent
symptoms, ambulatory esophageal pH or impedance and pH study
may be useful to exclude definitively a relationship between acid and
nonacid reflux episodes and chest pain events.
C. Esophageal Dysmotility
Esophageal motility abnormalities such as diffuse esophageal spasm
or nutcracker esophagus are uncommon causes of noncardiac chest
pain. In patients with chest pain and dysphagia, a barium swallow
radiograph should be obtained to look for evidence of achalasia or
diffuse esophageal spasm. Esophageal manometry is not routinely
performed because of low specificity and the unlikelihood of finding
a clinically significant disorder, but it may be recommended in
patients with frequent symptoms.
D. Heightened Visceral Sensitivity
Some patients with noncardiac chest pain report pain in response to
a variety of minor noxious stimuli such as physiologically normal
amounts of acid reflux, inflation of balloons within the esophageal
lumen, injection of intravenous edrophonium (a cholinergic stimulus),
or intracardiac catheter manipulation. Low doses of oral
antidepressants such as trazodone 50 mg or imipramine 50 mg
reduce chest pain symptoms and are thought to reduce visceral
afferent awareness. In a 2010 controlled crossover trial, over 50%
of patients treated with venlafaxine, 75 mg once daily at bedtime,
achieved symptomatic improvement compared with only 4%
treated with placebo.
E. Psychological Disorders
A significant number of patients have underlying depression, anxiety,
and panic disorder. Patients reporting dyspnea, sweating,
tachycardia, suffocation, or fear of dying should be evaluated for
panic disorder.
Fass R et al. Noncardiac chest pain. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2008
May–Jun;42(5):636–46. [PMID: 18364579]
 
Kushnir VM et al. Abnormal GERD parameters on ambulatory pH
monitoring predict therapeutic success in noncardiac chest pain.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 May;105(5):1032–8. [PMID:
19920808]
 
Lee H et al. Effects of venlafaxine for symptomatic relief in young
adult patients with functional chest pain: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial. Am J Gastroenterol.
2010 Jul;105(7):1504–12. [PMID: 20332772]
 
DISEASES OF THE STOMACH
& DUODENUM
 
GASTRITIS & GASTROPATHY
The term “gastropathy” should be used to denote conditions in
which there is epithelial or endothelial damage without inflammation,
and “gastritis” should be used to denote conditions in which there is
histologic evidence of inflammation. In clinical practice, the term
“gastritis” is commonly applied to three categories: (1) erosive and
hemorrhagic “gastritis” (gastropathy); (2) nonerosive, non-specific
(histologic) gastritis; and (3) specific types of gastritis, characterized
by distinctive histologic and endoscopic features diagnostic of
specific disorders.
1. Erosive & Hemorrhagic “Gastritis” (Gastropathy)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most commonly seen in alcoholic or critically ill patients, or
patients taking nsAiDs.
 Often asymptomatic; may cause epigastric pain, nausea, and
vomiting.
 May cause hematemesis; usually not significant bleeding.
 
 General Considerations
The most common causes of erosive gastropathy are medications
(especially NSAIDs), alcohol, stress due to severe medical or
surgical illness, and portal hypertension (“portal gastropathy”).
Major risk factors for stress gastritis include mechanical ventilation,
coagulopathy, trauma, burns, shock, sepsis, central nervous system
injury, liver failure, kidney disease, and multiorgan failure. The use
of enteral nutrition reduces the risk of stress-related bleeding.
Uncommon causes of erosive gastropathy include caustic ingestion
and radiation. Erosive and hemorrhagic gastropathy typically are
diagnosed at endoscopy, often being performed because of
dyspepsia or upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Endoscopic findings
include subepithelial hemorrhages, petechiae, and erosions. These
lesions are superficial, vary in size and number, and may be focal or
diffuse. There usually is no significant inflammation on histologic
examination.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Erosive gastropathy is usually asymptomatic. Symptoms, when they
occur, include anorexia, epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting.
There is poor correlation between symptoms and the number or
severity of endoscopic abnormalities. The most common clinical
manifestation of erosive gastritis is upper gastrointestinal bleeding,
which presents as hematemesis, “coffee grounds” emesis, or bloody
aspirate in a patient receiving nasogastric suction, or as melena.
Because erosive gastritis is superficial, hemo-dynamically significant
bleeding is rare.
B. Laboratory Findings
The laboratory findings are nonspecific. The hematocrit is low if
significant bleeding has occurred; iron deficiency may be found.
C. Special Examinations
Upper endoscopy is the most sensitive method of diagnosis.
Although bleeding from gastritis is usually insignificant, it cannot be
distinguished on clinical grounds from more serious lesions such as
peptic ulcers or esophageal varices. Hence, endoscopy is generally
performed within 24 hours in patients with upper gastrointestinal
bleeding to identify the source. An upper gastrointestinal series is
sometimes obtained in lieu of endoscopy in patients with
hemodynamically insignificant upper gastrointestinal bleeds to
exclude serious lesions but is insensitive for the detection of gastritis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Epigastric pain may be due to peptic ulcer, gastroesophageal reflux,
gastric cancer, biliary tract disease, food poisoning, viral
gastroenteritis, and functional dyspepsia. With severe pain, one
should consider a perforated or penetrating ulcer, pancreatic
disease, esophageal rupture, ruptured aortic aneurysm, gastric
volvulus, and myocardial colic. Causes of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding include peptic ulcer disease, esophageal varices, Mallory-
Weiss tear, and arteriovenous malformations.
 Specific Causes & Treatment
A. Stress Gastritis
1. Prophylaxis—Stress-related mucosal erosions and subepithelial
hemorrhages develop within 72 hours in the majority of critically ill
patients. Clinically overt bleeding occurs in 6%, but clinically
important bleeding in < 3%. Bleeding is associated with a higher
mortality rate but is seldom the cause of death.
In critically ill patients, pharmacologic prophylaxis with
intravenous H2-receptor antagonists, oral sucralfate, and an oral,
rapid-release suspension of omeprazole plus sodium bicarbonate
(Zegerid) has been shown to reduce the incidence of clinically overt
and significant bleeding by 50%. At this time, the optimal, cost-
effective regimen for the reduction of stress-related mucosal
bleeding is uncertain. Prophylaxis should be routinely administered
upon admission to critically ill patients with risk factors for significant
bleeding. Two of the most important risk factors are coagulopathy
(platelets < 50,000/mcL or INR > 1.5) and respiratory failure with
the need for mechanical ventilation for over 48 hours. When these
two risk factors are absent, the risk of significant bleeding is only
0.1%.
Although most critically ill patients have normal or decreased acid
secretion, numerous studies have shown that maintaining intragastric
pH > 4 reduces the incidence of clinically significant stress-related
bleeding. Continuous intravenous infusions of H2-receptor
antagonists provide adequate control of intragastric pH in most
patients in the following doses over 24 hours: cimetidine (900–1200
mg), ranitidine (150 mg), or famotidine (20 mg). After 4 hours of
infusion, the pH should be checked by nasogastric aspirate and the
dose doubled if the pH is under 4.0. For patients with nasoenteric
tubes, immediate-release omeprazole (40 mg at 1 and 6 hours on
day 1; then 40 mg once daily beginning on day 2) may be preferred
to intravenous H2-receptor antagonists because of lower cost, ease
of administration, and comparable efficacy. Although intravenous
proton pump inhibitors also are widely used for this indication, their
efficacy and optimal dosing have not been established in controlled
trials.
Sucralfate suspension (1 g orally every 4–6 hours) is effective for
the prevention of stress-related bleeding. However, there is a higher
incidence of clinically important upper gastrointestinal bleeding with
sucralfate (4%) versus H2-receptor antagonists (2%) with no
difference in nosocomial pneumonia in more recent studies. In most
ICUs, intravenous H2-receptor antagonists or proton pump
inhibitors are preferred because of their ease of administration.
2. Treatment—Once bleeding occurs, patients should receive
continuous infusions of a proton pump inhibitor (esomeprazole or
pantoprazole, 80 mg intravenous bolus, followed by 8 mg/h
continuous infusion) as well as sucral-fate suspension, 1 g orally
every 4 to 6 hours. Endoscopy should be performed in patients with
clinically significant bleeding to look for treatable causes, especially
stress-related peptic ulcers with active bleeding or visible vessels.
When bleeding arises from diffuse gastritis, endoscopic hemostasis
techniques are not helpful.
B. NSAID Gastritis
Of patients receiving NSAIDs in clinical trials, 25–50% have
gastritis and 10–20% have ulcers at endoscopy; however,
symptoms of significant dyspepsia develop in about 5%. NSAIDs
that are more selective for the cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 enzyme
(“coxibs”), such as celecoxib, etodolac, and meloxicam, decrease
the incidence of endoscopically visible ulcers by approximately 75%
and significant ulcer complications by up to 50% compared with
nonselective NSAIDs (nsNSAIDs) (see below). However, a
twofold increase in the incidence in cardiovascular complications
(myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular infarction, and death) in
patients taking coxibs compared with placebo has led to the
withdrawal of two highly selective coxibs (rofecoxib and
valdecoxib) from the market by the manufacturers. Celecoxib and
all currently available nsNSAIDS (with notable exception of aspirin
and possibly naproxen) are associated with increased risk of
cardiovascular complications and therefore should be used with
caution in patients with cardiovascular risk factors.
In population surveys, the rate of dyspepsia is increased 1.5- to
2-fold with nsNSAID and coxib use. However, dyspeptic
symptoms correlate poorly with significant mucosal abnormalities or
the development of adverse clinical events (ulcer bleeding or
perforation). Given the frequency of dyspeptic symptoms in patients
taking NSAIDs, it is neither feasible nor desirable to investigate all
such cases. Patients with alarm symptoms or signs, such as severe
pain, weight loss, vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, or anemia,
should undergo diagnostic upper endos-copy. For other patients,
symptoms may improve with discontinuation of the agent, reduction
to the lowest effective dose, or administration with meals. Proton
pump inhibitors have demonstrated efficacy in controlled trials for
the treatment of NSAID-related dyspepsia and superiority to H2-
receptor antagonists for healing of NSAID-related ulcers–even in
the setting of continued NSAID use. Therefore, an empiric 2–4
week trial of an oral proton pump inhibitor (omeprazole,
rabeprazole, or esomeprazole 20–40 mg/d; lansoprazole or
dexlansoprazole, 30 mg/d; pantoprazole, 40 mg/d) is recommended
for patients with NSAID-related dyspepsia, especially those in
whom continued NSAID treatment is required. If symptoms do not
improve, diagnostic upper endoscopy should be conducted.
C. Alcoholic Gastritis
Excessive alcohol consumption may lead to dyspepsia, nausea,
emesis, and minor hematemesis—a condition sometimes labeled
“alcoholic gastritis.” However, it is not proven that alcohol alone
actually causes significant erosive gastritis. Therapy with H2-
receptor antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, or sucralfate for 2–4
weeks often is empirically prescribed.
D. Portal Hypertensive Gastropathy
Portal hypertension commonly results in gastric mucosal and
submucosal congestion of capillaries and venules, which is
correlated with the severity of the portal hypertension and
underlying liver disease. Usually asymptomatic, it may cause chronic
gastrointestinal bleeding in 10% of patients and, less commonly,
clinically significant bleeding with hematemesis. Treatment with
propranolol or nadolol reduces the incidence of recurrent acute
bleeding by lowering portal pressures. Patients who fail propranolol
therapy may be successfully treated with portal decompressive
procedures (see section on treatment of esophageal varices).
Lanza FL et al; Practice Parameters Committee of the American
College of Gastroenterology. Guidelines for prevention of NSAID-
related ulcer complications. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009
Mar;104(3):728–38. [PMID: 19240698]
 
Lin PC et al. The efficacy and safety of proton pump inhibitors vs
histamine-2 receptor antagonists for stress ulcer bleeding
prophylaxis among critical care patients: a meta-analysis. Crit Care
Med. 2010 Apr;38(4):1197–205. [PMID: 20173630]
 
Ripoll C et al. The management of portal hypertensive gastropathy
and gastric antral vascular ectasia. Dig Liver Dis. 2011
May;43(5):345–51. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21095166]
 
2. Nonerosive, Nonspecific Gastritis
The diagnosis of nonerosive gastritis is based on histologic
assessment of mucosal biopsies. Endoscopic findings are normal in
many cases and do not reliably predict the presence of histologic
inflammation. The main types of nonerosive gastritis are those due
to H pylori infection, those associated with pernicious anemia, and
eosinophilic gastritis. (See Specific Types of Gastritis below.)
Helicobacter pylori Gastritis
H pylori is a spiral gram-negative rod that resides beneath the
gastric mucous layer adjacent to gastric epithelial cells. Although not
invasive, it causes gastric mucosal inflammation with PMNs and
lymphocytes. The mechanisms of injury and inflammation may in
part be related to the products of two genes, vacA and cagA.
In developed countries the prevalence of H pylori is rapidly
declining. In the United States, the prevalence rises from < 10% in
non-immigrants under age 30 years to over 50% in those over age
60 years. The prevalence is higher in non-whites and immigrants
from developing countries and is correlated inversely with
socioeconomic status. Transmission is from person to person,
mainly during infancy and childhood; however, the mode of
transmission is unknown.
Acute infection with H pylori may cause a transient clinical illness
characterized by nausea and abdominal pain that may last for
several days and is associated with acute histologic gastritis with
PMNs. After these symptoms resolve, the majority progress to
chronic infection with chronic, diffuse mucosal inflammation
(gastritis) characterized by PMNs and lymphocytes. Although
chronic H pylori infection with gastritis is present in 30–50% of the
population, most persons are asymptomatic and suffer no sequelae.
Three gastritis phenotypes occur which determine clinical outcomes.
Most infected people have a mild, diffuse gastritis that does not
disrupt acid secretion and seldom causes clinically important
outcomes. About 15% of infected people have inflammation that
predominates in the gastric antrum but spares the gastric body
(where acid is secreted). People with this phenotype tend to have
increased gastrin; increased acid production; and increased risk of
developing peptic ulcers, especially duodenal ulcers. An even
smaller subset of infected adults have inflammation that
predominates in the gastric body. Over time, this may lead to
destruction of acid-secreting glands with resultant mucosal atrophy,
decreased acid secretion, and intestinal metaplasia. This phenotype
is associated with an increased risk of gastric ulcers and gastric
cancer. Chronic H pylori gastritis leads to the development of
duodenal or gastric ulcers up to 10%, gastric cancer in 0.1–3%,
and low-grade B cell gastric lymphoma (mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma; MALToma) in < 0.01%.
Eradication of H pylori may be achieved with antibiotics in over
85% of patients and leads to resolution of the chronic gastritis (see
section on Peptic Ulcer Disease). Testing for H pylori is indicated
for patients with either active or a past history of documented peptic
ulcer disease or gastric MALToma and for patients with a family
history of gastric carcinoma. Testing and empiric treatment is cost-
effective in young patients (< 55 years of age) with uncomplicated
dyspepsia prior to further medical evaluation. The role of testing and
treating H pylori in patients with functional dyspepsia remains
controversial but is generally recommended (see Dyspepsia,
above). H pylori eradication decreases the risk of gastric cancer in
patients with peptic ulcer disease. Some groups recommend
population-based screening of all asymptomatic persons in regions
in which there is a high prevalence of H pylori and gastric cancer
(such as Japan, Korea, and China) to reduce the incidence of
gastric cancer. Population-based screening of asymptomatic
individuals is not recommended in western countries, in which the
incidence of gastric cancer is low, but should be considered in
immigrants from high-prevalence regions.
1. Noninvasive Testing for H pylori—Although sero-logic tests
are easily obtained and widely available, most clinical guidelines no
longer endorse their use for testing for H pylori infection because
they are less accurate than other noninvasive tests that measure
active infection. Laboratory-based quantitative serologic ELISA
tests have an overall accuracy of only 80%. In comparison, the
fecal antigen immunoassay and [13C] urea breath test have excellent
sensitivity and specificity (> 95%) at a cost of < $60. Although
more expensive and cumbersome to perform, these tests of active
infection are more cost-effective in most clinical settings because
they reduce unnecessary treatment for patients without active
infection.
Recent proton pump inhibitors or antibiotics significantly reduce
the sensitivity of urea breath tests and fecal antigen assays (but not
serologic tests). Prior to testing, proton pump inhibitors should be
discontinued 7–14 days and antibiotics for at least 28 days.
2. Endoscopic Testing for H pylori—Endoscopy is not indicated
to diagnose H pylori infection in most circumstances. However,
when it is performed for another reason, gastric biopsy specimens
can be obtained for detection of H pylori and tested for active
infection by urease production. This simple, inexpensive ($10) test
has excellent sensitivity (90%) and specificity (95%). In patients
with active upper gastrointestinal bleeding or patients recently taking
proton pump inhibitors or antibiotics, histologic assessment for H
pylori is preferred. Histologic assessment of biopsies from the
gastric antrum and body is more definitive but more expensive
($150–$250) than a rapid urease test. Histologic assessment is also
indicated in patients with suspected MALTomas and, possibly, in
patients with suspected infection whose rapid urease test is
negative. However, serologic testing is the most cost-effective
means of confirming H pylori infection in patients with a negative
rapid urease test.
Cover TL et al. Helicobacter pylori in health and disease.
Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(6):1863–73. [PMID:
19457415]
 
McColl KE. Clinical practice. Helicobacter pylori infection. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 29;362(17):1597–1604. [PMID:
20427808]
 
Wu CY et al. Early Helicobacter pylori eradication decreases
risk of gastric cancer in patients with peptic ulcer disease.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5):1641–8. [PMID: 19664631]
 
 Pernicious Anemia Gastritis
Pernicious anemia gastritis is an autoimmune disorder involving the
fundic glands with resultant achlorhydria, decreased intrinsic factor
secretion, and vitamin B12 malabsorption. Of patients with B12
deficiency, less than half have pernicious anemia. Most patients
have malabsorption secondary to aging or chronic H pylori
infection that results in atrophic gastritis, hypochlorhydria, and
impaired release of B12 from food. Fundic histology in pernicious
anemia is characterized by severe gland atrophy and intestinal
metaplasia caused by autoimmune destruction of the gastric fundic
mucosa. Anti-intrinsic factor antibodies are present in 70% of
patients. Achlorhydria leads to pronounced hypergastrinemia (>
1000 pg/mL) due to loss of acid inhibition of gastrin G cells.
Hypergastrinemia 
may 
induce 
hyperplasia 
of 
gastric
enterochromaffin-like cells that may lead to the development of
small, multicentric carcinoid tumors in 5% of patients. Metastatic
spread is uncommon in lesions smaller than 2 cm. The risk of gastric
adenocarcinoma is increased threefold, with a prevalence of 1–3%.
Endoscopy with biopsy is indicated in patients with pernicious
anemia at the time of diagnosis. Patients with dysplasia or small
carcinoids require periodic endoscopic surveillance. Pernicious
anemia is discussed in detail in Chapter 13.
Lahner E et al. Pernicious anemia: new insights from a
gastroenterological point of view. World J Gastroenterol. 2009
Nov;15(41):5121–8. [PMID: 19891010]
 
3. Specific Types of Gastritis
A number of disorders are associated with specific mucosal
histologic features.
Infections
Acute bacterial infection of the gastric submucosa and muscularis
with a variety of aerobic or anaerobic organisms produces a rare,
rapidly progressive, life-threatening condition known as
phlegmonous or necrotizing gastritis, which requires broad-
spectrum antibiotic therapy and, in many cases, emergency gastric
resection. Viral infection with CMV is commonly seen in patients
with AIDS and after bone marrow or solid organ transplantation.
Endoscopic findings include thickened gastric folds and ulcerations.
Fungal infection with mucormycosis and Candida may occur in
immunocompromised and diabetic patients. Larvae of Anisakis
marina ingested in raw fish or sushi may become embedded in the
gastric mucosa, producing severe abdominal pain. Pain persists for
several days until the larvae die. Endoscopic removal of the larvae
provides rapid symptomatic relief.
Okano K et al. Acute abdomen with epigastric pain and vomiting
in an adult healthy patient. Gastroenterology. 2010 Nov;
139(5):1465. [PMID: 20875783]
 
Eosinophilic Gastritis
This is a rare disorder in which eosinophils infiltrate the antrum and
sometimes the proximal intestine. Infiltration may involve the
mucosa, muscularis, or serosa. Peripheral eosinophilia is prominent.
Symptoms include anemia from mucosal blood loss, abdominal
pain, early satiety, and postprandial vomiting. Treatment with
corticosteroids is beneficial in the majority of patients.
Chang JY et al. A shift in the clinical spectrum of eosinophilic
gastroenteritis toward the mucosal disease type. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2010 Aug;8(8):669–75. [PMID: 20451664]
 
Ménétrier Disease (Hypertrophic Gastropathy)
This is an idiopathic entity characterized by giant thickened gastric
folds involving predominantly the body of the stomach. Patients
complain of nausea, epigastric pain, weight loss, and diarrhea.
Because of chronic protein loss, patients may develop severe
hypoproteinemia and anasarca. The cause is unknown. There are
case reports of resolution of symptoms and improvement in
histologic appearance after H pylori eradication. Dramatic
improvement has been reported in a small number of patients with
cetuximab, an antibody that binds epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR). Gastric resection is required in severe cases.
Rich A et al. Distinguishing Ménétrier's disease from its mimics.
Gut. 2010 Dec;59(12):1617–24. [PMID: 20926644]
 
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of dyspepsia present in 80–90% of patients with variable
relationship to meals.
 Ulcer symptoms characterized by rhythmicity and periodicity.
 Ten to 20 percent of patients present with ulcer complications
without antecedent symptoms.
 Most nsAiD-induced ulcers are asymptomatic.
 Upper endoscopy with gastric biopsy for H pylori is the
diagnostic procedure of choice in most patients.
 Gastric ulcer biopsy or documentation of complete healing
necessary to exclude gastric malignancy.
 
 General Considerations
Peptic ulcer is a break in the gastric or duodenal mucosa that arises
when the normal mucosal defensive factors are impaired or are
overwhelmed by aggressive luminal factors such as acid and pepsin.
By definition, ulcers extend through the muscularis mucosae and are
usually over 5 mm in diameter. In the United States, there are about
500,000 new cases per year of peptic ulcer and 4 million ulcer
recurrences; the lifetime prevalence of ulcers in the adult population
is approximately 10%. Ulcers occur five times more commonly in
the duodenum, where over 95% are in the bulb or pyloric channel.
In the stomach, benign ulcers are located most commonly in the
antrum (60%) and at the junction of the antrum and body on the
lesser curvature (25%).
Ulcers occur slightly more commonly in men than in women
(1.3:1). Although ulcers can occur in any age group, duodenal
ulcers most commonly occur in patients between the ages of 30 and
55 years, whereas gastric ulcers are more common in patients
between the ages of 55 and 70 years. Ulcers are more common in
smokers and in patients taking NSAIDs on a long-term basis (see
below). Alcohol, dietary factors, and stress do not appear to cause
ulcer disease. The incidence of duodenal ulcer disease has been
declining dramatically for the past 30 years, but the incidence of
gastric ulcers appears to be increasing as a result of the widespread
use of NSAIDs and low-dose aspirin.
Etiology
There are two major causes of peptic ulcer disease: NSAIDs and
chronic H pylori infection. Evidence of H pylori infection or
NSAID ingestion should be sought in all patients with peptic ulcer.
Less than 5-10% of ulcers are caused by other conditions, including
acid hypersecretory states (such as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome or
systemic mastocytosis), CMV (especially in transplant recipients),
Crohn disease, lymphoma, medications (eg, alendronate), chronic
medical illness (cirrhosis or chronic kidney disease), or are
idiopathic. NSAID and H pylori-associated ulcers will be
presented in this section; Zollinger-Ellison syndrome will be
discussed subsequently.
A. H pylori– Associated Ulcers
H pylori infection appears to be a necessary cofactor for the
majority of duodenal and gastric ulcers not associated with
NSAIDs. Ulcer disease will develop in an estimated 10% of
infected patients. The prevalence of H pylori infection in duodenal
ulcer patients is 75–90%. Most H pylori–infected duodenal ulcer
patients have infection predominantly in the gastric antrum, which is
associated with increased gastric acid secretion. It is hypothesized
that increased acid exposure can give rise to small islands of gastric
metaplasia in the duodenal bulb. Colonization of these islands by H
pylori may lead to duodenitis or duodenal ulcer. The association
with gastric ulcers is lower, but H pylori is found in most patients in
whom NSAIDs cannot be implicated. H pylori–associated gastric
ulcers tend to form at the junction of the gastric body and antrum—
the site of transition from oxyntic to pyloric epithelium. Most H
pylori–infected gastric ulcer patients have infection that
predominates in the gastric body and is associated with decreased
acid secretion. It is hypothesized that chronic inflammation
overwhelms the gastric mucosal defense mechanisms.
The natural history of H pylori–associated peptic ulcer disease is
well defined. In the absence of specific antibiotic treatment to
eradicate the organism, 85% of patients will have an endoscopically
visible recurrence within 1 year. Half of these will be symptomatic.
After successful eradication of H pylori with antibiotics, ulcer
recurrence rates are reduced dramatically to 5–20% at 1 year.
Most of these ulcer recurrences are due to NSAID use or, rarely,
reinfection with H pylori.
B. NSAID-Induced Ulcers
There is a 10–20% prevalence of gastric ulcers and a 2–5%
prevalence of duodenal ulcers in long-term NSAID users.
Approximately 2–5%/year of long-term NSAID users will have an
ulcer that causes clinically significant dyspepsia or a serious
complication. The incidence of serious gastrointestinal complications
(hospitalization, bleeding, perforation) is 0.2–1.9%/year. The risk of
NSAID complications is greater within the first 3 months of therapy
and in patients who are older than 60 years; who have a prior
history of ulcer disease; or who take NSAIDs in combination with
aspirin, corticosteroids, or anticoagulants.
Traditional nsNSAIDs inhibit prostaglandins through reversible
inhibition of both COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes. Aspirin causes
irreversible inhibition of COX-1 and COX-2 as well as of platelet
aggregation. Coxibs (or selective NSAIDs) preferentially inhibit
COX-2—the principal enzyme involved in prostaglandin production
at sites of inflammation—while providing relative sparing of COX-
1, the principal enzyme involved with mucosal cytoprotection in the
stomach and duodenum. Celecoxib is the only coxib currently
available in the United States, although other older NSAIDs
(etodolac, meloxicam) may have similar COX-2/COX-1 selectivity.
Coxibs decrease the incidence of endoscopically visible ulcers by
approximately 75% compared with nsNSAIDs. Of greater clinical
importance, the risk of significant clinical events (obstruction,
perforation, bleeding) is reduced by up to 50% in patients taking
coxibs versus nsNSAIDs. However, a twofold increase in the
incidence in cardiovascular complications (myocardial infarction,
cerebrovascular infarction, and death) has been detected in patients
taking coxibs compared with placebo, prompting the voluntary
withdrawal of two coxibs (rofecoxib and valdecoxib) from the
market by the manufacturers. It is hypothesized that selective
inhibition of COX-2 leads to decreased vascular prostacyclin,
reduced arterial vasodilation, hypertension, enhanced atherogenesis,
and enhanced platelet adhesion. In two large, prospective,
randomized controlled trials testing the efficacy of coxibs on polyp
prevention, celecoxib was associated with a 1.3- to 3.4-fold
increased risk of cardiovascular complications versus placebo; the
risk was greatest in patients taking higher doses of celecoxib. A
review by an FDA panel suggested that all NSAIDs (other than
aspirin and, possibly, naproxen) may be associated with an
increased risk of cardiovascular complications, but concluded that
celecoxib, which has less COX-2 selectivity than rofecoxib and
valdecoxib, does not have higher risk than other nsNSAIDs when
used in currently recommended doses (200 mg/day).
Use of even low-dose aspirin (81–325 mg/d) leads to a twofold
increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding complications. In
randomized controlled trials, the absolute annual increase of
gastrointestinal bleeding attributable to low-dose aspirin is only
0.12% higher than with placebo therapy. However, in population
studies, gastrointestinal bleeding occurs in 1.2% of patients each
year. Patients with a prior history of peptic ulcers or gastrointestinal
bleeding have a markedly increased risk of complications on low-
dose aspirin. It should be noted that low-dose aspirin in
combination with NSAIDs or coxibs increases the risk of ulcer
complications by up to tenfold compared with NSAIDs or low-
dose aspirin alone.
H pylori infection increases the risk of ulcer disease and
complications over threefold in patients taking NSAIDs or low-
dose aspirin. It is hypothesized that NSAID initiation may potentiate
or aggravate ulcer disease in susceptible infected individuals.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Epigastric pain (dyspepsia), the hallmark of peptic ulcer disease, is
present in 80–90% of patients. However, this complaint is not
sensitive or specific enough to serve as a reliable diagnostic criterion
for peptic ulcer disease. The clinical history cannot accurately
distinguish duodenal from gastric ulcers. Less than 25% of patients
with dyspepsia have ulcer disease at endoscopy. Twenty percent of
patients with ulcer complications such as bleeding have no
antecedent symptoms (“silent ulcers”). Nearly 60% of patients with
NSAID-related ulcer complications do not have prior symptoms.
Pain is typically well localized to the epigastrium and not severe.
It is described as gnawing, dull, aching, or “hunger-like.”
Approximately 50% of patients report relief of pain with food or
antacids (especially duodenal ulcers) and a recurrence of pain 2–4
hours later. However, many patients deny any relationship to meals
or report worsening of pain. Two-thirds of duodenal ulcers and
one-third of gastric ulcers cause nocturnal pain that awakens the
patient. A change from a patient's typical rhythmic discomfort to
constant or radiating pain may reflect ulcer penetration or
perforation. Most patients have symptomatic periods lasting up to
several weeks with intervals of months to years in which they are
pain free (periodicity).
Nausea and anorexia may occur with gastric ulcers. Significant
vomiting and weight loss are unusual with uncomplicated ulcer
disease and suggest gastric outlet obstruction or gastric malignancy.
The physical examination is often normal in uncomplicated peptic
ulcer disease. Mild, localized epigastric tenderness to deep
palpation may be present. FOBT or FIT is positive in one-third of
patients.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory tests are normal in uncomplicated peptic ulcer disease
but are ordered to exclude ulcer complications or confounding
disease entities. Anemia may occur with acute blood loss from a
bleeding ulcer or less commonly from chronic blood loss.
Leukocytosis suggests ulcer penetration or perforation. An elevated
serum amylase in a patient with severe epigastric pain suggests ulcer
penetration into the pancreas. A fasting serum gastrin level to screen
for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is obtained in some patients (see
below).
C. Endoscopy
Upper endoscopy is the procedure of choice for the diagnosis of
duodenal and gastric ulcers. Duodenal ulcers are virtually never
malignant and do not require biopsy. Three to 5 percent of benign-
appearing gastric ulcers prove to be malignant. Hence, biopsies of
the ulcer margin are almost always performed. Provided that the
gastric ulcer appears benign to the endoscopist and adequate
biopsy specimens reveal no evidence of cancer, dysplasia, or
atypia, the patient may be monitored without further endoscopy. If
these conditions are not fulfilled, follow-up endoscopy should be
performed 12 weeks after the start of therapy to document
complete healing; nonhealing ulcers are suspicious for malignancy.
D. Imaging
Because barium upper gastrointestinal series is less sensitive for
detection of ulcers and less accurate for distinguishing benign from
g
g
g
malignant ulcers, it has been supplanted by upper endoscopy in
most settings. Abdominal CT imaging is obtained in patients with
suspected complications of peptic ulcer disease (perforation,
penetration, or obstruction).
E. Testing for H pylori
In patients in whom an ulcer is diagnosed by endoscopy, gastric
mucosal biopsies should be obtained both for a rapid urease test
and for histologic examination. The specimens for histology are
discarded if the urease test is positive.
In patients with a history of peptic ulcer or when an ulcer is
diagnosed by upper gastrointestinal series, noninvasive assessment
for H pylori with fecal antigen assay or urea breath testing should
be done, which both have a sensitivity and specificity of 95%.
Proton pump inhibitors may cause false-negative urea breath tests
and fecal antigen tests and should be withheld for at least 7–14 days
before testing. Because of its lower sensitivity (85%) and specificity
(79%), serologic testing should not be performed unless fecal
antigen testing or urea breath testing is unavailable.
 Differential Diagnosis
Peptic ulcer disease must be distinguished from other causes of
epigastric distress (dyspepsia). Over 50% of patients with
dyspepsia have no obvious organic explanation for their symptoms
and are classified as having functional dyspepsia (see sections
above on Dyspepsia and Functional Dyspepsia). Atypical
gastroesophageal reflux may be manifested by epigastric symptoms.
Biliary tract disease is characterized by discrete, intermittent
episodes of pain that should not be confused with other causes of
dyspepsia. Severe epigastric pain is atypical for peptic ulcer disease
unless complicated by a perforation or penetration. Other causes
include acute pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis or choledocholithiasis,
esophageal rupture, gastric volvulus, and ruptured aortic aneurysm.
 Pharmacologic Agents
The pharmacology of several agents that enhance the healing of
peptic ulcers is briefly discussed here. They may be divided into
three categories: (1) acid-antisecretory agents, (2) mucosal
protective agents, and (3) agents that promote healing through
eradication of H pylori. Recommendations for their use are
provided in subsequent sections.
A. Acid-Antisecretory Agents
1. Proton pump inhibitors—Proton pump inhibitors covalently
bind the acid-secreting enzyme H+-K+-ATPase, or “proton pump,”
permanently inactivating it. Restoration of acid secretion requires
synthesis of new pumps, which have a half-life of 18 hours. Thus,
although these agents have a serum half-life of < 60 minutes, their
duration of action exceeds 24 hours.
There are six oral proton pump inhibitors currently available:
omeprazole, 
rabeprazole, 
esomeprazole, 
lansoprazole,
dexlansoprazole, and pantoprazole. The available oral agents inhibit
over 90% of 24-hour acid secretion, compared with under 65% for
H2-receptor antagonists in standard dosages. Despite minor
differences in their pharmacology, they are equally efficacious in the
treatment of peptic ulcer disease. Treatment with oral proton pump
inhibitors results in over 90% healing of duodenal ulcers after 4
weeks and 90% of gastric ulcers after 8 weeks when given once
daily (30 minutes before breakfast) at the following recommended
doses: omeprazole, 20–40 mg; esomeprazole, 40 mg; rabeprazole,
20 mg; lansoprazole, 30 mg; dexlansoprazole, 30–60 mg;
pantoprazole, 40 mg. Compared with H2-receptor antagonists,
proton pump inhibitors provide faster pain relief and more rapid
ulcer healing.
The proton pump inhibitors are remarkably safe for short-term
therapy. Long-term use may lead to mild decreases in vitamin B12,
iron, and calcium absorption. Observational studies suggest an
increased risk of enteric infections, including C difficile and
bacterial gastroenteritis, and a modest (1.4-fold) increased risk of
hip fracture. Serum gastrin levels rise significantly in 3% of patients
receiving long-term therapy but return to normal limits within 2
weeks after discontinuation.
2. H2-receptor antagonists—Although H2-receptor antagonists
are effective in the treatment of peptic ulcer disease, proton pump
inhibitors are now the preferred agents because of their ease of use
and superior efficacy. Four H2-receptor antagonists are available:
cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine. All four agents
effectively inhibit nocturnal acid output, but they are less effective at
inhibiting meal-stimulated acid secretion. For uncomplicated peptic
ulcers, H2-receptor antagonists may be administered once daily at
bedtime as follows: raniti-dine and nizatidine 300 mg, famotidine 40
mg, and cimetidine 800 mg. Duodenal and gastric ulcer healing rates
of 85–90% are obtained within 6 weeks and 8 weeks, respectively.
All four agents are well tolerated, and serious adverse effects are
rare. Cimetidine is rarely used because it inhibits hepatic
cytochrome P450 metabolism (raising the serum concentration of
theophylline, warfarin, lido-caine, and phenytoin) and may cause
gynecomastia or impotence.
B. Agents Enhancing Mucosal Defenses
Bismuth, misoprostol, and antacids all have been shown to promote
ulcer healing through the enhancement of mucosal defensive
mechanisms. Given the greater efficacy and safety of antisecretory
agents and better compliance of patients, these other agents are no
longer used as first-line therapy for active ulcers in most clinical
settings. Because of the rapid relief of ulcer symptoms they provide,
antacids are commonly used as needed to supplement antisecretory
agents during the first few days of treatment. Bismuth has direct
antibacterial action against H pylori and may be used in
combination with antibiotics for eradication (see below).
Misoprostol is a prostaglandin analog that stimulates gastroduodenal
mucus and bicarbonate secretion. It is effective as a prophylactic
agent in reducing the incidence of gastroduodenal ulcers in patients
taking nsNSAIDs but must be given four times daily and causes
diarrhea in 10–20% of patients.
C. H pylori Eradication Therapy
Eradication of H pylori has proved difficult. Combination regimens
that use two or three antibiotics with a proton pump inhibitor or
bismuth are required to achieve adequate rates of eradication and to
reduce the number of failures due to antibiotic resistance. In the
United States, up to 50% of strains are resistant to metronidazole
and 13% are resistant to clarithromycin. It is advisable to include
amoxicillin in first-line therapy in most patients, reserving
metronidazole for penicillin-allergic patients. Recommended
regimens are listed in Table 15–10. In most centers in the United
States, the preferred regimen is with a 14-day course of treatment
with an oral proton pump inhibitor—once daily—plus amoxicillin 1
g twice daily and clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily. In patients who
are allergic to penicillin, who have previously been treated with a
macrolide antibiotic, or whose infection persists after an initial
course of antibiotic therapy, the optimal regimen may be quadruple
therapy with a proton pump inhibitor, bismuth subsalicylate,
tetracycline, and metronidazole for 14 days (Table 15–10). These
regimens achieve rates of eradication > 75% after 10–14 days of
treatment; however, their efficacy has been declining due to rising
drug resistance. Several international studies report eradication rates
of > 90% using a novel 10-day sequential regimen consisting of four
drugs: a proton pump inhibitor and amoxicillin for 5 days, followed
by a proton pump inhibitor, clarithromycin, and tinidazole for 5
days. Importantly, sequential therapy appears to be effective in
patients with clarithromycin resistance. At present, there is
controversy among US and European experts about the role of
standard “triple therapy” (proton pump inhibitor, clarithromycin, and
amoxicillin) versus sequential four-drug therapy. However, many
experts believe corroboration by studies in North America is
needed before sequential four-drug therapy can be accepted as
first-line therapy. It also is debated whether there is any advantage
to giving the four drugs sequentially (which increases the regimen
complexity) compared with giving them simultaneously. A recent
trial demonstrated similar eradication rates for sequential and
concomitant 10-day therapy.
 Medical Treatment
Patients should be encouraged to eat balanced meals at regular
intervals. There is no justification for bland or restrictive diets.
Moderate alcohol intake is not harmful. Smoking retards the rate of
ulcer healing and increases the frequency of recurrences and should
be discouraged.
A. Treatment of H pylori–Associated Ulcers
1. Treatment of active ulcer—The goals of treatment of active H
pylori–associated ulcers are to relieve dyspeptic symptoms, to
promote ulcer healing, and to eradicate H pylori infection.
Uncomplicated H pylori–associated ulcers should be treated for
10–14 days with one of the proton pump inhibitor-based H pylori
eradication regimens listed in Table 15–10. At that point, no further
antisecretory therapy is needed, provided the ulcer was small (< 1
cm) and dyspeptic symptoms have resolved. For patients with large
or complicated ulcers, an antisecretory agent should be continued
for an additional 2–4 weeks (duodenal ulcer) or 4–6 weeks (gastric
ulcer) after completion of the antibiotic regimen to ensure complete
ulcer healing. A once-daily oral proton pump inhibitor (as listed in
Table 15–10) is recommended. Confirmation of H pylori
eradication is recommended for all patients > 4 weeks after
completion of antibiotic therapy and > 2 weeks after discontinuation
of the proton pump inhibitor either with noninvasive tests (urea
breath test, fecal antigen test) or endoscopy with biopsy for
histology.
2. Therapy to prevent recurrence—Successful eradication
reduces ulcer recurrences to < 20% after 1–2 years. The most
common cause of recurrence after antibiotic therapy is failure to
achieve successful eradication. Once cure has been achieved,
reinfection rates are < 0.5% per year. Although H pylori
eradication has reduced the need for long-term maintenance
antisecretory therapy to prevent ulcer recurrences, there remains a
subset of patients who require long-term therapy with either a
proton pump inhibitor once daily or an H2-receptor antagonist at
bedtime. This subset includes patients with H pylori–positive ulcers
who have not responded to repeated attempts at eradication
therapy, patients with a history of H pylori–positive ulcers who
have recurrent ulcers despite successful eradication, and patients
with idiopathic ulcers (ie, H pylori–negative and not taking
NSAIDs). In all patients with recurrent ulcers, NSAID usage
(unintentional or surreptitious) and hypersecretory states (including
gastrinoma) should be excluded.
B. Treatment of NSAID-Associated Ulcers
1. Treatment of active ulcers—In patients with NSAID-induced
ulcers, the offending agent should be discontinued whenever
possible. Both gastric and duodenal ulcers respond rapidly to
therapy with H2-receptor antagonists or proton pump inhibitors
(Table 15–10) once NSAIDs are eliminated. In some patients with
severe inflammatory diseases, it may not be feasible to discontinue
NSAIDs. These patients should be treated with concomitant proton
pump inhibitors once daily, which results in ulcer healing rates of
approximately 80% at 8 weeks in patients continuing to take
NSAIDs. All patients with NSAID-associated ulcers should
undergo testing for H pylori infection. Antibiotic eradication therapy
should be given if H pylori tests are positive.
 
Table 15–10. Treatment options for peptic ulce
 
Active Helicobacter pylori–associated ulcer
1. Treat with anti-H pylori regimen for 10–14 days.
Treatment options:
Standard Triple Therapy
•    Proton pump inhibitor orally twice daily1 Clarithromycin
500 mg orally twice daily2 Amoxicillin 1 g orally twice daily
(OR metronidazole 500 mg orally twice daily, if penicillin
allergic3)
     Standard Quadruple Therapy
•    Proton pump inhibitor orally twice daily1,4 Bismuth
subsalicylate two tablets orally four times daily Tetracycline
500 mg orally four times daily Metronidazole 250 mg orally
four times daily or 500 mg three times daily (OR bismuth
subcitrate potassium 140 mg/metronidazole 125
mg/tetracycline 125 mg [Pylera] three capsules orally four
times daily)5
     Sequential Quadruple Therapy
•    Proton pump inhibitor orally twice daily1,6Days 1–5:
amoxicillin 1 g orally twice daily Days 6–10: clarithromycin
500 mg and metronidazole 500 mg, both orally twice daily
2. After completion of course of H pylori eradication
therapy, continue treatment with proton pump inhibitor1
once daily for 4–6 weeks if ulcer is large (> 1 cm) or
complicated.
3. Confirm successful eradication of H pylori with urea
breath test, fecal antigen test, or endoscopy with biopsy at
least 4 weeks after completion of antibiotic treatment and
1–2 weeks after proton pump inhibitor treatment.
Active ulcer not attributable to H pylori
1. Consider other causes: NSAIDs, Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome, gastric malignancy. Treatment options:
•    Proton pump inhibitors1:
Uncomplicated duodenal ulcer: treat for 4 weeks
Uncomplicated gastric ulcer: treat for 8 weeks
•    H2-receptor antagonists:
Uncomplicated duodenal ulcer: cimetidine 800 mg,
ranitidine or nizatidine 300 mg, famotidine 40 mg, orally
once daily at bedtime for 6 weeks
Uncomplicated gastric ulcer: cimetidine 400 mg, ranitidine
or nizatidine 150 mg, famotidine 20 mg, orally twice daily
for 8 weeks Complicated ulcers: proton pump inhibitors
are the preferred drugs
Prevention of ulcer relapse
1. NSAID-induced ulcer: prophylactic therapy for high-risk
patients (prior ulcer disease or ulcer complications, use of
corticosteroids or anticoagulants, age > 60 years, serious
comorbid illnesses).
Treatment options:
     Proton pump inhibitor once daily1
     COX-2 selective NSAID (celecoxib) (contraindicated in
patients with increased risk of cardiovascular disease)
     Misoprostol 200 mcg orally 4 times daily
2. Long-term “maintenance” therapy indicated in patients
with recurrent ulcers who either are H pylori-negative or
who have failed attempts at eradication therapy: once-
daily oral proton pump inhibitor1 or oral H2-receptor
antagonist at bedtime (cimetidine 400–800 mg, nizatidine
or ranitidine 150–300 mg, famotidine 20–40 mg)
1Oral proton pump inhibitors: omeprazole 20–40 mg, rabeprazole 20 mg,
lansoprazole 30 mg, dexlansoprazole 30–60 mg, pantoprazole 40 mg,
esomeprazole 40 mg. Proton pump inhibitors are administered 30
minutes before meals. Esomeprazole 40 mg and dexlansoprazole 60 mg
may be given orally once daily.
2If patient has previously been treated with macrolide antibiotic, choose
another regimen.
3Avoid in areas of known high metronidazole resistance or in patients who
have failed a course of treatment that included metronidazole.
4Preferred regimen in patients who have previously received a macrolide
antibiotic or are penicillin allergic. Effective against metronidazole-resistant
organisms.
5Pylera is an FDA-approved formulation containing: bismuth subcitrate
140 mg/tetracycline 125 mg/metronidazole 125 mg per capsule.
6Regimen requires validation in US studies. Appears effective against
clarithromycin-resistant organisms. COX-2, cyclooxygenase-2; NSAIDs,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
2. Prevention of NSAID-induced ulcers—Clinicians should
carefully weigh the benefits of NSAID therapy with the risks of
cardiovascular and gastrointestinal complications. For all patients,
NSAIDs should be prescribed at the lowest effective dose and for
the shortest period possible. Both coxibs and nsNSAIDS with the
possible exception of naproxen increase the risk of cardiovascular
complications. Ulcer complications occur in up to 2% of all
nsNSAID-treated patients per year but in up to 10–20% per year
of patients with multiple risk factors. These include age over 60
years, history of ulcer disease or complications, concurrent use of
antiplatelet therapy (low-dose aspirin or clopidogrel, or both),
concurrent therapy with anticoagulants or corticosteroids, and
serious underlying medical illness. After considering the patient's risk
of cardiovascular and gastrointestinal complications due to NSAID
use, the clinician can decide what type of NSAID (nsNSAID vs
coxib) is appropriate and what strategies should be used to reduce
the risk of such complications. To minimize cardiovascular and
gastrointestinal risks, all NSAIDs should be used at the lowest
effective dose and for the shortest time necessary.
A. TEST FOR AND TREAT H PYLORI INFECTION—All patients with a
known history of peptic ulcer disease who are treated with
NSAIDs or antiplatelet agents (aspirin, clopidogrel) should be
tested for H pylori infection and treated, if positive. Although H
pylori eradication may decrease the risk of NSAID-related
complications, cotherapy with a proton pump inhibitor or
misoprostol therapy is still required in high-risk patients.
B. PROTON PUMP INHIBITOR—Treatment with an oral proton
pump inhibitor given once daily (rabeprazole 20 mg, omeprazole
20–40 mg, lansoprazole 30 mg, dexlansoprazole 30–60 mg, or
pantoprazole or esomeprazole 40 mg) is effective in the prevention
of NSAID-induced gastric and duodenal ulcers and is approved by
the FDA for this indication. Among high-risk patients taking
nsNSAIDs or coxibs, the incidence of endoscopically visible gastric
and duodenal ulcers after 6 months of therapy in patients treated
with esomeprazole 20–40 mg/d was 5%, compared with 17% who
were given placebo. Nonetheless, proton pump inhibitors are not
fully protective in high-risk patients in preventing NSAID-related
complications. In prospective, controlled trials of patients with a
prior history of NSAID-related ulcer complications, the incidence
of recurrent bleeding was almost 5% after 6 months in patients
taking nsNSAIDs and a proton pump inhibitor. In prospective,
controlled trials of patients with a prior history of ulcer
complications related to low-dose aspirin, the incidence of recurrent
ulcer bleeding in patients taking low-dose aspirin alone is
approximately 15% per year compared with 0–2% per year in
patients taking low-dose aspirin and proton pump inhibitor and 9–
14% per year in patients taking clopidogrel. Thus, proton pump
inhibitors are highly effective in preventing complications related to
low-dose aspirin, even in high-risk patients. Enteric coating of
aspirin may reduce direct topical damage to the stomach but does
not reduce complications.
C. MISOPROSTOL—Misoprostol reduces the incidence of
NSAID-induced gastric and duodenal ulcers by 50–75% and ulcer
complications by 40% when given at a dosage of 100–200 mcg
four times daily. However, misoprostol is less commonly used as a
prophylactic agent against NSAID-induced complications than
either concurrent therapy with a proton pump inhibitor or COX-2
selective agent because of its high side-effect profile and the need
for dosing four times daily.
D. RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO 
REDUCE 
RISK 
OF 
ULCER
COMPLICATIONS FROM NSNSAIDs AND COXIBS—For patients
with a low-risk of cardiovascular disease who have no risk factors
for gastrointestinal complications, an nsNSAID alone may be given.
For patients with 1-2 gastrointestinal risk factors, a coxib alone or
an nsNSAID should be given with a proton pump inhibitor once
daily to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal complications. NSAIDs
should be avoided if possible in patients with multiple risk factors; if
required, however, combination therapy with a coxib or a partially
COX-2 selective nsNSAIDs (etodolac, meloxicam) and a proton
pump inhibitor once daily is recommended.
For patients with an increased risk of cardiovascular
complications, it is preferable to avoid NSAIDs, if possible. If an
NSAID is required, naproxen is preferred because it appears to
have reduced risk of cardiovascular complications compared with
other nsNSAIDs. Coxibs should not be prescribed in patients with
increased cardiovascular risk. Almost all patients with increased
cardiovascular risk also will be taking antiplatelet therapy with low-
dose aspirin or clopidogrel, or both. Because combination therapy
with an nsNSAID and antiplatelet therapy increases the risks of
gastrointestinal complications, these patients should all receive
cotherapy with a proton pump inhibitor once daily or misoprostol.
E. RECOMMENDATIONS 
TO 
REDUCE 
RISK 
OF 
ULCER
COMPLICATIONS WITH USE OF ANTIPLATELET AGENTS —The risk
of significant gastrointestinal complications in persons taking low-
dose aspirin (81–325 mg/d) or clopidogrel, or both, for
cardiovascular prophylaxis is 0.5%/year. Aspirin, 81 mg/d, is
recommended in most patients because it has a lower risk of
gastrointestinal complications but equivalent cardiovascular
protection compared with higher aspirin doses. Complications are
increased with combinations of aspirin and clopidogrel or aspirin
and anticoagulants. Patients with dyspepsia or prior ulcer disease
should be tested for H pylori infection and treated, if positive.
Patients younger than age 60 who have no other risk factors for
gastrointestinal complications may be treated with low-dose aspirin
alone without a proton pump inhibitor or misoprostol. Virtually all
other patients who require low-dose aspirin or aspirin and
anticoagulant therapy should receive a proton pump inhibitor once
daily.
At the present time, the optimal management of patients who
require dual antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel and aspirin is
uncertain. Clopidogrel is a prodrug that is activated by the
cytochrome P450 CYP2C19 enzyme. All proton pump inhibitors
inhibit CYP2C19 to varying degrees, with omeprazole having the
highest and pantoprazole the least level of inhibition. In vitro and in
vivo platelet aggregation studies demonstrate that proton pump
inhibitors (especially omeprazole) may attenuate the antiplatelet
effects of clopidogrel, although the clinical importance of this
interaction is uncertain. Some large retrospective cohort studies
reported a higher incidence (hazard ratio or odds ratio < 2) of
myocardial infarction in patients taking clopidogrel and a proton
pump inhibitor (especially omeprazole) than in patients taking
clopidogrel alone, although the majority of observational studies
have shown no association. By contrast, subgroup analysis from
three prospective, randomized controlled trials (CREDO,
TRITON, PRINCIPLE) have not found an increase in clinically
important cardiac events in patients taking a combination of
clopidogrel with proton pump inhibitors, including omeprazole.
Furthermore, in 2010 a prospective, randomized controlled trial
(COGENT) comparing a combination of clopidogrel with
omeprazole versus placebo found no difference in adverse events.
Notwithstanding, the FDA issued a warning in 2009 that patients
should avoid using clopidogrel with omeprazole, stating further that
the safety of other proton pump inhibitors also was uncertain. Faced
with this warning, the optimal strategy to reduce the risk of
gastrointestinal bleeding in patients taking clopidogrel (with or
without aspirin) is uncertain. A 2010 expert consensus panel
concluded that once daily treatment with an oral proton pump
inhibitor (pantoprazole 40 mg; rabeprazole 20 mg; lansoprazole or
dexlansoprazole 30 mg) may still be recommended for patients who
have an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding (prior history of
peptic ulcer disease or gastrointestinal bleeding; concomitant
NSAIDs). In keeping with the FDA warning and product labeling,
omeprazole and esomeprazole should not be used. For patients
with a lower risk of gastrointestinal bleeding, the risks and benefits
of proton pump inhibitors must be weighed. Pending further
recommendations, an acceptable alternative is to treat with an oral
H2-receptor antagonist (famotidine 20 mg, ranitidine 150 mg,
nizatidine 150 mg) twice daily. Cimetidine is a CYP2C19 inhibitor
and should not be used.
C. Refractory Ulcers
Ulcers that are truly refractory to medical therapy are now
uncommon. Less than 5% of ulcers are unhealed after 8 weeks of
once daily therapy with proton pump inhibitors, and almost all
benign ulcers heal with twice daily therapy. Thus, noncompliance is
the most common cause of ulcer nonhealing. NSAID and aspirin
use, sometimes surreptitious, are commonly implicated in refractory
ulcers and must be stopped. H pylori infection should be sought
and the infection treated, if present, in all refractory ulcer patients.
Single or multiple linear gastric ulcers may occur in large hiatal
hernias where the stomach slides back and forth through the
diaphragmatic hiatus (“Cameron lesions”), which may be a cause of
iron deficiency anemia. Other causes of nonhealing ulcers include
acid hypersecretion (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome), unrecognized
malignancy (adenocarcinoma or lymphoma), medications causing
gastrointestinal ulceration (eg, iron or bisphosphonates), Crohn
disease, 
and 
unusual 
infections 
(H 
heilmanii, 
CMV,
mucormycosis). Fasting serum gastrin levels should be obtained to
exclude gastrinoma with acid hypersecretion (Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome). Repeat ulcer biopsies are mandatory after 2–3 months
of therapy in all nonhealed ulcers to look for malignancy or
infection. Patients with persistent nonhealing ulcers are referred for
surgical therapy after exclusion of NSAID use and persistent H
pylori infection.
Abraham NS et al. ACCF/ACG/AHA 2010 expert consensus
document on the concomitant use of proton pump inhibitors and
thienopyridines: a focused update of the ASSG/ACG/AHA 2008
expert consensus document on reducing the gastrointestinal risks of
antiplatelet therapy and NSAID use. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010
Dec;105(12):2533–49. [PMID: 21131924]
 
Bhatt DL et al; COGENT Investigators. Clopidogrel with or
without omeprazole in coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med.
2010 Nov 11;363(20):1909–17. [PMID: 20925534]
 
Charlot M et al. Proton-pump inhibitors are associated with
increased cardiovascular risk independent of clopidogrel use: a
nationwide cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Sep
21;153(6):378–86. [PMID: 20855802]
 
Lanza FL et al. Guidelines for the prevention of NSAID-ulcer
complications. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009 Mar;104(3):728–38.
[PMID: 19240698]
 
Luther J et al. Empiric quadruple vs. triple therapy for primary
treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection: systematic review and
meta-analysis of efficacy and tolerability. Am J Gastroenterol.
2010 Jan;105(1):65–73. [PMID: 19755966]
 
Malfertheiner P et al. Peptic ulcer disease. Lancet. 2009 Oct
24;374(9699):1449–61. [PMID: 19683340]
 
McColl KE. Clinical Practice. Helicobacter pylori infection. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 29;362(17):1597–604. [PMID:
20427808]
 
McColl KE. Helicobacter pylori-negative, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug-negative ulcer. Gastroenterol Clin North Am.
2009 Jun;38(2):353–61. [PMID: 19446263]
 
Ng FH et al. Famotidine is inferior to pantoprazole in preventing
recurrence of aspirin-related peptic ulcers or erosions.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Jan;138(1):82–8. [PMID: 19837071]
 
Taha AS et al. Famotidine for the prevention of peptic ulcers and
oesophagitis in patients taking low-dose aspirin (FAMOUS): a
phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Lancet. 2009 Jul 11;374(9684):119–25. [PMID: 19577798]
 
Wu DC et al. Sequential and concomitant therapy with four drugs
is equally effective for eradicating H pylori infection. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jan;8(1):36–41. [PMID: 19804842]
 
Yang YX et al. Safety of proton pump inhibitor exposure.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1115–27. [PMID:
20727892]
 
COMPLICATIONS OF PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
1. Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 “Coffee grounds” emesis, hematemesis, melena, or hematochezia.
 Emergent upper endoscopy is diagnostic and therapeutic.
 
 General Considerations
Approximately 50% of all episodes of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding are due to peptic ulcer. Clinically significant bleeding
occurs in 10% of ulcer patients. About 80% of patients stop
bleeding spontaneously and generally have an uneventful recovery;
the remaining 20% have more severe bleeding. The overall mortality
rate for ulcer bleeding is 7%, but it is higher in the elderly, in patients
with comorbid medical problems, and in patients with hospital-
associated bleeding. Mortality is also higher in patients who present
with persistent hypotension or shock, bright red blood in the
vomitus or nasogastric lavage fluid, or severe coagulopathy.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Up to 20% of patients have no antecedent symptoms of pain; this is
particularly true of patients receiving NSAIDs. Common presenting
signs include melena and hematemesis. Massive upper
gastrointestinal bleeding or rapid gastrointestinal transit may result in
hematochezia rather than melena; this may be misinterpreted as
signifying a lower tract bleeding source. Nasogastric lavage that
demonstrates “coffee grounds” or bright red blood confirms an
upper tract source. Recovered nasogastric lavage fluid that is
negative for blood does not exclude active bleeding from a
duodenal ulcer.
B. Laboratory Findings
The hematocrit may fall as a result of bleeding or expansion of the
intravascular volume with intravenous fluids. The BUN may rise as a
result of absorption of blood nitrogen from the small intestine and
prerenal azotemia.
 Treatment
The assessment and initial management of upper gastrointestinal
tract bleeding are discussed above. Specific issues pertaining to
peptic ulcer bleeding are described below.
A. Medical Therapy
1. Antisecretory agents—Intravenous proton pump inhibitors or
high-dose oral proton pump inhibitors should be administered for 3
days in patients with ulcers whose endoscopic appearance suggests
a high risk of rebleeding after endoscopic therapy. Intravenous or
high-dose oral proton pump inhibitors have been associated with a
reduction in rebleeding, transfusions, the need for further
endoscopic therapy, and surgery in the subset of patients with high-
risk ulcers, ie, an ulcer with active bleeding, visible vessel, or
adherent clot (see below). After initial successful endoscopic
treatment of ulcer hemorrhage, intravenous omeprazole (80 mg
bolus injection, followed by 8 mg/h continuous infusion for 72
hours) reduces the rebleeding rate from approximately 20% to <
10%; however, intravenous omeprazole is not available in the
United States. In the United States, intravenous esomeprazole and
pantoprazole are available and commonly used at comparable
dosing (80 mg bolus injection, followed by 8 mg/h) for this
indication.
High-dose oral proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole 40 mg twice
daily) also appear to be effective in reducing rebleeding but have
not been compared with the intravenous regimen. Intravenous H2-
receptor antagonists have not been demonstrated to be of any
benefit in the treatment of acute ulcer bleeding.
2. Long-term prevention of rebleeding—Recurrent ulcer
bleeding develops within 3 years in one-third of patients if no
specific therapy is given. In patients with bleeding ulcers who are H
pylori-positive, successful eradication effectively prevents recurrent
ulcer bleeding in almost all cases. It is therefore recommended that
all patients with bleeding ulcers be tested for H pylori infection and
treated if positive. Four to 8 weeks after completion of antibiotic
therapy, a urea breath or fecal antigen test for H pylori should be
administered or endoscopy performed with biopsy for histologic
confirmation of successful eradication. In patients in whom H pylori
persists or the small subset of patients whose ulcers are not
associated with NSAIDs or H pylori, long-term acid suppression
with a once-daily proton pump inhibitor should be prescribed to
reduce the likelihood of recurrence of bleeding.
B. Endoscopy
Endoscopy is the preferred diagnostic procedure in almost all cases
of upper gastrointestinal bleeding because of its high diagnostic
accuracy, its ability to predict the likelihood of recurrent bleeding,
and its availability for therapeutic intervention in high-risk lesions.
Endoscopy should be performed within 12–24 hours in most cases.
In cases of severe active bleeding, endoscopy is performed as soon
as patients have been appropriately resuscitated and are
hemodynamically stable.
On the basis of clinical and endoscopic criteria, it is possible to
predict which patients are at a higher risk of rebleeding and
therefore to make more rational use of hospital resources.
Nonbleeding ulcers under 2 cm in size with a base that is clean have
a < 5% chance of rebleeding. Most young (under age 60 years),
otherwise healthy patients with clean-based ulcers may be safely
discharged from the emergency department or hospital after endos-
copy. Ulcers that have a flat red or black spot have a < 10%
chance of significant rebleeding. Patients who are hemodynamically
stable with these findings should be admitted to a hospital ward for
24–72 hours and may begin immediate oral feedings and antiulcer
(or anti-H pylori) medication.
By contrast, the risk of rebleeding or continued bleeding in ulcers
with a firmly adherent clot is 12–33%, with a nonbleeding visible
vessel is 50%, and with active bleeding it is 80–90%. Endoscopic
therapy with thermocoagulation (bipolar or heater probes) or
application of endoscopic clips (akin to a staple) is the standard of
care for such lesions because it reduces the risk of rebleeding, the
number of transfusions, and the need for subsequent surgery. For
actively bleeding ulcers, a combination of epinephrine injection
followed by thermocoagulation or clip application commonly is
used. These techniques achieve successful hemostasis of actively
bleeding lesions in 90% of patients. Significant rebleeding occurs in
10–20% of cases, of which over 70% can be managed successfully
with repeat endoscopic treatment. After endoscopic treatment,
patients should remain hospitalized for at least 72 hours, when the
risk of rebleeding falls to below 3%.
C. Surgical Treatment
Patients with recurrent bleeding or bleeding that cannot be
controlled by endoscopic techniques should be evaluated by a
surgeon. However, < 5% of patients treated with hemostatic
therapy require surgery for continued or recurrent bleeding. Overall
surgical mortality for emergency ulcer bleeding is < 6%. The
prognosis is poorer for patients over age 60 years, those with
serious underlying medical illnesses or chronic renal failure, and
those who require more than 10 units of blood transfusion.
Percutaneous arterial embolization is an alternative to surgery for
patients in whom endoscopic therapy has failed.
2. Ulcer perforation
Perforations develop in < 5% of ulcer patients, usually from ulcers
on the anterior wall of the stomach or duodenum. Perforation results
in a chemical peritonitis that causes sudden, severe generalized
abdominal pain that prompts most patients to seek immediate
attention. Elderly or debilitated patients and those receiving long-
term corticosteroid therapy may experience minimal initial
symptoms, presenting late with bacterial peritonitis, sepsis, and
shock. On physical examination, patients appear ill, with a rigid,
quiet abdomen and rebound tenderness. Hypotension develops
later after bacterial peritonitis has developed. If hypotension is
present early with the onset of pain, other abdominal emergencies
should be considered such as a ruptured aortic aneurysm,
mesenteric infarction, or acute pancreatitis. Leukocytosis is almost
always present. A mildly elevated serum amylase (less than twice
normal) is sometimes seen. Abdominal CT usually establishes the
diagnosis without need for further studies. The absence of free air
may lead to a misdiagnosis of pancreatitis, cholecystitis, or
appendicitis.
Laparoscopic perforation closure can be performed in many
centers, significantly reducing operative morbidity compared with
open laparotomy.
3. Gastric Outlet Obstruction
Gastric outlet obstruction occurs in < 2% of patients with ulcer
disease and is due to edema or cicatricial narrowing of the pylorus
or duodenal bulb. With the advent of potent antisecretory therapy
with proton pump inhibitors and the eradication of H pylori,
obstruction now is less commonly caused by peptic ulcers than by
gastric neoplasms or extrinsic duodenal obstruction by intra-
abdominal neoplasms. The most common symptoms are early
satiety, vomiting, and weight loss. Later, vomiting may develop that
typically occurs one to several hours after eating and consists of
partially digested food contents. Patients may develop dehydration,
metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia. On physical examination, a
succussion splash may be heard in the epigastrium. In most cases,
nasogastric aspiration will result in evacuation of a large amount (>
200 mL) of foul-smelling fluid, which establishes the diagnosis.
Patients are treated initially with intravenous isotonic saline and KCl
to correct fluid and electrolyte disorders, an intravenous proton
pump inhibitor, and nasogastric decompression of the stomach.
Upper endoscopy is performed after 24–72 hours to define the
nature of the obstruction and to exclude gastric neoplasm.
Barkun AN et al; International Consensus Upper Gastrointestinal
Bleeding Conference Group. International consensus
recommendations on the management of patients with nonvariceal
upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Jan
19;152(2):101–13. [PMID: 20083829]
 
Chiu PW et al. Predicting mortality in patients with bleeding peptic
ulcers after therapeutic endoscopy. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2009 Mar;7(3):311–6. [PMID: 18955161]
 
Gralnek IM et al. Management of acute bleeding from a peptic
ulcer. N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 28;359(9):928–37. [PMID:
18753649]
 
Laine L et al. Endoscopic therapy for bleeding ulcers: an evidence-
based approach based on meta-analyses of randomized controlled
trials. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Jan;7(1):33–47. [PMID:
18986845]
 
ZOLLINGER-ELLISON SYNDROME (Gastrinoma)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Peptic ulcer disease; may be severe and atypical.
 Gastric acid hypersecretion.
 Diarrhea common, relieved by nasogastric suction.
 Most cases are sporadic; 25% with multiple endo-crine neoplasia
type 1 (MEn 1).
 
 General Considerations
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is caused by gastrin-secreting gut
neuroendocrine 
tumors 
(gastrinomas), 
which 
result 
in
hypergastrinemia and acid hypersecretion. Less than 1% of peptic
ulcer disease is caused by gastrinomas. Primary gastrinomas may
arise in the pancreas (25%), duodenal wall (45%), or lymph nodes
(5–15%), and in other locations or of unknown primary in 20%.
Approximately 80% arise within the “gastrinoma triangle” bounded
by the porta hepatis, the neck of the pancreas, and the third portion
of the duodenum. Most gastrinomas are solitary or multifocal
nodules that are potentially resectable. Over two-thirds of
gastrinomas are malignant, and one-third have already metastasized
to the liver at initial presentation. Approximately 25% of patients
have small multicentric gastrinomas associated with MEN 1 that are
more difficult to resect.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Over 90% of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome develop
peptic ulcers. In most cases, the symptoms are indistinguishable
from other causes of peptic ulcer disease and therefore may go
undetected for years. Ulcers usually are solitary and located in the
duodenal bulb, but they may be multiple or occur more distally in
the duodenum. Isolated gastric ulcers do not occur.
Gastroesophageal reflux symptoms occur often. Diarrhea occurs in
one-third of patients, in some cases in the absence of peptic
symptoms. Gastric acid hypersecretion can cause direct intestinal
mucosal injury and pancreatic enzyme inactivation, resulting in
diarrhea, steatorrhea, and weight loss; nasogastric aspiration of
stomach acid stops the diarrhea. Screening for Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome with fasting gastrin levels should be obtained in patients
with ulcers that are refractory to standard therapies, giant ulcers (>
2 cm), ulcers located distal to the duodenal bulb, multiple duodenal
ulcers, frequent ulcer recurrences, ulcers associated with diarrhea,
ulcers occurring after ulcer surgery, and patients with ulcer
complications. Ulcer patients with hypercalcemia or family histories
of ulcers (suggesting MEN 1) should also be screened. Finally,
patients with peptic ulcers who are H pylori negative and who are
not taking NSAIDs should be screened.
B. Laboratory Findings
The most sensitive and specific method for identifying Zollinger-
Ellison syndrome is demonstration of an increased fasting serum
gastrin concentration (> 150 pg/mL). Levels should be obtained
with patients not taking H2-receptor antagonists for 24 hours or
proton pump inhibitors for 6 days. The median gastrin level is 500–
700 pg/mL, and 60% of patients have levels < 1000 pg/mL.
Hypochlorhydria with increased gastric pH is a much more common
cause of hypergastrinemia than is gastrinoma. Therefore, a
measurement of gastric pH (and, where available, gastric secretory
studies) is performed in patients with fasting hypergastrinemia. Most
patients have a basal acid output of over 15 mEq/h. A gastric pH of
> 3.0 implies hypochlorhydria and excludes gastrinoma. In a patient
with a serum gastrin level of > 1000 pg/mL and acid
hypersecretion, the diagnosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is
established. With lower gastrin levels (150–1000 pg/mL) and acid
secretion, a secretin stimulation test is performed to distinguish
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome from other causes of hypergastrinemia.
Intravenous secretin (2 units/kg) produces a rise in serum gastrin of
over 200 pg/mL within 2–30 minutes in 85% of patients with
gastrinoma. 
An 
elevated 
serum 
calcium 
suggests
hyperparathyroidism and MEN 1 syndrome. In all patients with
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, a serum parathyroid hormone (PTH),
prolactin, luteinizing hormone-follicle-stimulating hormone (LH-
FSH), and growth hormone (GH) level should be obtained to
exclude MEN 1.
C. Imaging
Imaging studies are obtained in an attempt to determine whether
there is metastatic disease and, if not, to identify the site of the
primary tumor. Gastrinomas express somatostatin receptors that
bind radiolabeled octreotide. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
(SRS) with single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
allows total body imaging for detection of primary gastrinomas in
the pancreas and lymph nodes, primary gastrinomas in unusual
locations, and metastatic gastrinomas (liver and bone). SRS has a
sensitivity (> 80%) for tumor detection that exceeds all other
imaging studies combined. If SRS is positive for tumor localization,
further imaging studies are not necessary. In patients with negative
SRS, endoscopic ultra-sonography (EUS) may be useful to detect
small gastrinomas in the duodenal wall, pancreas, or peripancreatic
lymph nodes. CT and MRI scans are commonly obtained to look
for large hepatic metastases and primary lesions, but they have low
sensitivity for small lesions. With a combination of SRS and EUS,
more than 90% of primary gastrinomas can be localized
preoperatively.
 Differential Diagnosis
Gastrinomas are one of several gut neuroendocrine tumors that have
similar histopathologic features and arise either from the gut or
pancreas. These include carcinoid, insulinoma, VIPoma,
glucagonoma, and somatostatinoma. These tumors usually are
differentiated by the gut peptides that they secrete; however, poorly
differentiated neuroendocrine tumors may not secrete any
hormones. Patients may present with symptoms caused by tumor
metastases (jaundice, hepatomegaly) rather than functional
symptoms. Once a diagnosis of a neuroendocrine tumor is
established from the liver biopsy, the specific type of tumor can
subsequently be determined. Both carcinoid and gastrinoma tumors
may be detected incidentally during endoscopy after biopsy of a
submucosal nodule and must be distinguished by subsequent
studies.
Hypergastrinemia due to gastrinoma must be distinguished from
other causes of hypergastrinemia. Atrophic gastritis with decreased
acid secretion is detected by gastric secretory analysis. Other
conditions associated with hyper-gastrinemia (eg, gastric outlet
obstruction, vagotomy, chronic renal failure) are associated with a
negative secretin stimulation test.
 Treatment
A. Metastatic Disease
The most important predictor of survival is the presence of hepatic
metastases. In patients with multiple hepatic metastases, initial
therapy should be directed at controlling hypersecretion. Oral
proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, esomeprazole, rabeprazole,
pantoprazole, or lansoprazole) are given at a dose of 40–120 mg/d,
titrated to achieve a basal acid output of < 10 mEq/h. At this level,
there is complete symptomatic relief and ulcer healing. In patients
with isolated hepatic metastases, surgical resection or cryoablation
may decrease the need for antisecretory medications and may
prolong survival. Owing to the slow growth of these tumors, 30% of
patients with hepatic metastases have a survival of 10 years.
B. Localized Disease
Cure can be achieved only if the gastrinoma can be resected before
hepatic metastatic spread has occurred. Lymph node metastases do
not adversely affect prognosis. Laparotomy should be considered in
all patients in whom preoperative studies fail to demonstrate hepatic
or other distant metastases. A combination of preoperative studies,
duodenotomy with careful duodenal inspection, and intraoperative
palpation and sonography allows successful localization and
resection in the majority of cases. The 15-year survival of patients
who do not have liver metastases at initial presentation is over 95%.
The role of surgery in patients with MEN 1 is controversial. Surgical
cure in patients with MEN 1 rarely occurs, and long-term survival is
common in the absence of surgery. Some experts recommend
surgery only in patients with MEN 1 whose tumors are larger than 2
cm, in whom the risk of hepatic metastases is increased.
Ellison EC et al. The Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: a comprehensive
review of historical, scientific, and clinical considerations. Curr
Probl Surg. 2009 Jan;46(1):13–106. [PMID: 19059523]
 
BENIGN TUMORS OF THE STOMACH
Gastric epithelial polyps are usually detected incidentally at
endoscopy. The majority are fundic gland polyps or hyper-plastic
polyps, which are small, single or multiple, have no malignant
potential, and do not require removal or endoscopic surveillance.
There is an increased prevalence of fundic gland polyps in patients
taking proton pump inhibitors. Adenomatous polyps account for
10–20% of gastric polyps. They are usually solitary lesions. In rare
instances they ulcerate, causing chronic blood loss. Because of their
premalignant potential, endoscopic removal is indicated. Annual
endoscopic surveillance is recommended to screen for further polyp
development. Submucosal gastric polypoid lesions include benign
gastric stromal tumors (commonly misclassified as leiomyomas) and
pancreatic rests. (See Chapter 39 for Gastric Adenocarcinoma,
Lymphoma, Carcinoid Tumors, and Mesenchymal Tumors.)
Zelter A et al. Fundic gland polyps and association with proton
pump inhibitor intake: a prospective study in 1,780 endosco-pies.
Dig Dis Sci. 2010 Dec 3. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
21127978]
 
DISEASES OF THE SMALL
INTESTINE
 
MALABSORPTION
The term “malabsorption” denotes disorders in which there is a
disruption of digestion and nutrient absorption. The clinical and
laboratory manifestations of malabsorption are summarized in Table
15–11.
1. Celiac Disease
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Typical symptoms: weight loss, chronic diarrhea, abdominal
distention, growth retardation.
 Atypical symptoms: dermatitis herpetiformis, iron deficiency
anemia, osteoporosis.
 Abnormal serologic test results.
 Abnormal small bowel biopsy.
 Clinical improvement on gluten-free diet.
 
 General Considerations
Celiac disease is a permanent dietary disorder caused by an
immunologic response to gluten, a storage protein found in certain
grains, that results in diffuse damage to the proximal small intestinal
mucosa with malabsorption of nutrients. Although symptoms may
manifest between 6 months and 24 months of age after the
introduction of weaning foods, the majority of cases present in
childhood or adulthood. Population screening with serologic tests
suggests that the disease is present in 1:100 whites of Northern
European ancestry, in whom a clinical diagnosis of celiac disease is
made in only 10%, suggesting that most cases are undiagnosed or
asymptomatic. Celiac disease only develops in people with the
HLA-DQ2 (95%) or -DQ8 (5%) class II molecules, which are
present in 40% of the population. Although the precise pathogenesis
is unclear, celiac disease arises in a small subset of genetically
susceptible (-DQ2 or -DQ8) individuals when dietary gluten
stimulates an inappropriate immunologic response. Glutens are
partially digested in the intestinal lumen into glutamine-rich peptides.
Some of the glutamines are deamidated by the enzyme tTG,
generating negatively charged glutamic acid residues. If these
peptides are able to bind to HLA-DQ2 or -DQ8 molecules on
antigen-presenting cells, they may stimulate an inappropriate T cell–
mediated activation in the intestinal submucosa that results in
destruction of mucosal enterocytes as well as a humoral immune
response that results in antibodies to gluten, tTG, and other
autoantigens.
 
Table 15–11. Clinical manifestations and laboratory findings in
malabsorption of variou
 
INR, international normalized ratio.
 Clinical Findings
The most important step in diagnosing celiac disease is to consider
the diagnosis. Symptoms are present for more than 10 years in most
adults before the correct diagnosis is established. Because of its
protean manifestations, celiac disease is grossly underdiagnosed in
the adult population.
A. Symptoms and Signs
The gastrointestinal symptoms and signs of celiac disease depend
on the length of small intestine involved and the patient's age when
the disease presents. “Classic” symptoms of malabsorption,
including diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, abdominal distention,
weakness, muscle wasting, or growth retardation, more commonly
present in infants (< 2 years). Older children and adults are less
likely to manifest signs of serious malabsorption. They may report
chronic diarrhea, dyspepsia, or flatulence due to colonic bacterial
digestion of malabsorbed nutrients, but the severity of weight loss is
variable. Many adults have minimal or no gastrointestinal symptoms
but present with extraintestinal “atypical” manifestations, including
fatigue, depression, iron-deficiency anemia, osteoporosis, short
stature, delayed puberty, amenorrhea, or reduced fertility.
Approximately 40% of patients with positive serologic tests
consistent with sprue have no symptoms of disease; the natural
history of these patients with “silent” sprue is unclear.
Physical examination may be normal in mild cases or may reveal
signs of malabsorption such as loss of muscle mass or subcutaneous
fat, pallor due to anemia, easy bruising due to vitamin K deficiency,
hyperkeratosis due to vitamin A deficiency, bone pain due to
osteomalacia, or neurologic signs (peripheral neuropathy, ataxia)
due to vitamin B12 or vitamin E deficiency (Table 15–11).
Abdominal examination may reveal distention with hyper-active
bowel sounds.
Dermatitis herpetiformis is regarded as a cutaneous variant of
celiac disease. It is a characteristic skin rash consisting of pruritic
papulovesicles over the extensor surfaces of the extremities and
over the trunk, scalp, and neck. Dermatitis herpetiformis occurs in <
10% of patients with celiac disease; however, almost all patients
who present with dermatitis herpetiformis have evidence of celiac
disease on intestinal mucosal biopsy, though it may not be clinically
evident.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Routine laboratory tests—Depending on the severity of illness
and the extent of intestinal involvement, nonspecific laboratory
abnormalities may be present that may raise the suspicion of
malabsorption and celiac disease (Table 15–11). Limited proximal
involvement may result only in microcytic anemia due to iron
deficiency. Up to 5% of adults with iron deficiency not due to
gastrointestinal blood loss have undiagnosed celiac disease. More
extensive involvement results in a megaloblastic anemia due to folate
or vitamin B12 deficiency. Low serum calcium or elevated alkaline
phosphatase may reflect impaired calcium or vita-min D absorption
with osteomalacia or osteoporosis. Dual-energy x-ray densitometry
scanning is recommended for all patients with sprue to screen for
osteoporosis. Elevations of prothrombin time, or decreased vitamin
A or D levels reflect impaired fat-soluble vitamin absorption. A low
serum albumin may reflect small intestine protein loss or poor
nutrition. Severe diarrhea may result in a nonanion gap acidosis and
hypokalemia. Mild elevations of aminotransferases are found in up
to 40%.
2. Serologic tests—Serologic tests should be performed in all
patients in whom there is a suspicion of celiac disease. The two
tests with the highest diagnostic accuracy are the IgA endomysial
antibody and IgA tTG antibody tests, both of which have a ≥ 90%
sensitivity and ≥ 95% specificity for the diagnosis of celiac disease.
A negative test reliably excludes the diagnosis of celiac disease.
Antigliadin antibodies are not recommended because of their lower
sensitivity and specificity. Because up to 3% of patients with celiac
disease have IgA deficiency, an IgA level should be obtained in
patients with a negative IgA endomysial antibody or tTG antibody
when celiac disease is strongly suspected. For the subset of patients
with IgA deficiency, IgG tTG or endomysial antibodies can be
obtained. Levels of all antibodies become undetectable after 6–12
months of dietary gluten withdrawal and may be used to monitor
dietary compliance, especially in patients whose symptoms fail to
resolve after institution of a gluten-free diet.
C. Mucosal Biopsy
Endoscopic mucosal biopsy of the distal duodenum or proximal
jejunum is the standard method for confirmation of the diagnosis in
patients with a positive serologic test for celiac disease. Rarely,
mucosal biopsy may be pursued in patients with negative serologies
when symptoms and laboratory studies are suggestive of celiac
disease. At endoscopy, atrophy or scalloping of the duodenal folds
may be observed. Histology reveals abnormalities ranging from
intraepithelial lymphocytosis alone to extensive infiltration of the
lamina propria with lymphocytes and plasma cells with hypertrophy
of the intestinal crypts and, in its most severe form, to blunting or
complete loss of intestinal villi. An adequate normal biopsy excludes
the diagnosis. Partial or complete reversion of these abnormalities
on repeat biopsy after a patient is placed on a gluten-free diet
establishes the diagnosis. However, if a patient with a compatible
biopsy demonstrates prompt clinical improvement on a gluten-free
diet and a decrease in antigliadin antibodies, a repeat biopsy is
unnecessary.
 Differential Diagnosis
Many patients with chronic diarrhea or flatulence are erroneously
diagnosed as having irritable bowel syndrome. Celiac sprue must be
distinguished from other causes of malabsorption, as outlined
above. Severe panmalabsorption of multiple nutrients is almost
always caused by mucosal disease. The histologic appearance of
celiac sprue may resemble other mucosal diseases such as tropical
sprue, bacterial overgrowth, cow's milk intolerance, viral
gastroenteritis, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, and mucosal damage
caused by acid hypersecretion associated with gastrinoma.
Documentation of clinical response to gluten withdrawal therefore is
essential to the diagnosis.
 Treatment
Removal of all gluten from the diet is essential to therapy—all
wheat, rye, and barley must be eliminated. Although oats appear to
be safe, commercial products may be contaminated with wheat or
barley during processing. Because of the pervasive use of gluten
products in manufactured foods and additives, in medications, and
by restaurants, it is imperative that patients and their families confer
with a knowledgeable dietitian to comply satisfactorily with this
lifelong diet. Several excellent dietary guides and patient support
groups are available. Most patients with celiac disease also have
lactose intolerance either temporarily or permanently and should
avoid dairy products until the intestinal symptoms have improved on
the gluten-free diet. Dietary supplements (folate, iron, calcium, and
vitamins A, B12, D, and E) should be provided in the initial stages of
therapy but usually are not required long-term with a gluten-free
diet. Patients with confirmed osteoporosis may require long-term
calcium, vitamin D, and bisphosphonate therapy.
Improvement in symptoms should be evident within a few weeks
on the gluten-free diet. The most common reason for treatment
failure is incomplete removal of gluten. Acute severe diarrhea with
dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, and malnutrition may require
TPN and intravenous or oral corticosteroids (prednisone 40 mg or
budesonide 9 mg) for 2 or more weeks as a gluten-free diet is
initiated.
 Prognosis & Complications
If appropriately diagnosed and treated, patients with celiac disease
have an excellent prognosis. Celiac disease may be associated with
other autoimmune disorders, including Addison disease, Graves
disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, scleroderma,
Sjögren syndrome, atrophic gastritis, and pancreatic insufficiency. In
some patients, celiac disease may evolve and become refractory to
the gluten-free diet. The most common cause is intentional or
unintentional dietary noncompliance, which may be suggested by
positive serologic tests. Celiac disease that is truly refractory to
gluten withdrawal occurs in 5% and generally carries a poor
prognosis. There are two types of refractory disease, which are
distinguished by their intraepithelial lymphocyte phenotype. Type I
has a normal (polyclonal) lymphocyte population, whereas type II
has an aberrant population characterized by loss of surface
expression of CD3 and CD8 and monoclonal rearrangement of the
surface T-cell receptor by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Type I
disease usually responds to corticosteroids (prednisone or
budesonide) with or without azathioprine; however, long-term
therapy is usually required. Type II disease is less responsive to
corticosteroid therapy and has a high risk of progression to intestinal
T-cell lymphoma (50% at 5 years), which carries a poor prognosis
with either chemotherapy or autologous bone marrow
transplantation. This diagnosis should be considered in patients
previously responsive to the gluten-free diet in whom new weight
loss, abdominal pain, and malabsorption develop.
Celiac Disease Foundation, 13251 Ventura Blvd, Suite #1, Studio
City, CA 91604-1838. http://www.celiac.org
 
Jamma S et al. Celiac crisis is a rare but serious complication of
celiac disease in adults. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jul;
8(7):587–90. [PMID: 20417725]
 
Malamut G et al. Presentation and long-term follow-up of
refractory celiac disease: comparison of Type I with Type II.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Jan;136(1):81–90. [PMID: 19014942]
 
Rubio-Tapia A et al. Celiac disease and persistent symptoms. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Jan;9(1):13–7. [PMID: 20692372]
 
Schuppan D et al. Celiac disease: from pathogenesis to novel
therapies. Gastroenterology. 2009 Dec;137(6):1912–33. [PMID:
19766641]
 
2. Whipple Disease
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Multisystemic disease.
 Fever, lymphadenopathy, arthralgias.
 Weight loss, malabsorption, chronic diarrhea.
 Duodenal biopsy with periodic acid-schiff (PAs)-positive
macrophages with characteristic bacillus.
 
 General Considerations
Whipple disease is a rare multisystemic illness caused by infection
with the bacillus Tropheryma whippelii. It may occur at any age
but most commonly affects white men in the fourth to sixth decades.
The source of infection is unknown, but no cases of human-to-
human spread have been documented.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical manifestations are protean; however, the most common
are arthralgias, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss.
Arthralgias or a migratory, nondeforming arthritis occurs in 80%
and is typically the first symptom experienced. Gastrointestinal
symptoms occur in approximately 75% of cases. They include
abdominal pain, diarrhea, and some degree of malabsorption with
distention, flatulence, and steatorrhea. Weight loss is the most
common presenting symptom—seen in almost all patients. Loss of
protein due to intestinal or lymphatic involvement may result in
protein-losing enteropathy with hypoalbuminemia and edema. In the
absence of gastrointestinal symptoms, the diagnosis often is delayed
for several years. Intermittent low-grade fever occurs in over 50%
of cases. There may be generalized lymphadenopathy that
resembles sarcoidosis. Myocardial or valvular involvement may lead
to congestive failure or valvular regurgitation. Central nervous
system involvement is manifested by a variety of findings such as
dementia, lethargy, coma, seizures, myoclonus, or hypothalamic
signs. Cranial nerve findings include ophthalmoplegia or nystagmus.
Physical examination may reveal hypotension (a late finding),
low-grade fever, and evidence of malabsorption (see Table 15–11).
Lymphadenopathy is present in 50%. Heart murmurs due to
valvular involvement may be evident. Peripheral joints may be
enlarged or warm, and peripheral edema may be present.
Neurologic findings are cited above. Hyperpigmentation on sun-
exposed areas is evident in up to 40%.
B. Laboratory Findings
If significant malabsorption is present, patients may have laboratory
abnormalities as outlined in Table 15–11. There may be
steatorrhea.
C. Histologic Evaluation
In most cases, the diagnosis of Whipple disease is established by
endoscopic biopsy of the duodenum with histo-logic evaluation,
which demonstrates infiltration of the lamina propria with PAS-
positive macrophages that contain gram-positive bacilli (which are
not acid-fast) and dilation of the lacteals. The Whipple bacillus has a
characteristic trimellar wall appearance on electron microscopy. In
some patients who present with nongastrointestinal symptoms, the
duodenal biopsy may be normal, and biopsy of other involved
organs or lymph nodes may be necessary. Because the PAS stain is
less sensitive and specific for extraintestinal Whipple disease, PCR
is used to confirm the diagnosis by demonstrating the presence of
16S ribosomal RNA of T whippelii in blood, vitreous fluid,
synovial fluid, or cardiac valves. Because asymptomatic central
nervous system infection occurs in 40% of patients, examination of
the cerebrospinal fluid by PCR for T whippelii should be
performed routinely. The sensitivity of PCR is 97% and the
specificity 100%.
 Differential Diagnosis
Whipple disease should be considered in patients who present with
signs of malabsorption, fever of unknown origin, lymphadenopathy,
seronegative arthritis, culture-negative endocarditis, or multisystemic
disease. Small bowel biopsy readily distinguishes Whipple disease
from other mucosal malabsorptive disorders, such as celiac sprue.
Patients with AIDS and infection of the small intestine with
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) may have a similar clinical
and histologic picture; although both conditions are characterized by
PAS-positive macrophages, they may be distinguished by the acid-
fast stain, which is positive for MAC and negative for the Whipple
bacillus. Other conditions that may be confused with Whipple
disease 
include 
sarcoidosis, 
Reiter 
syndrome, 
familial
Mediterranean fever, systemic vasculitides, Behçet disease,
intestinal lymphoma, and subacute infective endocarditis.
 Treatment
Antibiotic therapy results in a dramatic clinical improvement within
several weeks, even in some patients with neurologic involvement.
The optimal regimen is unknown. Complete clinical response usually
is evident within 1–3 months; however, relapse may occur in up to
one-third of patients after discontinuation of treatment. Therefore,
prolonged treatment for at least 1 year is required. Drugs that cross
the blood-brain barrier are preferred. A randomized controlled trial
in 40 patients with 3–10 years follow-up demonstrated 100%
remission with either ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously twice daily or
meropenem 1 g intravenously three times daily for 2 weeks,
followed by trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg twice daily
for 12 months. After treatment, repeat duodenal biopsies for
histologic analysis and cerebrospinal fluid PCR should be obtained
every 6 months for at least 1 year. The absence of PAS-positive
material predicts a low likelihood of clinical relapse.
 Prognosis
If untreated, the disease is fatal. Because some neurologic signs may
be permanent, the goal of treatment is to prevent this progression.
Patients must be followed closely after treatment for signs of
symptom recurrence.
Feurle G et al. Efficacy of ceftriaxone or meropenem as initial
therapies for Whipple's disease. Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;
138(2):478–86. [PMID: 19879276]
 
Marth T. New insights into Whipple's disease—a rare intestinal
inflammatory disorder. Dig Dis. 2009;27(4):494–501. [PMID:
19897965]
 
3. Bacterial Overgrowth
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms of distention, flatulence, diarrhea, and weight loss.
 Increased qualitative or quantitative fecal fat.
 Advanced cases associated with deficiencies of iron or vitamins
A, D, and B12.
 Diagnosis suggested by breath tests using glucose, lactulose, or
14C-xylose as substrates.
 Diagnosis confirmed by jejunal aspiration with quantitative
bacterial cultures.
 
 General Considerations
The small intestine normally contains a small number of bacteria.
Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine of whatever cause may
result in malabsorption via a number of mechanisms. Bacterial
deconjugation of bile salts may lead to inadequate micelle formation,
resulting in decreased fat absorption with steatorrhea and
malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D). Microbial uptake of
specific nutrients reduces absorption of vitamin B12 and
carbohydrates. Bacterial proliferation also causes direct damage to
intestinal epithelial cells and the brush border, further impairing
absorption of proteins, carbohydrates, and minerals. Passage of the
malabsorbed bile acids and carbohydrates into the colon leads to an
osmotic and secretory diarrhea and increased flatulence.
Causes of bacterial overgrowth include: (1) gastric achlorhydria
(including proton pump inhibitor therapy); (2) anatomic
abnormalities of the small intestine with stagnation (afferent limb of
Billroth II gastrojejunostomy, resection of ileocecal valve, small
intestine diverticula, obstruction, blind loop); (3) small intestine
motility disorders (vagotomy, scleroderma, diabetic enteropathy,
chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction); (4) gastrocolic or coloenteric
fistula (Crohn disease, malignancy, surgical resection); and (5)
miscellaneous disorders. Bacterial overgrowth is an important cause
of malabsorption in the elderly, perhaps because of decreased
gastric acidity or impaired intestinal motility. It may also be present
in a subset of patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
 Clinical Findings
Many patients with bacterial overgrowth are asymptomatic.
Symptoms are nonspecific and include distention, flatulence, weight
loss, diarrhea, and sometimes steator-rhea. Severe cases may result
in clinically significant vitamin and mineral deficiencies, including fat-
soluble vitamins A or D, vitamin B12, and iron (Table 15–11).
Qualitative or quantitative fecal fat assessment typically is abnormal.
Bacterial overgrowth should be considered in any patient with
diarrhea, flatulence, weight loss, or macrocytic anemia, especially if
the patient has a predisposing cause (such as prior gastrointestinal
surgery). A stool collection should be obtained to corroborate the
presence of steatorrhea. Vitamins A, D, B12, and serum iron should
be measured. A specific diagnosis can be established firmly only by
an aspirate and culture of proximal jejunal secretion that
demonstrates over 105 organisms/mL. However, this is an invasive
and laborious test that requires careful collection and culturing
techniques and therefore is not available in many clinical settings.
Noninvasive breath tests are easier to perform and have a sensitivity
of 60–90% and specificity of 85% compared with jejunal cultures.
Breath hydrogen tests with glucose or lactulose as substrates or
breath CO2 tests with 14C-xylose as substrate are commonly done
because of their ease of use. A small bowel barium radiography or
CT enterography study should be obtained to look for mechanical
factors predisposing to intestinal stasis.
Owing to the lack of an optimal test for bacterial over-growth,
many clinicians use an empiric antibiotic trial as a diagnostic and
therapeutic maneuver in patients with predisposing conditions for
bacterial overgrowth in whom unexplained diarrhea or steatorrhea
develops.
 Treatment
Where possible, the anatomic defect that has potentiated bacterial
overgrowth should be corrected. Otherwise, treatment as follows
for 1–2 weeks with oral broad-spectrum antibiotics effective against
enteric aerobes and anaerobes usually leads to dramatic
improvement: twice daily ciprofloxacin 500 mg, norfloxacin 400 mg,
or amoxicillin clavulanate 875 mg, or a combination of
metronidazole 250 mg three times daily plus either trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet) twice daily or
cephalexin 250 mg four times daily. Rifaximin 400 mg three times
daily is a nonabsorbable antibiotic that also appears to be effective
but has fewer side effects than the other systemically absorbed
antibiotics.
In patients in whom symptoms recur off antibiotics, cyclic therapy
(eg, 1 week out of 4) may be sufficient. Continuous antibiotics
should be avoided, if possible, to avoid development of bacterial
antibiotic resistance.
In patients with severe intestinal dysmotility, treatment with small
doses of octreotide may prove to be of benefit.
Gasbarrini A et al. Methodology and indications of H2-breath
testing in gastrointestinal diseases: the Rome Consensus
Conference. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Mar 30;(29 Suppl 1):
1–49. [PMID: 19344474]
 
Lauritano EC et al. Antibiotic therapy in small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth: rifaximin versus metronidazole. Eur Rev Med
Pharmcol Sci. 2009 Mar–Apr;13(2):111–6. [PMID: 19499846]
 
Lombardo L et al. Increased incidence of small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth during proton pump inhibitor therapy. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jun;8(6):504–8. [PMID: 20060064]
 
4. Short Bowel Syndrome
Short bowel syndrome is the malabsorptive condition that arises
secondary to removal of significant segments of the small intestine.
The most common causes in adults are Crohn disease, mesenteric
infarction, radiation enteritis, volvulus, tumor resection, and trauma.
The type and degree of malabsorption depend on the length and site
of the resection and the degree of adaptation of the remaining
bowel.
 Terminal Ileal Resection
Resection of the terminal ileum results in malabsorption of bile salts
and vitamin B12, which are normally absorbed in this region.
Patients with low serum vitamin B12 levels, an abnormal Schilling
test, or resection of over 50 cm of ileum require monthly
intramuscular vitamin B12 injections. In patients with < 100 cm of
ileal resection, bile salt malabsorption stimulates fluid secretion from
the colon, resulting in watery diarrhea. This may be treated with bile
salt binding resins (cholestyramine, 2–4 g orally three times daily
with meals). Resection of over 100 cm of ileum leads to a reduction
in the bile salt pool that results in steatorrhea and mal-absorption of
fat-soluble vitamins. Treatment is with a low-fat diet and vitamins
supplemented with medium-chain triglycerides, which do not require
micellar solubilization. Unabsorbed fatty acids bind with calcium,
reducing its absorption and enhancing the absorption of oxalate.
Oxalate kidney stones may develop. Calcium supplements should
be administered to bind oxalate and increase serum calcium.
Cholesterol gallstones due to decreased bile salts are common also.
In patients with resection of the ileocolonic valve, bacterial
overgrowth may occur in the small intestine, further complicating
malabsorption (as outlined above).
 Extensive Small Bowel Resection
Resection of 40–50% of the total length of small intestine usually is
well tolerated. A more massive resection may result in “short-bowel
syndrome,” characterized by weight loss and diarrhea due to
nutrient, water, and electrolyte malabsorption. After resection, the
remaining small intestine has a remarkable ability to adapt, gradually
increasing its absorptive capacity up to fourfold over 1 year. The
colon also plays an important role in absorption of fluids,
electrolytes, and digestion of complex carbohydrates (through
bacterial fermentation to short-chain fatty acids) after small bowel
resection. If the colon is preserved, 100 cm of proximal jejunum
may be sufficient to maintain adequate oral nutrition with a low-fat,
high complex-carbohydrate diet, though fluid and electrolyte losses
may still be significant. In patients in whom the colon has been
removed, at least 200 cm of proximal jejunum is typically required
to maintain oral nutrition. Duodenal resection may result in folate,
iron, or calcium malabsorption. Levels of other minerals such as
zinc, selenium, and magnesium should be monitored. Parenteral
vitamin supplementation may be necessary. Antidiarrheal agents
(loperamide, 2–4 mg orally three times daily) slow transit and
reduce diarrheal volume. Octreotide reduces intestinal transit time
and fluid and electrolyte secretion. Gastric hypersecretion initially
complicates intestinal resection and should be treated with proton
pump inhibitors.
Patients with < 100–200 cm of proximal jejunum remaining
almost always require parenteral nutrition. Of patients who do, the
estimated annual mortality rate is 2–5% per year. Death is most
commonly due to TPN-induced liver disease, sepsis, or loss of
venous access. Small intestine transplantation is now being
performed with reported 5-year graft survival rates of 40%.
Currently, it is performed chiefly in patients who develop serious
problems due to parenteral nutrition.
Joly F et al. Tube feeding improves intestinal absorption in short
bowel patients. Gastroenterology. 2009 Mar;136(3):824–31.
[PMID: 19046971]
 
Sudan D. Long-term outcomes and quality of life after intestine
transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2010 Jun;
15(3):357–60. [PMID: 20445450]
 
5. Lactase Deficiency
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Diarrhea, bloating, flatulence, and abdominal pain after ingestion
of milk-containing products.
 Diagnosis supported by symptomatic improvement on lactose-
free diet.
 Diagnosis confirmed by hydrogen breath test.
 
 General Considerations
Lactase is a brush border enzyme that hydrolyzes the disaccharide
lactose into glucose and galactose. The concentration of lactase
enzyme levels is high at birth but declines steadily in most people of
non-European ancestry during childhood and adolescence and into
adulthood. Thus, approximately 50 million people in the United
States have partial to complete lactose intolerance. As many as
90% of Asian Americans, 70% of African Americans, 95% of
Native Americans, 50% of Mexican Americans, and 60% of Jewish
Americans are lactose intolerant compared with < 25% of white
adults. Lactase deficiency may also arise secondary to other
gastrointestinal disorders that affect the proximal small intestinal
mucosa. These include Crohn disease, sprue, viral gastroenteritis,
giardiasis, short bowel syndrome, and malnutrition. Malabsorbed
lactose is fermented by intestinal bacteria, producing gas and
organic acids. The nonmetabolized lactose and organic acids result
in an increased stool osmotic load with an obligatory fluid loss.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients have great variability in clinical symptoms, depending both
on the severity of lactase deficiency and the amount of lactose
ingested. Because of the nonspecific nature of these symptoms,
there is a tendency for both lactose-intolerant and lactose-tolerant
individuals to mistakenly attribute a variety of abdominal symptoms
to lactose intolerance. Most patients with lactose intolerance can
drink one or two 8 oz glasses of milk daily without symptoms if
taken with food at wide intervals, though rare patients have almost
complete intolerance. With mild to moderate amounts of lactose
malabsorption, patients may experience bloating, abdominal
cramps, and flatulence. With higher lactose ingestions, an osmotic
diarrhea will result. Isolated lactase deficiency does not result in
other signs of malabsorption or weight loss. If these findings are
present, other gastrointestinal disorders should be pursued.
Diarrheal specimens reveal an increased osmotic gap and a pH of <
6.0.
B. Laboratory Findings
The most widely available test for the diagnosis of lactase deficiency
is the hydrogen breath test. After ingestion of 50 g of lactose, a rise
in breath hydrogen of > 20 ppm within 90 minutes is a positive test,
indicative of bacterial carbohydrate metabolism. In clinical practice,
many clinicians prescribe an empiric trial of a lactose-free diet for 2
weeks. Resolution of symptoms (bloating, flatulence, diarrhea) is
suggestive of lactase deficiency (though a placebo response cannot
be excluded) and may be confirmed, if necessary, with a breath
hydrogen study.
 Differential Diagnosis
The symptoms of late-onset lactose intolerance are nonspecific and
may mimic a number of gastrointestinal disorders, such as
inflammatory bowel disease, mucosal malabsorptive disorders,
irritable bowel syndrome, and pancreatic insufficiency. Furthermore,
lactase deficiency frequently develops secondary to other
gastrointestinal disorders (as listed above). Concomitant lactase
deficiency should always be considered in these gastrointestinal
disorders.
 Treatment
The goal of treatment in patients with isolated lactase deficiency is
achieving patient comfort. Patients usually find their “threshold” of
intake at which symptoms will occur. Foods that are high in lactose
include milk (12 g/cup), ice cream (9 g/cup), and cottage cheese (8
g/cup). Aged cheeses have a lower lactose content (0.5 g/oz).
Unpasteurized yogurt contains bacteria that produce lactase and is
generally well tolerated.
By spreading dairy product intake throughout the day in
quantities of < 12 g of lactose (one cup of milk), most patients can
take dairy products without symptoms and do not require lactase
supplements. Most food markets provide milk that has been
pretreated with lactase, rendering it 70–100% lactose free. Lactase
enzyme replacement is commercially available as nonprescription
formulations (Lactaid, Lactrase, Dairy Ease). Caplets or drops of
lactase may be taken with milk products, improving lactose
absorption and eliminating symptoms. The number of caplets
ingested depends on the degree of lactose intolerance. Patients who
choose to restrict or eliminate milk products may have increased
risk of osteoporosis. Calcium supplementation (calcium carbonate
500 mg orally two to three times daily) is recommended for
susceptible patients.
Casellas F et al. Subjective perception of lactose intolerance does
not always indicate lactose malabsorption. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2010 Jul;8(7):581–6. [PMID: 20385250]
 
National Medical Association. Lactose intolerance and African
Americans: implications for the consumption of appropriate intake
levels of key nutrients. J Natl Med Assoc. 2009 Oct; 101(10
Suppl):5S–23S. [PMID: 19899495]
 
INTESTINAL MOTILITY DISORDERS
1. Acute Paralytic Ileus
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Precipitating factors: surgery, peritonitis, electrolyte abnormalities,
medications, severe medical illness.
 Nausea, vomiting, obstipation, distention.
 Minimal abdominal tenderness; decreased bowel sounds.
 Plain abdominal radiography with gas and fluid distention in small
and large bowel.
 
 General Considerations
Ileus is a condition in which there is neurogenic failure or loss of
peristalsis in the intestine in the absence of any mechanical
obstruction. It is commonly seen in hospitalized patients as a result
of: (1) intra-abdominal processes such as recent gastrointestinal or
abdominal surgery or peritoneal irritation (peritonitis, pancreatitis,
ruptured viscus, hemorrhage); (2) severe medical illness such as
pneumonia, respiratory failure requiring intubation, sepsis or severe
infections, uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis, and electrolyte
abnormalities (hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, hypomagnesemia,
hypophosphatemia); and (3) medications that affect intestinal
motility (opioids, anticholinergics, pheno thiazines). Following
surgery, small intestinal motility usually normalizes first (often within
hours), followed by the stomach (24–48 hours), and the colon (48–
72 hours). Post operative ileus is reduced by the use of patient-
controlled or epidural analgesia and avoidance of intravenous
opioids as well as early ambulation, gum chewing, and initiation of a
clear liquid diet.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients who are conscious report mild diffuse, continuous
abdominal discomfort with nausea and vomiting. Generalized
abdominal distention is present with minimal abdominal tenderness
but no signs of peritoneal irritation (unless due to the primary
disease). Bowel sounds are diminished to absent.
B. Laboratory Findings
The laboratory abnormalities are attributable to the underlying
condition. Serum electrolytes, including potassium, magnesium,
phosphorus, and calcium, should be obtained to exclude
abnormalities as contributing factors.
C. Imaging
Plain film radiography of the abdomen demonstrates dis-tended
gas-filled loops of small and large intestine. Air-fluid levels may be
seen. Under some circumstances, it may be difficult to distinguish
ileus from partial small bowel obstruction. A CT scan may be useful
in such instances to exclude mechanical obstruction, especially in
postoperative patients.
 Differential Diagnosis
Ileus must be distinguished from mechanical obstruction of the small
bowel or proximal colon. Pain from small bowel mechanical
obstruction is usually intermittent, cramping, and associated initially
with profuse vomiting. Acute gastroenteritis, acute appendicitis, and
acute pancreatitis may all present with ileus.
 Treatment
The primary medical or surgical illness that has precipitated
adynamic ileus should be treated. Most cases of ileus respond to
restriction of oral intake with gradual liberalization of diet as bowel
function returns. Severe or prolonged ileus requires nasogastric
suction and parenteral administration of fluids and electrolytes.
Alvimopan is a peripherally acting mu-opioid receptor antagonist
with limited absorption or systemic activity that reverses opioid-
induced inhibition of intestinal motility. In five randomized controlled
trials, it reduced the time to first flatus, bowel movement, solid meal,
and hospital discharge compared with placebo in postoperative
patients. Alvimopan may be considered in patients undergoing
partial large or small bowel resection when postoperative opioid
therapy is anticipated. Clinical trials are in progress to determine the
efficacy of methylnaltrexone for postoperative ileus.
Becker G et al. Novel opioid antagonists for opioid-induced bowel
dysfunction and postoperative ileus. Lancet. 2009 Apr
4;373(9670):1198–1206. [PMID: 19217656]
 
Stewart D et al. Management of postoperative ileus. Dis Mon.
2010 Apr;56(4):204–10. [PMID: 20350653]
 
2. Acute Colonic Pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie Syndrome)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe abdominal distention.
 Arises in postoperative state or with severe medical illness.
 May be precipitated by electrolyte imbalances, medications.
 Absent to mild abdominal pain; minimal tenderness.
 Massive dilation of cecum or right colon.
 
 General Considerations
Spontaneous massive dilation of the cecum and proximal colon may
occur in a number of different settings in hospitalized patients.
Progressive cecal dilation may lead to spontaneous perforation with
dire consequences. The risk of perforation correlates poorly with
absolute cecal size and duration of colonic distention. Early
detection and management are important to reduce morbidity and
mortality. Colonic pseudo-obstruction is most commonly detected
in postsurgical patients (mean 3–5 days), after trauma, and in
medical patients with respiratory failure, metabolic imbalance,
malignancy, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure,
pancreatitis, or a recent neurologic event (stroke, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, trauma). Liberal use of opioids or anticholinergic
agents may precipitate colonic pseudo-obstruction in susceptible
patients. It may also occur as a manifestation of colonic ischemia.
The etiology of colonic pseudo-obstruction is unknown, but either
an increase in gut sympathetic activity or a decrease in sacral
parasympathetic activity of the distal colon, or both, is hypothesized
to impair colonic motility.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Many patients are on ventilatory support or are unable to report
symptoms due to altered mental status. Abdominal distention is
frequently noted by the clinician as the first sign, often leading to a
plain film radiograph that demonstrates colonic dilation. Some
patients are asymptomatic, although most report constant but mild
abdominal pain. Nausea and vomiting may be present. Bowel
movements may be absent, but up to 40% of patients continue to
pass flatus or stool. Abdominal tenderness with some degree of
guarding or rebound tenderness may be detected; however, signs of
peritonitis are absent unless perforation has occurred. Bowel
sounds may be normal or decreased.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings reflect the underlying medical or surgical
problems. Serum sodium, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, and
calcium should be obtained. Significant fever or leukocytosis raises
concern for colonic ischemia or perforation.
C. Imaging
Radiographs demonstrate colonic dilation, usually confined to the
cecum and proximal colon. The upper limits of normal for cecal size
is 9 cm. A cecal diameter > 10–12 cm is associated with an
increased risk of colonic perforation. Varying amounts of small
intestinal dilation and air-fluid levels due to adynamic ileus may be
seen. Because the dilated appearance of the colon may raise
concern that there is a distal colonic mechanical obstruction due to
malignancy, volvulus, or fecal impaction, a CT scan or water-
soluble (diatrizoate meglumine) enema may sometimes be
performed.
 Differential Diagnosis
Colonic pseudo-obstruction should be distinguished from distal
colonic mechanical obstruction (as above) and toxic megacolon,
which is acute dilation of the colon due to inflammation
(inflammatory bowel disease) or infection (C difficile–associated
colitis, CMV). Patients with toxic megacolon manifest fever;
dehydration; significant abdominal pain; leukocytosis; and diarrhea,
which is often bloody.
 Treatment
Conservative treatment is the appropriate first step for patients with
no or minimal abdominal tenderness, no fever, no leukocytosis, and
a cecal diameter < 12 cm. The underlying illness is treated
appropriately. A nasogastric tube and a rectal tube should be
placed. Patients should be ambulated or periodically rolled from
side to side and to the knee-chest position in an effort to promote
expulsion of colonic gas. All drugs that reduce intestinal motility,
such as opioids, anticholinergics, and calcium channel blockers, are
discontinued if possible. Enemas may be administered judiciously if
large amounts of stool are evident on radiography. Oral laxatives
are not helpful and may cause perforation, pain, or electrolyte
abnormalities.
Conservative treatment is successful in over 80% of cases within
1–2 days. Patients must be watched for signs of worsening
distention or abdominal tenderness. Cecal size should be assessed
by abdominal radiographs every 12 hours. Intervention should be
considered in patients with any of the following: (1) no improvement
or clinical deterioration after 24–48 hours of conservative therapy;
(2) cecal dilation > 10 cm for a prolonged period (> 3–4 days); (3)
patients with cecal dilation > 12 cm. Neostigmine injection should
be given unless contraindicated. A single dose (2 mg intravenously)
results in rapid (within 30 minutes) colonic decompression in 75–
90% of patients. Cardiac monitoring during neostig-mine infusion is
indicated for possible bradycardia that may require atropine
administration. Colonoscopic decompression is indicated in patients
who fail to respond to neostig-mine. Colonic decompression with
aspiration of air or placement of a decompression tube is successful
in 70% of patients. However, the procedure is technically difficult in
an unprepared bowel and has been associated with perforations in
the distended colon. Dilation recurs in up to 50% of patients. In
patients in whom colonoscopy is unsuccessful, a tube cecostomy
can be created through a small laparotomy or with percutaneous
radiologically guided placement.
 Prognosis
In most cases, the prognosis is related to the underlying illness. The
risk of perforation or ischemia is increased with cecal diameter > 12
cm and when distention has been present for more than 6 days.
With aggressive therapy, the development of perforation is unusual.
Harrison ME et al; ASGE Standards of Practice Committee. The
role of endoscopy in the management of patients with known and
suspected colonic obstruction and pseudo-obstruction.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Apr;71(4):669–79. [PMID:
20363408]
 
3. Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction & Gastroparesis
Gastroparesis and chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction are chronic
conditions characterized by intermittent, waxing and waning
symptoms and signs of gastric or intestinal obstruction in the
absence of any mechanical lesions to account for the findings. They
are caused by a heterogeneous group of endocrine disorders
(diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, cortisol deficiency), postsurgical
conditions (vagotomy, partial gastric resection, fundoplication,
gastric bypass, Whipple procedure), neurologic conditions
(Parkinson disease, muscular and myotonic dystrophy, autonomic
dysfunction, multiple sclerosis, postpolio syndrome, porphyria),
rheumatologic syndromes (progressive systemic sclerosis),
infections (postviral, Chagas disease), amyloidosis, paraneoplastic
syndromes, medications, and eating disorders (anorexia); a cause
may not always be identified.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Gastric involvement leads to chronic or intermittent symptoms of
gastroparesis with postprandial fullness (early satiety), nausea, and
vomiting (1–3 hours after meals). Patients with predominantly small
bowel involvement may have abdominal distention, vomiting,
diarrhea, and varying degrees of malnutrition. Abdominal pain is not
common and should prompt investigation for structural causes of
obstruction. Bacterial overgrowth in the stagnant intestine may result
in malabsorption. Colonic involvement may result in constipation or
alternating diarrhea and constipation.
B. Imaging
Plain film radiography may demonstrate dilation of the esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, or colon resembling ileus or mechanical
obstruction. Mechanical obstruction of the stomach, small intestine,
or colon is much more common than gastroparesis or intestinal
pseudo-obstruction and must be excluded with endoscopy or CT
or barium enterography, especially in patients with prior surgery,
recent onset of symptoms, or abdominal pain. In cases of unclear
origin, studies based on the clinical picture are obtained to exclude
underlying systemic disease. Gastric scintigraphy with a low-fat
solid meal is the optimal means for assessing gastric emptying.
Gastric retention of 60% after 2 hours or more than 10% after 4
hours is abnormal. Small bowel manometry is useful for
distinguishing visceral from myopathic disorders and for excluding
cases of mechanical obstruction that are otherwise difficult to
diagnose by endoscopy or radiographic studies.
 Treatment
There is no specific therapy for gastroparesis or pseudo-
obstruction. Acute exacerbations are treated with nasogastric
suction and intravenous fluids. Long-term treatment is directed at
maintaining nutrition. Patients should eat small, frequent meals that
are low in fiber, milk, gas-forming foods, and fat. Some patients
may require liquid enteral supplements. Agents that reduce
gastrointestinal motility (opioids, anticholinergics, calcium channel
blockers) should be avoided. In diabetic patients, glucose levels
should be maintained below 200 mg/dL, as hyperglycemia may
slow gastric emptying even in the absence of diabetic neuropathy,
and amyline analogs (exenatide or pramlintide) should be
discontinued. Metoclopramide (5–20 mg orally or 5–10 mg
intravenously or subcutaneously four times daily) and erythromycin
(50–125 mg orally three times daily) before meals is of benefit in
treatment of gastroparesis but not small bowel dysmotility. The use
of metoclopr-amide for more than 3 months is associated with an
increased risk of tardive dyskinesia and should be avoided. The
elderly are at greatest risk. Domperidone (20–30 mg four times
daily) is another antidopaminergic agent that enhances gastric
emptying and has efficacy as an antiemetic agent. Unlike
metoclopramide, it does not cross the blood-brain barrier and
therefore is devoid of neuropsychiatric side effects. Although
unavailable in the United States, it is available in most other
countries, where its use is preferred. Gastric electrical stimulation
with internally implanted neurostimulators has shown reduction in
nausea and vomiting in small studies and one controlled trial in some
patients with severe gastroparesis; however, the mechanism of
action is uncertain as improvement is not correlated with changes in
gastric emptying. Bacterial overgrowth should be treated with
intermittent antibiotics (see above). Patients with predominant small
bowel distention may require a venting gastrostomy to relieve
distress. Some patients may require placement of a jejunostomy for
long-term enteral nutrition. Patients unable to maintain adequate
enteral nutrition require TPN or small bowel transplantation.
Difficult cases should be referred to centers with expertise in this
area.
Camilleri M et al. Epidemiology, mechanisms, and management of
diabetic gastroparesis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Jan;
9(1):5–12. [PMID: 20951838]
 
Reddymasu SC et al. Severe gastroparesis: medical therapy or
gastric electrical stimulation. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Feb; 8(2):117–24. [PMID: 19765675]
 
APPENDICITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Early: periumbilical pain; later: right lower quadrant pain and
tenderness.
 Anorexia, nausea and vomiting, obstipation.
 Tenderness or localized rigidity at McBurney point.
 Low-grade fever and leukocytosis.
 
 General Considerations
Appendicitis is the most common abdominal surgical emergency,
affecting approximately 10% of the population. It occurs most
commonly between the ages of 10 and 30 years. It is initiated by
obstruction of the appendix by a fecalith, inflammation, foreign
body, or neoplasm. Obstruction leads to increased intraluminal
pressure, venous congestion, infection, and thrombosis of intramural
vessels. If untreated, gangrene and perforation develop within 36
hours.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Appendicitis usually begins with vague, often colicky periumbilical
or epigastric pain. Within 12 hours the pain shifts to the right lower
quadrant, manifested as a steady ache that is worsened by walking
or coughing. Almost all patients have nausea with one or two
episodes of vomiting. Protracted vomiting or vomiting that begins
before the onset of pain suggests another diagnosis. A sense of
constipation is typical, and some patients administer cathartics in an
effort to relieve their symptoms—though some report diarrhea.
Low-grade fever (< 38°C) is typical; high fever or rigors suggest
another diagnosis or appendiceal perforation.
On physical examination, localized tenderness with guarding in
the right lower quadrant can be elicited with gentle palpation with
one finger. When asked to cough, patients may be able to precisely
localize the painful area, a sign of peritoneal irritation. Light
percussion may also elicit pain. Although rebound tenderness is also
present, it is unnecessary to elicit this finding if the above signs are
present. The psoas sign (pain on passive extension of the right hip)
and the obturator sign (pain with passive flexion and internal rotation
of the right hip) are indicative of adjacent inflammation and strongly
suggestive of appendicitis.
B. Atypical Presentations of Appendicitis
Owing to the variable location of the appendix, there are a number
of “atypical” presentations. Because the retrocecal appendix does
not touch the anterior abdominal wall, the pain remains less intense
and poorly localized; abdominal tenderness is minimal and may be
elicited in the right flank. The psoas sign may be positive. With
pelvic appendicitis, there is pain in the lower abdomen, often on the
left, with an urge to urinate or defecate. Abdominal tenderness is
absent, but tenderness is evident on pelvic or rectal examination; the
obturator sign may be present. In the elderly, the diagnosis of
appendicitis is often delayed because patients present with minimal,
vague symptoms and mild abdominal tenderness. Appendicitis in
pregnancy may present with pain in the right lower quadrant,
periumbilical area, or right subcostal area owing to displacement of
the appendix by the uterus.
C. Laboratory Findings
Moderate leukocytosis (10,000–20,000/mcL) with neutrophilia is
common. Microscopic hematuria and pyuria are present in 25% of
patients.
D. Imaging
Both abdominal ultrasound and CT scanning are useful in diagnosing
appendicitis as well as excluding other diseases presenting with
similar symptoms, including adnexal disease in younger women.
However, CT scanning appears to be more accurate (sensitivity
94%, specificity 95%, positive likelihood ratio 13.3, negative
likelihood ratio 0.09). Abdominal CT scanning is also useful in
cases of suspected appendiceal perforation to diagnose a
periappendiceal abscess. In patients in whom there is a clinically
high suspicion of appendicitis, some surgeons feel that preoperative
diagnostic imaging is unnecessary. However, studies suggest that
even in this group, imaging studies suggest an alternative diagnosis in
up to 15%.
 Differential Diagnosis
Given its frequency and myriad presentations, appendicitis should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of all patients with
abdominal pain. It is difficult to reliably diagnose the disease in some
cases. A several-hour period of close observation with
reassessment usually clarifies the diagnosis. Absence of the classic
migration of pain (from the epigastrium to the right lower abdomen),
right lower quadrant pain, fever, or guarding makes appendicitis less
likely. Ten to twenty percent of patients with suspected appendicitis
have either a negative examination at laparotomy or an alternative
surgical diagnosis. The widespread use of ultrasonography and CT
has reduced the number of incorrect diagnoses to < 2%. Still, in
some cases diagnostic laparotomy or laparoscopy is required. The
most common causes of diagnostic confusion are gastroenteritis and
gynecologic disorders. Viral gastroenteritis presents with nausea,
vomiting, low-grade fever, and diarrhea and can be difficult to
distinguish from appendicitis. The onset of vomiting before pain
makes appendicitis less likely. As a rule, the pain of gastroenteritis is
more generalized and the tenderness less well localized. Acute
salpingitis or tubo-ovarian abscess should be considered in young,
sexually active women with fever and bilateral abdominal or pelvic
tenderness. A twisted ovarian cyst may also cause sudden severe
pain. The sudden onset of lower abdominal pain in the middle of the
menstrual cycle suggests mittelschmerz. Sudden severe abdominal
pain with diffuse pelvic tenderness and shock suggests a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy. A positive pregnancy test and pelvic
ultrasonography are diagnostic. Retrocecal or retroileal appendicitis
(often associated with pyuria or hematuria) may be confused with
ureteral colic or pyelonephritis. Other conditions that may resemble
appendicitis are diverticulitis, Meckel diverticulitis, carcinoid of the
appendix, perforated colonic cancer, Crohn ileitis, perforated peptic
ulcer, cholecystitis, and mesenteric adenitis. It is virtually impossible
to distinguish appendicitis from Meckel diverticulitis, but both
require surgical treatment.
 Complications
Perforation occurs in 20% of patients and should be suspected in
patients with pain persisting for over 36 hours, high fever, diffuse
abdominal tenderness or peritoneal findings, a palpable abdominal
mass, or marked leukocytosis. Localized perforation results in a
contained abscess, usually in the pelvis. A free perforation leads to
suppurative peritonitis with toxicity. Septic thrombophlebitis (pyle
phlebitis) of the portal venous system is rare and suggested by high
fever, chills, bacteremia, and jaundice.
 Treatment
The treatment of uncomplicated appendicitis is surgical
appendectomy. When possible, a laparoscopic approach is
preferred to open laparotomy. Prior to surgery, patients should be
given broad-spectrum antibiotics with gram-negative and anaerobic
coverage to reduce the incidence of postoperative infections.
Recommended preoperative intravenous regimens include cefoxitin
or cefotetan 1-2 g every 8 hours; ampicillin-sulfabactam 3 g every 6
hours; or ertapenem 1 g as a single dose. Emergency
appendectomy is also required in patients with perforated
appendicitis with generalized peritonitis.
The optimal treatment of stable patients with perforated
appendicitis and a contained abscess is controversial. Surgery in this
setting can be difficult. Many recommend percutaneous CT-guided
drainage of the abscess with intravenous fluids and antibiotics to
allow the inflammation to subside. An interval appendectomy may
be performed after 6 weeks to prevent recurrent appendicitis.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate from uncomplicated appendicitis is extremely
low. Even with perforated appendicitis, the mortality rate in most
groups is only 0.2%, though it approaches 15% in the elderly.
Kouhia ST et al. Long-term follow-up of a randomized clinical trial
of open versus laparoscopic appendectomy. Br J Surg. 2010
Sep;97(9):1395–400. [PMID: 20632312]
 
Raja AS et al. Negative appendectomy rate in the era of CT: an
18-year perspective. Radiology. 2010 Aug;256(2):460–5.
[PMID: 20529988]
 
INTESTINAL TUBERCULOSIS
Intestinal tuberculosis is common in underdeveloped countries.
Previously rare in the United States, its incidence has been rising in
immigrant groups and patients with AIDS. It is caused by both
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and M bovis. Active pulmonary
disease is present in < 50% of patients. The most frequent site of
involvement is the ileocecal region; however, any region of the
gastrointestinal tract may be involved. Intestinal tuberculosis may
cause mucosal ulcerations or scarring and fibrosis with narrowing of
the lumen. Patients may be without symptoms or complain of
chronic abdominal pain, obstructive symptoms, weight loss, and
diarrhea. An abdominal mass may be palpable. Complications
include intestinal obstruction, hemorrhage, and fistula formation. The
purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test may be negative,
especially in patients with weight loss or AIDS. Barium radiography
may demonstrate mucosal ulcerations, thickening, or stricture
formation. Abdominal CT may show thickening of the cecum and
ileocecal valve and massive lymphadenopathy. Colonoscopy may
demonstrate an ulcerated mass, multiple ulcers with steep edges and
adjacent small sessile polyps, small ulcers or erosions, or small
diver-ticula, most commonly in the ileocecal region. The differential
diagnosis includes Crohn disease, carcinoma, and intestinal
amebiasis. The diagnosis is established by either endoscopic or
surgical biopsy revealing acid-fast bacilli, caseating granuloma, or
positive cultures from the organism. Detection of tubercle bacilli in
biopsy specimens by PCR is now the most sensitive means of
diagnosis.
Treatment with standard antituberculous regimens is effective.
Makharia GK et al. Clinical, endoscopic, and histologic
differentiations between Crohn's disease and intestinal tuberculosis.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Mar;105(3):642–51. [PMID:
20087333]
 
PROTEIN-LOSING ENTEROPATHY
Protein-losing enteropathy comprises a number of conditions that
result in excessive loss of serum proteins into the gastrointestinal
tract. The essential diagnostic features are hypoalbuminemia and an
elevated fecal α1-antitrypsin level.
The normal intact gut epithelium prevents the loss of serum
proteins. Proteins may be lost through one of three mechanisms: (1)
mucosal disease with ulceration, resulting in the loss of proteins
across the disrupted mucosal surface, such as in chronic gastric
ulcer, gastric carcinoma, or inflammatory bowel disease; (2)
lymphatic obstruction, resulting in the loss of protein-rich chylous
fluid from mucosal lacteals, such as in primary intestinal
lymphangiectasia, constrictive pericarditis or congestive heart
failure, Whipple disease or tuberculosis, Kaposi sarcoma or
lymphoma, retroperitoneal fibrosis, or sarcoidosis; and (3)
idiopathic change in permeability of mucosal capillaries and
conductance of interstitium, resulting in “weeping” of protein-rich
fluid from the mucosal surface, such as in Ménétrier disease,
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, viral or eosinophilic gastroenteritis,
celiac disease, giardiasis or hookworm, common variable
immunodeficiency, systemic lupus erythematosus, amyloidosis, or
allergic protein-losing enteropathy.
Hypoalbuminemia is the sine qua non of protein-losing
enteropathy. However, a number of other serum proteins such as
α1-antitrypsin also are lost from the gut epithelium. In protein-losing
enteropathy caused by lymphatic obstruction, loss of lymphatic fluid
commonly 
results 
in 
lymphocytopenia 
(< 
1000/mcL),
hypoglobulinemia, and hypocholesterolemia.
In most cases, protein-losing enteropathy is recognized as a
sequela of a known gastrointestinal disorder. In patients in whom
the cause is unclear, evaluation is indicated and is guided by the
clinical suspicion. Protein-losing enteropathy must be distinguished
from other causes of hypoalbuminemia, which include liver disease
and nephrotic syndrome; and from congestive heart failure. Protein-
losing enteropathy is confirmed by determining the gut α1-antitrypsin
clearance (24-hour volume of feces × stool concentration of α1-
antitrypsin ÷ serum α1-antitrypsin concentration). A clearance of
more than 27 mL/24 h is abnormal.
Laboratory evaluation of protein-losing enteropathy includes
serum protein electrophoresis, lymphocyte count, and serum
cholesterol to look for evidence of lymphatic obstruction. Serum
ANA and C3 levels are useful to screen for autoimmune disorders.
Stool samples should be examined for ova and parasites. Evidence
of malabsorption is evaluated by means of a stool qualitative fecal
fat determination. Intestinal imaging is performed with small bowel
enteroscopy biopsy, CT enterography, or wireless capsule
endoscopy of the small intestine. Colonic diseases are excluded
with colonoscopy. A CT scan of the abdomen is performed to look
for evidence of neoplasms or lymphatic obstruction. Rarely,
lymphangiography is helpful. In some situations, laparotomy with
full-thickness intestinal biopsy is required to establish a diagnosis.
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause. Patients with
lymphatic obstruction benefit from low-fat diets supplemented with
medium-chain triglycerides. Case reports suggest that octreotide
may lead to symptomatic and nutritional improvement in some
patients.
Umar SB et al. Protein-losing enteropathy: case illustrations and
clinical review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;105(1):43–9.
[PMID: 19789526]
 
DISEASES OF THE COLON &
RECTUM
 
IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic functional disorder characterized by abdominal pain or
discomfort with alterations in bowel habits.
 Symptoms usually begin in late teens to early twenties.
 Limited evaluation to exclude organic causes of symptoms.
 
 General Considerations
The functional gastrointestinal disorders are characterized by a
variable combination of chronic or recurrent gastrointestinal
symptoms not explicable by the presence of structural or
biochemical abnormalities. Several clinical entities are included
under this broad rubric, including chest pain of unclear origin
(noncardiac chest pain), functional dyspepsia, and biliary dyskinesia
(sphincter of Oddi dysfunction). There is a large overlap among
these entities. For example, over 50% of patients with noncardiac
chest pain and over one-third with functional dyspepsia also have
symptoms compatible with irritable bowel syndrome. In none of
these disorders is there a definitive diagnostic study. Rather, the
diagnosis is a subjective one based on the presence of a compatible
profile and the exclusion of similar disorders.
Irritable bowel syndrome can be defined, therefore, as an
idiopathic clinical entity characterized by chronic (more than 3
months) abdominal pain or discomfort that occurs in association
with altered bowel habits. These symptoms may be continuous or
intermittent. Consensus definition of irritable bowel syndrome is
abdominal discomfort or pain that has two of the following three
features: (1) relieved with defecation, (2) onset associated with a
change in frequency of stool, or (3) onset associated with a change
in form (appearance) of stool. Other symptoms supporting the
diagnosis include abnormal stool frequency; abnormal stool form
(lumpy or hard; loose or watery); abnormal stool passage (straining,
urgency, or feeling of incomplete evacuation); passage of mucus;
and bloating or a feeling of abdominal distention.
Patients may have other somatic or psychological complaints
such as dyspepsia, heartburn, chest pain, headaches, fatigue,
myalgias, urologic dysfunction, gynecologic symptoms, anxiety, or
depression.
The disorder is a common problem presenting to both
gastroenterologists and primary care physicians. Up to 10% of the
adult population have symptoms compatible with the diagnosis, but
most never seek medical attention. Approximately two-thirds of
patients with irritable bowel syndrome are women.
 Pathogenesis
A number of pathophysiologic mechanisms have been identified and
may have varying importance in different individuals.
A. Abnormal Motility
A variety of abnormal myoelectrical and motor abnormalities have
been identified in the colon and small intestine. In some cases, these
are temporally correlated with episodes of abdominal pain or
emotional stress. Whether they represent a primary motility disorder
or are secondary to psychosocial stress is debated. Differences
between patients with constipation-predominant and diarrhea-
predominant syndromes are reported.
B. Visceral Hypersensitivity
Patients often have a lower visceral pain threshold, reporting
abdominal pain at lower volumes of colonic gas insufflation or
colonic balloon inflation than controls. Many patients complain of
bloating and distention, which may be due to a number of different
factors including increased visceral sensitivity, increased gas
production (due to small bowel bacterial overgrowth or
carbohydrate malabsorption), impaired gas transit through the
intestine, or impaired rectal expulsion. Many patients report rectal
urgency despite small rectal volumes of stool.
C. Enteric Infection
Symptoms compatible with irritable bowel syndrome develop within
1 year in up to 10% of patients after an episode of bacterial
gastroenteritis compared with < 2% of controls. Women and
patients with increased life stressors at the onset of gastroenteritis
appear to be at increased risk for developing “postinfectious”
irritable bowel syndrome. Increased inflammatory cells have been
found in the mucosa, submucosa, and muscularis of some patients
with irritable bowel syndrome, but their importance is unclear.
Chronic inflammation is postulated by some investigators to
contribute to alterations in motility or visceral hypersensitivity.
Some investigators suggest that alterations in the numbers and
distribution of bacterial species (estimated 30,000 different species)
may affect bowel transit time, gas production, and sensitivity. An
increase in breath hydrogen or methane excretion after lactulose
ingestion in 65% of patients with irritable bowel syndrome has been
reported, believed by some investigators to indicate small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth. However, many investigators dispute these
findings because overgrowth was confirmed in only 4% of patients
using jejunal aspiration and bacterial culture. Small bowel bacterial
overgrowth may be more likely in patients with bloating,
postprandial discomfort, and loose stools. It is hypothesized that
bacterial overgrowth may lead to alterations in immune alterations
that affect motility or visceral sensitivity or to degradation of
carbohydrates in the small intestine that may cause increased
postprandial gas, bloating, and distention.
D. Psychosocial Abnormalities
More than 50% of patients with irritable bowel who seek medical
attention have underlying depression, anxiety, or somatization. By
contrast, those who do not seek medical attention are similar
psychologically to normal individuals. Psychological abnormalities
may influence how the patient perceives or reacts to illness and
minor visceral sensations. Chronic stress may alter intestinal motility
or modulate pathways that affect central and spinal processing of
visceral afferent sensation.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Irritable bowel is a chronic condition. Symptoms usually begin in the
late teens to twenties. Symptoms should be present for at least 3
months before the diagnosis can be considered. The diagnosis is
established in the presence of compatible symptoms and the
judicious use of tests to exclude organic disease.
Abdominal pain usually is intermittent, crampy, and in the lower
abdominal region. As previously stated, the onset of pain typically is
associated with a change in stool frequency or form and commonly
is relieved by defecation. It does not usually occur at night or
interfere with sleep. Patients with irritable bowel syndrome may be
classified into one of three categories based on the predominant
bowel habit: irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea; irritable bowel
syndrome with constipation; or irritable bowel syndrome with mixed
constipation and diarrhea. It is important to clarify what the patient
means by these complaints. Patients with irritable bowel and
constipation report infrequent bowel movements (less than three per
week), hard or lumpy stools, or straining. Patients with irritable
bowel syndrome with diarrhea refer to loose or watery stools,
frequent stools (more than three per day), urgency, or fecal
incontinence. Many patients report that they have a firm stool in the
morning followed by progressively looser movements. Complaints
of visible distention and bloating are common, though these are not
always clinically evident.
The patient should be asked about “alarm symptoms” that
suggest a diagnosis other than irritable bowel syndrome and warrant
further investigation. The acute onset of symptoms raises the
likelihood of organic disease, especially in patients aged > 40–50
years. Nocturnal diarrhea, severe constipation or diarrhea,
hematochezia, weight loss, and fever are incompatible with a
diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome and warrant investigation for
underlying disease. Patients who have a family history of cancer,
inflammatory bowel disease, or celiac disease should undergo
additional evaluation.
A physical examination should be performed to look for evidence
of organic disease and to allay the patient's anxieties. The physical
examination usually is normal. Abdominal tenderness, especially in
the lower abdomen, is common but not pronounced. A new onset
of symptoms in a patient over age 40 years warrants further
examination.
B. Laboratory Findings and Special Examinations
In patients whose symptoms fulfill the diagnostic criteria for irritable
bowel syndrome and who have no other alarm symptoms,
evidence-based consensus guidelines do not support further
diagnostic testing, as the likelihood of serious organic diseases does
not appear to be increased. Although the vague nature of symptoms
and patient anxiety may prompt clinicians to consider a variety of
diagnostic studies, overtesting should be avoided. The use of routine
blood tests (complete blood count, chemistry panel, serum albumin,
thyroid function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate) is unnecessary
in most patients. Stool specimen examinations for ova and parasites
should be obtained only in patients with increased likelihood of
infection (eg, day care workers, campers, foreign travelers).
Routine sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy also are not recommended
in young patients with symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome
without alarm symptoms but should be considered in patients who
do not improve with conservative management. In all patients age
50 years or older who have not had a previous evaluation, colonos-
copy should be obtained to exclude malignancy. When
colonoscopy is performed, random mucosal biopsies should be
obtained to look for evidence of microscopic colitis (which may
have similar symptoms). In patients with irritable bowel syndrome
with diarrhea, serologic tests for celiac disease should be
performed. Routine testing for bacterial overgrowth with hydrogen
breath tests are not recommended.
 Differential Diagnosis
A number of disorders may present with similar symptoms.
Examples include colonic neoplasia, inflammatory bowel disease
(ulcerative 
colitis, 
Crohn 
disease, 
microscopic 
colitis),
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, parasites, malabsorption
(especially celiac disease, bacterial overgrowth, lactase deficiency),
causes of chronic secretory diarrhea (carcinoid), and endometriosis.
Psychiatric disorders such as depression, panic disorder, and
anxiety must be considered as well. Women with refractory
symptoms have an increased incidence of prior sexual and physical
abuse. These diagnoses should be excluded in patients with
presumed irritable bowel syndrome who do not improve within 2–4
weeks of empiric treatment or in whom subsequent alarm symptoms
develop.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
As with other functional disorders, the most important interventions
the clinician can offer are reassurance, education, and support. This
includes identifying and responding to the patient's concerns, careful
explanation of the pathophysiology and natural history of the
disorder, setting realistic treatment goals, and involving the patient in
the treatment process. Because irritable bowel symptoms are
chronic, the patient's reasons for seeking consultation at this time
should be determined. These may include major life events or recent
psychosocial stressors, dietary or medication changes, concerns
about serious underlying disease, or reduced quality of life and
impairment of daily activities. In discussing with the patient the
importance of the mind-gut interaction, it may be helpful to explain
that alterations in visceral motility and sensitivity may be
exacerbated by environmental, social, or psychological factors such
as foods, medications, hormones, and stress. Symptoms such as
pain, bloating, and altered bowel habits may lead to anxiety and
distress, which in turn may further exacerbate bowel disturbances
due to disordered communication between the gut and the central
nervous system. A symptom diary in which patients record the time
and severity of symptoms, food intake, and life events may help
uncover aggravating dietary or psychosocial factors. Fears that the
symptoms will progress, require surgery, or degenerate into serious
illness should be allayed. The patient should understand that irritable
bowel syndrome is a chronic disorder characterized by periods of
exacerbation and quiescence. The emphasis should be shifted from
finding the cause of the symptoms to finding a way to cope with
them. Clinicians must resist the temptation to chase chronic
complaints with new or repeated diagnostic studies.
B. Dietary Therapy
Patients commonly report dietary intolerances, although a role for
dietary triggers in irritable bowel syndrome has never been
convincingly demonstrated. Proposed mechanisms for dietary
intolerance include food allergy, hyper-sensitivity, effects of gut
hormones, changes in bacterial flora, increased bacterial gas
production (arising in the small or large intestine), and direct
chemical irritation. Fatty foods and caffeine are poorly tolerated by
many patients with irritable bowel syndrome. In patients with
diarrhea, bloating, and flatulence, lactose intolerance should be
excluded with a hydrogen breath test or a trial of a lactose-free diet.
A host of poorly absorbed, fermentable, short-chain carbohydrates
may exacerbate bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea in some patients.
These include fructose (corn syrups, apples, pears, watermelon,
raisins), fructans (onions, leeks, asparagus, artichokes), wheat-
based products (breads, pasta, cereals, cakes), sorbitol (stone
fruits), and raffinose (legumes, lentils, brussel sprouts, cabbage).
A high-fiber diet and fiber supplements appears to be of little
value in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Many patients
report little change in bowel frequency but increased gas and
distention.
C. Pharmacologic Measures
More than two-thirds of patients with irritable bowel syndrome
have mild symptoms that respond readily to education, reassurance,
and dietary interventions. Drug therapy should be reserved for
patients with moderate to severe symptoms that do not respond to
conservative measures. These agents should be viewed as being
adjunctive rather than curative. Given the wide spectrum of
symptoms, no single agent is expected to provide relief in all or even
most patients. Nevertheless, therapy targeted at the specific
dominant symptom (pain, constipation, or diarrhea) may be
beneficial.
1. Antispasmodic agents—Anticholinergic agents are used by
some practitioners for treatment of acute episodes of pain or
bloating despite a lack of well-designed trials demonstrating
efficacy. Available agents include hyoscyamine, 0.125 mg orally (or
sublingually as needed) or sustained-release, 0.037 mg or 0.75 mg
orally twice daily; dicyclomine, 10–20 mg orally; or
methscopolamine 2.5–5 mg orally before meals and at bedtime.
Anticholinergic side effects are common, including urinary retention,
constipation, tachycardia, and dry mouth. Hence, these agents
should be used with caution in the elderly and in patients with
constipation. Peppermint oil formulations (which relax smooth
muscle) may be helpful.
2. Antidiarrheal agents—Loperamide (2 mg orally three or four
times daily) is effective for the treatment of patients with diarrhea,
reducing stool frequency, liquidity, and urgency. It may best be used
“prophylactically” in situations in which diarrhea is anticipated (such
as stressful situations) or would be inconvenient (social
engagements).
3. Anticonstipation agents—Treatment with osmotic laxatives
(milk of magnesia or polyethylene glycol) may increase stool
frequency, improve stool consistency, and reduce straining.
Lactulose or sorbitol produces increased flatus and distention,
which are poorly tolerated in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Lubiprostone is a selective chloride C-2 activator that stimulates
increased intestinal chloride secretion, which leads to increased
stool frequency. Lubiprostone is approved for the treatment of
chronic constipation (24 mcg orally twice daily) as well as for the
treatment of women with irritable bowel with constipation (8 mcg
twice daily). In clinical trials of patients with irritable bowel
syndrome and constipation, lubipros-tone led to global symptom
improvement in 18% of patients compared with 10% of patients
who received placebo. Patients with intractable constipation should
undergo further assessment for slow colonic transit and pelvic floor
dysfunction (see Constipation, above).
4. Psychotropic agents—Patients with predominant symptoms of
pain or bloating may benefit from low doses of tricyclic
antidepressants, which are believed to have effects on motility,
visceral sensitivity, and central pain perception that are independent
of their psychotropic effects. Because of their anticholinergic effects,
these agents may be more useful in patients with diarrhea-
predominant than constipation-predominant symptoms. Oral
nortriptyline, desipramine, or imipramine, may be started at a low
dosage of 10 mg at bedtime and increased gradually to 50–150 mg
as tolerated. Response rates do not correlate with dosage, and
many patients respond to doses of ≤ 50 mg daily. Side effects are
common, and lack of efficacy with one agent does not preclude
benefit from another. Improvement should be evident within 4
weeks. The oral serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline, 25–100
mg daily; citalopram 10–20 mg; paroxetine 20–50 mg daily; or
fluoxetine, 10–40 mg daily) may lead to improvement in overall
sense of well-being but have little impact on abdominal pain or
bowel symptoms. Anxiolytics should not be used chronically in
irritable bowel syndrome because of their habituation potential.
Patients with major depression or anxiety disorders should be
identified and treated with therapeutic doses of appropriate agents.
5. Serotonin receptor agonists and antagonists—Serotonin is
an important mediator of gastrointestinal motility and sensation.
Alosetron and tegaserod modulate serotonin pathways. However,
in 2007, tegaserod was withdrawn by the FDA from the US market
after an analysis of safety data from over 18,000 patients in 29
clinical trials showed an excessive number of serious cardiovascular
side effects.
Alosetron is a 5-HT3 antagonist that is FDA-approved for the
treatment of women with severe irritable bowel syndrome with
predominant diarrhea. It appears to alter visceral sensation through
blockade of peripheral 5-HT3-receptors on enteric afferent neurons
and inhibits enteric cholinergic motor neurons, resulting in inhibition
of colonic motility. Alosetron (0.5–1 mg orally twice daily) reduces
symptoms of pain, cramps, urgency, and diarrhea in 50–60% of
women compared with 30–40% treated with placebo. Efficacy in
men has not been demonstrated. In contrast to the excellent safety
profile of other 5-HT3 antagonists (eg, ondansetron), alosetron may
cause constipation (sometimes severe) in 30% of patients or
ischemic colitis in 4:1000 patients. Given the seriousness of these
side effects, alosetron is restricted to women with severe irritable
bowel syndrome with diarrhea who have not responded to
conventional therapies and who have been educated about the
relative risks and benefits of the agent. It should not be used in
patients with constipation.
6. 
Nonabsorbable 
antibiotics—Two 
2011 
multicenter,
randomized controlled studies reported global symptom
improvement in 41% of patients with irritable bowel syndrome
without constipation treated with the nonabsorbable antibiotic
rifaximin, 550 mg orally three times daily for 2 weeks, compared
with a 32% improvement in placebo-treated patients. Relief of
bloating occurred in 40% of treated patients compared with 30% of
controls. Improvement persisted over a 10-week follow-up period.
Symptom improvement may be attributable to suppression of
bacteria in either the small intestine or colon, resulting in decreased
bacterial carbohydrate fermentation, diarrhea, and bloating. At this
time, the role of rifaximin or other antibiotics in the treatment of
irritable bowel remains controversial, due to uncertainties about
duration of symptom improvement and concerns about bacterial
resistance. At present, rifaximin is not approved for the treatment of
irritable bowel syndrome but may be considered in patients with
refractory symptoms, especially bloating.
7. Probiotics—Meta-analyses of small controlled clinical trials
report improved symptoms in some patients treated with one
probiotic, Bifidobacterium infantis, but not with another probiotic,
Lactobacillus salivarius, or placebo. It is hypothesized that
alterations in gut flora may reduce symptoms through suppression of
inflammation or reduction of bacterial gas production, resulting in
reduced distention, flatus, and visceral sensitivity. Such therapy is
attractive because it is safe, well tolerated, and inexpensive.
Although promising, further study is needed to define the efficacy
and optimal formulations of probiotic therapy. The probiotics
VSL#3 (1 packet twice daily) or Bifidobacterium infantis (1
tablet twice daily) have shown modest benefit in small studies.
D. Psychological Therapies
Cognitive-behavioral 
therapies, 
relaxation 
techniques, 
and
hypnotherapy appear to be beneficial in some patients. Patients with
underlying psychological abnormalities may benefit from evaluation
by a psychiatrist or psychologist. Patients with severe disability
should be referred to a pain treatment center.
 Prognosis
The majority of patients with irritable bowel syndrome learn to cope
with their symptoms and lead productive lives.
American College of Gastroenterology IBS Task Force. An
evidence-based position statement on the management of irritable
bowel syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009 Jan;104 (Suppl
1):S8–35. [PMID: 19521341]
 
Brenner DM et al. The utility of probiotics in the treatment of
irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2009 Apr;10(4):1033–49. [PMID: 19277023]
 
Ford AC et al. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in irritable
bowel syndrome: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Dec;7(12):1279–86. [PMID:
19602448]
 
Khan S et al. Diagnosis and management of IBS. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Oct;7(10):565–81. [PMID:
20890316]
 
Mayer EA. Clinical practice. Irritable bowel syndrome. N Engl J
Med. 2008 Apr 17;358(16):1692–9. [PMID: 18420501]
 
Pimentel M et al; TARGET Study Group. Rifaximin therapy for
patients with irritable bowel syndrome without constipation. N Engl
J Med. 2011 Jan 6;364(1):22–32. [PMID: 21208106]
 
Spiller R et al. Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome.
Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(6):1979–88. [PMID:
19457422]
 
ANTIBIOTIC-ASSOCIATED COLITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most cases of antibiotic-associated diarrhea are not attributable
to C difficile and are usually mild and self-limited.
 Symptoms of antibiotic-associated colitis vary from mild to
fulminant; almost all colitis is attributable to C difficile.
 Diagnosis in mild to moderate cases established by stool toxin
assay.
 Flexible sigmoidoscopy provides most rapid diag-nosis in severe
cases.
 
 General Considerations
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea is a common clinical occurrence.
Characteristically, the diarrhea occurs during the period of antibiotic
exposure, is dose related, and resolves spontaneously after
discontinuation of the antibiotic. In most cases, this diarrhea is mild,
self-limited, and does not require any specific laboratory evaluation
or treatment. Stool examination usually reveals no fecal leukocytes,
and stool cultures reveal no pathogens. Although C difficile is
identified in the stool of 15–25% of cases of antibiotic-associated
diarrhea, it is also identified in 5–10% of patients treated with
antibiotics who do not have diarrhea. Most cases of antibiotic-
associated diarrhea are due to changes in colonic bacterial
fermentation of carbohydrates and are not due to C difficile.
Antibiotic-associated colitis is a significant clinical problem
almost always caused by C difficile infection. Hospitalized patients
are most susceptible, especially those who are severely ill or
malnourished or who are receiving chemotherapy. C difficile–
colitis is the major cause of diarrhea in patients hospitalized for
more than 3 days, affecting 22 patients of every 1000. This
anaerobic bacterium colonizes the colon of 3% of healthy adults. It
is acquired by fecal-oral transmission. Found throughout hospitals in
patient rooms and bathrooms, it is readily transmitted from patient
to patient by hospital personnel. Fastidious hand washing and use of
disposable gloves are helpful in minimizing transmission. C difficile
is acquired in approximately 20% of hospitalized patients, most of
whom have received antibiotics that disrupt the normal bowel flora
and thus allow the bacterium to flourish. Although almost all
antibiotics have been implicated, colitis most commonly develops
after use of ampicillin, clindamycin, third-generation cephalosporins,
and 
fluoroquinolones. C difficile– colitis will develop in
approximately one-third of infected patients. Prophylactic
administration of probiotics (containing Lactobacillus casei,
Lactobacillus bulgaricus, and Streptococcus thermophilus) to
hospitalized patients who are receiving antibiotics may reduce the
incidence of C difficile– associated diarrhea. Symptoms usually
begin during or shortly after antibiotic therapy but may be delayed
for up to 8 weeks. All patients with acute diarrhea should be asked
about recent antibiotic exposure. Patients who are elderly,
debilitated, immunocompromised, receiving multiple antibiotics or
prolonged (> 10 days) antibiotic therapy, receiving enteral tube
feedings or proton pump inhibitors, or who have inflammatory
bowel disease have a higher risk of acquiring C difficile and
developing C difficile– associated diarrhea.
The incidence and severity of C difficile– colitis in hospitalized
patients appear to be increasing, which is attributable to the
emergence of a more virulent strain of C difficile (BI/NAP1) that
contains an 18-base pair deletion of the tcdC inhibitory gene,
resulting in higher toxin A and B production. This hypervirulent
strain has been associated with several hospital outbreaks of severe
disease with up to 7% mortality.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients report mild to moderate greenish, foul-smelling
watery diarrhea 5–15 times per day with lower abdominal cramps.
Physical examination is normal or reveals mild left lower quadrant
tenderness. The stools may have mucus but seldom gross blood. In
most patients, colitis is most severe in the distal colon and rectum.
Over half of hospitalized patients diagnosed with C difficile– colitis
have a white blood count > 15,000/mcL, and C difficile should be
considered in all hospitalized patients with unexplained leukocytosis.
Severe or fulminant disease occurs in 10-15% of patients. It is
characterized by fever; hemodynamic instability; and abdominal
distention, pain, and tenderness. Most patients have profuse
diarrhea (up to 30 stools/day); however, diarrhea may be absent or
appear to be improving in patients with fulminant disease or ileus.
Laboratory data suggestive of severe disease include a white blood
count > 30,000/mcL, albumin < 2.5 g/dL (due to protein-losing
enteropathy), elevated serum lactate, or rising creatinine.
B. Special Examinations
1. Stool studies—Pathogenic strains of C difficile produce two
toxins: toxin A is an enterotoxin and toxin B is a cytotoxin. A
cytotoxicity assay (toxin B) performed in cell cultures has a
specificity of 90% and a sensitivity of 95%. Although this is the
definitive test, it is expensive and results are not available for 24–48
hours. To optimize cost-effective use of the cytotoxicity assay,
some laboratories first perform an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for
glutamate dehydrogenase (a common C difficile antigen), which
has a high sensitivity and specificity. A negative glutamate
dehydrogenase assay effectively excludes infection, while a positive
assay requires confirmation with the cytotoxicity assay to determine
whether the strain that is present is toxin producing. Rapid EIAs (2–
4 hours) for toxins A and B have a 75–90% sensitivity with a single
stool specimen, which increases to 90–95% with two specimens.
Until recently, EIA has been the preferred diagnostic test in most
clinical settings because it is inexpensive, easy to use, and results are
available within 24 hours. In 2009, a rapid (same day) PCR assay
became commercially available that amplifies the toxin B gene.
Studies demonstrate a 97% sensitivity for the PCR-test compared
with the gold-standard cell culture cytotoxicity assay. As a result,
the PCR assay now is increasingly preferred by many laboratories.
2. Flexible sigmoidoscopy—Flexible sigmoidoscopy is not
needed in patients who have typical symptoms and a positive stool
toxin assay. It may be useful in patients with severe symptoms when
a rapid diagnosis is desired. It also may clarify the diagnosis in
patients with positive C difficile toxin assays who have atypical
symptoms or who have persistent diarrhea despite appropriate
therapy. In patients with mild to moderate symptoms, there may be
no abnormalities or only patchy or diffuse, nonspecific colitis
indistinguishable from other causes. In patients with severe illness,
true pseudomembranous colitis is seen. This has a characteristic
appearance, with yellow adherent plaques 2–10 mm in diameter
scattered over the colonic mucosa interspersed with hyperemic
mucosa. Biopsies reveal epithelial ulceration with a classic
“volcano” exudate of fibrin and neutrophils. In 10% of cases,
pseudomembranous colitis is confined to the proximal colon and
may be missed at sigmoidoscopy.
3. Imaging studies—Abdominal radiographs or non-contrast
abdominal CT scans are obtained in patients with severe or
fulminant symptoms to look for evidence of colonic dilation and wall
thickening. Abdominal CT also is useful in the evaluation of
hospitalized patients with abdominal pain or ileus without significant
diarrhea, in whom the presence of colonic wall thickening suggests
unsuspected C difficile colitis. CT scanning is also useful in the
detection of possible perforation.
 Differential Diagnosis
In the hospitalized patient in whom acute diarrhea develops after
admission, the differential diagnosis includes simple antibiotic-
associated diarrhea (not related to C difficile), enteral feedings,
medications, and ischemic colitis. Other infectious causes are
unusual in hospitalized patients in whom diarrhea develops more
than 72 hours after admission, and it is not cost-effective to obtain
stool cultures unless tests for C difficile are negative. Rarely, other
organisms (staphylococci, Clostridium perfringens) have been
associated with pseudomembranous colitis. Klebsiella oxytoca
may cause a distinct form of antibiotic-associated hemorrhagic
colitis that is segmental (usually in the right or transverse colon);
spares the rectum; and is more common in younger, healthier
outpatients.
 Complications
Severe colitis may progress quickly to fulminant disease, resulting in
hemodynamic instability, respiratory failure, metabolic acidosis,
megacolon (> 7 cm diameter), perforation, and death. Chronic
untreated colitis may result in weight loss and protein-losing
enteropathy.
 Treatment
A. Immediate Treatment
If possible, antibiotic therapy should be discontinued and therapy
with metronidazole or vancomycin should be initiated. For patients
with mild disease, metronidazole, 500 mg orally three times daily or
vancomycin, 125 mg orally four times daily, are equally effective for
initial treatment. Vancomycin is significantly more expensive than
metronidazole and promotes the emergence of vancomycin-resistant
hospital-associated infections. Therefore, metronidazole remains the
preferred first-line therapy in patients with mild disease, while
vancomycin should be reserved for patients who are intolerant of
metronidazole, pregnant women, children, and patients who do not
respond to metronidazole. The duration of initial therapy is usually
10–14 days. However, in patients requiring long-term systemic
antibiotics, it may be appropriate to continue therapy until the
antibiotics can be discontinued. Symptomatic improvement occurs
in most patients within 72 hours.
For patients with severe disease, characterized by a white blood
cell count > 15,000/mcL or a rise in serum creatinine to > 1.5 times
baseline, vancomycin, 125 mg orally four times daily, is the
preferred agent because it achieves significantly higher response
rates (97%) than metronidazole (76%). In patients with severe,
complicated disease, characterized by ileus, megacolon, or shock,
intravenous metronidazole, 500 mg every 6 hours, should be given
—supplemented by vancomycin (500 mg four times daily
administered by nasoenteric tube) and, in some cases, vancomycin
enemas (500 mg in 100 mL every 6 hours). Intravenous
vancomycin does not penetrate the bowel and should not be used.
Early surgical consultation is recommended for all patients with
severe or fulminant disease. Total abdominal colectomy may be
required in patients with toxic megacolon, perforation, sepsis, or
hemorrhage.
B. Treatment of Relapse
Up to 25% of patients have a relapse of diarrhea from C difficile
within 1 or 2 weeks after stopping initial therapy. This may be due
to reinfection or failure to eradicate the organism. A 2010
randomized controlled trial of a single infusion of neutralizing
monoclonal antibodies against toxins A and B reduced recurrence
rates from 25% in the placebo arm to 7% in the active treatment
group. This therapy is not yet clinically available. Most relapses
respond promptly to a second course of the same regimen as the
initial episode. Some patients have recurrent relapses that can be
difficult to treat. The optimal treatment regimen for recurrent
relapses is unknown. Many authorities recommend a 7-week
tapering regimen of vancomycin (125 mg orally four times daily for
14 days; twice daily for 7 days; once daily for 7 days; every other
day for 7 days; and every third day for 2–8 weeks). Controlled
trials show that oral administration of a live yeast, Saccharomyces
boulardii, 500 mg twice daily, reduces the incidence of relapse by
50%. Probiotic therapy with this agent is recommended as
adjunctive therapy in patients with relapsing disease. In cases series,
instillation of fecal bacteria from a healthy donor (“fecal transplant”)
by nasoenteric tube or enema results in disease remission in 90% of
patients.
Bakken JS. Fecal bacteriotherapy for recurrent Clostridium
difficile infection. Anaerobe. 2009 Dec;15(6):285–9. [PMID:
19778623]
 
Cohen SH et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium
difficile infection in adults: 2010 update by the Society for
Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the Infectious
Disease Society of America (IDSA). Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol. 2010 May;31(5):431–55. [PMID: 20307191]
 
Lowry I et al. Treatment with monoclonal antibodies against
Clostridium difficile toxins. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jan 21;
362(3):197–205. [PMID: 20089970]
 
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
The term “inflammatory bowel disease” includes ulcerative colitis
and Crohn disease. Ulcerative colitis is a chronic, recurrent disease
characterized by diffuse mucosal inflammation involving only the
colon. Ulcerative colitis invariably involves the rectum and may
extend proximally in a continuous fashion to involve part or all of the
colon. Crohn disease is a chronic, recurrent disease characterized
by patchy transmural inflammation involving any segment of the
gastrointestinal tract from the mouth to the anus.
Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis may be associated in 50% of
patients with a number of extraintestinal manifestations, including
oral ulcers, oligoarticular or polyarticular nondeforming peripheral
arthritis, spondylitis or sacroiliitis, episcleritis or uveitis, erythema
nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum, hepatitis and sclerosing
cholangitis, and thromboembolic events.
 Pharmacologic Therapy
Although ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease appear to be distinct
entities, the same pharmacologic agents are used to treat both.
Despite extensive research, there are still no specific therapies for
these diseases. The mainstays of therapy are 5-aminosalicylic acid
derivatives, corticosteroids, immunomodulating agents (such as
mercaptopurine or azathioprine and methotrexate), and biologic
agents.
A. 5-Aminosalicylic Acid (5-ASA)
5-ASA is a topically active agent that has a variety of anti-
inflammatory effects. It is used in the active treatment of ulcerative
colitis and Crohn disease and during disease inactivity to maintain
remission. It is readily absorbed from the small intestine but
demonstrates minimal colonic absorption. A number of oral and
topical compounds have been designed to target delivery of 5-ASA
to the colon or small intestine while minimizing absorption.
Commonly used formulations of 5-ASA are sulfasalazine,
mesalamine, and azo compounds. Side effects of these compounds
are uncommon but include nausea, rash, diarrhea, pancreatitis, and
acute interstitial nephritis.
1. Oral mesalamine agents—These 5-ASA agents are coated in
various pH-sensitive resins (Asacol, Apriso, and Lialda) or
packaged in timed-release capsules (Pentasa). Pentasa releases 5-
ASA slowly throughout the small intestine and colon. Asacol and
Lialda tablets dissolve at pH 6.0–7.0, releasing 5-ASA in the
terminal small bowel and proximal colon. Lialda has a multi-matrix
system that gradually releases 5-ASA throughout the colon.
2. Azo compounds—Sulfasalazine, balsalazide and olsalazine
contain 5-ASA linked by an azo bond that requires cleavage by
colonic bacterial azoreductases to release 5-ASA. Absorption of
these drugs from the small intestine is negligible. After release within
the colon, the 5-ASA works topically and is largely unabsorbed.
Olsalazine contains two 5-ASA molecules connected by the azo
bond. Balsalazide contains 5-ASA linked to an inert carrier (4-
aminobenzoyl-β-alanine).
Sulfasalazine contains 5-ASA linked to a sulfapyridine moiety. It
is unclear whether the sulfapyridine group has any anti-inflammatory
effects. One gram of sulfasalazine contains 400 mg of 5-ASA. The
sulfapyridine group, however, is absorbed and may cause side
effects in 15–30% of patients—much higher than with other 5-ASA
compounds. Dose-related side effects include nausea, headaches,
leukopenia, oligospermia, and impaired folate metabolism. Allergic
and idiosyncratic side effects are fever, rash, hemolytic anemia,
neutropenia, worsened colitis, hepatitis, pancreatitis, and
pneumonitis. Because of its side effects, sulfasalazine is less
frequently used than other 5-ASA agents. It should always be
administered in conjunction with folate. Eighty percent of patients
intolerant of sulfasalazine can tolerate mesalamine.
3. Topical mesalamine—5-ASA is provided in the form of
suppositories (Canasa; 1000 mg) and enemas (Rowasa; 4 g/60
mL). These formulations can deliver much higher concentrations of
5-ASA to the distal colon than oral compounds. Side effects are
uncommon.
B. Corticosteroids
A variety of intravenous, oral, and topical corticosteroid
formulations have been used in inflammatory bowel disease. They
have utility in the short-term treatment of moderate to severe
disease. However, long-term use is associated with serious,
potentially irreversible side effects and is to be avoided. The agents,
route of administration, duration of use, and tapering regimens used
are based more on personal bias and experience than on data from
rigorous clinical trials. The most commonly used intravenous
formulations have been hydrocortisone or methylpredniso-lone,
which are given by continuous infusion or every 6 hours. Oral
formulations are prednisone or methylprednisolone. Adverse events
commonly occur during short-term systemic corticosteroid therapy,
including mood changes, insomnia, dyspepsia, weight gain, edema,
elevated serum glucose levels, acne, and moon facies. Side effects
of long-term use include osteoporosis, osteonecrosis of the femoral
head, myopathy, cataracts, and susceptibility to infections. Calcium
and vitamin D supplementation should be administered to all
patients receiving long-term corticosteroid therapy. Bone
densitometry should be considered in patients with inflammatory
bowel disease with other risk factors for osteoporosis and in all
patients requiring corticosteroids for 3 months or more. Topical
preparations are provided as hydrocortisone suppositories (100
mg), foam (90 mg), and enemas (100 mg). Budesonide is an oral
glucocorticoid with high topical anti-inflammatory activity but low
systemic activity due to high first-pass hepatic metabolism. A
controlled-release formulation is available (Entocort) that targets
delivery to the terminal ileum and proximal colon. It produces less
suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and fewer
steroid-related side effects than hydrocortisone or prednisone.
C. Immunomodulating Drugs: Mercaptopurine, Azathioprine, or
Methotrexate
Mercaptopurine and azathioprine are thiopurine drugs that are used
in many patients with Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis who are
corticosteroid-dependent in an attempt to reduce or withdraw the
corticosteroids and to maintain patients in remission. Azathioprine is
converted in vivo to mercaptopurine. It is believed that the active
metabolite of mercaptopurine is 6-thioguanine. Monitoring of 6-
thioguanine levels is performed in some clinical settings but is of
unproven value in the management of most patients. Side effects of
mercaptopurine and azathioprine, including allergic reactions (fever,
rash, or arthralgias) and nonallergic reactions (nausea, vomiting,
pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, bone marrow suppression, infections,
and a higher risk of lymphoma), occur in 15% of patients.
Three competing enzymes are involved in the metabolism of
mercaptopurine to its active (6-thioguanine) and inactive
metabolites. About 1 person in 300 has a homozygous mutation of
one of the enzymes that metabolizes thiopurine methyltransferase
(TPMT), placing them at risk for profound immunosuppression; 1
person in 9 is heterozygous for TPMT, resulting in intermediate
enzyme activity. Measurement of TPMT functional activity is
recommended prior to initiation of therapy. Treatment should be
withheld in patients with absent TPMT activity. The most effective
dose of mercaptopurine is 1–1.5 mg/kg. For azathioprine, it is 2–3
mg/kg daily. For patients with normal TPMT activity, both drugs
may be initiated at the weight-calculated dose. A complete blood
count should be obtained weekly for 4 weeks, biweekly for 4
weeks, and then every 1–3 months for the duration of therapy.
Liver function tests should be measured periodically. Some
clinicians prefer gradual dose-escalation, especially for patients with
intermediate TPMT activity or in whom TPMT measurement is not
available; both drugs may be started at 25 mg/d and increased by
25 mg every 1–2 weeks while monitoring for myelosuppression until
the target dose is reached. If the white blood count falls below
3000–4000/mcL or the platelet count falls below 100,000/mcL, the
medication should be held for at least 1 week before reducing the
daily dose by 25–50 mg.
Methotrexate is used in the treatment of patients with
inflammatory bowel disease, especially patients with Crohn disease
who are intolerant of mercaptopurine. Methotrexate is an analog of
dihydrofolic acid. Although at high doses it interferes with cell
proliferation through inhibition of nucleic acid metabolism, at low
doses it has anti-inflammatory properties, including inhibition of
expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in monocytes and
macrophages. Methotrexate may be given intramuscularly,
subcutaneously, or orally. Side effects of methotrexate include
nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, infections, bone marrow suppression,
hepatic fibrosis, and life-threatening pneumonitis. A complete blood
count and liver function tests should be monitored every 1–3
months. Folate supplementation (1 mg/d) should be administered.
D. Biologic Therapies
Although the etiology of inflammatory bowel disorders is uncertain,
it appears that an abnormal response of the mucosal innate immune
system to luminal bacteria may trigger inflammation, which is
perpetuated by dysregulation of cellular immunity. A number of
biologic therapies are available or in clinical testing that more
narrowly target various components of the immune system. Biologic
agents are highly effective for patients with corticosteroid-
dependent or refractory disease and potentially may improve the
natural history of disease. The potential benefits of these agents,
however, must be carefully weighed with their high cost and risk of
serious and potentially life-threatening side effects.
1. Anti-TNF therapies—TNF is one of the key proinflammatory
cytokines in the TH1 response. TNF exists in two biologically active
forms: a soluble form (sTNF), which is enzymatically cleaved from
its cell surface, and membrane-bound precursor (tmTNF). When
either form binds to the TNF-receptors on effector cells, they
initiate a variety of signaling pathways that lead to inflammatory gene
activation. Three monoclonal antibodies to TNF currently are
available for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: infliximab,
adalimumab, and certolizumab. All three agents bind and neutralize
soluble as well as membrane-bound TNF on macrophages and
activated T lymphocytes, thereby preventing TNF stimulation of
effector cells. When bound to membrane-associated TNF,
infliximab and adalimumab may also cause apoptosis and cell lysis
of TNF-producing cells.
Infliximab is a chimeric (75% human/25% mouse) IgG1 antibody
that is administered by intravenous infusion. A three-dose regimen
of 5 mg/kg administered at 0, 2, and 6 weeks is recommended for
acute induction, followed by infusions every 8 weeks for
maintenance therapy. Acute infusion reactions occur in 5–10% of
py
infusions but occur less commonly in patients receiving regularly
scheduled infusions or concomitant immunomodulators (ie,
azathioprine or methotrexate). Most reactions are mild or moderate
(nausea; headache; dizziness; urticaria; diaphoresis; or mild
cardiopulmonary symptoms that include chest tightness, dyspnea, or
palpitations) and can be treated by slowing the infusion rate and
administering acetaminophen and diphenhydramine. Severe
reactions (hypotension, severe shortness of breath, rigors, severe
chest discomfort) occur in < 1% and may require oxygen,
diphenhydramine, hydro-cortisone, and epinephrine. Delayed serum
sickness-like reactions occur in 1%. With repeated, intermittent
intravenous injections, antibodies to infliximab develop in up to 40%
of patients, which are associated with a shortened duration or loss
of response and increased risk of acute or delayed infusion
reactions. Giving infliximab in a regularly scheduled maintenance
therapy (eg, every 8 weeks), concomitant use of infliximab with
other immunomodulating agents (azathioprine, mercaptopurine, or
methotrexate), or preinfusion treatment with corticosteroids
(intravenous hydrocortisone 200 mg) significantly reduces the
development of antibodies to approximately 10%.
Adalimumab is a fully human IgG1 antibody that is administered
by subcutaneous injection. A dose of 160 mg at week 0 and 80 mg
at week 2 is recommended for acute induction, followed by
maintenance therapy with 40 mg subcutaneously every other week.
Certolizumab is a fusion compound in which the Fab1 portion of a
chimeric (95% human/5% mouse) TNF-antibody is bound to
polyethylene glycol in order to prolong the drug half-life. A dose of
400 mg at weeks 0, 2, and 4 is recommended for acute induction,
followed by maintenance therapy every 4 weeks with 400 mg. Both
adalimumab and certolizumab are administered subcutaneously.
Injection site reactions (burning, pain, redness, itching) are relatively
common but are usually minor and self-limited. Because of their
subcutaneous route of injection, acute and delayed hypersensitivity
reactions are rare. Antibodies to adalimumab develop in 5% of
patients and to certolizumab in 10%, which may lead to shortened
duration or loss of response to the drug.
Serious infections with anti-TNF therapies may occur in 2–5% of
patients, including sepsis, pneumonia, abscess, and cellulitis;
however, controlled studies suggest the increased risk may be
attributable to increased severity of disease and concomitant use of
corticosteroids. Patients treated with anti-TNF therapies are at
increased risk for the development of bacterial infections,
tuberculosis, 
mycoses 
(candidiasis, 
histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis, nocardiosis), reactivation of hepatitis B, and
other opportunistic infections. Prior to use of these agents, patients
should be screened for latent tuberculosis with PPD testing and a
chest radiograph. Antinuclear and anti-DNA antibodies occur in a
large percentage of patients; however, the development of drug-
induced lupus is rare. All agents may cause severe hepatic reactions
leading to acute hepatic failure; liver enzymes should be monitored
routinely during therapy. Studies suggest that anti-TNF therapies
increase the risk of malignancies, especially non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(6 per 10,000 patient-years) and nonmelanoma skin cancer. Rare
cases of optic neuritis and demyelinating diseases, including multiple
sclerosis have been reported. Anti-TNF therapies may worsen
congestive heart failure in patients with cardiac disease.
2. Anti-integrins—Natalizumab is a humanized monoclonal
antibody targeted against α4-integrins, decreasing the trafficking of
circulating leukocytes through the vasculature and reducing chronic
inflammation. Natalizumab is efficacious for the induction and
maintenance of response and remission in patients with Crohn
disease. Due to an increased incidence of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy caused by reactivation of the JC virus, the use
of natalizumab is restricted to patients with Crohn disease who have
not responded to other therapies.
Atif W et al. Safety profile of IBD therapeutics: infectious risks.
Med Clin North Am. 2010 Jan;94(1):115–33. [PMID:
19944801]
 
Beaugerie L et al. Lymphoproliferative disorders in patients
receiving thiopurines for inflammatory bowel disease: a prospective
observational cohort study. Lancet. 2009 Nov
7;374(9701):1617–25. [PMID: 19837455]
 
Clark M et al. American Gastroenterological Association
consensus development conference on the use of biologics in the
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, June 21–23, 2006.
Gastroenterology. 2007 Jul;133(1):312–39. [PMID: 17631151]
 
Cottone M et al. Advanced age is an independent risk factor for
severe infections and mortality in patients given anti-tumor necrosis
factor therapy for inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2011 Jan;9(1):30–5. [PMID: 20951835]
 
Lewis JD et al. Timing of myelosuppression during thiopurine
therapy for inflammatory bowel disease: implications for monitoring
recommendations. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009
Nov;7(11):1195–201. [PMID: 19631285]
 
Siegel CA et al. Risk of lymphoma associated with combination
anti-tumor necrosis factor and immunomodulators therapy for the
treatment of Crohn's disease: a meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009 Aug;7(8):874–81. [PMID: 19558997]
 
 Social Support for Patients
Inflammatory bowel disease is a lifelong illness that can have
profound emotional and social impacts on the individual. Patients
should be encouraged to become involved in the Crohn's and
Colitis Foundation of America (CCFA). National headquarters may
be contacted at 444 Park Avenue South, 11th Floor, New York,
NY 10016-7374; phone 212-685-3440. Internet address:
http://www.ccfa.org.
1. Crohn Disease
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Insidious onset.
 Intermittent bouts of low-grade fever, diarrhea, and right lower
quadrant pain.
 Right lower quadrant mass and tenderness.
 Perianal disease with abscess, fistulas.
 Radiographic evidence of ulceration, stricturing, or fistulas of the
small intestine or colon.
 
 General Considerations
One-third of cases of Crohn disease involve the small bowel only,
most commonly the terminal ileum (ileitis). Half of all cases involve
the small bowel and colon, most often the terminal ileum and
adjacent proximal ascending colon (ileocolitis). In 20% of cases, the
colon alone is affected. One-third of patients have associated
perianal disease (fistulas, fissures, abscesses). Less than 5%
patients have symptomatic involvement of the upper intestinal tract.
Unlike ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease is a transmural process that
can result in mucosal inflammation and ulceration, stricturing, fistula
development, and abscess formation. Cigarette smoking is strongly
associated with the development of Crohn disease, resistance to
medical therapy, and early disease relapse.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Because of the variable location of involvement and severity of
inflammation, Crohn disease may present with a variety of
symptoms and signs. In eliciting the history, the clinician should take
particular note of fevers, the patient's general sense of well-being,
weight loss, the presence of abdominal pain, the number of liquid
bowel movements per day, and prior surgical resections. Physical
examination should focus on the patient's temperature, weight, and
nutritional status, the presence of abdominal tenderness or an
abdominal 
mass, 
rectal 
examination, 
and 
extraintestinal
manifestations (described below). Most commonly, there is one or
a combination of the following clinical constellations.
1. Chronic inflammatory disease—This is the most common
presentation and is often seen in patients with ileitis or ileocolitis.
Patients report malaise, weight loss, and loss of energy. In patients
with ileitis or ileocolitis, there may be diarrhea, which is usually
nonbloody and often intermittent. In patients with colitis involving
the rectum or left colon, there may be bloody diarrhea and fecal
urgency, which may mimic the symptoms of ulcerative colitis.
Cramping or steady right lower quadrant or periumbilical pain is
common. Physical examination reveals focal tenderness, usually in
the right lower quadrant. A palpable, tender mass that represents
thickened or matted loops of inflamed intestine may be present in
the lower abdomen.
2. Intestinal obstruction—Narrowing of the small bowel may
occur as a result of inflammation, spasm, or fibrotic stenosis.
Patients report postprandial bloating, cramping pains, and loud
borborygmi. This may occur in patients with active inflammatory
symptoms (as above) or later in the disease from chronic fibrosis
without other systemic symptoms or signs of inflammation.
3. Penetrating disease and fistulae—Sinus tracts that penetrate
through the bowel, where they may be contained or form fistulas to
adjacent structures, develop in a subset of patients. Penetration
through the bowel can result in an intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal
phlegmon or abscess manifested by fevers, chills, a tender
abdominal mass, and leukocytosis. Fistulas between the small
intestine and colon commonly are asymptomatic but can result in
diarrhea, weight loss, bacterial overgrowth, and malnutrition.
Fistulas to the bladder produce recurrent infections. Fistulas to the
vagina result in malodorous drainage and problems with personal
hygiene. Fistulas to the skin usually occur at the site of surgical
scars.
4. Perianal disease—One-third of patients with either large or
small bowel involvement develop perianal disease manifested by
large painful skin tags, anal fissures, perianal abscesses, and fistulas.
5. Extraintestinal manifestations—Extraintestinal manifestations
may be seen with both Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis. These
include arthralgias, arthritis, iritis or uveitis, pyoderma gangrenosum
(Figure 15–3), or erythema nodosum. Oral aphthous lesions are
common. There is an increased prevalence of gallstones due to
malabsorption of bile salts from the terminal ileum. Nephrolithiasis
with urate or calcium oxalate stones may occur.
B. Laboratory Findings
There is a poor correlation between laboratory studies and the
patient's clinical picture. Laboratory values may reflect inflammatory
activity or nutritional complications of disease. A complete blood
count and serum albumin should be obtained in all patients. Anemia
may reflect chronic inflammation, mucosal blood loss, iron
deficiency, or vitamin B12 malabsorption secondary to terminal ileal
inflammation or resection. Leukocytosis may reflect inflammation or
abscess formation or may be secondary to corticosteroid therapy.
Hypoalbuminemia may be due to intestinal protein loss (protein-
losing enteropathy), malabsorption, bacterial over-growth, or
chronic inflammation. The sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein
level is elevated in many patients during active inflammation. Fecal
lactoferrin or calprotectin levels also are increased in patients with
intestinal inflammation. Stool specimens are sent for examination for
routine pathogens, ova and parasites, leukocytes, fat, and C
difficile toxin.
 
Figure 15–3. Pyoderma gangrenosum on the leg of a patient
with Crohn disease. (Courtesy of Jack Resneck, Sr, MD; used,
with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr,
Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill
 
C. Special Diagnostic Studies
In most patients, the initial diagnosis of Crohn disease is based on a
compatible clinical picture with supporting endoscopic, pathologic,
and radiographic findings. Colonoscopy usually is performed first to
evaluate the colon and terminal ileum and to obtain mucosal
biopsies. Typical endoscopic findings include aphthoid, linear or
stel-late ulcers, strictures, and segmental involvement with areas of
normal-appearing mucosa adjacent to inflamed mucosa. In 10% of
cases, it may be difficult to distinguish ulcerative colitis from Crohn
disease. Granulomas on biopsy are present in < 25% of patients but
are highly suggestive of Crohn disease. CT or MR enterography or
a barium upper gastrointestinal series with small bowel follow-
through often is obtained in patients with suspected small bowel
involvement. Suggestive findings include ulcerations, strictures, and
fistulas; in addition, CT or MR enterography may identify bowel
wall thickening and vascularity, mucosal enhancement, and fat
stranding. Capsule imaging may help establish a diagnosis when
clinical suspicion for small bowel involvement is high but
radiographs are normal or nondiagnostic. When the diagnosis
remains uncertain, a panel of seven tests that measure
autoantibodies to P-ANCA as well as antibodies to the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, to the outer membrane porin C of E
coli, and to the bacterial flagellin Cbir1 (Prometheus IBD Serology
7) is marketed as being 92% accurate for diagnosing inflammatory
bowel disease and for distinguishing between Crohn disease and
ulcerative colitis.
 Complications
A. Abscess
The presence of a tender abdominal mass with fever and
leukocytosis suggests an abscess. Emergent CT of the abdomen is
necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Patients should be given broad-
spectrum antibiotics. Percutaneous drainage or surgery is usually
required.
B. Obstruction
Small bowel obstruction may develop secondary to active
inflammation or chronic fibrotic stricturing and is often acutely
precipitated by dietary indiscretion. Patients should be given
intravenous fluids with nasogastric suction. Systemic corticosteroids
are indicated in patients with symptoms or signs of active
inflammation but are unhelpful in patients with inactive, fixed
disease. Patients unimproved on medical management require
surgical resection of the stenotic area or stricturoplasty.
C. Abdominal and Rectovaginal Fistulas
Many fistulas are asymptomatic and require no specific therapy.
Most symptomatic fistulas eventually require surgical therapy;
however, medical therapy is effective in a subset of patients and is
usually tried first in outpatients who otherwise are stable. Large
abscesses associated with fistulas require percutaneous or surgical
drainage. After percutaneous drainage, long-term antibiotics are
administered in order to reduce recurrent infections until the fistula is
closed or surgically resected. Fistulas may close temporarily in
response to TPN or oral elemental diets but recur when oral
feedings are resumed. Immunomodulating agents heal fistulas in
one-third of patients within 3–6 months. For fistulas that do not
close with immuno-modulators, anti-TNF agents may promote
closure in up to 60% within 10 weeks; however, relapse occurs in
over one-half of patients within 1 year despite continued therapy.
Surgical therapy is required for symptomatic fistulas that do not
respond to medical therapy. Fistulas that arise above (proximal to)
areas of intestinal stricturing commonly require surgical treatment.
D. Perianal Disease
Patients with fissures, fistulas, and skin tags commonly have perianal
discomfort. Successful treatment of active intestinal disease also
may improve perianal disease. Specific treatment of perianal disease
can be difficult and is best approached jointly with a surgeon with
an expertise in colorectal disorders. Pelvic MRI and endoscopic
ultra-sonography are the best noninvasive studies for evaluating
perianal fistulas. Patients should be instructed on proper perianal
skin care, including gentle wiping with a premoistened pad (baby
wipes) followed by drying with a cool hair dryer, daily cleansing
with sitz baths or a water wash, and use of perianal cotton balls or
pads to absorb drainage. Oral antibiotics (metronidazole, 250 mg
three times daily, or ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily) may
promote symptom improvement or healing in patients with fissures
or uncomplicated fistulas; however, recurrent symptoms are
common. Refractory fissures may benefit from mesalamine
suppositories 
or 
topical 
0.1% 
tacrolimus 
ointment.
Immunomodulators or anti-TNF agents or both promote short-term
symptomatic improvement from anal fistulas in two-thirds of patients
and complete closure in up to one-half of patients; however, less
than one-third maintain symptomatic remission during long-term
maintenance treatment.
Anorectal abscesses should be suspected in patients with severe,
constant perianal pain, or perianal pain in association with fever.
Superficial abscesses are evident on perianal examination, but deep
perirectal abscesses may be detected by digital examination or
pelvic CT scan. Depending on the abscess location, surgical
drainage may be achieved by incision, or catheter or seton
placement. Surgery should be considered for patients with severe,
refractory symptoms but is best approached after medical therapy
of the Crohn disease has been optimized.
E. Carcinoma
Patients with colonic Crohn disease are at increased risk for
developing colon carcinoma; hence, annual screening colonoscopy
to detect dysplasia or cancer is recommended for patients with a
history of 8 or more years of Crohn colitis. Patients with Crohn
disease have an increased risk of lymphoma and of small bowel
adenocarcinoma; however, both are rare.
F. Hemorrhage
Unlike ulcerative colitis, severe hemorrhage is unusual in Crohn
disease.
G. Malabsorption
Malabsorption may arise after extensive surgical resections of the
small intestine and from bacterial overgrowth in patients with
enterocolonic fistulas, strictures, and stasis resulting in bacterial
overgrowth.
 Differential Diagnosis
Chronic cramping abdominal pain and diarrhea are typical of both
irritable bowel syndrome and Crohn disease, but radiographic
examinations are normal in the former. Celiac disease may cause
diarrhea with malabsorption. Acute fever and right lower quadrant
pain may resemble appendicitis or Yersinia enterocolitica enteritis.
Intestinal lymphoma causes fever, pain, weight loss, and abnormal
small bowel radiographs that may mimic Crohn disease. Patients
with undiagnosed AIDS may present with fever and diarrhea.
Segmental colitis may be caused by tuberculosis, E histolytica,
Chlamydia, or ischemic colitis. C difficile or CMV infection may
develop in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, mimicking
disease recurrence. Diverticulitis with abscess formation may be
difficult to distinguish acutely from Crohn disease. NSAIDs may
exacerbate inflammatory bowel disease and may also cause
NSAID-induced colitis characterized by small bowel or colonic
ulcers, erosion, or strictures that tend to be most severe in the
terminal ileum and right colon.
 Treatment of Active Disease
Crohn disease is a chronic lifelong illness characterized by
exacerbations and periods of remission. As no specific therapy
exists, current treatment is directed toward symptomatic
improvement and controlling the disease process. The treatment
must address the specific problems of the individual patient. All
patients with Crohn disease should be counseled to discontinue
cigarettes.
A. Nutrition
1. Diet—Patients should eat a well-balanced diet with as few
restrictions as possible. Eating smaller but more frequent meals may
be helpful. Patients with diarrhea should be encouraged to drink
fluids to avoid dehydration. Many patients report that certain foods
worsen symptoms, especially fried or greasy foods. Because
lactose intolerance is common, a trial off dairy products is
warranted if flatulence or diarrhea is a prominent complaint. Patients
with obstructive symptoms should be placed on a low-roughage
diet, ie, no raw fruits or vegetables, popcorn, nuts, etc. Resection of
more than 100 cm of terminal ileum results in fat malabsorption for
which a low-fat diet is recommended. Parenteral vitamin B12 (100
mcg intramuscularly per month) commonly is needed for patients
with previous ileal resection or extensive terminal ileal disease.
2. Enteral therapy—Supplemental enteral therapy via nasogastric
tube may be required for children and adolescents with poor intake
and growth retardation.
3. Total parenteral nutrition—TPN is used short term in patients
with active disease and progressive weight loss or those awaiting
surgery who have malnutrition but cannot tolerate enteral feedings
because of high-grade obstruction, high-output fistulas, severe
diarrhea, or abdominal pain. It is required long term in a small
subset of patients with extensive intestinal resections resulting in
short bowel syndrome with malnutrition.
B. Symptomatic Medications
There are several potential mechanisms by which diarrhea may
occur in Crohn disease in addition to active Crohn disease. A
rational empiric treatment approach often yields therapeutic
improvement that may obviate the need for corticosteroids or
immunosuppressive agents. Involvement of the terminal ileum with
Crohn disease or prior ileal resection may lead to reduced
absorption of bile acids that may induce secretory diarrhea from the
colon. This diarrhea commonly responds to cholestyramine 2–4 g,
colestipol 5 g, or colesevelam 625 mg one to two times daily before
meals to bind the malabsorbed bile salts. Patients with extensive
ileal disease (requiring more than 100 cm of ileal resection) have
such severe bile salt malabsorption that steatorrhea may arise. Such
patients may benefit from a low-fat diet; bile salt-binding agents will
exacerbate the diarrhea and should not be given. Patients with
Crohn disease are at risk for the development of small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth due to enteral fistulas, ileal resection, and
impaired motility and may benefit from a course of broad-spectrum
antibiotics (see Bacterial Overgrowth, above). Other causes of
diarrhea include lactase deficiency and short bowel syndrome
(described in other sections). Use of oral antidiarrheal agents may
provide benefit in some patients. Loperamide (2–4 mg),
diphenoxylate with atropine (one tablet), or tincture of opium (5–15
drops) may be given as needed up to four times daily. Because of
the risk of toxic mega-colon, these drugs should not be used in
patients with active severe colitis.
C. Specific Drug Therapy
1. 5-aminosalicylic acid agents—Mesalamine (Asacol 2.4–4.8
g/d orally; Pentasa 4 g/d orally) has long been used as initial therapy
for the treatment of mild to moderately active colonic and
ileocolonic Crohn disease. However, meta-analyses of published
and unpublished trial data suggest that mesalamine is of little or no
value in either the treatment of active Crohn disease or the
maintenance of remission. Notwithstanding these data, many
clinicians continue to use mesalamine as first-line therapy for
patients with mild disease because of its safety relative to other
agents.
2. Antibiotics—Antibiotics also are widely used by clinicians for
the treatment of active luminal Crohn disease, although meta-
analyses of controlled trials suggest that they have little or no
efficacy. It is hypothesized that antibiotics may reduce inflammation
through alteration of gut flora, reduction of bacterial overgrowth, or
treatment of microperforations. Oral metronidazole (10 mg/kg/d) or
ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily), or rifaximin (400 mg three times
daily) are commonly administered for 6–12 weeks.
3. Corticosteroids—Approximately one-half of patients with
Crohn disease require corticosteroids at some time in their illness.
Corticosteroids dramatically suppress the acute clinical symptoms
or signs in most patients with both small and large bowel disease;
however, they do not alter the underlying disease. An ileal-release
budesonide preparation (Entocort), 9 mg once daily for 8–16
weeks, induces remission in 50–70% of patients with mild to
moderate Crohn disease involving the terminal ileum or ascending
colon. After initial treatment, budesonide is tapered over 2–4 weeks
in 3 mg increments. In some patients, low-dose budesonide (6
mg/d) may be used for up to 1 year to maintain remission.
Budesonide is superior to mesalamine but somewhat less effective
than prednisone. However, because budesonide has markedly
reduced acute and chronic steroid-related adverse effects, including
smaller reductions of bone mineral density, it is preferred to other
systemic corticosteroids for the treatment of mild to moderate
Crohn disease involving the terminal ileum or ascending colon.
Prednisone or methylprednisolone, 40–60 mg/d, is generally
administered to patients with Crohn disease that is severe, that
involves the distal colon or proximal small intestine, or that has failed
treatment with budesonide. Remission or significant improvement
occurs in > 80% of patients after 8–16 weeks of therapy. After
improvement at 2 weeks, tapering proceeds at 5 mg/wk until a
dosage of 20 mg/d is being given. Thereafter, slow tapering by 2.5
mg/wk is recommended. Approximately 20% of patients cannot be
completely withdrawn from corticosteroids without experiencing a
symptomatic flare-up. Furthermore, more than 50% of patients who
achieve initial remission on corticosteroids will experience a relapse
within 1 year. Use of long-term low corticosteroid doses (2.5–10
mg/d) should be avoided, because of associated complications (see
above). Patients requiring long-term corticosteroid treatment should
be given immunomodulatory drugs (as described below) in an effort
to wean them from corticosteroids.
Patients with persisting symptoms despite oral corticosteroids or
those with high fever, persistent vomiting, evidence of intestinal
obstruction, severe weight loss, severe abdominal tenderness, or
suspicion of an abscess should be hospitalized. In patients with a
tender, palpable inflammatory abdominal mass, CT scan of the
abdomen should be obtained prior to administering corticosteroids
to rule out an abscess. If no abscess is identified, parenteral
corticosteroids should be administered (as described for ulcerative
colitis below).
4. Immunomodulating drugs: Azathioprine, mercaptopurine,
or methotrexate—Immunomodulating agents are used in
approximately two-thirds of patients with Crohn disease who have
not responded to corticosteroids or who require repeated courses
of long-term corticosteroids to control symptoms. These agents
permit elimination or reduction of corticosteroids in over 75% and
fistula closure in 30% of patients. In the United States,
mercaptopurine or azathioprine are more commonly used than
methotrexate. The mean time to symptomatic response is 2–4
months, so these agents are not useful for acute exacerbations.
Meta-analyses of controlled trials suggest that patients with Crohn
disease treated with immunomodulating agents are three times as
likely to achieve remission and 2.25 times as likely to maintain
remission as those treated with corticosteroids. Once patients
achieve remission, immunomodulating drugs reduce the 3-year
relapse rate from over 60% to < 25% (see Immunomodulating
Drugs, above). Methotrexate (25 mg intramuscularly or
subcutaneously weekly for 12 weeks, followed by 12.5–15 mg
once weekly) is used in patients who are unresponsive to or
intolerant of mercaptopurine or azathioprine. Because oral
absorption may be erratic, parenteral administration is preferred.
Other immunosuppressive agents have been investigated in the
treatment of Crohn disease, including cyclosporine and thalidomide;
however, efficacy has been modest and toxicity greater than with
the thiopurines.
5. 
Anti-TNF 
therapies—Infliximab, 
adalimumab, 
and
certolizumab are used for the treatment of patients with moderate to
severe Crohn disease (including fistulizing disease) with an
inadequate response to mesalamine, antibiotics, corticosteroids or
immunomodulators. These agents are also used to treat severe
disease in hospitalized patients and extraintestinal manifestations of
Crohn disease (except optic neuritis).
A. ACUTE INDUCTION THERAPY—The doses for acute induction
therapy are described above. Up to two-thirds of patients have
significant clinical improvement during acute induction therapy.
B. MAINTENANCE THERAPY—After initial clinical response,
symptom relapse occurs in > 80% of patients within 1 year in the
absence of further maintenance therapy. Therefore, scheduled
maintenance therapy is usually recommended (infliximab, 5 mg/kg
infusion every 8 weeks; adalimumab, 40 mg subcutaneous injection
every 2 weeks; certolizumab, 400 mg subcutaneous injection every
4 weeks). With long-term maintenance therapy, approximately two-
thirds have continued clinical response and up to one-half have
complete symptom remission. A gradual or complete loss of
efficacy occurs over time in some patients, necessitating increased
dosing (infliximab 10 mg/kg; adalimumab 80 mg), decreased dosing
intervals (infliximab every 6 weeks; adalimumab every week),
changing to the alternative agent, or discontinuation of anti-TNF
therapy. In some cases, loss of efficacy is due to the development
of antibodies to the anti-TNF agent (ATAs). Scheduled
maintenance therapy is associated with a lower likelihood of
developing ATA and an increased likelihood of sustained response.
Concomitant therapy with anti-TNF agents and immunomodulating
agents (azathioprine, mercaptopurine, or methotrexate) reduces the
risk of development of ATA but may increase the risk of
complications from anti-TNF agents, including the development of
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma. Thus, it remains controversial
whether anti-TNF agents should be used alone or in combination
with immunomodulating agents for maintenance therapy, especially
for the sole purpose of reducing the incidence of anti-TNF antibody
formation.
C. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS—There is considerable controversy
about whether anti-TNF agents should be reserved as second-line
therapy in patients with moderate to severe Crohn disease who
have not responded to prior therapy with corticosteroids and
immunomodulators (“step-up” therapy) or whether it should be
used early in the course of illness with the goal of inducing early
remission and altering the natural history of the disease. In phase III
pivotal trials assessing the efficacy of anti-TNF agents, remission
rates were significantly higher among patients with a shorter duration
of disease (< 5 years). A 2008 study of patients with moderate to
severe Crohn disease of < 4 years duration, compared step-down
therapy (infliximab for induction followed by azathioprine for
maintenance) with step-up therapy (corticosteroids, followed by
azathioprine, followed by infliximab). After 1-year, 61% of patients
who received step-down therapy were in clinical remission
compared with 42% who received step-up therapy. Moreover,
mucosal healing occurred in 73% of patients treated with step-
down therapy versus only 30% with step-up therapy. Further data
in support of use of early combination therapy come from a large
2010 trial (SONIC) that compared three treatment arms:
combination therapy with infliximab and azathioprine versus
infliximab alone or azathioprine alone in patients with moderate to
severe Crohn disease who had not previously been treated with
immunomodulators or anti-TNF agents. After 6 months, clinical
remission (57%) and mucosal healing (44%) was significantly higher
with combination therapy than with either agent alone. Although
further investigation is needed, data increasingly support the use of
anti-TNF agents early in the course of disease in patients with
moderate to severe Crohn disease. However, there is considerable
controversy about whether early anti-TNF therapy should be used
alone or in combination with an immunomodulator, since
combination therapy increases the likelihood of lymphoma.
Concomitant therapy with anti-TNF and immunomodulators is most
appropriate for patients with early disease (< 2 years) with
extensive intestinal involvement, perianal involvement, or
complicated disease. It is inappropriate in patients with limited,
uncomplicated disease, especially young men (< 26 years) in whom
there is a higher risk of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma.
 Indications for Surgery
Over 50% of patients will require at least one surgical procedure.
The main indications for surgery are intractability to medical
therapy, intra-abdominal abscess, massive bleeding, symptomatic
refractory internal or perianal fistulas, and intestinal obstruction.
Patients with chronic obstructive symptoms due to a short segment
of ileal stenosis are best treated with resection or stricturoplasty
(rather than long-term medical therapy), which promotes rapid
return of well-being and elimination of corticosteroids. After
surgery, endoscopic evidence of recurrence occurs in 60% within 1
year. Endoscopic recurrence precedes clinical recurrence by
months to years; clinical recurrence occurs in 20% of patients within
1 year and 80% within 10–15 years. Therapy with metronidazole,
250 mg three times daily for 3 months, or long-term therapy with
immunomodulators (mercaptopurine or azathioprine) have only
been modestly effective in preventing clinical and endoscopic
recurrence after ileocolic resection; however, small uncontrolled
studies suggest that anti-TNF therapies may prevent endoscopic
recurrence in up to 90% of patients. Clinicians may choose to
perform endoscopy in high-risk patients 6–12 months after surgery
in order to identify patients with early endoscopic recurrence who
may benefit from anti-TNF therapy.
 Prognosis
With proper medical and surgical treatment, the majority of patients
are able to cope with this chronic disease and its complications and
lead productive lives. Few patients die as a direct consequence of
the disease.
 When to Refer
 
•    For expertise in endoscopic procedures or capsule
endoscopy.
•    Any patient requiring hospitalization for follow-up.
•    Patients with moderate to severe disease for whom
therapy with immunomodulators or biologic agents is being
considered.
•    When surgery may be necessary.
 When to Admit
 
•    An intestinal obstruction is suspected.
•    An intra-abdominal or perirectal abscess is suspected.
•    A serious infectious complication is suspected,
especially in patients who are immunocompromised due to
concomitant use of corticosteroids, immunomodulators, or
anti-TNF agents.
•    Patients with severe symptoms of diarrhea, dehydration,
weight loss, or abdominal pain.
•    Patients with severe or persisting symptoms despite
treatment with corticosteroids.
Cho SM et al. Postoperative management of Crohn disease. Med
Clin North Am. 2010 Jan;94(1):179–88. [PMID: 19944804]
 
Colombel JF et al; SONIC Study Group. Infliximab, azathioprine,
or combination therapy for Crohn's disease. N Engl J Med. 2010
Apr 15;362(15):1383–95. [PMID: 20393175]
 
Devlin SM et al. Evolving inflammatory bowel disease treatment
paradigms: top-down versus step-up. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Jan;94(1):1–18. [PMID: 19944795]
 
D'Haens G et al. Early combined immunosuppression or
conventional management in patients with newly diagnosed Crohn's
disease: an open randomized trial. Lancet. 2008 Feb
23;371(9613):660–7. [PMID: 18295023]
 
Jones J et al. Relationships between disease activity and serum and
fecal biomarkers in patients with Crohn's disease. Clin Gastro
enterol Hepatol. 2008 Nov;6(11):1218–24. [PMID: 18799360]
 
Lichtenstein GR et al; Practice Parameters Committee of the
American College of Gastroenterology. Management of Crohn's
disease in adults. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009 Feb; 104(2):465–83.
[PMID: 19174807]
 
Melmed GY et al. The appropriateness of concomitant immuno-
modulators with anti-tumor necrosis factor agents for Crohn's
disease: one size does not fit all. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Aug;8(8):655–9. [PMID: 20451665]
 
Peyrin-Biroulet L et al. Efficacy and safety of tumor necrosis factor
antagonists in Crohn's disease: meta-analysis of placebo-controlled
trials. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Jun;6(6): 644–53. [PMID:
18550004]
 
2. Ulcerative Colitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bloody diarrhea.
 Lower abdominal cramps and fecal urgency.
 Anemia, low serum albumin.
 Negative stool cultures.
 Sigmoidoscopy is the key to diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Ulcerative colitis is an idiopathic inflammatory condition that
involves the mucosal surface of the colon, resulting in diffuse
friability and erosions with bleeding. Approximately one-third of
patients have disease confined to the rectosigmoid region
(proctosigmoiditis); one-third have disease that extends to the
splenic flexure (left-sided colitis); and one-third have disease that
extends more proximally (extensive colitis). There is some
correlation between disease extent and symptom severity. In the
majority of patients, the extent of colonic involvement does not
progress over time. In most patients, the disease is characterized by
periods of symptomatic flare-ups and remissions. Ulcerative colitis
is more common in nonsmokers and former smokers. Disease
severity may be lower in active smokers and may worsen in patients
who stop smoking. Appendectomy before the age of 20 years for
acute appendicitis is associated with a reduced risk of developing
ulcerative colitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical profile in ulcerative colitis is highly variable. Bloody
diarrhea is the hallmark. On the basis of several clinical and
laboratory parameters, it is clinically useful to classify patients as
having mild, moderate, or severe disease (Table 15–12). Patients
should be asked about stool frequency, the presence and amount of
rectal bleeding, cramps, abdominal pain, fecal urgency, and
tenesmus. Physical examination should focus on the patient's volume
status as determined by orthostatic blood pressure and pulse
measurements and by nutritional status. On abdominal examination,
the clinician should look for tenderness and evidence of peritoneal
inflammation. Red blood may be present on digital rectal
examination.
1. Mild to moderate disease—Patients with mild disease have a
gradual onset of infrequent diarrhea (less than four movements per
day) with intermittent rectal bleeding and mucus. Stools may be
formed or loose in consistency. Because of rectal inflammation,
there is fecal urgency and tenesmus. Left lower quadrant cramps
relieved by defecation are common, but there is no significant
abdominal tenderness. Patients with moderate disease have more
severe diarrhea with frequent bleeding. Abdominal pain and
tenderness may be present but are not severe. There may be mild
fever, anemia, and hypoalbuminemia.
 
Table 15–12. Ulcerative colitis: Assessment of diseas
 
ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
2. severe disease—Patients with severe disease have more than
six bloody bowel movements per day, resulting in severe anemia,
hypovolemia, and impaired nutrition with hypoalbuminemia.
Abdominal pain and tenderness are present. “Fulminant colitis” is a
subset of severe disease characterized by rapidly worsening
symptoms with signs of toxicity.
B. Laboratory Findings
The degree of abnormality of the hematocrit, sedimentation rate,
and serum albumin reflects disease severity.
C. Endoscopy
In acute colitis, the diagnosis is readily established by
sigmoidoscopy. The mucosal appearance is characterized by
edema, friability, mucopus, and erosions. Colonoscopy should not
be performed in patients with fulminant disease because of the risk
of perforation. After patients have demonstrated improvement on
therapy, colonoscopy is performed to determine the extent of
disease.
D. Imaging
Plain abdominal radiographs are obtained in patients with severe
colitis to look for significant colonic dilation. Barium enemas are of
little utility in the evaluation of acute ulcerative colitis and may
precipitate toxic megacolon in patients with severe disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
The initial presentation of ulcerative colitis is indistinguishable from
other causes of colitis, clinically as well as endoscopically. Thus, the
diagnosis of idiopathic ulcerative colitis is reached after excluding
other known causes of colitis. Infectious colitis should be excluded
by sending stool specimens for routine bacterial cultures (to exclude
Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter, as well as specific
assays for E coli O157), ova and parasites (to exclude amebiasis),
and stool toxin assay for C difficile. Mucosal biopsy can distinguish
amebic colitis from ulcerative colitis. CMV colitis occurs in
immunocompromised patients and is diagnosed on mucosal biopsy.
Gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, herpes, and syphilis are
considerations in sexually active patients with proctitis. In elderly
patients with cardiovascular disease, ischemic colitis may involve the
rectosigmoid. A history of radiation to the pelvic region can result in
proctitis months to years later. Crohn disease involving the colon
but not the small intestine may be confused with ulcerative colitis. In
10% of patients, a distinction between Crohn disease and ulcerative
colitis may not be possible. The possible utility of serologic testing
(Prometheus IBD Serology 7 panel) in patients with indeterminate
colitis requires further clinical study (see discussion in the section on
Crohn disease).
 Treatment
There are two main treatment objectives: (1) to terminate the acute,
symptomatic attack and (2) to prevent recurrence of attacks. The
treatment of acute ulcerative colitis depends on the extent of colonic
involvement and the severity of illness.
Patients with mild to moderate disease should eat a regular diet
but limit their intake of caffeine and gas-producing vegetables.
Antidiarrheal agents should not be given in the acute phase of illness
but are safe and helpful in patients with mild chronic symptoms.
Oral loperamide (2 mg) or diphenoxylate with atropine (one tablet)
may be given up to four times daily. Such remedies are particularly
useful at nighttime and when taken prophylactically for occasions
when patients may not have reliable access to toilet facilities.
A. Distal Colitis
Patients with disease confined to the rectum or rectosigmoid region
generally have mild but distressing symptoms. Patients may be
treated with topical mesalamine, topical corticosteroids, or oral
aminosalicylates (5-ASA) according to patient preference and cost
considerations. Topical mesalamine is the drug of choice and is
superior to topical corticosteroids and 5-ASA. A combination of an
oral and topical mesalamine agent is more effective than either
alone. Mesalamine is administered as a suppository, 1000 mg once
daily at bedtime for proctitis, and as an enema, 4 g at bedtime for
proctosigmoiditis, for 4–12 weeks, with 75% of patients improving.
Topical corticosteroids are a less expensive alternative to
mesalamine but are also less effective. Hydrocortisone suppository
or foam is prescribed for proctitis and hydrocortisone enema (80–
100 mg) for proctosigmoiditis. Systemic effects from short-term use
are very slight. Patients who either decline or are unable to manage
topical therapy may be treated with oral 5-ASA, as discussed
below. For patients with distal disease who do not improve with
once daily topical therapy, the following options may be considered:
(1) combination topical therapy with a 5-ASA suppository or
enema at bedtime and a corticosteroid enema or foam in the
morning, or (2) a combination of a topical agent with an oral 5-
ASA agent.
Patients whose acute symptoms resolve rapidly with immediate
therapy may have prolonged periods of remission that are treated
successfully with intermittent courses of therapy. Patients with early
or frequent relapse should be treated with maintenance therapy with
mesala-mine suppositories (1000 mg) or enemas (4 g) nightly or
every other night. For patients who have difficulty complying with
topical therapies, oral 5-ASA agents are an acceptable, though
possibly less effective, alternative (see below).
B. Mild to Moderate Colitis
1. 5-ASA Agents—Disease extending above the sigmoid colon is
best treated with 5-ASA agents (mesalamine, balsalazide, or
sulfasalazine), which result in symptomatic improvement in 50–75%
of patients. Most patients improve within 3–6 weeks, though some
require 2–3 months. Oral mesalamine (Asacol 0.8–1.6 g three times
daily; Lialda 2.4–4.8 g once daily; Pentasa 0.5–1 g four times daily)
and balsalazide, 2.25 g three times daily, are approved for active
disease. These agents achieve clinical improvement in 50–70% of
patients and remission in 20–30%. Total doses of mesalamine
above 2–2.4 g/d result in marginal increases in remission in patients
with moderate disease. Oral sulfasalazine is comparable in efficacy
to mesalamine and because of its low cost is still commonly used as
a first-line agent by many providers, though it is associated with
greater side effects. To minimize side effects, sulfasalazine is begun
at a dosage of 500 mg twice daily and increased gradually over 1–2
weeks to 2 g twice daily. Total doses of 5–6 g/d may have greater
efficacy but are poorly tolerated. Folic acid, 1 mg/d orally, should
be administered to all patients taking sulfasalazine.
2. Corticosteroids—Patients with mild to moderate disease who
do not improve after 4–8 weeks of 5-ASA therapy should have the
addition of corticosteroid therapy. The addition of topical therapy
with 5-ASA enemas (4 g once daily) or hydrocortisone foam or
enemas (80–100 mg once or twice daily) may be tried first. Patients
who do not improve after 2 more weeks require systemic
corticosteroid therapy. Prednisone and methylprednisolone are
most commonly used. Depending on the severity of illness, the initial
oral dose of prednisone is 40–60 mg daily. Rapid improvement is
observed in most cases within 2 weeks. Thereafter, tapering of
prednisone should proceed by 5–10 mg/wk. After tapering to 20
mg/d, slower tapering (2.5 mg/week) is sometimes required.
Complete tapering without symptomatic flare-ups is possible in the
majority of patients.
3. Immunomodulating agents—A subset of patients either does
not respond to aminosalicylates or corticosteroids or has
symptomatic flares during attempts at corticosteroid tapering.
Although surgical resection is traditionally recommended for patients
with refractory disease, many patients may wish to avoid surgery
and others have moderately severe disease for which surgery might
not otherwise be warranted. Immunomodulating agents are used for
the treatment of ulcerative colitis; however, the risks of these drugs
from chronic immunosuppression must be weighed against the
certainty of cure with surgical resection. Limited trials suggest
mercaptopurine or azathioprine is of benefit in 60% of patients,
allowing tapering of corticosteroids and maintenance of remission.
There is less evidence that methotrexate is effective.
Infliximab is approved in the United States for the treatment of
patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who have had an
inadequate response to conventional therapies (oral corticosteroids,
mercaptopurine or azathioprine, and mesalamine). Following a
three-dose induction regimen of 5 mg/kg administered at 0, 2, and 6
weeks, clinical response occurs in 65% and clinical remission in
35% (see Crohn Disease, above). Other anti-TNF agents (ie,
adalimumab) have not been approved for treatment of ulcerative
colitis.
C. Severe Colitis
About 15% of patients with ulcerative colitis have a more severe
course. Because they may progress to fulminant colitis or toxic
megacolon, hospitalization is generally required.
1. General measures—Discontinue all oral intake for 24–48
hours or until the patient demonstrates clinical improvement. TPN is
indicated only in patients with poor nutritional status or if feedings
cannot be reinstituted within 7–10 days. All opioid or anticholinergic
agents should be discontinued. Restore circulating volume with
fluids, correct electrolyte abnormalities, and consider transfusion for
significant anemia (hematocrit < 25–28%). Abdominal examinations
should be repeated to look for evidence of worsening distention or
pain. A plain abdominal radiograph should be ordered on admission
to look for evidence of colonic dilation. Send stools for bacterial
culture, C difficile toxin assay, and examination for ova and
parasites. CMV superinfection should be considered in patients
receiving long-term immunosuppressive therapy who are
unresponsive to corticosteroid therapy. Surgical consultation should
be sought for all patients with severe disease.
2. Corticosteroid therapy—Methylprednisolone, 48–64 mg, or
hydrocortisone, 300 mg, is administered intravenously in four
divided doses or by continuous infusion over 24 hours. Higher or
“pulse” doses are of no benefit. Hydrocortisone enemas (100 mg)
may also be administered twice daily for treatment of urgency or
tenesmus. Approximately 50–75% of patients achieve remission
with systemic corticosteroids within 7–10 days. Once symptomatic
improvement has occurred, oral fluids are reinstituted. If fluids are
well tolerated, intravenous corticosteroids are discontinued and the
patient is started on oral prednisone (as described for moderate
disease).
3. Anti-TNF therapies—A single infusion of infliximab, 5 mg/kg,
has been shown in recent controlled and uncontrolled studies to be
effective in treating severe colitis in patients who did not improve
within 4–7 days of intravenous corticosteroid therapy. In a
controlled study of patients hospitalized for ulcerative colitis,
colectomy was required within 3 months in 69% who received
placebo therapy, compared with 47% who received infliximab.
Although further studies are needed, infliximab therapy should be
considered in patients with severe ulcerative colitis who have not
improved with intravenous corticosteroid therapy. (See Crohn
Disease, above.)
4. Cyclosporine—Intravenous cyclosporine (2–4 mg/kg/d as a
continuous infusion) benefits 60–75% of patients with severe colitis
who have not improved after 7–10 days of corticosteroids. In
patients with severe steroid-resistant colitis who are reluctant to
undergo colectomy, intravenous cyclosporine may be considered as
a “bridge” therapy while mercaptopurine or azathioprine therapy
(which take 2–4 months for full efficacy) is initiated. Up to two-
thirds of responders may be maintained in remission with a
combination of oral cyclosporine for 3 months and long-term
therapy with mercaptopurine or azathioprine. The relative role of
infliximab versus cyclosporine in the treatment of severe colitis
requires further clinical study.
5. Surgical therapy—Patients with severe disease who fail to
improve after 7–10 days of corticosteroid, infliximab or
cyclosporine therapy are unlikely to respond to further medical
therapy, and surgery is recommended.
D. Fulminant Colitis and Toxic Megacolon
A subset of patients with severe disease has a more fulminant
course with rapid progression of symptoms over 1–2 weeks and
signs of severe toxicity. These patients appear quite ill, with fever,
prominent hypovolemia, hemorrhage requiring transfusion, and
abdominal distention with tenderness. They are at a higher risk of
perforation or development of toxic megacolon and must be
followed 
closely. 
Broad-spectrum 
antibiotics 
should 
be
administered to cover anaerobes and gram-negative bacteria.
Toxic megacolon develops in < 2% of cases of ulcerative colitis.
It is characterized by colonic dilation of more than 6 cm on plain
films with signs of toxicity. In addition to the therapies outlined
above, nasogastric suction should be initiated. Patients should be
instructed to roll from side to side and onto the abdomen in an effort
to decompress the distended colon. Serial abdominal plain films
should be obtained to look for worsening dilation or ischemia.
Patients with fulminant disease or toxic megacolon who worsen or
fail to improve within 48–72 hours should undergo surgery to
prevent perforation. If the operation is performed before
perforation, the mortality rate should be low.
 Maintenance of Remission
Without long-term therapy, 75% of patients who initially go into
remission on medical therapy will experience a symptomatic relapse
within 1 year. Long-term oral maintenance therapy with
sulfasalazine, 1–1.5 g twice daily, or mesalamine have been shown
to reduce relapse rates to < 35%. Acceptable mesalamine regimens
are Asacol 0.8–1.2 g twice daily or 1.6–2.4 g once daily, Pentasa 1
g twice daily or 2 g once daily, Lialda 2.4 g once daily, and Apriso
1.5 g once daily. Mercaptopurine and azathioprine are useful in
patients with frequent disease relapses (more than two per year) or
corticosteroid-dependent disease to maintain remission. The role of
long-term infliximab therapy in the maintenance of remission is
evolving. In two, large, controlled studies of patients with active
moderate to severe colitis, initial induction therapy was followed by
infliximab maintenance infusions (5 mg/kg) administered every 8
weeks for 30–54 weeks. At the end of the study (30 or 54 weeks),
35% were in clinical remission, (21% in corticosteroid-free
remission), a modest but impressive response in patients with more
refractory disease. In considering long-term infliximab therapy,
patients and clinicians need to weigh the long-term risks of
immunosuppression against colectomy.
 Risk of Colon Cancer
In patients with ulcerative colitis with disease proximal to the rectum
and in patients with Crohn colitis, there is a markedly increased risk
of developing colon carcinoma. A large meta-analysis of
observational studies reported a cumulative incidence of 2% at 10
years, 8% at 20 years, and 18% after 30 years of disease.
Retrospective studies suggest that the risk of colon cancer may be
reduced in patients treated with long-term 5-ASA therapy.
Ingestion of folic acid, 1 mg/d, also is associated with a decreased
risk of cancer development. Colonoscopies are recommended
every 1–2 years in patients with colitis, beginning 8–10 years after
diagnosis. At colonoscopy, multiple (at least 32) random mucosal
biopsies are taken throughout the colon at 10-cm intervals as well
as biopsies of mass lesions to look for dysplasia or carcinoma.
Because of the relatively high incidence of concomitant carcinoma in
patients with dysplasia (either low or high grade) in flat mucosa or
mass lesions, colectomy is recommended. Several prospective
studies demonstrate that dye spraying with methylene blue or indigo
carmine (“chromoendoscopy”) enhances the detection of subtle
mucosal lesions, thereby significantly increasing the detection of
dysplasia compared with standard colonoscopy. Although
surveillance colonoscopy appears to be effective in reducing the
incidence of colon cancer, patients must understand that
approximately one-third of detected cancers are advanced, despite
compliance with routine colonoscopy surveillance.
 Surgery in Ulcerative Colitis
Surgery is required in 25% of patients. Severe hemorrhage,
perforation, and documented carcinoma are absolute indications for
surgery. Surgery is indicated also in patients with fulminant colitis or
toxic megacolon that does not improve within 48–72 hours, in
patients with dysplasia on surveillance colonoscopy, and in patients
with refractory disease requiring long-term corticosteroids to
control symptoms.
Although total proctocolectomy (with placement of an ileostomy)
provides complete cure of the disease, most patients seek to avoid
it out of concern for the impact it may have on their bowel function,
their self-image, and their social interactions. After complete
colectomy, patients may have a standard ileostomy with an external
appliance, a continent ileostomy, or an internal ileal pouch that is
anastomosed to the anal canal (ileal pouch-anal anastomosis). The
latter maintains intestinal continuity, thereby obviating an ostomy.
Under optimal circumstances, patients have five to seven loose
bowel movements per day without incontinence. Endoscopic or
histologic inflammation in the ileal pouch (“pouchitis”) develops in
over 40% of patients, resulting in increased stool frequency, fecal
urgency, cramping, and bleeding, but usually resolves with a 2-
week course of oral metronidazole (10 mg/kg/d) or ciprofloxacin
(500 mg twice daily). Patients with frequently relapsing pouchitis
may 
need 
continuous 
antibiotics. 
Probiotics 
containing
nonpathogenic strains of lactobacilli, bifidobacteria, and
streptococci (VSL#3) are effective in the maintenance of remission
in patients with recurrent pouchitis. Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto
Bismol, 262 mg, two tablets four times daily) has demonstrated
benefit in some series. Some clinicians report that topical
corticosteroids or oral budesonide 9 mg/d are of benefit. Refractory
cases of pouchitis can be disabling and may require conversion to a
standard ileostomy.
 Prognosis
Ulcerative colitis is a lifelong disease characterized by exacerbations
and remissions. For most patients, the disease is readily controlled
by medical therapy without need for surgery. The majority never
require hospitalization. A subset of patients with more severe
disease will require surgery, which results in complete cure of the
disease. Properly managed, most patients with ulcerative colitis lead
close to normal productive lives.
 When to Refer
 
•    Colonoscopy: for evaluation of activity and extent of
active disease and for surveillance for neoplasia in patients
with quiescent disease for more than 8–10 years.
•    When hospitalization is required.
•    When surgical colectomy is indicated.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with severe disease manifested by frequent
bloody stools, anemia, weight loss, and fever.
•    Patients with fulminant disease manifested by rapid
progression of symptoms, worsening abdominal pain,
distention, high fever, tachycardia.
•    Patients with moderate to severe symptoms that do not
respond to oral corticosteroids and require a trial of bowel
rest and intravenous corticosteroids.
Farraye FA et al. AGA medical position statement on the
diagnosis and management of colorectal neoplasia in inflammatory
bowel disease. Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;138(2):738–45.
[PMID: 20141808]
 
Farraye FA et al. AGA technical review on the diagnosis and
management of colorectal neoplasia in inflammatory bowel disease.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;138(2):746–74. [PMID: 20141809]
 
Kornbluth A et al. Ulcerative colitis practice guidelines in adults:
American College Of Gastroenterology, Practice Parameters
Committee. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Mar;105(3):501–23.
[PMID: 20068560]
 
Lichtenstein GR et al. The importance of mucosal healing in
ulcerative colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2010 Feb;16(2):338–46.
[PMID: 19637362]
 
Sandborn WJ et al. Colectomy rate comparison after treatment of
ulcerative colitis with placebo or infliximab. Gastroenterology.
2009 Oct;137(4):1250–60. [PMID: 19596014]
 
Sandborn WJ et al. Once-daily dosing of delayed-release oral
mesalamine (400-mg tablet) is as effective as twice-daily dosing
for maintenance of remission of ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology.
2010 Apr;138(4):1286–96. [PMID: 20064514]
 
Sternthal MB et al. Adverse events associated with the use of
cyclosporine in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2008 Apr;103(4):937–43. [PMID: 18177449]
 
3. Microscopic Colitis
Microscopic colitis is an idiopathic condition that is found in up to
15% of patients who have chronic or intermittent watery diarrhea
with normal-appearing mucosa at endos-copy. There are two major
subtypes—lymphocytic colitis and collagenous colitis. In both,
histologic evaluation of mucosal biopsies reveals chronic
inflammation (lymphocytes, plasma cells) in the lamina propria and
increased intraepithelial lymphocytes. Collagenous colitis is further
characterized by the presence of a thickened band (> 10 mcm) of
subepithelial collagen. Both forms occur more commonly in women,
especially in the fifth to sixth decades. Symptoms tend to be chronic
or recurrent but may remit in most patients after several years. A
more severe illness characterized by abdominal pain, fatigue,
dehydration, and weight loss may develop in a subset of patients.
The cause of microscopic colitis usually is unknown. Several
medications have been implicated as etiologic agents, including
NSAIDs, sertraline, paroxetine, lansoprazole, lisinopril, and
simvastatin. Diarrhea usually abates within 30 days of stopping the
offending medication. Celiac sprue may be present in up to 20% of
patients and should be excluded with serologic testing (antitissue
transglutaminase or antiendomysial antibody). Treatment is largely
empiric since there are few well-designed, controlled treatment
trials. Antidiarrheal therapy with loperamide is the first-line
treatment, providing symptom improvement in up to 70%. For
patients who do not respond to loperamide, the next option is
budesonide (which is efficacious but expensive) versus other agents
(which have limited data supporting efficacy but are less expensive).
In uncontrolled studies, treatment with 5-ASAs (sulfasalazine,
mesalamine) or bile-salt binding agents (cholestyramine, colestipol)
is reported to be effective in many patients. A small unpublished
controlled trial demonstrated efficacy for bismuth subsalicylate (two
tablets three times daily) for 2 months; however, clinical experience
has yielded only modest benefit. Delayed release budesonide
(Entocort) 9 mg/d for 6–8 weeks has been shown in three
prospective controlled studies to induce clinical remission in > 80%
of patients; however, relapse occurs in most patients after stopping
therapy. In two prospective studies, remission was maintained in
75% of patients treated with budesonide 6 mg/d compared with
25% of persons given placebo. In clinical practice, budesonide is
tapered to the lowest effective dose for maintaining symptoms. Less
than 3% of patients have refractory or severe symptoms, which may
be treated with immunosuppressive agents (azathioprine or
methotrexate).
Bonderup OK et al. Long-term budesonide treatment of
collagenous colitis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):68–72. [PMID: 18669576]
 
Chande N et al. Interventions for treating microscopic colitis: a
Cochrane inflammatory bowel disease and functional bowel
disorders review group systematic review of randomized trials. Am
J Gastroenterol. 2009 Jan;104(1):235–41. [PMID: 19098875]
 
Miehlke S et al. Budesonide is effective in treating lymphocytic
colitis: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Jun;136(7):2092–100. [PMID:
19303012]
 
DIVERTICULAR DISEASE OF THE COLON
Colonic diverticulosis increases with age, ranging from 5% in those
under age 40, to 30% at age 60, to more than 50% over age 80
years in Western societies. In contrast, it is very uncommon in
developing countries with much lower life expectancies. Most are
asymptomatic, discovered incidentally at endoscopy or on barium
enema. Complications in one-third include lower gastrointestinal
bleeding and diverticulitis.
Colonic diverticula may vary in size from a few millimeters to
several centimeters and in number from one to several dozen.
Almost all patients with diverticulosis have involvement in the
sigmoid and descending colon; however, only 15% have proximal
colonic disease.
In most patients, diverticulosis is believed to arise after many
years of a diet deficient in fiber. The undistended, contracted
segments of colon have higher intraluminal pressures. Over time, the
contracted colonic musculature, working against greater pressures
to move small, hard stools, develops hypertrophy, thickening,
rigidity, and fibrosis. Diverticula may develop more commonly in the
sigmoid because intraluminal pressures are highest in this region.
The extent to which abnormal motility and hereditary factors
contribute to diverticular disease is unknown. Patients with diffuse
diverticulosis may have an inherent weakness in the colonic wall.
Patients with abnormal connective tissue are also disposed to
development of diver-ticulosis, including Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
Marfan syndrome, and scleroderma.
1. Uncomplicated Diverticulosis
More than two-thirds of patients with diverticulosis have
uncomplicated disease and no specific symptoms. In some,
diverticulosis may be an incidental finding detected during
colonoscopic examination or barium enema examination. Some
patients have nonspecific complaints of chronic constipation,
abdominal pain, or fluctuating bowel habits. It is unclear whether
these symptoms are due to alterations in the colonic musculature or
underlying irritable bowel syndrome. Physical examination is usually
normal but may reveal mild left lower quadrant tenderness with a
thickened, palpable sigmoid and descending colon. Screening
laboratory studies should be normal in uncomplicated diverticulosis.
There is no reason to perform imaging studies for the purpose of
diagnosing uncomplicated disease. Diverticula are best seen on
barium enema. Involved segments of colon may also be narrowed
and deformed. Colonoscopy is a less sensitive means of detecting
diverticula.
Asymptomatic patients in whom diverticulosis is discovered and
patients with a history of complicated disease (see below) should be
treated with a high-fiber diet or fiber supplements (bran powder, 1–
2 tbsp twice daily; psyllium or methylcellulose) (see section on
constipation). Retrospective studies suggest that such treatment may
decrease the likelihood of subsequent complications.
Rocco A et al. Treatment options for uncomplicated diverticular
disease of the colon. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2009 Oct;43(9): 803–
8. [PMID: 19652620]
 
Tursi A et al. Review article: the current and evolving treatment of
colonic diverticular disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Sep
15;30(6):532–46. [PMID: 19549266]
 
2. Diverticulitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute abdominal pain and fever.
 Left lower abdominal tenderness and mass.
 Leukocytosis.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Perforation of a colonic diverticulum results in an intra-abdominal
infection that may vary from microperforation (most common) with
localized paracolic inflammation to macroperforation with either
abscess or generalized peritonitis. Thus, there is a range from mild
to severe disease. Most patients with localized inflammation or
infection report mild to moderate aching abdominal pain, usually in
the left lower quadrant. Constipation or loose stools may be
present. Nausea and vomiting are frequent. In many cases,
symptoms are so mild that the patient may not seek medical
attention until several days after onset. Physical findings include a
low-grade fever, left lower quadrant tenderness, and a palpable
mass. Stool occult blood is common, but hematochezia is rare.
Leukocytosis is mild to moderate. Patients with free perforation
present with a more dramatic picture of generalized abdominal pain
and peritoneal signs.
B. Imaging
In patients with mild symptoms and a presumptive diagnosis of
diverticulitis, empiric medical therapy is started without further
imaging in the acute phase. Patients who respond to acute medical
management should undergo complete colonic evaluation with
colonoscopy or radiologic imaging (CT colonography or barium
enema) after resolution of clinical symptoms to corroborate the
diagnosis or exclude other disorders such as colonic neoplasms. In
patients who do not improve rapidly after 2–4 days of empiric
therapy and in those with severe disease, CT scan of the abdomen
is obtained to look for evidence of diver-ticulitis and determine its
severity, and to exclude other disorders that may cause lower
abdominal pain. The presence of colonic diverticula and wall
thickening, pericolic fat infiltration, abscess formation, or
extraluminal air or contrast suggest diverticulitis. Endoscopy and
colonography are contraindicated during the initial stages of an
acute attack because of the risk of free perforation.
 Differential Diagnosis
Diverticulitis must be distinguished from other causes of lower
abdominal pain, including perforated colonic carcinoma, Crohn
disease, appendicitis, ischemic colitis, C difficile– associated colitis,
and gynecologic disorders (ectopic pregnancy, ovarian cyst or
torsion) by abdominal CT scan, pelvic ultrasonography, or
radiographic studies of the distal colon that use water-soluble
contrast enemas.
 Complications
Fistula formation may involve the bladder, ureter, vagina, uterus,
bowel, and abdominal wall. Diverticulitis may result in stricturing of
the colon with partial or complete obstruction.
 Treatment
A. Medical Management
Most patients can be managed with conservative measures. Patients
with mild symptoms and no peritoneal signs may be managed
initially as outpatients on a clear liquid diet and broad-spectrum oral
antibiotics with anaerobic activity. Reasonable regimens include
amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium (875 mg/125 mg) twice daily;
or metronidazole, 500 mg three times daily; plus either
ciprofloxacin, 
500 
mg 
twice 
daily, 
or 
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, 160/800 mg twice daily orally, for 7–10 days or
until the patient is afebrile for 3–5 days. Symptomatic improvement
usually occurs within 3 days, at which time the diet may be
advanced. Once the acute episode has resolved, a high fiber diet is
often recommended. Patients with increasing pain, fever, or inability
to tolerate oral fluids require hospitalization. Patients with severe
diverticulitis (high fevers, leukocytosis, or peritoneal signs) and
patients who are elderly or immunosuppressed or who have serious
comorbid disease require hospitalization acutely. Patients should be
given nothing by mouth and should receive intravenous fluids. If ileus
is present, a nasogastric tube should be placed. Intravenous
antibiotics should be given to cover anaerobic and gram-negative
bacteria. Single-agent therapy with either a second-generation
cephalosporin (eg, cefoxitin), piperacillin-tazobactam, or ticarcillin
clavulanate appears to be as effective as combination therapy (eg,
metronidazole or clindamycin plus an aminoglycoside or third-
generation 
cephalosporin 
[eg, 
ceftazidime, 
cefotaxime]).
Symptomatic improvement should be evident within 2–3 days.
Intravenous antibiotics should be continued for 5–7 days, before
changing to oral antibiotics.
B. Surgical Management
Surgical consultation and repeat abdominal CT imaging should be
obtained on all patients with severe disease or those who do not
improve after 72 hours of medical management. Patients with a
localized abdominal abscess ≥ 4 cm in size are usually treated
urgently with a percutaneous catheter drain placed by an
interventional radiologist. This permits control of the infection and
resolution of the immediate infectious inflammatory process. In this
manner, a subsequent elective one-stage surgical operation can be
performed (if deemed necessary) in which the diseased segment of
colon is removed and primary colonic anastomosis performed.
Patients with chronic disease resulting in fistulas or colonic
obstruction will also require elective surgical resection.
Indications for emergent surgical management include generalized
peritonitis, large undrainable abscesses, and clinical deterioration
despite medical management and percutaneous drainage. Surgery
may be performed in oneor two-stage operations depending on the
patient's nutritional status, severity of illness, and extent of intra-
abdominal peritonitis and abscess formation. In a two-stage
operation, the diseased colon is resected and the proximal colon
brought out to form a temporary colostomy. The distal colonic
stump is either closed (forming a Hartmann pouch) or exteriorized
as a mucous fistula. Weeks later, after inflammation and infection
have completely subsided, the colon can be reconnected electively.
 Prognosis
Diverticulitis recurs in 10–30% of patients treated with medical
management. Recurrent attacks warrant elective surgical resection,
which carries a lower morbidity and mortality risk than emergency
surgery.
 When to Refer
 
•    Failure to improve within 72 hours of medical
management.
•    Presence of significant peridiverticular abscesses (≥ 4
cm) requiring possible percutaneous or surgical drainage.
•    Generalized peritonitis or sepsis.
•    Recurrent attacks.
•    Chronic complications including colonic strictures or
fistulas.
 When to Admit
 
•    Severe pain or inability to tolerate oral intake.
•    Signs of sepsis or peritonitis.
•    CT scan showing signs of complicated disease
(abscess, perforation).
•    Failure to improve with outpatient management.
•    Immunocompromised or frail, elderly patient.
Touzios JG et al. Diverticulosis and acute diverticulitis.
Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;38(3):513–25. [PMID:
19699411]
 
3. Diverticular Bleeding
Half of all cases of acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding are
attributable to diverticulosis. For a full discussion, see the section on
Acute Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding, above.
POLYPS OF THE COLON
Polyps are discrete mass lesions that protrude into the intestinal
lumen. Although most commonly sporadic, they may be inherited as
part of a familial polyposis syndrome. Polyps may be divided into
three major pathologic groups: mucosal neoplastic (adenomatous)
polyps, mucosal nonneoplastic polyps (hyperplastic, juvenile
polyps, hamartomas, inflammatory polyps), and submucosal lesions
(lipomas, lymphoid aggregates, carcinoids, pneumatosis cystoides
intestinalis). Of polyps removed at colonoscopy, over 70% are
adenomatous; most of the remainder are hyperplastic.
Adenomatous polyps have significant clinical implications and will
be considered further below. Hyperplastic polyps are increasingly
called “serrated polyps” due to their saw-tooth mucosal
architecture. Serrated polyps now are classified into three
subgroups: hyperplastic polyps, sessile serrated adenomas, and
traditional serrated adenomas. “Sessile serrated adenomas” refers
to a subset of serrated polyps that have abnormal architecture and
cellular proliferation. “Traditional serrated adenoma” refers to
polyps with serrated polyps with cytologic dysplasia. Many
pathologists are still unfamiliar with these distinctions. Small
hyperplastic polyps (< 5 mm) located in the rectosigmoid region are
of no consequence, except that they cannot reliably be distinguished
from adenomatous lesions other than by biopsy. Recent studies
demonstrate that ser-rated polyps located in the proximal colon (ie,
proximal to the splenic flexure) are associated with an increased
prevalence of advanced neoplasia, particularly those larger than 1
cm. It is believed that sessile and traditional serrated adenomas
harbor an increased risk of colorectal cancer similar to other
adenomas; however, the importance of a true hyperplastic polyp in
;
,
p
yp p
p yp
the proximal colon is less clear.
NONFAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPS
Histologically, adenomas are classified as tubular, villous,
tubulovillous, or serrated. Adenomas may be flat, sessile or
pedunculated (containing a stalk). They are present in 30% of adults
over 50 years of age. Their significance is that over 95% of cases of
adenocarcinoma of the colon are believed to arise from adenomas.
It is proposed that there is an adenoma → carcinoma sequence
whereby colorectal cancer develops through a continuous process
from normal mucosa to adenoma to carcinoma. The majority of
cancers arise in adenomas after inactivation of the APC gene leads
to chromosomal instability and inactivation or loss of other tumor
suppressor genes. By contrast, cancers arising from serrated
adenomas appear to have either Kras (traditional serrated
adenomas) mutations or BRAF oncogene activation (sessile
serrated adenomas) with methylation of CpG-rich promoter regions
that leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor genes or mismatch
repair genes with microsatellite instability. Most adenomas are small
(< 1 cm) and have a low risk of becoming malignant; < 5% of these
enlarge with time. Adenomas are classified as “advanced” if they
are ≥ 1 cm, or contain villous features or high-grade dysplasia.
Advanced adenomas are believed to have a higher risk of harboring
or progressing to malignancy. It has been estimated from
longitudinal studies that it takes an average of 5 years for a medium-
sized polyp to develop from normal-appearing mucosa and 10
years for a gross cancer to arise. In a 2009 meta-analysis of 18
studies in average-risk populations, the pooled prevalence of
advanced adenomas is 6% and colorectal cancer 0.3%. The role of
aspirin and NSAIDs for the chemoprevention of adenomatous
polyps is discussed in Chapter 39, in the section on Colorectal
Cancer.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with adenomatous polyps are completely
asymptomatic. Chronic occult blood loss may lead to iron
deficiency anemia. Large polyps may ulcerate, resulting in
intermittent hematochezia.
B. Fecal Occult Blood or Multitarget DNA Tests
FOBT, FIT, and fecal DNA tests are available as part of colorectal
cancer screening programs (see Chapter 39). FIT is a fecal blood
immunochemical test for hemoglobin that is more sensitive than
guaiac-based tests for the detection of colorectal cancer and
advanced adenomas. In prospective studies, the FIT and other new
fecal tests detected 20–50% of advanced noncancerous adenomas.
C. Radiologic Tests
Polyps are identified by means of barium enema examinations or
CT colonography. Both studies require bowel cleansing with
laxatives before the study and insertion of a rectal catheter for air
insufflation during the study. CT colonography (“virtual
colonoscopy”) uses data from helical CT imaging with computer-
enabled luminal image reconstruction to generate two-dimensional
and three-dimensional images of the colon. Using optimal imaging
software with multidetector helical CT scanners, several studies
report a sensitivity of ≥ 90% for the detection of polyps > 10 mm in
size. However, the accuracy for detection of polyps 5–9 mm in size
is significantly lower (sensitivity 50%). A small proportion of these
small polyps harbor advanced histology (3–7%) or carcinoma (<
1%). Abdominal CT imaging results in a radiation exposure that
may lead to a small risk of cancer. CT colonography is endorsed by
US Multisociety Task Force as an acceptable option for screening
for colorectal adenomatous polyps and cancer in average risk
asymptomatic adults. Barium enema examinations as currently
performed detect < 50% of colorectal polyps ≥ 1 cm in size.
Where CT colonography is available, barium enema is no longer
recommended due to its poor diagnostic accuracy.
D. Endoscopic Tests
Colonoscopy allows evaluation of the entire colon and is the best
means of detecting and removing adenomatous polyps (Figure 15–
4). It should be performed in all patients who have positive FOBT,
FIT, fecal, or DNA tests or iron deficiency anemia (see Occult
Gastrointestinal Bleeding and Obscure Gastrointestinal Bleeding,
above), as the prevalence of colonic neoplasms is increased in these
patients. Colonoscopy should also be performed in patients with
polyps detected on radiologic imaging studies (barium enema or CT
colonography) or adenomas detected on flexible sigmoidoscopy to
remove these polyps and to fully evaluate the entire colon. Capsule
endoscopy of the colon has a 73% sensitivity and 79% specificity
for detection of adenomas with advanced histology or cancer
compared with colonoscopy and cannot be recommended at this
time to screen for colorectal neoplasia.
 
Figure 15–4. Cecal polyp on colonoscopy. (Courtesy of Marvin
Derezin, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA,
Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill
 
 Treatment
A. Colonoscopic Polypectomy
Most adenomatous polyps are amenable to colonoscopic removal
with biopsy forceps or snare cautery. Large sessile polyps (> 2–3
cm) may be removed in by snare cautery using a variety of
techniques (eg, piecemeal or saline-lift assisted mucosal resection)
or may require surgical resection. Patients with large sessile polyps
removed in piecemeal fashion should undergo repeated
colonoscopy in 2–6 months to verify complete polyp removal.
Complications after colonoscopic polypectomy include perforation
in 0.2% and clinically significant bleeding in 0.3–1% of patients.
A malignant polyp is an adenoma that appears grossly benign at
endoscopy but on histologic assessment is found to contain cancer
that has penetrated through the muscularis mucosae into the
submucosa. Malignant polyps may be considered to be adequately
treated by polypectomy alone if: (1) the polyp is completely excised
and submitted for pathologic examination, (2) it is well
differentiated, (3) the margin is not involved, and (4) there is no
vascular invasion. The risk of residual cancer or nodal metastasis
with favorable histologic features is < 1%. The excision site of these
“favorable” malignant polyps should be checked in 3 months for
residual tissue. In patients with malignant polyps that have
unfavorable histologic features, cancer resection is advisable if the
patient is a good operative candidate.
B. Postpolypectomy Surveillance
Adenomas can be found in 30–40% of patients when another
colonoscopy is performed within 3–5 years after the initial
examination. Periodic colonoscopic surveillance is therefore
recommended to detect these “metachronous” adenomas, which
either may be new or may have been overlooked during the initial
examination. Most of these adenomas are small, without high-risk
features and of little immediate clinical significance. The probability
of detecting advanced neoplasms at surveillance colonoscopy
depends on the number, size, and histologic features of the polyps
removed on initial (index) colonoscopy. Patients with 1–2 small (<
1 cm) tubular adenomas (without villous features or high-grade
dysplasia) should have their next colonoscopy in 5–10 years.
Patients with 3–10 adenomas, an adenoma > 1 cm, or an adenoma
with villous features or high-grade dysplasia should have their next
colonoscopy at 3 years. Patients with more than 10 adenomas
should have a repeat colonoscopy at 1–2 years and may be
considered for evaluation for a familial polyposis syndrome (see
below).
Allison JE. FIT: a valuable but underutilized screening test for
colorectal cancer—it's time for a change. Am J Gastroenterol.
2010 Sep;105(9):2026–8. [PMID: 20818351]
 
Heitman SJ et al. Prevalence of adenomas and colorectal cancer in
average risk individuals: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Dec;7(12):1272–8. [PMID:
19523536]
 
Levin B et al. Screening and surveillance for the early detection of
colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps 2008: a joint guideline
from the American Cancer Society, the US Multi-Society Task
Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of
Radiology. Gastroenterology. 2008 May;134(5):1570–95.
[PMID: 18384785]
 
Martinez ME et al. A pooled analysis of advanced colorectal
neoplasia diagnoses after colonoscopic polypectomy.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Mar;136(3):832–41. [PMID: 19171141]
 
Regge D et al. Diagnostic accuracy of computed tomographic
colonography for the detection of advanced neoplasia in individuals
at increased risk of colorectal cancer. JAMA. 2009 Jun
17;301(23):2453–61. [PMID: 19531785]
Rex DK et al. Update on colonoscopic imaging and projections
for the future. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Apr;8(4): 318–
21. [PMID: 20026427]
 
Terdiman JP et al. Surveillance guidelines should be updated to
recognize the importance of serrated polyps. Gastroenterology.
2010 Nov;139(5):1444–7. [PMID: 20875785]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Colon polyps. JAMA. 2008
Sep 24;300(12):1480. [PMID: 18812541]
 
Van Gossum A et al. Capsule endoscopy versus colonoscopy for
the detection of polyps and cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jul
16;361(3):264–70. [PMID: 19605831]
 
HEREDITARY COLORECTAL CANCER & POLYPOSIS
SYNDROMES
Up to 4% of all colorectal cancers are caused by germline genetic
mutations that impose on carriers a high lifetime risk of developing
colorectal cancer (see Chapter 39). Because the diagnosis of these
disorders has important implications for treatment of affected
members and for screening of family members, it is important to
consider these disorders in patients with a family history of
colorectal cancer that has affected more than one family member,
those with a personal or family history of colorectal cancer
developing at an early age (≥ 50 years), those with a personal or
family history of multiple polyps (> 20), and those with a personal
or family history of multiple extracolonic malignancies.
1. Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Inherited condition characterized by early devel-opment of
hundreds to thousands of colonic adenomatous polyps and
adenocarcinoma.
 Variety of extracolonic manifestations, including duodenal
adenomas, desmoid tumors, and osteomas.
 Attenuated variant with < 100 colonic adenomas.
 Genetic testing confirms mutation of APC gene (90%) or MYH
gene (8%).
 Prophylactic colectomy recommended to prevent otherwise
inevitable colon cancer.
 
 General Considerations
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a syndrome affecting
1:10,000 people and accounts for approximately 0.5% of
colorectal cancer. The classic form of FAP is characterized by the
development of hundreds to thousands of colonic adenomatous
polyps and a variety of extracolonic manifestations. An attenuated
variant of FAP also has been recognized in which an average of
only 25 polyps (range of 0–500) develop. FAP is most commonly
caused by autosomally dominant inherited mutations in the
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene on chromosome 5q21.
FAP arises de novo in 15% of patients in the absence of genetic
mutations in the parents. Mutations in the MYH gene, a gene
involved with base excision repair, are present in patients with the
classic and attenuated forms of FAP who do not have mutations of
the APC gene. FAP due to MYH mutation is inherited in an
autosomal recessive fashion, hence a family history of colorectal
cancer may not be evident. Of patients with classic FAP,
approximately 90% have a mutation in the APC gene and 8% in the
MYH gene. In contrast, among patients with 10–100 adenomatous
polyps and suspected attenuated FAP, APC mutations are
identified in 15% but MYH mutations in 25%.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Colorectal polyps develop by a mean age of 15 years and cancer at
40 years. Unless prophylactic colectomy is performed, colorectal
cancer is inevitable by age 50 years. In attenuated FAP, the mean
age for development of cancer is about 56 years.
Adenomatous polyps of the duodenum and periampullary area
develop in over 90% of patients, resulting in a 5–8% lifetime risk of
adenocarcinoma. Adenomas occur less frequently in the gastric
antrum and small bowel and in those locations have a lower risk of
malignant transformation. Gastric fundus gland polyps occur in over
50% but have an extremely low (0.6%) malignant potential.
A variety of other benign extraintestinal manifestations, including
soft tissue tumors of the skin, desmoid tumors, osteomas, and
congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment, develop in some
patients with FAP. These extraintestinal manifestations vary among
families, depending in part on the type or site of mutation in the
APC gene. Desmoid tumors are locally invasive fibromas, most
commonly intra-abdominal, that may cause bowel obstruction,
ischemia, or hemorrhage. They occur in 15% of patients and are the
second leading cause of death in FAP. Malignancies of the central
nervous system (Turcot syndrome) and tumors of the thyroid and
liver (hepatoblastomas) may also develop in patients with FAP.
B. Genetic Testing
Genetic counseling and testing should be offered to patients with a
diagnosis of FAP established by endoscopy and to first-degree
family members of patients with the disease; testing should be done
also to confirm a diagnosis of attenuated disease in patients with 20
or more adenomas. Genetic testing is best performed by sequencing
the APC gene to identify disease-associated mutations, which are
identified in approximately 90% of cases of typical FAP. Mutational
assessment of MYH should be considered in patients with negative
test results and in patients with suspected attenuated FAP. First-
degree relatives of patients with FAP should undergo genetic
screening after age 10 years. If the assay cannot be done or is not
informative, family members at risk should undergo yearly
sigmoidos-copy beginning at 12 years of age.
 Treatment
Once 
the 
diagnosis 
has 
been 
established, 
complete
proctocolectomy with ileoanal anastomosis or colectomy with
ileorectal anastomosis is recommended, usually before age 20
years. Ileorectal anastomosis affords superior bowel function but
has a 5% risk of development of rectal cancer, and for that reason
frequent sigmoidoscopy with fulguration of polyps is required.
Upper endoscopic evaluation of the stomach, duodenum, and
periampullary area should be performed every 1–3 years to look
for adenomas or carcinoma. Large (> 2 cm) periampullary
adenomas require surgical resection. Sulindac and COX-2 selective
agents (celecoxib) have been shown to decrease the number and
size of polyps in the rectal stump but not the duodenum.
Latchford AR et al. Features of duodenal cancer in patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009
Jun;7(6):659–63. [PMID: 19281862]
 
Stoffel EM et al. Genetic testing for hereditary colorectal cancer:
challenges in identifying, counseling, and managing high-risk
patients. Gastroenterology. 2010 Nov;139(5):1436–41. [PMID:
20858494]
 
Terdiman JP. MYH-associated disease: attenuated adenomatous
polyposis of the colon is only part of the story. Gastroenterology.
2009 Dec;137(6):1883–6. [PMID: 19879216]
 
2. Hamartomatous Polyposis Syndromes
Hamartomatous polyposis syndromes are rare and account for <
0.1% of colorectal cancers.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition
characterized 
by 
hamartomatous 
polyps 
throughout 
the
gastrointestinal tract (most notably in the small intestine) as well as
mucocutaneous pigmented macules on the lips, buccal mucosa, and
skin. The hamartomas may become large, leading to bleeding,
intussusception, or obstruction. Although hamartomas are not
malignant, gastrointestinal malignancies (stomach, small bowel, and
colon) develop in 40–60%, breast cancer in 30–50%, as well as a
host of other malignancies of nonintestinal organs (gonads,
pancreas). The defect has been localized to the serine threonine
kinase 11 gene, and genetic testing is available.
Familial juvenile polyposis is also autosomal dominant and is
characterized by several (more than ten) juvenile hamartomatous
polyps located most commonly in the colon. There is an increased
risk (up to 50%) of adenocarcinoma due to synchronous
adenomatous polyps or mixed hamartomatous-adenomatous
polyps. Genetic defects have been identified to loci on 18q and 10q
(MADH4 and BMPR1A). Genetic testing is available.
PTEN multiple hamartoma syndrome (Cowden disease) is
characterized by hamartomatous polyps and lipomas throughout the
gastrointestinal tract, trichilemmomas, and cerebellar lesions. An
increased rate of malignancy is demonstrated in the thyroid, breast,
and urogenital tract.
van Lier MG et al. High cancer risk in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: a
systematic review and surveillance recommendations. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2010 Jun;105(6):1258–64. [PMID: 20051941]
 
3. Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNpCC)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Autsomally dominant inherited condition
•    Caused by mutations in a gene that detect and repair DnA base-
pair mismatches, resulting in DnA microsatellite instability and
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes.
•    Increased lifetime risk of colorectal cancer (50–80%),
endometrial cancer (30–60%), and other cancers that may develop
at young age.
 Evaluation warranted in patients with personal history of early-
onset colorectal cancer or family history of colorectal,
endometrial, or other HnPCC-related cancers at young age or in
multiple members.
 Diagnosis suspected by tumor tissue immunohis-tochemical
staining for mismatch repair proteins or testing for microsatellite
instability.
 Diagnosis confirmed by genetic testing.
 
 General Considerations
HNPCC (also known as Lynch syndrome) is an autosomal
dominant condition in which there is a markedly increased risk of
developing colorectal cancer as well as a host of other cancers,
including endometrial, ovarian, renal or vesical, hepatobiliary,
gastric, and small intestinal cancers. It is estimated to account for up
to 3% of all colorectal cancers. Affected individuals have a 50–
80% lifetime risk of developing colorectal carcinoma and a 30–
60% lifetime risk of endometrial cancer. Unlike individuals with
familial adenomatous polyposis, patients with HNPCC develop only
a few adenomas, which may be flat and more often contain villous
features or high-grade dysplasia. In contrast to the traditional polyp
→ cancer progression (which may take over 10 years), these
polyps are believed to undergo rapid transformation over 1-2 years
from normal tissue → adenoma → cancer. HNPCC and
endometrial cancer tend to develop at an earlier age than sporadic,
nonhereditary cancers (mean age 45–50 years). Compared with
patients with sporadic tumors of similar pathologic stage, those with
HNPCC tumors have improved survival. Synchronous or
metachronous cancers occur within 10 years in up to 45% of
patients.
HNPCC is caused by a defect in one of several genes that are
important in the detection and repair of DNA base-pair mismatches:
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. Germline mutations in MLH1
and MSH2 account for more than 90% of the known mutations in
families with HNPCC. Mutations in any of these mismatch repair
genes result in a characteristic phenotypic DNA abnormality known
as microsatellite instability. In over 90% of cancers in patients with
HNPCC, microsatellite instability is readily demonstrated by
expansion or contraction of DNA microsatellites (short, repeated
DNA sequences). Microsatellite instability also occurs in 15% of
sporadic colorectal cancers arising from serrated adenomas, usually
due to aberrant methylation of the MLH1 promoter (resulting in
decreased gene expression) and BRAF mutations.
 Clinical Findings
A thorough family cancer history is essential to identify families that
may be affected with HNPCC so that appropriate genetic and
colonoscopic screening can be offered. Owing to the limitations of
genetic testing for HNPCC and the medical, psychological, and
social implications that such testing may have, families with
suspected HNPCC should be evaluated first by a genetic counselor
and should give informed consent in writing before genetic testing is
performed. Patients whose families meet any of the revised
“Bethesda criteria” have an increased likelihood of harboring a
germline mutation in one of the mismatch repair genes and should be
considered for genetic testing. The “Bethesda criteria” are (1)
colorectal cancer under age 50; (2) synchronous or metachronous
colorectal or HNPCC-associated tumor regardless of age
(endometrial, stomach, ovary, pancreas, ureter and renal pelvis,
biliary tract, brain); (3) colorectal cancer with one or more first-
degree relatives with colorectal or HNPCC-related cancer, with
one of the cancers occurring before age 50; (4) colorectal cancer
with two or more second-degree relatives with colorectal or
HNPCC cancer, regardless of age; (5) tumors with infiltrating
lymphocytes, mucinous/signet ring differentiation, or medullary
growth pattern in patients younger than 60 years. Tumor tissues of
affected individuals or family members meeting the revised Bethesda
criteria should undergo immunohistochemical staining for MLH1,
MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 (using commercially available assays) or
testing for microsatellite instability (PCR amplification of a panel of
DNA markers) or both. Individuals whose tumors have normal
immunohistochemical staining or do not have micro-satellite
instability are unlikely to have germline mutations in mismatch repair
genes, do not require further genetic testing, and do not require
intensive cancer surveillance. Tumors with microsatellite instability
or absent MLH1 staining may undergo subsequent testing for BRAF
mutation to detect sporadic (ie, noninherited) cancers arising from
the serrated adenoma pathway. Germline testing for gene mutations
is positive in > 90% of individuals whose tumors show absent
histochemical staining of one of the mismatch repair genes or high
level of microsatellite instability without a BRAF mutation. Germline
testing is also warranted in families with a strong history consistent
with HNPCC when tumors from affected members are unavailable
for assessment. If a mutation is detected in a patient with cancer in
one of the known mismatch genes, genetic testing of other first-
degree family members is indicated.
The Bethesda criteria identify approximately 70% of mutation-
positive HNPCC families but overlook 30%. For this reason,
expert guidelines issued in 2009–10 have recommended that all
colorectal cancers should undergo testing for Lynch syndrome with
either immunohistochemistry or microsatellite instability and BRAF
testing. Patients whose tumors test positive using one of these tests
should be given genetic counseling before undergoing germline
testing for gene mutations.
 Screening & Treatment
If genetic testing documents an HNPCC gene mutation, affected
relatives should be screened with colonoscopy every year beginning
at age 25 (or at age 5 years younger than the age at diagnosis of the
youngest affected family member). If cancer is found, subtotal
colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (followed by annual
surveillance of the rectal stump) should be performed. Women
should undergo screening for endometrial and ovarian cancer
beginning at age 25–35 years with pelvic examination, CA-125
assay, endometrial aspiration, and transvaginal ultrasound.
Prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy may be considered,
especially in women of postchild-bearing age. Similarly,
consideration should be given for increased cancer surveillance in
family members in proven or suspected HNPCC families who do
not wish to undergo germline testing. (See Chapter 39 for
Colorectal Cancer.)
Boland CR et al. Report from the Jerusalem workshop on Lynch
syndrome-hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Jun;138(7):2197.e1-7. [PMID:
20416305]
 
Evaluation of Genomic Applications in Practice and Prevention
(EGAPP) Working Group. Recommendations from the EGAPP
Working Group: genetic testing strategies in newly diagnosed
individuals with colorectal cancer aimed at reducing morbidity and
mortality from Lynch syndrome in relatives. Genet Med. 2009
Jan;11(1):35–41. [PMID: 19125126]
 
ANORECTAL DISEASES
 
HEMORRHOIDS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bright red blood per rectum.
 Protrusion, discomfort.
 Characteristic findings on external anal inspection and anoscopic
examination.
 
 General Considerations
Internal hemorrhoids are subepithelial vascular cushions consisting
of connective tissue, smooth muscle fibers, and arteriovenous
communications between terminal branches of the superior rectal
artery and rectal veins. They are a normal anatomic entity, occurring
in all adults, that contribute to normal anal pressures and ensure a
water-tight closure of the anal canal. They commonly occur in three
primary locations—right anterior, right posterior, and left lateral.
External hemorrhoids arise from the inferior hemorrhoidal veins
located below the dentate line and are covered with squamous
epithelium of the anal canal or perianal region.
Hemorrhoids may become symptomatic as a result of activities
that increase venous pressure, resulting in distention and
engorgement. Straining at stool, constipation, prolonged sitting,
pregnancy, obesity, and low-fiber diets all may contribute. With
time, redundancy and enlargement of the venous cushions may
develop and result in bleeding or protrusion.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients often attribute a variety of perianal complaints to
“hemorrhoids.” However, the principal problems attributable to
internal hemorrhoids are bleeding, prolapse, and mucoid discharge.
Bleeding is manifested by bright red blood that may range from
streaks of blood visible on toilet paper or stool to bright red blood
that drips into the toilet bowl after a bowel movement.
Uncommonly, bleeding is severe and prolonged enough to result in
anemia. Initially, internal hemorrhoids are confined to the anal canal
(stage I). Over time, the internal hemorrhoids may gradually enlarge
and protrude from the anal opening. At first, this mucosal prolapse
occurs during straining and reduces spontaneously (stage II). With
progression over time, the prolapsed hemorrhoids may require
manual reduction after bowel movements (stage III) or may remain
chronically protruding (stage IV). Chronically prolapsed
hemorrhoids may result in a sense of fullness or discomfort and
mucoid perianal discharge, resulting in irritation and soiling of
underclothes. Pain is unusual with internal hemorrhoids, occurring
only when there is extensive inflammation and thrombosis of
irreducible tissue or with thrombosis of an external hemorrhoid (see
below).
B. Examination
External hemorrhoids are readily visible on perianal inspection.
Nonprolapsed internal hemorrhoids are not visible but may protrude
through the anus with gentle straining while the clinician spreads the
buttocks. Prolapsed hemorrhoids are visible as protuberant purple
nodules covered by mucosa. The perianal region should also be
examined for other signs of disease such as fistulas, fissures, skin
tags, condyloma, anal cancer, or dermatitis. On digital examination,
uncomplicated internal hemorrhoids are neither palpable nor painful.
Anoscopic evaluation, best performed in the prone jackknife
position, provides optimal visualization of internal hemorrhoids.
 Differential Diagnosis
Small volume rectal bleeding may be caused by anal fissure or
fistula, neoplasms of the distal colon or rectum, ulcerative colitis or
Crohn colitis, infectious proctitis, or rectal ulcers. Rectal prolapse,
in which a full thickness of rectum protrudes concentrically from the
anus, is readily distinguished from mucosal hemorrhoidal prolapse.
Proctosigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy should be performed in all
patients with hematochezia to exclude disease in the rectum or
sigmoid colon that could be misinterpreted in the presence of
hemorrhoidal bleeding.
 Treatment
A. Conservative Measures
Most patients with early (stage I and stage II) disease can be
managed with conservative treatment. To decrease straining with
defecation, patients should be given instructions for a high-fiber diet
and told to increase fluid intake with meals. Dietary fiber may be
supplemented with bran powder (1–2 tbsp twice daily added to
food or in 8 oz of liquid) or with commercial bulk laxatives (eg,
Benefiber, Metamucil, Citrucel). Suppositories and rectal ointments
have no demonstrated utility in the management of mild disease.
Mucoid discharge may be treated effectively by the local application
of a cotton ball tucked next to the anal opening after bowel
movements.
B. Medical Treatment
Patients with stage I, stage II, and stage III hemorrhoids and
recurrent bleeding despite conservative measures may be treated
without anesthesia with injection sclerotherapy, rubber band
ligation, or application of electrocoagulation (bipolar cautery or
infrared photocoagulation). The choice of therapy is dictated by
p
g
)
py
y
operator preference, but rubber band ligation is preferred due to its
ease of use and high rate of efficacy. Major complications occur in
< 2%, including pelvic sepsis, pelvic abscess, urinary retention, and
bleeding. Recurrence is common unless patients alter their dietary
habits. Edematous, prolapsed (stage IV) internal hemorrhoids, may
be treated acutely with topical creams, foams, or suppositories
containing various combinations of emollients, topical anesthetics,
(eg, pramoxine, dibu-caine), vasoconstrictors (eg, phenylephrine),
astringents (witch hazel) and corticosteroids. Common preparations
include Preparation H (several formulations), Anusol HC,
Proctofoam, Nupercainal, Tucks, and Doloproct (not available in
the United States).
C. Surgical Treatment
Surgical excision (hemorrhoidectomy) is reserved for < 5–10% of
patients with chronic severe bleeding due to stage III or stage IV
hemorrhoids or patients with acute thrombosed stage IV
hemorrhoids 
with 
necrosis. 
Complications 
of 
surgical
hemorrhoidectomy include postoperative pain (which may persist
for 2–4 weeks) and impaired continence.
Thrombosed External Hemorrhoid
Thrombosis of the external hemorrhoidal plexus results in a perianal
hematoma. It most commonly occurs in otherwise healthy young
adults and may be precipitated by coughing, heavy lifting, or
straining at stool. The condition is characterized by the relatively
acute onset of an exquisitely painful, tense and bluish perianal
nodule covered with skin that may be up to several centimeters in
size. Pain is most severe within the first few hours but gradually
eases over 2–3 days as edema subsides. Symptoms may be
relieved with warm sitz baths, analgesics, and ointments. If the
patient is evaluated in the first 24–48 hours, removal of the clot may
hasten symptomatic relief. With the patient in the lateral position, the
skin around and over the lump is injected subcutaneously with 1%
lidocaine using a tuber-culin syringe with a 30-gauge needle. An
ellipse of skin is then excised and the clot evacuated. A dry gauze
dressing is applied for 12–24 hours, and daily sitz baths are then
begun.
 When to Refer
 
•    Stage I, II, or III: When conservative measures fail and
expertise in medical procedures is needed (injection,
banding, thermocoagulation).
•    Stage IV: When surgical excision is required.
Abramowitz L. Diagnosis and management of haemorrhoidal
disease from a global perspective. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010
May;31(Suppl 1):1–58. [PMID: 20500735]
 
Jutabha R et al. Randomized prospective study of endoscopic
rubber band ligation compared with bipolar coagulation for
chronically bleeding internal hemorrhoids. Am J Gastroenterol.
2009 Aug; 104(8):2057–64. [PMID: 19513028]
 
ANORECTAL INFECTIONS
A number of organisms can cause inflammation of the anal and
rectal mucosa. Proctitis is characterized by anorectal discomfort,
tenesmus, constipation, and mucus or bloody discharge. Most cases
of proctitis are sexually transmitted, especially by anal-receptive
intercourse. Infectious proctitis must be distinguished from
noninfectious causes of anorectal symptoms, including anal fissures
or fistulae, perirectal abscesses, anorectal carcinomas, and
inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease).
 Etiology & Management
Several organisms may cause infectious proctitis.
A. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Gonorrhea may cause itching, burning, tenesmus, and a
mucopurulent discharge, although many anorectal infections are
asymptomatic. Rectal swab specimens should be taken during
anoscopy for culture; Gram staining is unreliable. Cultures should
also be taken from the pharynx and urethra in men and from the
cervix in women. Complications of untreated infections include
strictures, fissures, fistulas, and perirectal abscesses. (For treatment,
see Chapter 33.)
B. Treponema pallidum
Anal syphilis may be asymptomatic or may lead to perianal pain and
discharge. With primary syphilis, the chancre may be at the anal
margin or within the anal canal and may mimic a fissure, fistula, or
ulcer. Proctitis or inguinal lymphadenopathy may be present. With
secondary syphilis, condylomata lata (pale-brown, flat verrucous
lesions) may be seen, with secretion of foul-smelling mucus.
Although the diagnosis may be established with dark-field
microscopy or fluorescent antibody testing of scrapings from the
chancre or condylomas, this requires proper equipment and trained
personnel. The VDRL or RPR test is positive in 75% of primary
cases and in 99% of secondary cases. (For treatment, see Chapter
34.)
C. Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydial infection may cause proctitis similar to gonorrheal
proctitis; however, some infections are asymptomatic. It also may
cause lymphogranuloma venereum, characterized by proctocolitis
with fever and bloody diarrhea, painful perianal ulcerations,
anorectal strictures and fistulas, and inguinal adenopathy (buboes).
Previously rare in developed countries, an increasing number of
cases have been identified among men who have sex with men. The
diagnosis is established by serology, culture, or PCR-based testing
of rectal discharge or rectal biopsy. Recommended treatment is
doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 21 days.
D. Herpes Simplex Type 2
Herpes simplex virus is a common cause of anorectal infection.
Symptoms occur 4–21 days after exposure and include severe pain,
itching, constipation, tenesmus, urinary retention, and radicular pain
from involvement of lumbar or sacral nerve roots. Small vesicles or
ulcers may be seen in the perianal area or anal canal.
Sigmoidoscopy is not usually necessary but may reveal vesicular or
ulcerative lesions in the distal rectum. Diagnosis is established by
viral culture, PCR, or antigen detection assays of vesicular fluid.
Symptoms resolve within 2 weeks, but viral shedding may continue
for several weeks. Patients may remain asymptomatic with or
without viral shedding or may have recurrent mild relapses.
Treatment of acute infection for 7–10 days with acyclovir, 400 mg
or famciclovir 250 mg orally three times daily or valacyclovir 1 g
twice daily, has been shown to reduce the duration of symptoms
and viral shedding. Patients with AIDS and recurrent relapses may
benefit from long-term suppressive therapy (see Chapter 31).
E. Condylomata Acuminata
Condylomata acuminata (warts) are a significant cause of anorectal
symptoms. Caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV), they may
occur in the perianal area, the anal canal, or the genitals. Perianal or
anal warts are seen in up to 25% of men who have sex with men.
HIV-positive individuals with condylomas have a higher relapse rate
after therapy and a higher rate of progression to high-grade
dysplasia or anal cancer. The warts are located on the perianal skin
and extend within the anal canal up to 2 cm above the dentate line
(see Figure 6–35). Patients may have no symptoms or may report
itching, bleeding, and pain. The warts may be small and flat or
verrucous, or may form a confluent mass that may obscure the anal
opening. Warts must be distinguished from condyloma lata
(secondary syphilis) or anal cancer. Biopsies should be obtained
from large or suspicious lesions. Treatment can be difficult. Sexual
partners should also be examined and treated. The treatment of
anogenital warts is discussed in Chapter 30. HPV vaccines have
demonstrated efficacy in preventing anogenital warts and routine
vaccination is now recommended for all girls and women ages 9–26
years. In 2009, the FDA also approved HPV vaccination in boys
and men ages 9-26 years (see Chapters 1 and 30). Vaccination
also should be considered in men who have sex with men. HIV-
positive individuals with condylomas who have detectable serum
HIV RNA levels should have anoscopic surveillance every 3–6
months.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Workowski KA et
al. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006 Aug 4;55(RR-11):1–94.
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/ mmwrhtml/rr5511a1.htm)
[PMID: 16888612]
 
Kim JJ. Targeted human papillomavirus vaccination of men who
have sex with men in the USA: a cost-effectiveness modeling
analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010 Dec;10(12):845–52. [PMID:
21051295]
 
Van Kemseke C. Sexually transmitted diseases and the
anorectum. Acta Gastroenterol Belg. 2009 Oct–Dec;72(4):413–9.
[PMID: 20163035]
 
White JA. Manifestations and management of lymphogranuloma
venereum. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2009 Feb;22(1):57–66. [PMID:
19532081]
 
FECAL INCONTINENCE
There are five general requirements for bowel continence: (1) solid
or semisolid stool (even healthy young adults have difficulty
maintaining continence with liquid rectal contents); (2) a distensible
rectal reservoir (as sigmoid contents empty into the rectum, the vault
must expand to accommodate); (3) a sensation of rectal fullness (if
the patient cannot sense this, overflow may occur before the patient
can take appropriate action); (4) intact pelvic nerves and muscles;
and (5) the ability to reach a toilet in a timely fashion.
 Minor Incontinence
Many patients complain of inability to control flatus or slight soilage
of undergarments that tends to occur after bowel movements or
with straining or coughing. This may be due to local anal problems
such as prolapsed hemorrhoids that make it difficult to form a tight
anal seal or isolated weakness of the internal anal sphincter,
especially if stools are somewhat loose. Patients should be treated
with fiber supplements to provide greater stool bulk. Coffee and
other caffeinated beverages should be eliminated. The perianal skin
should be cleansed with moist, lanolin-coated tissue (baby wipes) to
reduce excoriation and infection. After wiping, loose application of
a cotton ball near the anal opening may absorb small amounts of
fecal leakage. Prolapsing hemorrhoids may be treated with band
ligation or surgical hemorrhoidectomy. Control of flatus and
seepage may be improved by Kegel perineal exercises. Conditions
such as ulcerative proctitis that cause tenesmus and urgency,
chronic diarrheal conditions, and irritable bowel syndrome may
result in difficulty in maintaining complete continence, especially if a
toilet is not readily available. Loperamide may be helpful to reduce
urge incontinence in patients with loose stools and may be taken in
anticipation of situations in which a toilet may not be readily
available. The elderly may require more time or assistance to reach
a toilet, which may lead to incontinence. Scheduled toileting and the
availability of a bedside commode are helpful. Elderly patients with
chronic constipation may develop stool impaction leading to
“overflow” incontinence.
 Major Incontinence
Complete uncontrolled loss of stool reflects a significant problem
with central perception or neuromuscular function. Incontinence that
occurs without awareness suggests a loss of central awareness (eg,
dementia, cerebrovascular accident, multiple sclerosis) or peripheral
nerve injury (eg, spinal cord injury, cauda equina syndrome,
pudendal nerve damage due to obstetric trauma or pelvic floor
prolapse, aging, or diabetes mellitus). Incontinence that occurs
despite awareness and active efforts to retain stool suggests
sphincteric damage, which may be caused by traumatic childbirth
(especially forceps delivery), episiotomy, pro-lapse, prior anal
surgery, and physical trauma.
Physical examination should include careful inspection of the
perianal area for hemorrhoids, rectal prolapse, fissures, fistulas, and
either gaping or a keyhole defect of the anal sphincter (indicating
severe sphincteric injury or neurologic disorder). The perianal skin
should be stimulated to confirm an intact anocutaneous reflex.
Digital examination during relaxation gives valuable information
about resting tone (due mainly to the internal sphincter) and
contraction of the external sphincter and pelvic floor during
squeezing. It also excludes fecal impaction. Anoscopy is required to
evaluate 
for 
hemorrhoids, 
fissures, 
and 
fistulas.
Proctosigmoidoscopy is useful to exclude rectal carcinoma or
proctitis. Anal ultrasonography or pelvic MRI is the most reliable
test for definition of anatomic defects in the external and internal
anal sphincters. Anal manometry may also be useful to define the
severity of weakness, to assess sensation, and to predict response
to biofeedback training. In special circumstances, surface
g
p
,
electromyography is useful to document sphincteric denervation and
proctography 
to 
document 
perineal 
descent 
or 
rectal
intussusception.
Patients who are incontinent only of loose or liquid stools are
treated with bulking agents and antidiarrheal drugs (eg, loperamide,
2 mg before meals and prophylactically before social engagements,
shopping trips, etc). Patients with incontinence of solid stool benefit
from scheduled toilet use after glycerin suppositories or tap water
enemas. Biofeedback training with anal sphincteric strengthening
(Kegel) exercises (alternating 5-second squeeze and 10-second
rest for 10 minutes twice daily) may be helpful in motivated patients
to lower the threshold for awareness of rectal filling—or to improve
anal sphincter squeeze function—or both. Operative management is
seldom needed but should be considered in patients with major
incontinence due to prior injury to the anal sphincter who have not
responded to medical therapy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Conservative measures fail.
•    Anorectal tests are deemed necessary (manometry,
ultrasonography, electromyography).
•    A surgically correctable lesion is suspected.
Leung FW et al. Fecal incontinence in the elderly. Gastroenterol
Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;38(3):503–11. [PMID: 19699410]
 
Rao SS. Advances in diagnostic assessment of fecal incontinence
and dyssynergic defecation. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Nov;8(11):910–9. [PMID: 20601142]
 
Whitehead WE et al. Fecal incontinence in US adults:
epidemiology and risk factors. Gastroenterology. 2009
Aug;137(2):512–7. [PMID: 19410574]
 
OTHER ANAL CONDITIONS
 Anal Fissures
Anal fissures are linear or rocket-shaped ulcers that are usually < 5
mm in length. Most fissures are believed to arise from trauma to the
anal canal during defecation, perhaps caused by straining,
constipation, or high internal sphincter tone. They occur most
commonly in the posterior midline, but 10% occur anteriorly.
Fissures that occur off the midline should raise suspicion for Crohn
disease, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, syphilis, or anal carcinoma.
Patients complain of severe, tearing pain during defecation followed
by throbbing discomfort that may lead to constipation due to fear of
recurrent pain. There may be mild associated hematochezia, with
blood on the stool or toilet paper. Anal fissures are confirmed by
visual inspection of the anal verge while gently separating the
buttocks. Acute fissures look like cracks in the epithelium. Chronic
fissures result in fibrosis and the development of a skin tag at the
outermost edge (sentinel pile). Digital and anoscopic examinations
may cause severe pain and may not be possible. Medical
management is directed at promoting effortless, painless bowel
movements. Fiber supplements and sitz baths should be prescribed.
Topical anesthetics (EMLA cream) may provide temporary relief.
Healing occurs within 2 months in up to 45% of patients with
conservative management. Chronic fissures may be treated with
topical 0.2–0.4% nitroglycerin or diltiazem 2% ointment (1 cm of
ointment) applied twice daily just inside the anus with the tip of a
finger for 4–8 weeks or injection of botulinum toxin (20 units) into
the internal anal sphincter. All of these treatments result in healing in
50–80% of patients with chronic anal fissure, but headaches occur
in up to 40% of patients treated with nitroglycerin. Fissures recur in
up to 40% of patients after treatment. Chronic or recurrent fissures
benefit from lateral internal sphincterotomy; however, minor
incontinence may complicate this procedure.
Festen S et al. Blinded randomized clinical trial of botulinum toxin
versus isosorbide dinitrate ointment for treatment of anal fissure. Br
J Surg. 2009 Dec;96(12):1393–9. [PMID: 19918859]
 
Nelson RL. Operative procedures for fissure in ano. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 20;(1):CD002199. [PMID:
20091532]
 
 Perianal Abscess & Fistula
The anal glands located at the base of the anal crypts at the dentate
line may become infected, leading to abscess formation. Other
causes of abscess include anal fissure and Crohn disease.
Abscesses may extend upward or downward through the
intersphincteric plane. Symptoms of perianal abscess are throbbing,
continuous perianal pain. Erythema, fluctuance, and swelling may be
found in the perianal region on external examination or in the
ischiorectal fossa on digital rectal examination. Perianal abscesses
are treated with local incision and drainage, while ischiorectal
abscesses require drainage in the operating room. After drainage of
an abscess, most patients are found to have a fistula in ano.
Fistula in ano most often arises in an anal crypt and is usually
preceded by an anal abscess. In patients with fistulas that connect
to the rectum, other disorders such as Crohn disease,
lymphogranuloma venereum, rectal tuberculosis, and cancer should
be considered. Fistulas are associated with purulent discharge that
may lead to itching, tenderness, and pain. The treatment of Crohn-
related fistula is discussed elsewhere in this chapter. Treatment of
simple idiopathic fistula in ano is by surgical incision or excision
under anesthesia. Care must be taken to preserve the anal
sphincters. Surgical fistulotomy for treatment of complex (high,
transphincteric) anal fissures carries a high risk of incontinence.
Techniques for healing the fistula while preserving the sphincter
include an endoanal advancement flap over the internal opening and
insertion of a bioprosthetic plug into the fistula opening.
Adamina M et al. To plug or not to plug: a cost-effectiveness
analysis for complex anal fistula. Surgery. 2010 Jan;147(1): 72–8.
[PMID: 19733880]
 
 Perianal Pruritus
Perianal pruritus is characterized by perianal itching and discomfort.
It may be caused by poor anal hygiene associated with fistulas,
fissures, prolapsed hemorrhoids, skin tags, and minor incontinence.
Conversely, overzealous cleansing with soaps may contribute to
local irritation or contact dermatitis. Contact dermatitis, atopic
dermatitis, bacterial infections (Staphylococcus or Streptococcus),
parasites (pinworms, scabies), candidal infection (especially in
diabetics), sexually transmitted disease (condylomata acuminata,
herpes, syphilis, molluscum contagiosum), and other skin conditions
(psoriasis, Paget, lichen sclerosis) must be excluded. In patients
with idiopathic perianal pruritus, examination may reveal erythema,
excoriations, or lichenified, eczematous skin. Education is vital to
successful therapy. Spicy foods, coffee, chocolate, and tomatoes
may cause irritation and should be eliminated. After bowel
movements, the perianal area should be cleansed with nonscented
wipes premoistened with lanolin followed by gentle drying. A piece
of cotton ball should be tucked next to the anal opening to absorb
perspiration or fecal seepage. Anal ointments and lotions may
exacerbate the condition and should be avoided. A short course of
high-potency topical corticosteroid may be tried, although efficacy
has not been demonstrated. Diluted capsaicin cream (0.006%) led
to symptomatic relief in 75% of patients in a double-blind crossover
study. (See Chapter 39 for Carcinoma of the Anus.)
Siddiqi S et al. Pruritus ani. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2008
Sep;90(6):457–63. [PMID: 18765023]
 
 
 
Liver, Biliary Tract, &
Pancreas Disorders
Lawrence S. Friedman, MD
JAUNDICE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Results from accumulation of bilirubin in the body tissues; cause
may be hepatic or nonhepatic.
 Hyperbilirubinemia may be due to abnormalities in the formation,
transport, metabolism, and excretion of bilirubin.
 Total serum bilirubin is normally 0.2–1.2 mg/dL (3.42–20.52
mcmol/L); jaundice may not be recognizable until levels are about
3 mg/dL (51.3 mcmol/L).
 Evaluation of obstructive jaundice begins with ultrasonography
and is usually followed by cholangiography.
 
 General Considerations
Jaundice (icterus) results from the accumulation of bilirubin—a
product 
of 
heme 
metabolism—in 
the 
body 
tissues.
Hyperbilirubinemia may be due to abnormalities in the formation,
transport, metabolism, and excretion of bilirubin. Total serum
bilirubin is normally 0.2–1.2 mg/dL (3.42–20.52 mcmol/L) (mean
levels are higher in men than women and higher in whites and
Hispanics than blacks and correlate inversely with the risk of stroke,
suggesting that bilirubin is somehow neuroprotective). Jaundice may
not be recognizable until serum bilirubin levels are about 3 mg/dL
(51.3 mcmol/L).
Jaundice is caused by predominantly unconjugated or conjugated
bilirubin 
in 
the 
serum 
(Table 
16–1). 
Unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia may result from overproduction of bilirubin
because of hemolysis; impaired hepatic uptake of bilirubin due to
certain drugs; or impaired conjugation of bilirubin by glucuronide, as
in Gilbert syndrome, due to mild decreases in glucuronyl
transferase, or Crigler–Najjar syndrome, caused by moderate
decreases or absence of glucuronyl transferase. Hemolysis alone
rarely elevates the serum bilirubin level to more than 7 mg/dL
(119.7 mcmol/L). Predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
may result from impaired excretion of bilirubin from the liver due to
hepatocellular disease, drugs, sepsis, hereditary hepatocanalicular
transport defects (such as Dubin–Johnson syndrome, progressive
familial intrahepatic cholestasis syndromes, and some cases of
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy), or from extrahepatic biliary
obstruction. Features of some hyperbilirubinemic syndromes are
summarized in Table 16–2. The term “cholestasis” denotes retention
of bile in the liver, and the term “cholestatic jaundice” is often used
when conjugated hyperbilirubinemia results from impaired bile flow.
 Clinical Findings
A. Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Stool and urine color are normal, and there is mild jaundice and
indirect (unconjugated) hyperbilirubinemia with no bilirubin in the
urine. Splenomegaly occurs in hemolytic disorders except in sickle
cell anemia.
B. Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
1. Hereditary cholestatic syndromes or intrahepatic
cholestasis—The patient may be asymptomatic; cholestasis is
often accompanied by pruritus, light-colored stools, and jaundice.
2. Hepatocellular disease—Malaise, anorexia, low-grade fever,
and right upper quadrant discomfort are frequent. Dark urine,
jaundice, and, in women, amenorrhea occur. An enlarged tender
liver, vascular spiders, palmar erythema, ascites, gynecomastia,
sparse body hair, fetor hepaticus, and asterixis may be present,
depending on the cause, severity, and chronicity of liver dysfunction.
C. Biliary Obstruction
There may be right upper quadrant pain, weight loss (suggesting
carcinoma), jaundice, dark urine, and light-colored stools.
Symptoms and signs may be intermittent if caused by stone,
carcinoma of the ampulla, or cholangiocarcinoma. Pain may be
absent early in pancreatic cancer. Occult blood in the stools
suggests cancer of the ampulla. Hepatomegaly and a palpable
gallbladder (Courvoisier sign) are characteristic, but neither specific
nor sensitive, of a pancreatic head tumor. Fever and chills are more
common in benign obstruction with associated cholangitis.
 
Table 16–1. Classification o
 
 
 
Type of
Hyperbilirubinemia
Location and Cause
Unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia
(predominant
indirect-reacting
bilirubin)
Increased bilirubin production (eg,
hemolytic anemias, hemolytic
reactions, hematoma, pulmonary
infarction)
Impaired bilirubin uptake and storage
(eg, posthepatitis hyperbilirubinemia,
Gilbert syndrome, Crigler-Najjar
syndrome, drug reactions)
Conjugated
h
bili bi
i
HEREDITARY CHOLESTATIC
SYNDROMES
Faulty excretion of bilirubin conjugates
(eg, Dubin-Johnson syndrome, Rotor
syndrome) or mutation in genes
coding for bile salt transport proteins
(eg, progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis syndromes, benign
recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis, and
some cases of intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy)
HEPATOCELLULAR
DYSFUNCTION
Biliary epithelial and hepatocyte
hyperbilirubinemia
(predominant
direct-reacting
bilirubin)
damage (eg, hepatitis, hepatic
cirrhosis)
Intrahepatic cholestasis (eg, certain
drugs, biliary cirrhosis, sepsis,
postoperative jaundice)
Hepatocellular damage or intrahepatic
cholestasis resulting from
miscellaneous causes (eg, spirochetal
infections, infectious mononucleosis,
cholangitis, sarcoidosis, lymphomas,
industrial toxins)
BILIARY OBSTRUCTION
Choledocholithiasis, biliary atresia,
carcinoma of biliary duct, sclerosing
cholangitis, choledochal cyst, external
pressure on common duct,
pancreatitis, pancreatic neoplasms
 
Table 16–2. Hyperbilirubinemi
 
1The Dubin-Johnson syndrome is caused by a point mutation in the gene
coding for an organic anion transporter in bile canaliculi on chromosome
10q23-24.
2Mutations in genes that control hepatocellular transport systems that are
involved in the formation of bile and inherited as autosomal recessive traits
are on chromosomes 18q21–22, 2q24, and 7q21 in families with
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Gene mutations on
chromosome 18q21–22 alter a P-type ATPase expressed in the small
intestine and liver and others on chromosome 2q24 alter the bile acid
export pump and cause benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis.
3Mutations in the MDR3 gene on chromosome 7q 21 that are responsible
for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 account for some
cases of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.
 
Table 16–3. Liver biochemical tests: normal values and changes in
hepatocellular and obstructiv
 
1Measured by the van den Bergh reaction, which overestimates direct
bilirubin in normal persons.
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; INR,
international normalized ratio.
 Diagnostic Studies (Tables 16–3, 16–
4)
A. Laboratory Findings
Serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferase (ALT and AST)
levels vary with age and correlate with body mass index and
mortality from liver disease and inversely with caffeine consumption.
There is controversy about whether an elevated ALT level is
associated with mortality from coronary artery disease, cancer,
diabetes mellitus, and all causes. Normal reference values for ALT
and AST may be lower than generally reported when persons with
risk factors for fatty liver are excluded. Truncal fat and early-onset
paternal obesity are risk factors for increased ALT levels. Elevated
ALT and AST levels are the hallmark of hepatocellular necrosis or
inflammation. Levels are frequently mildly elevated in persons with
untreated celiac disease and often rise transiently in healthy persons
who begin taking 4 g of acetaminophen per day or experience rapid
weight gain on a fast-food diet and in patients with acute biliary
obstruction from choledocholithiasis. Elevated alkaline phosphatase
levels are seen in cholestasis or infiltrative liver disease (such as
tumor, granulomas, or amyloidosis). Isolated alkaline phosphatase
elevations of hepatic rather than bone, intestinal, or placental origin
are confirmed by concomitant elevation of γ-glutamyl
transpeptidase or 5′-nucleotidase levels. Serum γ-glutamyl
transpeptidase levels appear to correlate with the risk of mortality
and disability in the general population, and serum bilirubin levels
are inversely associated with cardiovascular disease. The differential
diagnosis of any liver test elevation includes toxicity caused by
drugs, herbal remedies, and toxins.
 
Table 16–4. Causes of serum aminotransferase elevations.1
 
 
 
Mild Elevations (< 5 ×
normal)
Severe Elevations (>
15 × normal)
Hepatic: ALT-predominant
     Chronic hepatitis B, C, and
D
     Acute viral hepatitis (A-E,
EBV, CMV)
     Steatosis/steatohepatitis
     Hemochromatosis
     Medications/toxins
     Autoimmune hepatitis
     α1-Antitrypsin (α1-
antiprotease) deficiency
     Wilson disease
     Celiac disease
Hepatic: AST–predominant
     Alcohol-related liver injury
(AST:ALT > 2:1)
     Cirrhosis
Nonhepatic
     Strenuous exercise
     Hemolysis
Acute viral hepatitis (A–
E, herpes)
Medications/toxins
Ischemic hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis
Wilson disease
Acute bile duct
obstruction
Acute Budd-Chiari
syndrome
Hepatic artery ligation
     Myopathy
     Thyroid disease
     Macro-AST
1Almost any liver disease can cause moderate aminotransferase
elevations (5–15× normal).
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CMV,
cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus.
Adapted with permission from Green RM et al. AGA technical review on the
evaluation 
of 
liver 
chemistry 
tests. 
Gastroenterology. 
2002
Oct;123(4):1367–84.
B. Liver Biopsy
Percutaneous liver biopsy is the definitive study for determining the
cause and histologic severity of hepatocellular dysfunction or
infiltrative liver disease. In patients with suspected metastatic
disease or a hepatic mass, it is performed under ultrasound or CT
guidance. A transjugular route can be used in patients with
coagulopathy or ascites. The risk of bleeding after a percutaneous
liver biopsy is approximately 0.5% and is increased in persons with
a platelet count ≤ 60,000/mcL. Panels of blood tests (eg,
FibroSure) and transient or magnetic resonance elastography
(ultrasonographic and magnetic resonance techniques, respectively,
to measure liver stiffness) are emerging approaches for estimating
the degree of liver fibrosis without the need for liver biopsy.
C. Imaging
Demonstration of dilated bile ducts by ultrasonography or CT
indicates biliary obstruction (90–95% sensitivity). Ultrasonography,
CT, and MRI may also demonstrate hepatomegaly, intrahepatic
tumors, and portal hypertension. Multiphasic helical or multislice
CT, CT arterial portography, in which imaging follows intravenous
contrast infusion via a catheter placed in the superior mesenteric
artery, MRI with use of gadolinium or ferumoxides as contrast
agents, and intraoperative ultrasonography are the most sensitive
techniques for detection of individual small hepatic lesions in patients
eligible for resection of metastases. Use of color Doppler
ultrasonography or contrast agents that produce microbubbles
increases the sensitivity of transcutaneous ultrasonography for
detecting small neoplasms. MRI is the most accurate technique for
identifying isolated liver lesions such as hemangiomas, focal nodular
hyperplasia, or focal fatty infiltration and for detecting hepatic iron
overload. Dynamic gadolinium-enhanced MRI and MRI following
administration of superparamagnetic iron oxide show promise in
visualizing hepatic fibrosis. Because of its much lower cost (amount
charged), ultrasonography ($300–$1000) is preferable to CT
($1700) or MRI ($2100) as a screening test. Positron emission
tomography (PET) can be used to detect small pancreatic tumors
and metastases. Ultrasonography can detect gallstones with a
sensitivity of 95%.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is a
sensitive, noninvasive method of detecting bile duct stones,
strictures, and dilatation; however, it is less reliable than endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for distinguishing
malignant from benign strictures. ERCP requires a skilled
endoscopist and may be used to demonstrate pancreatic or
ampullary causes of jaundice, to carry out papillotomy and stone
extraction, to insert a stent through an obstructing lesion, or to
facilitate direct cholangiopancreatoscopy. Complications of ERCP
include pancreatitis (≤ 5%) and, less commonly, cholangitis,
bleeding, or duodenal perforation after papillotomy. Risk factors for
post-ERCP pancreatitis include female gender, prior post-ERCP
pancreatitis, suspected sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, and a difficult
or failed cannulation. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography
(PTC) is an alternative approach to evaluating the anatomy of the
biliary tree. Severe complications of PTC occur in 3% and include
fever, bacteremia, bile peritonitis, and intraperitoneal hemorrhage.
Endoscopic ultrasonography is the most sensitive test for detecting
small lesions of the ampulla or pancreatic head and for detecting
portal vein invasion by pancreatic cancer. It is also accurate in
detecting or excluding bile duct stones.
 When to Refer
Patients with jaundice should be referred for diagnostic procedures.
 When to Admit
Patients with liver failure should be hospitalized.
Claessen H et al. Hepatology. Gamma-glutamyltransferase and
disability pension: a cohort study of construction workers in
Germany. 2010 Feb;51(2):482–90. [PMID: 19967717]
y
;
( )
[
]
 
Maccioni F et al. Magnetic resonance cholangiography: past,
present and future: a review. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2010
Aug;14(8):721–5. [PMID: 20707292]
 
Seeff LB et al. Complication rate of percutaneous liver biopsies
among persons with advanced chronic liver disease in the HALT-
C trial. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Oct;8(10): 877–83.
[PMID: 20362695]
 
Stapelbroek JM et al. Liver disease associated with canalicular
transport defects: current and future therapies. J Hepatol. 2010
Feb;52(2):258–71. [PMID: 20034695]
 
DISEASES OF THE LIVER
 
See Chapter 39 for Hepatocellular Carcinoma.
ACUTE HEPATITIS A
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Prodrome of anorexia, nausea, vomiting, malaise, aversion to
smoking.
 Fever, enlarged and tender liver, jaundice.
 Normal to low white cell count; markedly elevated
aminotransferases.
 
 General Considerations
Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is a 27-nm RNA hepatovirus (in the
picornavirus family) that causes epidemics or sporadic cases of
hepatitis. The virus is transmitted by the fecal–oral route, and its
spread is favored by crowding and poor sanitation. Since
introduction of the HAV vaccine in the United States in 1995, the
incidence rate of HAV infection has declined from 14 to 1.3 per
100,000 population, with a corresponding decline in the mortality
rate of 32%, and international travel has emerged as the leading risk
factor, accounting for over 40% of cases, with another 18% of
cases attributable to exposure to an international traveler. Common
source outbreaks may still result from contaminated water or food,
including inadequately cooked shellfish. Outbreaks among injection
drug users and cases among international adoptees and their
contacts also have been reported.
The incubation period averages 30 days. HAV is excreted in
feces for up to 2 weeks before clinical illness but rarely after the first
week of illness. The mortality rate for hepatitis A is low, and
fulminant hepatitis A is uncommon except for rare instances in which
it occurs in a patient with chronic hepatitis C. There is no chronic
carrier state. In the United States, about 30% of the population
have serologic evidence of previous HAV infection.
 
Figure 16–1. The typical course of acute type a hepatitis. (HAV,
hepatitis a virus; anti-HAV, antibody to hepatitis a virus; ALT,
alanine aminotransferase.) (Reprinted with permission from Koff
RS. Acute viral hepatitis. In: Handbook of Liver Disease.
Friedman LS, Keeffe EB [editors], 2nd ed. ©Elsevier
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Figure 16–1 shows the typical course of acute hepatitis A. Clinical
illness is more severe in adults than in children, in whom it is usually
asymptomatic. The onset may be abrupt or insidious, with malaise,
myalgia, arthralgia, easy fatigability, upper respiratory symptoms,
and anorexia. A distaste for smoking, paralleling anorexia, may
occur early. Nausea and vomiting are frequent, and diarrhea or
constipation may occur. Fever is generally present but is low-grade
except in occasional cases in which systemic toxicity may occur.
Defervescence and a fall in pulse rate often coincide with the onset
of jaundice.
Abdominal pain is usually mild and constant in the right upper
quadrant or epigastrium, often aggravated by jarring or exertion,
and rarely may be severe enough to simulate cholecystitis.
Jaundice occurs after 5–10 days but may appear at the same
time as the initial symptoms. In many patients, jaundice never
develops. With the onset of jaundice, prodromal symptoms often
worsen, followed by progressive clinical improvement. Stools may
be acholic during this phase.
The acute illness usually subsides over 2–3 weeks with complete
clinical and laboratory recovery by 9 weeks. In some cases, clinical,
biochemical, and serologic recovery may be followed by one or
two relapses, but recovery is the rule. A protracted course has been
reported to be associated with HLA DRB1*1301. Acute
cholecystitis occasionally complicates the course of acute hepatitis
A.
Hepatomegaly—rarely marked—is present in over half of cases.
Liver tenderness is usually present. Splenomegaly is reported in
15% of patients, and soft, enlarged lymph nodes—especially in the
cervical or epitrochlear areas—may occur.
B. Laboratory Findings
The white blood cell count is normal to low, especially in the
preicteric phase. Large atypical lymphocytes may occasionally be
seen. Mild proteinuria is common, and bilirubinuria often precedes
the appearance of jaundice. Strikingly elevated AST or ALT occurs
early, followed by elevations of bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase;
in a minority of patients, the latter persist after aminotransferase
levels have normalized. Cholestasis is occasionally marked.
Antibody to hepatitis A (anti-HAV) appears early in the course of
the illness (Figure 16–1). Both IgM and IgG anti-HAV are
detectable in serum soon after the onset. Peak titers of IgM anti-
HAV occur during the first week of clinical disease and disappear
within 3–6 months. Detection of IgM anti-HAV is an excellent test
for diagnosing acute hepatitis A but is not recommended for the
evaluation of asymptomatic persons with persistently elevated serum
aminotransferase levels because false-positive results occur. Titers
of IgG anti-HAV rise after 1 month of the disease and may persist
for years. IgG anti-HAV (in the absence of IgM anti-HAV)
indicates previous exposure to HAV, noninfectivity, and immunity.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes other viruses that cause hepatitis,
particularly hepatitis B and C, and diseases such as infectious
mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus infection, and herpes simplex virus
infection; spirochetal diseases such as leptospirosis and secondary
syphilis; brucellosis; rickettsial diseases such as Q fever; drug-
induced liver disease; and shock liver (ischemic hepatitis).
Occasionally, autoimmune hepatitis (see below) may have an acute
onset mimicking acute viral hepatitis. Rarely, metastatic cancer of
the liver may present with a hepatitis-like picture.
The prodromal phase of viral hepatitis must be distinguished from
other infectious disease such as influenza, upper respiratory
infections, and the prodromal stages of the exanthematous diseases.
Cholestasis may mimic obstructive jaundice.
 Prevention
Strict isolation of patients is not necessary, but hand washing after
bowel movements is required. Vaccination against HAV (after
prescreening for prior immunity) is recommended for patients with
chronic hepatitis B, chronic hepatitis C, and other chronic liver
diseases.
Unvaccinated persons who are exposed to HAV are advised to
receive postexposure prophylaxis with a single dose of HAV
vaccine or immune globulin (0.02 mL/kg) as soon as possible. The
vaccine is preferred in healthy persons ages 1 year to 40 years,
whereas immune globulin is preferred in those who are older than
40 years or younger than 1 year or who are immunocompromised
or who have chronic liver disease.
Two effective inactivated hepatitis A vaccines are available in the
United States and recommended for persons living in or traveling to
endemic areas (including military personnel), patients with chronic
liver disease upon diagnosis, persons with clotting-factor disorders
who are treated with concentrates, men who have sex with men,
animal handlers, illicit drug users, sewage workers, food handlers,
close personal contacts of international adoptees, and children and
caregivers in day-care centers and institutions. For healthy travelers,
a single dose of vaccine at any time before departure can provide
adequate protection. Routine vaccination is advised for all children
in states with an incidence of hepatitis A at least twice the national
average and has been approved by the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) for use in all children between ages 1 and 2 in
the United States. HAV vaccine is also effective in the prevention of
secondary spread to household contacts of primary cases. The
recommended dose for adults is 1 mL (1440 ELISA units) of
Havrix (GlaxoSmithKline) or 1 mL (50 units) of Vaqta (Merck)
intramuscularly, followed by a booster dose at 6–18 months. A
combined hepatitis A and B vaccine (Twinrix, GlaxoSmithKline) is
available. HIV infection impairs the response to the HAV vaccine,
especially in persons with a CD4 count <200/mcL.
 Treatment
Bed rest is recommended only if symptoms are marked. If nausea
and vomiting are pronounced or if oral intake is substantially
decreased, intravenous 10% glucose is indicated.
Dietary management consists of palatable meals as tolerated,
without overfeeding; breakfast is usually tolerated best. Strenuous
physical exertion, alcohol, and hepatotoxic agents are avoided.
Small doses of oxazepam are safe, as metabolism is not hepatic;
morphine sulfate is avoided.
Corticosteroids have no benefit in patients with viral hepatitis,
including those with fulminant disease.
 Prognosis
In most patients, clinical recovery is generally complete within 3
months. Laboratory evidence of liver dysfunction may persist for a
longer period, but most patients recover completely. Hepatitis A
does not cause chronic liver disease, although it may persist for up
to 1 year, and clinical and biochemical relapses may occur before
full recovery. The mortality rate is <0.6%.
 When to Admit
 
•    Encephalopathy is present.
•    INR > 1.6.
•    The patient is unable to maintain hydration.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Hepatitis A
vaccination coverage among U.S. children aged 12–23 months-
immunization information system sentinel sites, 2006–2009.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Jul 2;59(25):776–9.
[PMID: 20592688]
 
Jacobsen KH et al. Hepatitis A virus seroprevalence by age and
world region, 1990 and 2005. Vaccine. 2010 Sep 24;28(41):
6653–7. [PMID: 20723630]
 
Klevens RM et al. The evolving epidemiology of hepatitis A in the
United States: incidence and molecular epidemiology from
population-based surveillance, 2005–2007. Arch Intern Med.
2010 Nov 8;170(20):1811–8. [PMID: 21059974]
 
ACUTE HEPATITIS B
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Prodrome of anorexia, nausea, vomiting, malaise, aversion to
smoking.
 Fever, enlarged and tender liver, jaundice.
 Normal to low white blood cell count; markedly elevated
aminotransferases early in the course.
 Liver biopsy shows hepatocellular necrosis and mononuclear
infiltrate but is rarely indicated.
 
 General Considerations
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a 42-nm hepadnavirus with a partially
double-stranded DNA genome, inner core protein (hepatitis B core
antigen, HBcAg), and outer surface coat (hepatitis B surface
antigen, HBsAg). There are eight different genotypes (A–H), which
may influence the course of infection and responsiveness to anti-
viral therapy. HBV is usually transmitted by inoculation of infected
blood or blood products or by sexual contact and is present in
saliva, semen, and vaginal secretions. HBsAg-positive mothers may
transmit HBV at delivery; the risk of chronic infection in the infant is
as high as 90%.
HBV is prevalent in men who have sex with men and in injection
drug users (about 7% of HIV-infected persons are coinfected with
HBV), but the greatest number of cases results from heterosexual
transmission; since 1990, the incidence has decreased from 8.5 to
1.5 cases per 100,000 population. Groups at risk include patients
and staff at hemodialysis centers, physicians, dentists, nurses, and
personnel working in clinical and pathology laboratories and blood
banks. Half of all patients with acute hepatitis B in the United States
have previously been incarcerated or treated for a sexually
transmitted disease. The risk of HBV infection from a blood
transfusion is < 1 in 60,000 units transfused in the United States.
The incubation period of hepatitis B is 6 weeks to 6 months
(average 12–14 weeks). The onset of hepatitis B is more insidious
and the aminotransferase levels are higher on average than in HAV
infection. Fulminant hepatitis occurs in <1%, with a mortality rate of
up to 60%. Following acute hepatitis B, HBV infection persists in
1–2% of immunocompetent adults but in a higher percentage of
immunocompromised adults or children. There are up to 1.4 million
persons with chronic hepatitis B in the United States. Persons with
chronic hepatitis B, particularly when HBV infection is acquired
early in life and viral replication persists, are at substantial risk for
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (up to 25–40%). Men are at
greater risk than women. Infection caused by HBV may be
associated with serum sickness, glomerulonephritis, and polyarteritis
nodosa.
 
Figure 16–2. The typical course of acute type B hepatitis.
(HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBs, antibody to HBsAg;
HBeAg, hepatitis Be antigen; anti-HBe, antibody to HBeAg; anti-
HBc, antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; ALT, alanine
aminotransferase.) (Reprinted with permission from Koff RS. Acute
viral hepatitis. In: Handbook of Liver Disease. Friedman LS,
Keeffe EB [editors], 2nd ed. ©Elsevier
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical picture of viral hepatitis is extremely variable, ranging
from asymptomatic infection without jaundice to a fulminating
disease and death in a few days. Figure 16–2 shows the typical
course of HBV infection. The onset may be abrupt or insidious, and
the clinical features are similar to those for acute hepatitis A (see
earlier). Serum sickness may be seen early in acute hepatitis B.
Fever is generally present and is low-grade. Defervescence and a
fall in pulse rate often coincide with the onset of jaundice.
The acute illness usually subsides over 2–3 weeks with complete
clinical and laboratory recovery by 16 weeks. In 5–10% of cases,
the course may be more protracted, but < 1% will have a fulminant
course. Hepatitis B may become chronic (see below).
B. Laboratory Findings
The laboratory features are similar to those for acute hepatitis A
(see earlier), although serum aminotransferase levels are higher on
average in acute hepatitis B, and marked cholestasis is not a feature.
Marked prolongation of the prothrombin time in severe hepatitis
correlates with increased mortality.
There are three distinct antigen–antibody systems that relate to
HBV infection and circulating markers that are useful in diagnosis.
Interpretation of common serologic patterns is shown in Table 16–
5.
1. HBsAg—The appearance of HBsAg is the first evidence of
infection, appearing before biochemical evidence of liver disease,
and persists throughout the clinical illness. Persistence of HBsAg
more than 6 months after the acute illness signifies chronic hepatitis
B.
2. Anti-HBs—Specific antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) appears in
most individuals after clearance of HBsAg and after successful
vaccination against hepatitis B. Disappearance of HBsAg and the
appearance of anti-HBs signal recovery from HBV infection,
noninfectivity, and immunity.
3. Anti-HBc—IgM anti-HBc appears shortly after HBsAg is
detected. (HBcAg alone does not appear in serum.) In the setting of
acute hepatitis, IgM anti-HBc indicates a diagnosis of acute
hepatitis B, and it fills the serologic gap in rare patients who have
cleared HBsAg but do not yet have detectable anti-HBs. IgM anti-
HBc can persist for 3–6 months or longer. IgM anti-HBc may also
reappear during flares of previously inactive chronic hepatitis B (see
later). IgG anti-HBc also appears during acute hepatitis B but
persists indefinitely, whether the patient recovers (with the
appearance of anti-HBs in serum) or chronic hepatitis B develops
(with persistence of HBsAg). In asymptomatic blood donors, an
isolated anti-HBc with no other positive HBV serologic results may
represent a falsely positive result or latent infection in which HBV
DNA is detectable only by polymerase chain reaction testing.
4. HBeAg—HBeAg is a secretory form of HBcAg that appears in
serum during the incubation period shortly after the detection of
HBsAg. HBeAg indicates viral replication and infectivity.
Persistence of HBeAg beyond 3 months indicates an increased
likelihood of chronic hepatitis B. Its disappearance is often followed
by the appearance of anti-HBe, generally signifying diminished viral
replication and decreased infectivity.
5. HBV DNA—The presence of HBV DNA in serum generally
parallels the presence of HBeAg, although HBV DNA is a more
sensitive and precise marker of viral replication and infectivity. Very
low levels of HBV DNA, detectable only by polymerase chain
reaction testing, may persist in serum and liver long after a patient
has recovered from acute hepatitis B, but the HBV DNA in serum
is bound to IgG and is rarely infectious. In some patients with
chronic hepatitis B, HBV DNA is present at high levels without
HBeAg in serum because of development of a mutation in the core
promoter or precore region of the gene that codes HBcAg; these
mutations prevent synthesis of HBeAg in infected hepatocytes.
When additional mutations in the core gene are present, the pre-
core mutant enhances the severity of HBV infection and increases
the risk of cirrhosis (see later).
 
Table 16–5. Common serologic patterns in hepatitis B virus
infection and thei
 
1Low levels of IgM anti-HBc may also be detected.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes hepatitis A and the same
disorders listed for the differential diagnosis of acute hepatitis A (see
earlier). In addition, coinfection with HDV must be considered (see
later).
 Prevention
Strict isolation of patients is not necessary. Thorough hand washing
by medical staff who may contact contaminated utensils, bedding,
or clothing is essential. Medical staff should handle disposable
needles carefully and not recap them. Screening of donated blood
for HBsAg, anti-HBc, and anti-HCV has reduced the risk of
transfusion-associated hepatitis markedly. All pregnant women
should undergo testing for HBsAg. HBV-infected persons should
practice safe sex.
Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) may be protective—or may
attenuate the severity of illness—if given within 7 days after
exposure (adult dose is 0.06 mL/kg body weight) followed by
initiation of the HBV vaccine series (see below). This approach is
currently recommended for persons exposed to HBsAg-
contaminated material via mucous membranes or through breaks in
the skin and for individuals who have had sexual contact with a
person with HBV infection (irrespective of the presence or absence
of HBeAg in the source). HBIG is also indicated for newborn
infants of HBsAg-positive mothers followed by initiation of the
vaccine series (see below).
The CDC recommends vaccination of all infants and children in
the United States and all adults who are at risk for hepatitis B or
request vaccination. Over 90% of recipients of the vaccine mount
protective antibody to hepatitis B; immunocompromised persons
respond poorly (see Table 30–12). Reduced response to the
vaccine may have a genetic basis in some cases and has also been
associated with age over 40 years and celiac disease. The standard
regimen for adults is 10–20 mcg (depending on the formulation)
repeated again at 1 and 6 months, but alternative schedules have
been approved, including accelerated schedules of 0, 1, 2, and 12
months and of 0, 7, and 21 days plus 12 months. For greatest
reliability of absorption, the deltoid muscle is the preferred site.
Vaccine formulations free of the mercury-containing preservative
thimerosal are given to infants < 6 months of age. When
documentation of seroconversion is considered desirable,
postimmunization anti-HBs titers may be checked. Protection
appears to be excellent even if the titer wanes—at least for 20 years
—and booster reimmunization is not routinely recommended but is
advised for immunocompromised persons in whom anti-HBs titers
fall below 10 milli-international units/mL. For vaccine
nonresponders, three additional vaccine doses may elicit
seroprotective anti-HBs levels in 30–50% of persons. Universal
vaccination of neonates in countries endemic for HBV has reduced
the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma.
 Treatment
Treatment of acute hepatitis B is the same as that for acute hepatitis
A (see earlier). Encephalopathy or severe coagulopathy indicates
impending acute liver failure, and hospitalization at a liver transplant
center is mandatory (see below). Antiviral therapy is generally
unnecessary in patients with acute hepatitis B but is usually
prescribed in cases of fulminant hepatitis B.
 Prognosis
In most patients, clinical recovery is complete in 3–6 months.
Laboratory evidence of liver dysfunction may persist for a longer
period, but most patients recover completely. The mortality rate for
acute hepatitis B is 0.1–1% but is higher with superimposed
hepatitis D (see later).
Chronic hepatitis, characterized by elevated amino-transferase
levels for >6 months, develops in 1–2% of immunocompetent adults
with acute hepatitis B but in as many as 90% of infected neonates
and infants and a substantial proportion of immunocompromised
adults. Ultimately, cirrhosis develops in up to 40% of those with
chronic hepatitis B; the risk of cirrhosis is even higher in patients
coinfected with both hepatitis B and C or with HIV. Patients with
cirrhosis are at risk for hepatocellular carcinoma at a rate of 3–5%
per year. Even in the absence of cirrhosis, patients with chronic
hepatitis B—particularly those with active viral replication—are at
increased risk.
 When to Refer
Refer patients with acute hepatitis who require liver biopsy for
diagnosis.
 When to Admit
 
•    Encephalopathy is present.
•    INR >1.6.
•    The patient is unable to maintain hydration.
Liaw YF et al. Hepatitis B virus infection. Lancet. 2009 Feb
14;373(9663):582–92. [PMID: 19217993]
 
Mitchell AE et al. Institute of Medicine recommendations for the
prevention and control of hepatitis B and C. Hepatology. 2010
Mar;51(3):729–33. [PMID: 20186842]
 
Shiffman ML. Management of acute hepatitis B. Clin Liver Dis.
2010 Feb;14(1):75–91. [PMID: 20123442]
 
ACUTE HEPATITIS C & OTHER CAUSES OF ACUTE
VIRAL HEPATITIS
Hepatitis can be caused by many drugs and toxic agents as well as
by numerous viruses, the clinical manifestations of which may be
quite similar. Common viruses causing acute hepatitis include HAV
and HBV, both of which are discussed above. This section
addresses other viruses that can cause hepatitis: hepatitis C virus
(HCV), hepatitis D virus (HDV) (delta agent), and hepatitis E virus
(HEV) (an enterically transmitted hepatitis seen in epidemic form in
Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa). Hepatitis G virus (HGV)
rarely, if ever, causes frank hepatitis. A DNA virus designated the
TT virus (TTV) has been identified in up to 7.5% of blood donors
and found to be transmitted readily by blood transfusions, but an
association between this virus and liver disease has not been
established. A related virus known as SEN-V has been found in
2% of US blood donors, is transmitted by transfusion, and may
account for some cases of transfusion-associated non-ABCDE
hepatitis. In immunocompromised and rare immuno-competent
persons, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, and herpes simplex
virus should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hepatitis.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and influenza may be
associated with marked serum aminotransferase elevations.
Unidentified pathogens account for a small percentage of cases of
acute viral hepatitis.
1. Hepatitis C
HCV is a single-stranded RNA virus (hepacivirus) with properties
similar to those of flaviviruses. At least six major genotypes of HCV
have been identified. In the past, HCV was responsible for over
90% of cases of posttransfusion hepatitis, yet only 4% of cases of
hepatitis C were attributable to blood transfusions. Over 50% of
cases are transmitted by injection drug use, and both reinfection and
superinfection of HCV are common in actively injecting drug users.
Body piercing, tattoos, and hemodialysis are risk factors. The risk
of sexual and maternal–neonatal transmission is low and may be
greatest in a subset of patients with high circulating levels of HCV
RNA. Having multiple sexual partners may increase the risk of
HCV infection, and HIV coinfection increases the risk of HCV
transmission in men who have sex with men. Transmission via
breast-feeding has not been documented. An outbreak of hepatitis
C in patients with immune deficiencies has occurred in some
recipients of intravenous immune globulin. Hospital-and outpatient
facility-acquired transmission has occurred via multidose vials of
saline used to flush Portacaths; through reuse of disposable
syringes; 
through 
contamination 
of 
shared 
saline,
radiopharmaceutical, and sclerosant vials; via inadequately
disinfected endoscopy equipment; and between hospitalized
patients on a liver unit. In the developing world, unsafe medical
practices lead to a substantial number of cases of HCV infection.
Covert transmission during bloody fisticuffs has even been reported,
and incarceration in prison is a risk factor. In many patients, the
source of infection is unknown. Coinfection with HCV is found in at
least 30% of persons infected with HIV; HIV infection leads to an
increased risk of acute liver failure and more rapid progression of
chronic hepatitis C to cirrhosis; in addition, HCV increases the
hepatotoxicity of highly active antiretroviral therapy. There are more
than 2.7 million HCV carriers in the United States and another 1.3
million previously exposed persons who have cleared the virus.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Figure 16–3 shows the typical course of HCV infection. The
incubation period for hepatitis C averages 6–7 weeks, and clinical
illness is often mild, usually asymptomatic, and characterized by
waxing and waning aminotransferase elevations and a high rate
(>80%) of chronic hepatitis. Spontaneous clearance of HCV
following acute infection is more common (64%) in persons with the
CC genotype of the IL28B gene (which encodes interferon lambda-
3) than in those with the CT or TT genotype (24% and 6%,
respectively). In persons with the CC genotype, jaundice is more
likely to develop during the course of acute hepatitis C. Patients
with the CC genotype and chronic hepatitis C are more likely to
respond to therapy with pegylated interferon (see Chronic Viral
Hepatitis, below). In pregnant patients with chronic hepatitis C,
serum aminotransferase levels frequently normalize despite
persistence of viremia, only to increase again after delivery.
 
Figure 16–3. The typical course of acute and chronic hepatitis
C. (ALT, alanine aminotransferase; Anti-HCV, antibody to hepatitis
C virus by enzyme immunoassay; HCV RNA [PCR], hepatitis C
viral RNA by polymerase chai
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Diagnosis of hepatitis C is based on an enzyme immunoassay (EIA)
that detects antibodies to HCV. Anti-HCV is not protective, and in
patients with acute or chronic hepatitis, its presence in serum
generally signifies that HCV is the cause. Limitations of the EIA
include moderate sensitivity (false-negatives) for the diagnosis of
acute hepatitis C early in the course and low specificity (false-
positives) in some persons with elevated γ-globulin levels. In these
situations, a diagnosis of hepatitis C may be confirmed by using an
assay for HCV RNA. Occasional persons are found to have anti-
HCV in serum, confirmed by a recombinant immunoblot assay
(RIBA), without HCV RNA in serum, suggesting recovery from
HCV infection in the past.
 Complications
HCV is a pathogenetic factor in mixed cryoglobulinemia and
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and may be related to
lichen planus, autoimmune thyroiditis, lymphocytic sialadenitis,
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sporadic porphyria cutanea tarda,
and monoclonal gammopathies. HCV infection confers a 20–30%
increased risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Hepatitis C may induce
insulin resistance (which in turn increases the risk of hepatic
fibrosis), and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus is increased in
persons with chronic hepatitis C. Hepatic steatosis is a particular
feature of infection with HCV genotype 3 and may also occur in
patients infected with other HCV genotypes who have risk factors
for fatty liver (see below). On the other hand, chronic HCV
infection is associated with a decrease in serum cholesterol and
low-density lipoprotein levels.
 Prevention
Testing donated blood for HCV has helped reduce the risk of
transfusion-associated hepatitis C from 10% in 1990 to about 1
case per 2 million units in 2011. HCV-infected persons should
practice safe sex, but there is little evidence that HCV is spread
easily by sexual contact, and no specific precautions are
recommended for persons in a monogamous relationship.
Vaccination against HAV (after pre-screening for prior immunity)
and HBV is recommended for patients with chronic hepatitis C, and
vaccination against HAV is recommended for patients with chronic
hepatitis B or C.
 Treatment
Treatment of patients with acute hepatitis C with peginterferon (see
later) for 6–24 weeks appreciably decreases the risk of chronic
hepatitis. In general, patients infected with HCV genotype 1 require
a 24-week course of treatment, but a 12-week course is adequate
if HCV RNA is undetectable in serum by 4 weeks. Those infected
with genotypes 2, 3, or 4 generally require 8–12 weeks of therapy.
Because 20% of patients with acute hepatitis C, particularly those
who are symptomatic, clear the virus without such treatment,
reserving treatment for patients in whom serum HCV RNA levels
fail to clear after 3 months may be advisable. Ribavirin may be
added if HCV RNA fails to clear after 3 months of peginterferon,
but some authorities recommend using ribavirin with peginterferon
from the start of therapy.
 Prognosis
In most patients, clinical recovery is complete in 3–6 months.
Laboratory evidence of liver dysfunction may persist for a longer
period. The overall mortality rate is < 1%, but the rate is reportedly
higher in older people. Fulminant hepatitis C is rare in the United
States.
Chronic hepatitis, which progresses very slowly in many cases,
develops in as many as 85% of all persons with acute hepatitis C.
Ultimately, cirrhosis develops in up to 30% of those with chronic
hepatitis C; the risk of cirrhosis is higher in patients coinfected with
both HCV and HBV or HIV. Patients with cirrhosis are at risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma at a rate of 3–5% per year.
2. Hepatitis D (Delta Agent)
HDV is a defective RNA virus that causes hepatitis only in
association with hepatitis B infection and specifically only in the
presence of HBsAg; it is cleared when the latter is cleared. Eight
major genotypes (I-VIII) have been identified.
HDV may coinfect with HBV or may superinfect a person with
chronic hepatitis B, usually by percutaneous exposure. When acute
hepatitis D is coincident with acute HBV infection, the infection is
generally similar in severity to acute hepatitis B alone. In chronic
hepatitis B, superinfection by HDV appears to carry a worse short-
term prognosis, often resulting in fulminant hepatitis or severe
chronic hepatitis that progresses rapidly to cirrhosis.
In the 1970s and early 1980s, HDV was endemic in some areas,
such as the Mediterranean countries (and later in Central and
Eastern Europe), where up to 80% of HBV carriers were
superinfected with HDV. In the United States, HDV occurred
primarily among injection drug users. However, new cases of
hepatitis D are now infrequent in the United States primarily
because of the control of HBV infection, and cases seen today are
usually from cohorts infected years ago who survived the initial
impact of hepatitis D and now have cirrhosis. These patients are at
risk for decompensation and have a threefold increased risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma. New cases are primarily seen in
immigrants from endemic areas, including Africa, central Asia,
Eastern Europe, and the Amazon region of Brazil. The diagnosis of
hepatitis D is made by detection of antibody to hepatitis D antigen
(anti-HDV) or, where available, hepatitis D antigen (HDAg) or
HDV RNA in serum.
3. Hepatitis E
HEV is a 29- to 32-nm RNA hepevirus (in the Hepeviridae family)
that is a major cause of acute hepatitis throughout Central and
Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa, where it is
responsible for waterborne hepatitis outbreaks. It is rare in the
United States but should be considered in patients with acute
hepatitis after a trip to an endemic area. In industrialized countries, it
may be spread by swine, and having a pet in the home and
consuming organ meats are risk factors. Illness generally is self-
limited (no carrier state), but instances of chronic hepatitis attributed
to HEV have been reported in transplant recipients, and preliminary
observations suggest that treatment with oral ribavirin may induce
sustained clearance of HEV RNA from the serum of such patients.
In endemic regions, the mortality rate is high (10–20%) in pregnant
women, and the risk of hepatic decompensation is increased in
patients with underlying chronic liver disease. Improved public
hygiene reduces the risk of HEV infection in endemic areas. A
recombinant vaccine against HEV has shown promise in clinical
trials.
4. Hepatitis G
HGV is a flavivirus that is percutaneously transmitted and
associated with chronic viremia lasting at least 10 years. HGV has
been detected in 1.5% of blood donors, 50% of injection drug
users, 30% of hemodialysis patients, 20% of hemophiliacs, and
15% of patients with chronic hepatitis B or C, but it does not
appear to cause important liver disease or affect the response of
patients with chronic hepatitis B or C to antiviral therapy. HGV
coinfection may improve survival in patients with HIV infection and
reduce the degree of liver fibrosis in patients with HCVHIV
coinfection.
Kamar N et al. Ribavirin therapy inhibits viral replication on
patients with chronic hepatitis E virus infection. Gastroenterology.
2010 Nov;139(5):1612–8. [PMID: 20708006]
 
Tillmann HL et al; German Anti-D Study Group. A polymorphism
near IL28B is associated with spontaneous clearance of acute
hepatitis C virus and jaundice. Gastroenterology. 2010
Nov;139(5):1586–92. [PMID: 20637200]
 
Wedemeyer H et al. Epidemiology, pathogenesis and management
of hepatitis D: update and challenges ahead. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jan;7(1):31–40. [PMID: 20051970]
 
ACUTE LIVER FAILURE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 May be fulminant or subfulminant; both forms carry a poor
prognosis.
 Acetaminophen and idiosyncratic drug reactions are the most
common causes.
 
 General Considerations
Acute liver failure may be fulminant or subfulminant. Fulminant
hepatic failure is characterized by the development of hepatic
encephalopathy within 8 weeks after the onset of acute liver
disease. Coagulopathy (international normalized ratio [INR] ≥ 1.5)
is invariably present. Subfulminant hepatic failure occurs when these
findings appear between 8 weeks and 6 months after the onset of
acute liver disease and carries an equally poor prognosis.
An estimated 1600 cases of acute liver failure occur each year in
the United States. Acetaminophen toxicity is the most common
cause, accounting for at least 45% of cases. Suicide attempts
account for 44% of cases of acetaminophen-induced hepatic failure,
and unintentional overdoses (“therapeutic misadventures”), which
are often a result of a decrease in the threshold toxic dose because
of chronic alcohol use or fasting, account for at least 48%. Other
causes include idiosyncratic drug reactions (now the second most
common cause, with antituberculosis drugs, antiepileptics, and
antibiotics implicated most commonly), viral hepatitis, poisonous
mushrooms (Amanita phylloides), shock, hyperthermia or
hypothermia, Budd–Chiari syndrome, malignancy (most commonly
lymphomas), Wilson disease, Reye syndrome, fatty liver of
pregnancy and other disorders of fatty acid oxidation, autoimmune
hepatitis, parvovirus B19 infection and, rarely, grand mal seizures.
The risk of acute liver failure is increased in patients with diabetes
mellitus, and outcome is worsened by obesity. Herbal and dietary
supplements are thought to be contributory to acute liver failure in a
substantial portion of cases, regardless of cause.
Viral hepatitis now accounts for only 12% of all cases of acute
liver failure. The decline of viral hepatitis as the principal cause of
acute liver failure is due to universal vaccination of infants and
children against hepatitis B and the availability of the hepatitis A
vaccine. In endemic areas, hepatitis E is an important cause of acute
liver failure. Hepatitis C is a rare cause of acute liver failure in the
United States, but acute hepatitis A or B superimposed on chronic
hepatitis C may cause fulminant hepatitis.
 Clinical Findings
Gastrointestinal symptoms, systemic inflammatory response, renal
dysfunction, and hemorrhagic phenomena are common. Adrenal
insufficiency and subclinical myocardial injury manifesting as an
elevated serum troponin I level often complicate acute liver failure.
Jaundice may be absent or minimal early, but laboratory tests show
severe hepatocellular damage. In acetaminophen toxicity, serum
aminotransferase levels are often towering (> 5000 units/L), and
diagnosis is aided by the detection of acetaminophen-protein
adducts in serum. In acute liver failure due to microvesicular
steatosis (eg, fatty liver of pregnancy), serum aminotransferase
elevations may be modest (< 300 units/L). Over 10% of patients
have an elevated serum amylase level at least three times the upper
limit of normal, often as a result of renal dysfunction. The blood
ammonia level is typically elevated and correlates (along with the
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease [MELD] score) with the
development of encephalopathy and intracranial hypertension. The
severity of extrahepatic organ dysfunction (as assessed by the
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment, or SOFA) also correlates
with the likelihood of intracranial hypertension.
 Treatment
The treatment of acute liver failure is directed toward correcting
metabolic abnormalities. These include coagulation defects,
electrolyte and acid-base disturbances, advanced chronic kidney
disease, hypoglycemia, and encephalopathy. Cerebral edema and
sepsis are the leading causes of death. Prophylactic antibiotic
therapy decreases the risk of infection, observed in up to 90%, but
has no effect on survival and is not routinely recommended. For
suspected sepsis, broad coverage is indicated. Despite a high rate
of adrenal insufficiency, corticosteroids are of uncertain value.
Stress gastropathy prophylaxis with an H2-receptor blocker or
proton pump inhibitor is recommended. Administration of
acetylcysteine (140 mg/kg orally followed by 70 mg/kg orally every
4 hours for an additional 17 doses or 150 mg/kg in 5% dextrose
intravenously over 15 minutes followed by 50 mg/kg over 4 hours
and then 100 mg/kg over 16 hours) is indicated for acetaminophen
toxicity up to 72 hours after ingestion and improves cerebral blood
flow and oxygenation as well as transplant-free survival in patients
with stage 1 or 2 encephalopathy due to fulminant hepatic failure of
any cause. (Acetylcysteine treatment can prolong the prothrombin
time, leading to the erroneous assumption that liver failure is
worsening.) Penicillin G (300,000 to 1 million units/kg/day) or
silibinin (silymarin or milk thistle), which is not licensed in the United
States, is administered to patients with mushroom poisoning.
Nucleoside analogs are recommended for patients with fulminant
hepatitis B (see Chronic Viral Hepatitis), and intravenous acyclovir
has shown benefit in those with herpes simplex virus hepatitis.
Plasmapheresis combined with D-penicillamine has been used in
fulminant Wilson disease. Subclinical seizure activity is common in
patients with acute liver failure, but the value of prophylactic
phenytoin is uncertain.
Early transfer to a liver transplantation center is essential. The
head of the patient's bed should be elevated to 30 degrees, and
patients with stage 3 or 4 encephalopathy should be intubated.
Extradural sensors may be placed to monitor intracranial pressure
for impending cerebral edema with the goal of maintaining the
intracranial pressure below 20 mm Hg and the cerebral perfusion
pressure above 70 mm Hg. Lactulose is administered for
encephalopathy (see Cirrhosis). Mannitol, 0.5 g/kg, or 100–200
mL of a 20% solution by intravenous infusion over 10 minutes, may
decrease cerebral edema but should be used with caution in patients
with advanced chronic kidney disease. Intravenously administered
hypertonic saline to induce hypernatremia (serum sodium
concentration of 145–155 mEq/L [145–155 mmol/L]) also may
reduce intracranial hypertension. Hypothermia to a temperature of
32-34 °C may reduce intracranial pressure when other measures
have failed and may improve survival long enough to permit liver
transplantation. The value of hyperventilation and intravenous
prostaglandin E1 is uncertain. A short-acting barbiturate, propofol,
or administration of intravenous boluses of indomethacin, 25 mg, is
considered for refractory intracranial hypertension. Nonbiologic
liver support (eg, molecular adsorbent recirculating system
[MARS], an albumin dialysis system), hepatic-assist devices using
living hepatocytes, extracorporeal whole liver perfusion, hepatocyte
transplantation, and liver xenografts have shown promise
experimentally but have not been shown conclusively to reduce
mortality in patients with acute liver failure. They may serve as a
“bridge” to liver transplantation.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate of fulminant hepatic failure with severe
encephalopathy is as high as 80%, except for acetaminophen
hepatotoxicity, in which the transplant-free survival is 65% and no
more than 8% of patients undergo liver transplantation. For patients
with fulminant hepatic failure of other causes, the outlook is
especially poor in patients younger than 10 and older than 40 years
of age and in those with an idiosyncratic drug reaction but appears
to be improved when acetylcysteine is administered to patients with
stage 1 or 2 encephalopathy. Spontaneous recovery is less likely for
hepatitis B than for hepatitis A. Polymorphisms of the genes that
encode keratins 8 and 18 appear to affect outcomes. Other adverse
prognostic factors are a serum bilirubin level >18 mg/dL (307.8
mcmol/L), INR >6.5, onset of encephalopathy more than 7 days
after the onset of jaundice, and a low factor V level (<20% of
normal). For acetaminophen-induced fulminant hepatic failure,
indicators of a poor outcome are acidosis (pH < 7.3), INR > 6.5,
and azotemia (serum creatinine ≥3.4 mg/dL [283.22 mcmol/L]),
whereas a rising serum α-fetoprotein level predicts a favorable
outcome. An elevated blood lactate level (>3.5 mmol/L), blood
ammonia level (>124 mcmol/L), and possibly hyperphosphatemia
(>1.2 mmol/L) also predict poor survival. A prognostic (“BiLE”)
score based on the serum bilirubin, serum lactate, and etiology has
been proposed. Emergency liver transplantation is considered for
patients with stage 2 to stage 3 encephalopathy (see Cirrhosis) and
is associated with a 70% survival rate at 5 years. For mushroom
poisoning, liver transplantation should be considered when the
interval between ingestion and the onset of diarrhea is < 8 hours or
the INR is ≥ 6.0, even in the absence of encephalopathy.
 When to Admit
All patients with acute liver failure should be hospitalized.
Bernal W et al. Acute liver failure. Lancet. 2010 Jul 17;376(9736):
190–201. [PMID: 20638564]
 
Craig DG et al. Review article: the current management of acute
liver failure. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Feb 1;31(3): 345–58.
[PMID: 19845566]
 
CHRONIC VIRAL HEPATITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Defined by chronic infection (HBV, HCV, HDV) for > 6 months.
 Diagnosis is usually made by antibody tests and viral nucleic acid
in serum.
 
 General Considerations
Chronic hepatitis is defined as chronic necroinflammation of the liver
of more than 3–6 months’ duration, demonstrated by persistently
abnormal serum aminotransferase levels or characteristic histologic
findings. In many cases, the diagnosis of chronic hepatitis may be
made on initial presentation. The causes of chronic hepatitis include
HBV, HCV, and HDV as well as autoimmune hepatitis; alcoholic
and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; certain medications, such as
isoniazid and nitrofurantoin; Wilson disease; α1-antiprotease
deficiency; and, rarely, celiac disease. Chronic hepatitis is
categorized on the basis of etiology; the grade of portal, periportal,
and lobular inflammation (minimal, mild, moderate, or severe); and
the stage of fibrosis (none, mild, moderate, severe, cirrhosis). In the
absence of advanced cirrhosis, patients are often asymptomatic or
have mild nonspecific symptoms.
1. Chronic Hepatitis B & Chronic Hepatitis D
 Clinical Findings & Diagnosis
Chronic hepatitis B afflicts nearly 400 million people worldwide
(endemic areas include Asia and sub-Saharan Africa) and 1.25
million (predominantly males) in the United States. It may be noted
as a continuum of acute hepatitis B or diagnosed because of
repeated detection of HBsAg in serum, often with elevated
aminotransferase levels.
Four phases of HBV infection are recognized: immune tolerant
phase, immune clearance phase, inactive HBsAg carrier state, and
reactivated chronic hepatitis B phase. In the immune tolerant
phase, HBeAg and HBV DNA are present in serum, which is
indicative of active viral replication, and serum aminotransferase
levels are normal, with little necroinflammation in the liver. This
phase is common in infants and young children whose immature
immune system fails to mount an immune response to HBV.
Persons in the immune tolerant phase and those who acquire HBV
infection later in life may enter an immune clearance phase, in
which aminotransferase levels are elevated and necroinflammation is
present in the liver, with a risk of progression to cirrhosis (at a rate
of 2–5.5% per year) and of hepatocellular carcinoma (at a rate of >
2% per year in those with cirrhosis); low-level IgM anti-HBc is
present in about 70%.
Patients enter the inactive HBsAg carrier state when
biochemical improvement follows immune clearance. This
improvement coincides with disappearance of HBeAg and reduced
HBV DNA levels (<105 copies/mL, or <20,000 international
units/mL) in serum, appearance of anti-HBe, and integration of the
HBV genome into the host genome in infected hepatocytes. Patients
in this phase are at a low risk for cirrhosis (if it has not already
developed) and hepatocellular carcinoma.
The reactivated chronic hepatitis B phase may result from
infection by a pre-core mutant of HBV or spontaneous mutation of
the pre-core or core promoter region of the HBV genome during
the course of chronic hepatitis caused by wild-type HBV. So-called
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B accounts for <10% of cases of
chronic hepatitis B in the United States, up to 50% in southeast
Asia, and up to 90% in Mediterranean countries, reflecting in part
differences in the frequencies of HBV genotypes. In reactivated
chronic hepatitis B, there is a rise in serum HBV DNA levels and
possible progression to cirrhosis (at a rate of 8–10% per year),
particularly when additional mutations in the core gene of HBV are
present. Risk factors for reactivation include male sex and HBV
genotype C. In patients with either HBeAg-positive or HBeAg-
negative chronic hepatitis B, the risk of cirrhosis and of
hepatocellular carcinoma correlates with the serum HBV DNA
level. Other risk factors include advanced age, alcohol use, cigarette
smoking, and coinfection with HCV or HDV. HIV coinfection is
also associated with an increased frequency of cirrhosis when the
CD4 count is low.
Acute hepatitis D infection superimposed on chronic HBV
infection may result in severe chronic hepatitis, which may progress
rapidly to cirrhosis and may be fatal. Patients with long-standing
chronic hepatitis D and B often have inactive cirrhosis and are at
risk for decompensation and hepatocellular carcinoma. The
diagnosis is confirmed by detection of anti-HDV or HDAg in
serum.
 Treatment
Patients with active viral replication (HBeAg and HBV DNA [≥
105 copies/mL, or ≥ 20,000 international units/mL] in serum and
elevated aminotransferase levels) may be treated with a nucleoside
or nucleotide analog or with pegylated interferon. Nucleoside and
nucleotide analogs are preferred because they are better tolerated
and can be taken orally. For patients who are HBeAg-negative, the
threshold for treatment is a serum HBV DNA level ≥ 104
copies/mL, or ≥ 2000 international units/mL. If the threshold HBV
DNA level for treatment is met but the serum ALT level is normal,
treatment may still be considered in patients over age 35–40 if liver
biopsy demonstrates a fibrosis stage of 2 (moderate) or higher.
Therapy is aimed at reducing and maintaining the serum HBV DNA
level to the lowest possible levels, thereby leading to normalization
of the ALT level and histologic improvement. An additional goal in
HBeAg-positive patients is seroconversion to anti-HBe, and some
responders eventually clear HBsAg. Although nucleoside and
nucleotide analogs generally have been discontinued 6–12 months
after HBeAg-to-anti-HBe seroconversion, some patients serorevert
to HBeAg after discontinuation and require long-term therapy,
which also is required when seroconversion does not occur, as well
as in all HBeAg-negative patients.
The available nucleoside and nucleotide analogs—entecavir,
tenofovir, lamivudine, adefovir, and telbivudine—differ in efficacy
and rates of resistance; however, in HBeAg-positive patients, they
all achieve an HBeAg-to-anti-HBe seroconversion rate of about
20% at 1 year with higher rates with more prolonged therapy. The
preferred first-line oral agents are entecavir and tenofovir.
Entecavir, a nucleoside analog, is rarely associated with resistance
unless a patient is already resistant to lamivudine. The daily dose is
0.5 mg orally for patients not resistant to lamivudine and 1 mg for
patients who previously became resistant to lamivudine. Entecavir is
more effective than lamivudine and adefovir, with histologic
improvement observed in 70% of treated patients and suppression
of HBV DNA in serum in up to 80%. Entecavir has been reported
to cause lactic acidosis when used in patients with decompensated
cirrhosis.
Tenofovir, a nucleotide analog, has substantial activity against
HBV and is used as a first-line agent or when resistance to a
nucleoside analog has developed. Like entecavir, tenofovir has a
low rate of resistance when used as initial therapy. Long-term use
may lead to an elevated serum creatinine level and reduced serum
phosphate level (Fanconi-like syndrome) that is reversible with
discontinuation of the drug.
The first available nucleoside analog was lamivudine, 100 mg
orally daily, which reliably suppresses HBV DNA in serum,
improves liver histology in 60% of patients, and leads to normal
ALT levels in over 40% after 1 year of therapy. By the end of 1
year, however, 15–30% of responders experience a relapse (and
occasionally frank decompensation) as a result of a mutation in the
polymerase gene (the YMDD motif) of HBV DNA that confers
resistance to lamivudine. The rate of resistance reaches 70% by 5
years of therapy, and the drug is no longer considered first-line
therapy. In patients with advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis, treatment
with lamivudine has been shown to reduce the risk of hepatic
decompensation and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Adefovir dipivoxil, a nucleotide analog, has activity against wild-
type and lamivudine-resistant HBV but is the least potent of the oral
antiviral agents for HBV. The standard dose is 10 mg orally once a
day for at least 1 year. Adding the drug may be effective in patients
who have become resistant to lamivudine. As with lamivudine, only
a small number of patients achieve sustained suppression of HBV
replication with adefovir, and long-term suppressive therapy is often
required. Resistance to adefovir is less frequent than with lamivudine
but is seen in up to 29% of patients treated for 5 years. Patients
with underlying kidney dysfunction are at risk for nephrotoxicity
from adefovir.
Telbivudine, given in a daily dose of 600 mg orally, is more
potent than either lamivudine or adefovir. Resistance to this drug
may develop, however, particularly in patients who are resistant to
lamivudine, and elevated creatine kinase levels are common in
patients treated with telbivudine.
Other antiviral agents are under study, and strategies using
multiple drugs are being investigated.
Nucleoside and nucleotide analogs are well tolerated even in
patients with decompensated cirrhosis (for whom the treatment
threshold may be an HBV DNA level <104 copies/mL) and may be
effective in patients with rapidly progressive hepatitis B (“fibrosing
cholestatic hepatitis”) following organ transplantation. Although
therapy with these agents leads to biochemical, virologic, and
histologic improvement in patients with HBeAg-negative chronic
hepatitis B and baseline HBV DNA levels ≥ 104 copies/mL (≥
2000 international units/mL), relapse is frequent when therapy is
stopped, and long-term treatment is often required. Resistance is
most likely to develop to lamivudine and may develop to adefovir
and telbivudine, but these drugs are no longer used frequently as
first-line agents in the United States. The development of resistance
occasionally results in hepatic decompensation. Sequential addition
of a second antiviral agent is usually effective after resistance to the
first agent has developed. Combined use of peginterferon and a
nucleoside or nucleotide analog has not been shown convincingly to
have a substantial advantage over the use of either type of drug
alone.
Nucleoside analogs are also recommended for inactive HBV
carriers prior to the initiation of immunosuppressive therapy
(including anti-tumor necrosis factor antibody therapy) or cancer
chemotherapy to prevent reactivation. In patients infected with both
HBV and HIV, antiretroviral therapy, including two drugs active
against both viruses (eg, tenofovir plus lamivudine or emtricitabine),
has been recommended when treatment of HIV infection is
indicated. Telbivudine and tenofovir are classified as pregnancy
category B drugs, and lamivudine, a category C drug, has been
shown to be safe in pregnant women with HIV infection.
Peginterferon alfa-2a is still an alternative to the oral agents in
selected cases. A dose of 180 mcg subcutaneously once weekly for
48 weeks leads to sustained normalization of aminotransferase
levels, disappearance of HBeAg and HBV DNA from serum,
appearance of anti-HBe, and improved survival in up to 40% of
treated patients. A response is most likely in patients with a low
baseline HBV DNA level and high aminotransferase levels and is
more likely in those infected with HBV genotype A than with other
genotypes (especially genotype D). Moreover, most complete
responders eventually clear HBsAg and develop anti-HBs in serum,
and are thus cured. Relapses are uncommon in complete
responders who seroconvert from HBeAg to anti-HBe.
Peginterferon may be considered in order to avoid long-term
therapy with an oral agent, as in young women who may want to
become pregnant in the future. Patients with HBeAg-negative
chronic hepatitis B have a response rate of 60% after 48 weeks of
therapy with peginterferon, but the response may not be durable
once peginterferon is stopped. Preliminary studies suggest that a
rapid decline in serum HBsAg titers predicts a sustained response
and ultimate clearance of HBsAg. The response to peginterferon is
poor in patients with HIV coinfection.
Peginterferon alfa-2b (1.5 mcg/kg/wk for 48 weeks) may lead to
normalization of serum aminotransferase levels, histologic
improvement, and elimination of HDV RNA from serum in 20–50%
of patients with chronic hepatitis D, but patients may relapse and
tolerance is poor. Nucleoside and nucleotide analogs are not
effective in treating chronic hepatitis D.
 Prognosis
The course of chronic hepatitis B is variable. The sequelae of
chronic hepatitis secondary to hepatitis B include cirrhosis, liver
failure, and hepatocellular carcinoma. The 5-year mortality rate is
0–2% in those without cirrhosis, 14–20% in those with
compensated cirrhosis, and 70–86% following decompensation.
The risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma correlates with
serum HBV DNA levels, and a focus of therapy is to suppress
HBV DNA levels below 300 copies/mL (60 international units/mL).
There is some evidence that HBV genotype C is associated with a
higher risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma than other
genotypes. Antiviral treatment improves the prognosis in
responders, prevents (or leads to regression of) cirrhosis, and
decreases the frequency of liver-related complications.
2. Chronic Hepatitis C
 Clinical Findings & Diagnosis
Chronic hepatitis C develops in up to 85% of patients with acute
hepatitis C. It is clinically indistinguishable from chronic hepatitis due
to other causes and may be the most common. Worldwide, 170
million people are infected with HCV, with 1.8% of the US
population infected. Peak prevalence in the United States (about
4%) is in persons born between 1945 and 1964. In approximately
40% of cases, serum aminotransferase levels are persistently
normal. The diagnosis is confirmed by detection of anti-HCV by
EIA. In rare cases of suspected chronic hepatitis C but a negative
EIA, HCV RNA is detected by polymerase chain reaction testing.
Progression to cirrhosis occurs in 20% of affected patients after 20
years, with an increased risk in men, those who drink more than 50
g of alcohol daily, and those who acquire HCV infection after age
40 years. The rate of fibrosis progression accelerates after age 50.
African Americans have a higher rate of chronic hepatitis C but
lower rates of fibrosis progression and response to therapy than
whites (see below). Immunosuppressed persons—including patients
with hypogammaglobulinemia, HIV infection with a low CD4 count,
or those receiving immunosuppressants—appear to progress more
rapidly to cirrhosis than immunocompetent persons with chronic
hepatitis C. Tobacco and cannibis smoking and hepatic steatosis
also appear to promote progression of fibrosis, but coffee
consumption appears to slow progression. Persons with chronic
hepatitis C and persistently normal serum aminotransferase levels
usually have mild chronic hepatitis with slow or absent progression
to cirrhosis; however, cirrhosis is present in 10% of these patients.
 Treatment
Treatment of chronic hepatitis C is generally considered in patients
under age 70 with more than mild fibrosis on liver biopsy. (A liver
biopsy may be avoided if a FibroSure test result suggests absence
of fibrosis.) Because of high response rates to treatment in patients
infected with HCV genotype 2 or 3, treatment may be initiated in
these patients without a liver biopsy.
Two formulations of pegylated interferon are approved for HCV
infection: peginterferon alfa-2b, with a 12-kDa polyethylene glycol
(PEG), 1.5 mcg/kg, and peginterferon alfa-2a, with a 40-kDa PEG,
180 mcg, both given subcutaneously once per week; in comparative
studies, peginterferon alfa-2a has been slightly more effective.
Addition of the nucleoside analog ribavirin, 800–1400 mg orally
daily in two divided doses, results in higher sustained response rates
than peginterferon alone in previously untreated patients with
chronic hepatitis C and in patients who have had a relapse after an
initial response to interferon alfa (no longer available in the United
States) and ribavirin. Still higher rates of response are achieved in
persons infected with HCV genotype 1 when a direct acting
antiviral agent—telaprevir or boceprevir, both protease inhibitors
under investigation (ie, submitted in 2010 to the FDA for approval)
—is added to peginterferon and ribavirin.
Sustained response rates are as high as 50% for HCV genotype
1 (and up to 80% for HCV genotypes 2 or 3) with a combination
of peginterferon and ribavirin and 75% with a three-drug regimen.
Low levels of HCV RNA may persist in the liver, lymphocytes, and
macrophages of successfully treated (“cured”) patients, but the
significance of this finding is uncertain. Response rates to
peginterferon and ribavirin are lower in patients with advanced
fibrosis, high levels of viremia, alcohol consumption, HIV
coinfection, obesity, insulin resistance, and severe steatosis; they are
also lower in blacks and Latinos than in whites, in part because of a
higher rate of genotype 1 among infected black patients and in part
because of intrinsic resistance to therapy. Response to peginterferon
is associated strongly with the CC genotype of the IL28B gene on
chromosome 19, with sustained response rates to peginterferon and
ribavirin as high as 80%, compared with 40% for the TC genotype
and 30% for the TT genotype. For prior nonresponders to standard
interferon and ribavirin, sustained response rates to re-treatment
with peginterferon alfa and ribavirin are only 10–15% but 35% with
a three-drug regimen that includes one of the investigational agents,
telaprevir or boceprevir.
When used with peginterferon alfa-2b, the dose of ribavirin in
patients infected with genotype 1 is based on the patient's weight
and may range from 800 mg to 1400 mg daily in two divided doses.
When used with peginterferon alfa-2a, the daily ribavirin dose is
1000 mg or 1200 mg depending on whether the patient's weight is
less than or greater than 75 kg. Patients infected with genotype 1
have generally been treated for 48 weeks with peginterferon and
ribavirin. If there is a decrease in the serum HCV RNA level to <50
international units/mL by 4 weeks (rapid virologic response),
treatment for at least 24 weeks results in a sustained virologic
response rate of 90%. For those who do not achieve a rapid
virologic response but have a serum HCV RNA level <50
international units/mL by 12 weeks (complete early virologic
response), treatment is continued for the full 48 weeks. If serum
HCV RNA levels decline by at least 2 logs by 12 weeks (partial
early virologic response) and become undetectable by 24 weeks
(slow response), treatment may be extended to 72 weeks. If none
of the aforementioned targets is reached, particularly a minimum of
a partial early virologic response, treatment is discontinued. With
the addition of a protease inhibitor, the treatment duration can be
shortened to 24 weeks in previously untreated patients who achieve
an extended rapid virologic response (negative HCV RNA in serum
at 4 and 12 weeks). The investigational agent telaprevir is given in a
dose of 750 mg orally three times daily for the first 12 weeks. If
boceprevir is used, it is started in a dose of 800 mg orally three
times daily 4 weeks after the start of peginterferon and ribavirin and
given for a variable duration depending on the rapidity of clearance
of HCV RNA from serum (response-guided therapy). In patients
who did not respond or relapsed after peginterferon and ribavirin
therapy, a total treatment duration of 48 weeks is prescribed with
either three-drug regimen, with expected sustained virologic
response rates of up to 40% and 70%, respectively. The role of
IL28B testing to assess responsiveness to interferon when a three-
drug regimen is used is under study. For patients infected with HCV
genotype 1 and without any hepatic fibrosis, expectant management
and a repeat assessment of hepatic fibrosis (often by liver biopsy) in
3–5 years are often recommended.
Patients infected with genotype 2 or 3 (without cirrhosis and with
low levels of viremia) are treated for 24 weeks with peginterferon
and ribavirin and require a ribavirin total daily dose of only 800 mg.
For patients infected with these genotypes who clear the virus within
4 weeks (rapid virologic response), a total treatment duration of
only 16 weeks may be sufficient, if the baseline HCV RNA level is
<400,000 international units/mL; however, such a short course is
not routinely recommended. For patients with cirrhosis or a high
viral level (>400,000 international units/mL), 48 weeks of treatment
may be preferred. The added benefit of the investigational agents
telaprevir or boceprevir in patients infected with HCV genotype 2
or 3 is under study.
Peginterferon-based therapy may be beneficial in the treatment of
cryoglobulinemia associated with chronic hepatitis C; an acute flare
of cryoglobulinemia may first require treatment with rituximab,
cyclophosphamide plus methylprednisolone, or plasma exchange.
“Chronic HCV carriers” with normal serum aminotransferase levels
respond just as well to treatment as do patients with elevated
aminotransferase levels. Patients with both HCV and HIV infections
may benefit from treatment of HCV. Moreover, in HCV/HIV-
coinfected persons, long-term liver-related mortality increases as
mortality from HIV infection is reduced by highly active
antiretroviral therapy.
Treatment with peginterferon-based therapy is costly (up to
$30,000 for 24 weeks of therapy with three drugs). Side effects,
including flulike symptoms; psychiatric symptoms (irritability,
depression); thyroid dysfunction; bone marrow suppression; and, in
men, sexual impairment, are common. Discontinuation rates are 15–
30% and higher in persons over age 60 years than in younger
patients. Sustained response rates decline if <60% of the cumulative
dose is taken. A blood count is obtained at weeks 1, 2, and 4 after
therapy is started and monthly thereafter. Peginterferon alfa is
contraindicated in pregnant or breast-feeding patients and those
with decompensated cirrhosis, profound cytopenias, severe
psychiatric disorders, autoimmune diseases, or an inability to self-
administer treatment. HCV treatment can be successful in carefully
selected persons who continue to inject illicit drugs if they are
managed by a multidisciplinary team. In patients with severe chronic
kidney disease, the doses of peginterferon and ribavirin must be
reduced. Patients taking ribavirin must be monitored for hemolysis.
Variants in the ITPA gene that result in deficiency of inosine
triphosphatase have been shown to protect against ribavirin-induced
hemolytic anemia and decrease the need for reductions in dose.
Men and women taking the drug must practice strict contraception
until 6 months after conclusion of therapy because of teratogenic
effects in animals. Ribavirin should be used with caution in persons
over age 65 years and in others in whom hemolysis could pose a
risk of angina or stroke. Rash, itching, headache, cough, and
shortness of breath also occur with the drug. Lactic acidosis is a
concern in patients also taking highly active antiretroviral therapy for
HIV infection. Telaprevir can cause a troubling skin rash that
requires discontinuation of the drug in up to 12% of patients,
gastrointestinal distress, and anemia. The major side effects of
boceprevir are anemia, nausea, vomiting, and dysgeusia.
Erythropoietin (epoetin alfa) and granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (filgrastim) may be used to treat therapy-induced anemia and
leukopenia. Peginterferon alfa is generally contraindicated in heart,
lung, and kidney transplant recipients because of an increased risk
of organ rejection. Selected liver transplant recipients with recurrent
hepatitis C may be treated with peginterferon and ribavirin, but
response rates are low; the benefit of adding a protease inhibitor is
uncertain.
In patients with advanced fibrosis who are nonresponders to
peginterferon-based therapy, long-term maintenance treatment with
peginterferon as a strategy to prevent histologic progression and
reduce the risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma has been
shown to be ineffective. Antiviral agents under study include other
pro-tease inhibitors; polymerase inhibitors; virus entry, assembly,
and secretion inhibitors; RNA interference sequences; cyclophilin
inhibitors; and therapeutic vaccines. In the future, it is anticipated
that the use of combinations of oral direct antiviral agents will
obviate the need for peginterferon.
 Prognosis
Chronic hepatitis C is an indolent, often subclinical disease that may
lead to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma after decades. The
overall mortality rate in patients with transfusion-associated hepatitis
C may be no different from that of an age-matched control
population. Nevertheless, mortality rates clearly rise once cirrhosis
develops, and mortality from cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma
due to hepatitis C is rising. There is some evidence that HCV
genotype 1b is associated with a higher risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma than other genotypes. Peginterferon-based therapy
appears to have a beneficial effect on survival and quality of life, is
cost-effective, appears to retard and even reverse fibrosis, and in
responders may reduce the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. The
risk of mortality from drug addiction is higher than that for liver
disease in patients with chronic hepatitis C.
 When to Refer
 
•    For liver biopsy.
•    For antiviral therapy.
 When to Admit
 
•    For complications of decompensated cirrhosis.
Lok AS. Drug therapy: tenofovir. Hepatology. 2010
Aug;52(2):743–7. [PMID: 20597070]
 
McHutchison JG et al; PROVE3 Study Team. Telaprevir for
previously treated chronic HCV infection. N Engl J Med. 2010
Apr 8;362(14):1292–303. [PMID: 20375406]
 
Reijnders JG et al. Nucleos(t)ide analogues only induce temporary
hepatitis B e antigen seroconversion in most patients with chronic
hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2010 Aug;139(2):491–8. [PMID:
20381492]
 
Thompson AJ et al. Variants in the ITPA gene protect against
ribavirin-induced hemolytic anemia and decrease the need for
ribavirin dose reduction. Gastroenterology. 2010
Oct;139(4):1181–9. [PMID: 20547162]
 
Woo G et al. Tenofovir and entecavir are the most effective anti-
viral agents for chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review and
Bayesian meta-analyses. Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):
1218–29. [PMID: 20600036]
 
AUTOIMMUNE HEPATITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually young to middle-aged women.
 Chronic hepatitis with high serum globulins and characteristic liver
histology.
 Positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) and/or smooth muscle
antibody in most common type.
 Responds to corticosteroids.
 
 General Considerations
Although autoimmune hepatitis is usually seen in young women, it
can occur in either sex at any age. The incidence and prevalence are
estimated to be 8.5 and 107 per million population, respectively.
Affected younger persons are often positive for HLA-B8 and
HLA-DR3; older patients are often positive for HLA-DR4. The
principal susceptibility allele among white Americans and northern
Europeans is HLA DRB1*0301; HLA DRB1*0401 is a secondary
but independent risk factor.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is usually insidious, but up to 40% of cases present with
an acute (occasionally fulminant) attack of hepatitis and some cases
follow a viral illness (such as hepatitis A, Epstein-Barr infection, or
measles) or exposure to a drug or toxin (such as nitrofurantoin,
minocycline, or infliximab). Exacerbations may occur postpartum.
Thirty-four percent of patients are asymptomatic. Typically,
examination reveals a healthy-appearing young woman with multiple
spider nevi, cutaneous striae, acne, hirsutism, and hepatomegaly.
Amenorrhea may be a presenting feature. Extrahepatic features
include arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, thyroiditis, nephritis, ulcerative
colitis, and Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia. Patients with
autoimmune hepatitis are at increased risk for cirrhosis which, in
turn, increases the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (at a rate of
about 1% per year).
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum aminotransferase levels may be >1000 units/L, and the total
bilirubin is usually increased. In type I (classic) autoimmune
hepatitis, ANA or smooth muscle antibodies (either or both) are
detected in serum. Serum γ-globulin levels are typically elevated (up
to 5–6 g/dL [0.05–0.06 g/L]). In patients with the latter, the EIA
for antibody to HCV may be falsely positive. Other antibodies,
including atypical perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(pANCA) and antibodies to histones, may be found. Antibodies to
soluble liver antigen (anti-SLA) characterize a variant of type I that
is marked by severe disease, a high relapse rate after treatment, and
absence of the usual antibodies (ANA and smooth muscle
antibody). Anti-SLA is directed against a transfer RNA complex
responsible for incorporating selenocysteine into peptide chains—
Sep (O-phosphoserine) tRNA:Sec (selenocysteine) tRNA
synthase, or SEPSECS. Type II, seen more often in girls under age
14 in Europe, is characterized by circulating antibody to liver-
kidney microsome type 1 (anti-LKM1)—directed against
cytochrome P450 2D6—without anti-smooth muscle antibody or
ANA. In some cases, anti-liver cytosol type 1, directed against
formiminotransferase cyclodeaminase, is detected. This type of
autoimmune hepatitis can be seen in patients with autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 1. Concurrent primary biliary cirrhosis
or primary sclerosing cholangitis has been recognized in 11% and
5% of patients with autoimmune hepatitis, respectively. Liver biopsy
is indicated to help establish the diagnosis (interface hepatitis is the
hallmark), evaluate disease severity, and determine the need for
treatment.
Simplified diagnostic criteria based on the detection of
autoantibodies (1 or 2 points depending on titers), elevated IgG
levels (1 or 2 points depending on levels), and characteristic
histologic features (1 or 2 points depending on how typical the
features are) and exclusion of viral hepatitis (2 points) can be useful
for diagnosis; a score of 6 indicates probable and a score of 7
indicates definite autoimmune hepatitis with a high degree of
specificity but moderate sensitivity.
 Treatment
Prednisone with or without azathioprine improves symptoms;
decreases the serum bilirubin, aminotransferase, and γ-globulin
levels; and reduces hepatic inflammation. Symptomatic patients with
aminotransferase levels elevated tenfold (or fivefold if the serum
globulins are elevated at least twofold) are optimal candidates for
therapy, and asymptomatic patients with modest enzyme elevations
may be considered for therapy depending on the clinical
circumstances and histologic severity; however, asymptomatic
patients usually remain asymptomatic, have either mild hepatitis or
inactive cirrhosis on liver biopsy specimens, and have a good long-
term prognosis without therapy.
Prednisone is given initially in a dose of 30 mg orally daily with
azathioprine, 50 mg orally daily, which is generally well tolerated
and permits the use of lower corticosteroid doses than a regimen
beginning with prednisone 60 mg orally daily alone. Preliminary
experience suggests that budesonide, 6–9 mg orally daily, may be at
least as effective as prednisone in noncirrhotic autoimmune hepatitis.
Whether patients should undergo testing for the genotype or level of
thiopurine methyltransferase prior to treatment with azathioprine to
predict toxicity is still a matter of debate. Blood counts are
monitored weekly for the first 2 months of therapy and monthly
thereafter because of the small risk of bone marrow suppression.
The dose of prednisone is lowered from 30 mg/d after 1 week to
20 mg/d and again after 2 or 3 weeks to 15 mg/d. Ultimately, a
maintenance dose of 10 mg/d is achieved. While symptomatic
improvement is often prompt, biochemical improvement is more
gradual, with normalization of serum aminotransferase levels after
several months in many cases. Histologic resolution of inflammation
may require 18–24 months, the time at which repeat liver biopsy is
recommended. Failure of aminotransferase levels to normalize
invariably predicts lack of histologic resolution.
The response rate to therapy with prednisone and azathioprine is
80%. Older patients and those with HLA genotype DRB1*04 are
more likely to respond than younger patients and those with HLA
DRB1*03 or hyperbilirubinemia. Fibrosis may reverse with therapy
and rarely progresses after apparent biochemical and histologic
remission. Once remission is achieved, therapy may be withdrawn,
but the subsequent relapse rate is 50–80%. Relapses may again be
treated in the same manner as the initial episode, with the same
remission rate. After successful treatment of a relapse, the patient
may continue taking azathioprine (up to 2 mg/kg) or the lowest dose
of prednisone needed to maintain aminotransferase levels as close
to normal as possible; another attempt at withdrawing therapy may
be considered in patients remaining in remission long term (eg, ≥ 4
years). Prednisone can be used to treat rare flares during
pregnancy, and maintenance azathioprine does not have to be
discontinued.
Nonresponders to corticosteroids and azathioprine (failure of
serum aminotransferase levels to decrease by 50% after 6 months)
may be considered for a trial of cyclosporine, tacrolimus,
methotrexate, or rituximab. Mycophenolate mofetil, 1 g twice daily,
is an effective alternative to azathioprine in patients who cannot
tolerate or do not respond to it. Bone density should be monitored
—particularly in patients receiving maintenance corticosteroid
therapy—and measures undertaken to prevent or treat osteoporosis
(see Chapter 26). Liver transplantation may be required for
treatment failures and patients with a fulminant presentation, but the
outcome may be worse than that for primary biliary cirrhosis
because of an increased rate of infectious complications, and the
disease has been recognized to recur in up to 40% of transplanted
livers (and rarely to develop de novo) as immunosuppression is
reduced; sirolimus can be effective in such cases.
 When to Refer
 
•    For liver biopsy.
•    For immunosuppressive therapy.
 When to Admit
 
•    Hepatic encephalopathy.
•    INR >1.6.
Czaja AJ et al. Advances in the diagnosis, pathogenesis, and
management of autoimmune hepatitis. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;
139(1):58–72.e4. [PMID: 20451521]
 
Friedman LS et al. Case records of the Massachusetts General
Hospital. Case 39-2010. A 19-year-old woman with nausea,
jaundice, and pruritus. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 23;
363(26):2548–57. [PMID: 21175318]
 
Lamers MM et al. Treatment options for autoimmune hepatitis: a
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Hepatol. 2010
Jul;53(1):191–8. [PMID: 20400196]
 
Manns MP et al. Diagnosis and management of autoimmune
hepatitis. Hepatology. 2010 Jun;51(6):2193–213. [PMID:
20513004]
 
Yeoman AD et al. Review article: the modern management of
autoimmune hepatitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010
Apr;31(8):771–87. [PMID: 20096018]
 
ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic alcohol intake usually exceeds 80 g/d in men and 30–40
g/d in women with alcoholic hepatitis or cirrhosis.
 Fatty liver is often asymptomatic.
 Fever, right upper quadrant pain, tender hepatomegaly, and
jaundice characterize alcoholic hepatitis, but the patient may be
asymptomatic.
 AST is usually elevated but usually not above 300 units/L (6
mckat/L); AST is greater than ALT, usually by a factor of 2 or
more.
 Alcoholic hepatitis is often reversible but it is the most common
precursor of cirrhosis in the United states.
 
 General Considerations
Excessive alcohol intake can lead to fatty liver, hepatitis, and
cirrhosis. Alcoholic hepatitis is characterized by acute or chronic
inflammation and parenchymal necrosis of the liver induced by
alcohol. Alcoholic hepatitis is often a reversible disease, is the most
common precursor of cirrhosis in the United States, and is
associated with four to five times the number of hospitalizations and
deaths as hepatitis C, which is the second most common cause of
cirrhosis.
The frequency of alcoholic cirrhosis is estimated to be 10–15%
among persons who consume over 50 g of alcohol (4 oz of 100-
proof whiskey, 15 oz of wine, or four 12-oz cans of beer) daily for
over 10 years (although the risk of cirrhosis may be lower for wine
than for a comparable intake of beer or spirits). The risk of cirrhosis
is lower (5%) in the absence of other cofactors such as chronic viral
hepatitis and obesity. Genetic factors, including polymorphisms of
the genes encoding tumor necrosis factor and cytochrome P450
2E1, may also account for differences in susceptibility. Women
appear to be more susceptible than men, in part because of lower
gastric mucosal alcohol dehydrogenase levels. Over 80% of
patients with alcoholic hepatitis have been drinking 5 years or more
before symptoms that can be attributed to liver disease develop; the
longer the duration of drinking (10–15 or more years) and the larger
the alcoholic consumption, the greater the probability of developing
alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis. In individuals who drink alcohol
excessively, the rate of ethanol metabolism can be sufficiently high
to permit the consumption of large quantities without raising the
blood alcohol level over 80 mg/dL.
Deficiencies in vitamins and calories probably contribute to the
development of alcoholic hepatitis and its progression to cirrhosis.
Many adverse effects of alcohol on the liver are thought to be
mediated by tumor necrosis factor and by the oxidative metabolite
acetaldehyde, which contributes to lipid peroxidation and induction
of an immune response following covalent binding to proteins in the
liver.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical presentation of alcoholic liver disease can vary from
asymptomatic hepatomegaly to a rapidly fatal acute illness or end-
stage cirrhosis. A recent period of heavy drinking, complaints of
anorexia and nausea, and the demonstration of hepatomegaly and
jaundice strongly suggest the diagnosis. Abdominal pain and
tenderness, splenomegaly, ascites, fever, and encephalopathy may
be present. Infection is common in patients with severe alcoholic
hepatitis.
B. Laboratory Findings
In patients with steatosis, mild liver enzyme elevations may be the
only laboratory abnormality. Anemia (usually macrocytic) may be
present. Leukocytosis with a shift to the left is common in patients
with severe alcoholic hepatitis. Leukopenia is occasionally seen and
resolves after cessation of drinking. About 10% of patients have
thrombocytopenia related to a direct toxic effect of alcohol on
megakaryocyte production or to hypersplenism.
AST is usually elevated but infrequently above 300 units/L (6
mckat/L). AST is greater than ALT, usually by a factor of 2 or
more. Serum alkaline phosphatase is generally elevated, but seldom
more than three times the normal value. Serum bilirubin is increased
in 60–90% of patients with alcoholic hepatitis.
Serum bilirubin levels >10 mg/dL (171 mcmol/L) and marked
prolongation of the prothrombin time (≥6 seconds above control)
indicate severe alcoholic hepatitis with a mortality rate as high as
50%. The serum albumin is depressed, and the γ-globulin level is
elevated in 50–75% of individuals, even in the absence of cirrhosis.
Increased transferrin saturation, hepatic iron stores, and
sideroblastic anemia are found in many alcoholic patients. Folic acid
deficiency may coexist.
C. Imaging
Imaging studies can detect moderate to severe hepatic steatosis
reliably but not inflammation or fibrosis. Ultrasonography helps
exclude biliary obstruction and identifies subclinical ascites. CT with
intravenous contrast or MRI may be indicated in selected cases to
evaluate patients for collateral vessels, space-occupying lesions of
the liver, or concomitant disease of the pancreas.
D. Liver Biopsy
Liver biopsy, if done, demonstrates macrovesicular fat and, in
patients with alcoholic hepatitis, polymorphonuclear infiltration with
hepatic necrosis, Mallory (or Mallory-Denk) bodies (alcoholic
hyaline), and perivenular and perisinusoidal fibrosis. Micronodular
cirrhosis may be present as well. The findings are identical to those
of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Alcoholic hepatitis may be closely mimicked by cholecystitis and
cholelithiasis and by drug toxicity. Other causes of hepatitis or
chronic liver disease may be excluded by serologic or biochemical
testing, by imaging studies, or by liver biopsy. A formula based on
the AST/ALT ratio, body mass index, mean corpuscular volume,
and gender has been reported to reliably distinguish alcoholic liver
disease from nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Abstinence from alcohol is essential. Naltrexone or acamprosate
may be considered in combination with counseling to reduce the
likelihood of recidivism. Fatty liver is quickly reversible with
abstinence. Every effort should be made to provide sufficient
amounts of carbohydrates and calories in anorectic patients to
reduce endogenous protein catabolism, promote gluconeogenesis,
and prevent hypoglycemia. Nutritional support (40 kcal/kg with
1.5–2 g/kg as protein) improves liver disease, but not necessarily
survival, in patients with malnutrition. Use of liquid formulas rich in
branched-chain amino acids does not improve survival beyond that
achieved with less expensive caloric supplementation. The
administration of vitamins, particularly folic acid, thiamine, and zinc,
is indicated, especially when deficiencies are noted; glucose
administration increases the vitamin B1 requirement and can
precipitate Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome if thiamine is not
coadministered.
B. Pharmacologic Measures
Methylprednisolone, 32 mg/d orally, or the equivalent, for 1 month,
may reduce short-term mortality in patients with alcoholic hepatitis
and either encephalopathy or a discriminant function (defined by the
patient's prothrombin time minus the control prothrombin time times
4.6 plus the total bilirubin in mg/dL) is >32. Failure of the serum
bilirubin level to decline after 7 days of treatment predicts
nonresponse and poor long-term survival, as does the Lille model,
which includes age, serum creatinine, serum albumin, prothrombin
time (or INR), serum bilirubin on admission, and serum bilirubin on
day 7. No benefit has been demonstrated in patients with
concomitant gastrointestinal bleeding, but infection should not
preclude treatment with corticosteroids if otherwise indicated.
Pentoxifylline—an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor—400 mg
orally three times daily for 4 weeks, may reduce 1-month mortality
rates in patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis, primarily by
decreasing the risk of hepatorenal syndrome. It is often used when
corticosteroids are contraindicated. Other experimental therapies
include corticosteroids plus N-acetylcysteine, propylthiouracil,
oxandrolone, S-adenosyl-L-methionine, infliximab, anti-oxidants,
and extracorporeal liver support. Colchicine does not reduce
mortality in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, and etanercept may
increase mortality after 6 months.
 Prognosis
A. Short-Term
The overall mortality rate is 34% (20% within 1 month) without
corticosteroid therapy. Individuals in whom the prothrombin time
prohibits liver biopsy have a 42% mortality rate at 1 year. Other
unfavorable prognostic factors are a serum bilirubin >10 mg/dL
(171 mcmol/L), hepatic encephalopathy, azotemia, leukocytosis,
lack of response to corticosteroid therapy, and possibly little
steatosis on a liver biopsy specimen and reversal of portal blood
flow by Doppler ultrasonography. In addition to the discriminant
function discussed above, the MELD score used for cirrhosis (see
later) and the Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis score (based on age,
white blood cell count, blood urea nitrogen, prothrombin time ratio,
and bilirubin level) correlate with mortality from alcoholic hepatitis
and have higher specificities. A scoring system based on age, serum
bilirubin, INR, and serum creatinine (ABIC) has been proposed.
B. Long-Term
Overall mortality from alcoholic liver disease has declined slightly in
the United States since 1980. Nevertheless, the 3-year mortality
rate of persons who recover from acute alcoholic hepatitis is ten
times greater than that of control individuals of comparable age; the
5-year mortality rate is as high as 85%. Histologically severe
disease is associated with continued excessive mortality rates after 3
years, whereas the death rate is not increased after the same period
in those whose liver biopsies show only mild alcoholic hepatitis.
Complications of portal hypertension (ascites, variceal bleeding,
hepatorenal syndrome), coagulopathy, and severe jaundice
following recovery from acute alcoholic hepatitis also suggest a
poor long-term prognosis. Alcoholic cirrhosis is a risk factor for
hepatocellular carcinoma, and the risk is highest in carriers of the
C282Y mutation for hemochromatosis or those with increased
hepatic iron.
The most important prognostic consideration is continued
excessive drinking. A 6-month period of abstinence is generally
required before liver transplantation is considered, although this
requirement has been questioned. Optimal candidates have
adequate social support, do not smoke, have no psychosis or
personality disorder, are adherent to therapy, and have regular
appointments with a psychiatrist or psychologist who specializes in
addiction treatment. Patients with alcoholic liver disease are at
higher risk for posttransplant malignancy than those with other types
of liver disease because of alcohol and tobacco use.
 When to Refer
Refer patients with alcoholic hepatitis who require liver biopsy for
diagnosis.
 When to Admit
 
•    Hepatic encephalopathy.
•    INR >1.6.
•    Total bilirubin ≥10 mg/dL.
•    Inability to maintain hydration.
Jepsen P et al. Clinical course of alcoholic liver cirrhosis: a Danish
population-based cohort study. Hepatology. 2010
May;51(5):1675–82. [PMID: 20186844]
 
Mathurin P et al. Corticosteroids improve short-term survival in
patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis: meta-analysis of individual
patient data. Gut. 2010 Oct 12. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
20940288]
 
O'Shea RS et al; Practice Guideline Committee of the American
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases; Practice Parameters
Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology.
Alcoholic liver disease. Hepatology. 2010 Jan;51(1):307–28.
[PMID: 20034030]
Paula H et al. Alcoholic liver disease-related mortality in the United
States: 1980–2003. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Aug;
105(8):1782–7. [PMID: 20179691]
 
DRUG- & TOXIN-INDUCED LIVER DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Drug-induced liver disease can mimic viral hepatitis, biliary tract
obstruction, or other types of liver disease.
 Clinicians must inquire about the use of many widely used
therapeutic agents, including over-the-counter “natural” and
herbal products, in any patient with liver disease.
 
 General Considerations
Many therapeutic agents may cause hepatic injury. The medications
most commonly implicated are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
and antibiotics because of their widespread use. Drug-induced liver
disease can mimic viral hepatitis, biliary tract obstruction, or other
types of liver disease. In any patient with liver disease, the clinician
must inquire carefully about the use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs
or exposure to hepatotoxins, including over-the-counter “natural”
and herbal products. In some cases, coadministration of a second
agent may increase the toxicity of the first (eg, isoniazid and
rifampin, acetaminophen and alcohol). A relationship between
increased serum ALT levels in premarketing clinical trials and
postmarketing reports of hepatotoxicity has been identified. Drug
toxicity may be categorized on the basis of pathogenesis or
histologic appearance.
1. Direct Hepatotoxic Group
The liver lesion caused by this group of drugs is characterized by:
(1) dose-related severity, (2) a latent period following exposure,
and (3) susceptibility in all individuals. Examples include
acetaminophen (toxicity is enhanced by fasting and chronic alcohol
use because of depletion of glutathione and induction of cytochrome
P450 2E1 and possibly reduced by statins, fibrates, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), alcohol, carbon tetrachloride,
chloroform, heavy metals, mercaptopurine, niacin, plant alkaloids,
phosphorus, pyrazinamide, tetracyclines, tipranavir, valproic acid,
and vitamin A. Statins, like all cholesterol-lowering agents, may
cause serum aminotransferase elevations but rarely cause true
hepatitis and are no longer considered contraindicated in patients
with liver disease.
2. Idiosyncratic Reactions
Except for acetaminophen, most severe hepatotoxicity is
idiosyncratic. Reactions of this type are: (1) sporadic, (2) not
related to dose, and (3) occasionally associated with features
suggesting an allergic reaction, such as fever and eosinophilia, which
may be associated with a favorable outcome. In many instances,
toxicity results directly from a metabolite that is produced only in
certain individuals on a genetic basis. Toxicity may be observed
only on post-marketing surveillance and not during preclinical trials.
Examples include abacavir, amiodarone, aspirin, carbamazepine,
chloramphenicol, diclofenac, disulfiram, duloxetine, ezetimibe,
flutamide, 
halothane, 
isoniazid, 
ketoconazole, 
lamotrigine,
methyldopa, 
natalizumab, 
nevirapine, 
oxacillin, 
phenytoin,
pyrazinamide, quinidine, streptomycin, thiazolidinediones, and
perhaps tacrine.
3. Cholestatic Reactions
A. Noninflammatory
Drug-induced cholestasis results from inhibition or genetic
deficiency of various hepatobiliary transporter systems. The
following drugs cause cholestasis: anabolic steroids containing an
alkyl or ethinyl group at carbon 17, azathioprine, diclofenac,
indinavir (increased risk of indirect hyperbilirubinemia in patients
with Gilbert syndrome), cyclosporine, estrogens, mercaptopurine,
methyltestosterone, and ticlopidine.
B. Inflammatory
The following drugs cause inflammation of portal areas with bile
duct injury (cholangitis), often with allergic features such as
eosinophilia: amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (among the most common
causes of drug-induced liver injury), azathioprine, azithromycin,
captopril, 
cephalosporins, 
chlorothiazide, 
chlorpromazine,
chlorpropamide, erythromycin, mercaptopurine, penicillamine,
prochlorperazine, semisynthetic penicillins (eg, cloxacillin), and
sulfadiazine. Cholestatic and mixed cholestatic hepatocellular
toxicity is more likely than pure hepatocellular toxicity to lead to
chronic liver disease.
4. Acute or Chronic Hepatitis
Medications that may result in acute or chronic hepatitis that is
histologically—and in some cases clinically—indistinguishable from
autoimmune hepatitis include aspirin, isoniazid (increased risk in
HBV and HCV carriers), methyldopa, minocycline, nitrofurantoin,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, propylthiouracil, and
terbinafine. Hepatitis also can occur in patients taking cocaine,
diclofenac, methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; Ecstasy),
efavirenz, imatinib mesylate, nafazodone (has a black box warning
for a potential to cause liver failure), nevirapine (like other protease
inhibitors, increased risk in HBV and HCV carriers), pioglitazone,
ritonavir (greater rate than other protease inhibitors), rosiglitazone,
saquinavir, sulfonamides, telithromycin, and zafirlukast as well as a
variety of alternative remedies (eg, chaparral, germander, green tea
extracts, Herbalife products, hydroxycut, jin bu huan, kava,
skullcap, and possibly black cohosh). In patients with jaundice due
to drug-induced hepatitis, the mortality rate without liver
transplantation is at least 10%.
5. Other Reactions
A. Fatty Liver
1. Macrovesicular—This type of liver injury may be produced by
alcohol, amiodarone, corticosteroids, methotrexate, irinotecan,
tamoxifen, vinyl chloride (in exposed workers), zalcitabine, and
possibly oxaliplatin.
2. Microvesicular—Often resulting from mitochondrial injury, this
condition is associated with didanosine, stavudine, tetracyclines,
valproic acid, and zidovudine.
B. Granulomas
Allopurinol, quinidine, quinine, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, and
pyrazinamide can lead to granulomas.
C. Fibrosis and Cirrhosis
Methotrexate and vitamin A are associated with fibrosis and
cirrhosis.
D. Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome (Veno-occlusive Disease)
This disorder may result from treatment with antineoplastic agents
(eg, pre-bone marrow transplant, oxaliplatin), and pyrrolizidine
alkaloids (eg, Comfrey).
E. Peliosis Hepatis (Blood-Filled Cavities)
Peliosis hepatis may be caused by anabolic steroids and oral
contraceptive steroids as well as azathioprine and mercaptopurine,
which may also cause nodular regenerative hyperplasia.
F. Neoplasms
Neoplasms may result from therapy with oral contraceptive
steroids, including estrogens (hepatic adenoma but not focal nodular
hyperplasia); and vinyl chloride (angiosarcoma).
 When to Refer
Refer patients with drug- and toxin-induced hepatitis who require
liver biopsy for diagnosis.
 When to Admit
Patients with liver failure should be hospitalized.
Agarwal VK et al; Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network. Important
elements for the diagnosis of drug-induced liver injury. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 May;8(5):463–70. [PMID:
20170750]
 
Björnsson E. Review article: drug-induced liver injury in clinical
practice. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Jul;32(1):3–13. [PMID:
20374223]
 
Llanos L et al. The existence of a relationship between increased
serum alanine aminotransferase levels detected in premarketing
clinical trials and postmarketing published hepatotoxicity case
reports. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Jun;31(12): 1337–45.
[PMID: 20331578]
 
Núñez M. Clinical syndromes and consequences of antiretroviral-
related hepatotoxicity. Hepatology. 2010 Sep;52(3):1143–55.
[PMID: 20812358]
 
Senousy BE et al. Hepatotoxic effects of therapies for tuberculosis.
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Oct;7(10):543–56. [PMID:
20808293]
 
NONALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often asymptomatic.
 Elevated aminotransferase levels and/or hepatomegaly.
 Macrovesicular and/or microvesicular steatosis with or without
inflammation and fibrosis on liver biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is estimated to affect 20–
30% of the US population. Causes of NAFLD are obesity (present
in ≥ 40%), diabetes mellitus (in ≥ 20%), hypertriglyceridemia (in ≥
20%), corticosteroids, amiodarone, diltiazem, tamoxifen, irinotecan,
oxaliplatin, highly active antiretroviral therapy, toxins (vinyl chloride,
carbon tetrachloride, yellow phosphorus), endocrinopathies such as
Cushing syndrome and hypopituitarism, polycystic ovary syndrome,
hypobetalipoproteinemia and other metabolic disorders, obstructive
sleep apnea, excessive dietary fructose consumption, starvation and
refeeding syndrome, and total parenteral nutrition. Genetic factors,
including polymorphisms of the gene that encodes apolipoprotein
C3, are likely to play a role. The risk of NAFLD is increased in
persons with psoriasis and appears to correlate with the activity of
psoriasis. Soft drink consumption has been reported to be
associated with NAFLD. Steatosis is nearly universal in obese
alcoholic patients and is a hallmark of insulin resistance (metabolic
syndrome), which is characterized by obesity, diabetes,
hypertriglyceridemia, and hypertension. The risk of fatty liver in
persons with metabolic syndrome is 4 to 11 times higher than that of
persons without insulin resistance. Physical activity protects against
the development of NAFLD. In addition to macrovesicular
steatosis, histologic features may include focal infiltration by
polymorphonuclear neutrophils and Mallory hyalin, a picture
indistinguishable from that of alcoholic hepatitis and referred to as
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), which affects 3–5% of the
US population. In patients with NAFLD, older age, obesity, and
diabetes mellitus are risk factors for advanced hepatic fibrosis and
cirrhosis. Cirrhosis caused by NASH appears to be uncommon in
African Americans.
Microvesicular steatosis is seen with Reye syndrome, didanosine
toxicity, valproic acid toxicity, high-dose tetracycline, or acute fatty
liver of pregnancy and may result in fulminant hepatic failure.
Women in whom fatty liver of pregnancy develops often have a
defect in fatty acid oxidation due to reduced long-chain 3-
hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with NAFLD are asymptomatic or have mild right
upper quadrant discomfort. Hepatomegaly is present in up to 75%
of patients, but stigmata of chronic liver disease are uncommon.
Rare instances of subacute liver failure caused by previously
unrecognized NASH have been described.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory studies may show mildly elevated aminotransferase and
alkaline phosphatase levels; however, laboratory values may be
normal in up to 80% of persons with hepatic steatosis. In contrast
to alcoholic liver disease, the ratio of ALT to AST is almost always
>1 in NAFLD, but it decreases to <1 as advanced fibrosis and
cirrhosis develop. Antinuclear or smooth muscle antibodies and an
elevated serum ferritin level may each be detected in one-fourth of
patients with NASH.
C. Imaging
Macrovascular steatosis may be demonstrated on ultrasonography,
CT, or MRI. However, imaging does not distinguish steatosis from
steatohepatitis. Where available, magnetic resonance spectroscopy
allows hepatic fat content to be quantitated, and transient
elastography to assess liver stiffness can be used to estimate hepatic
fibrosis.
D. Liver Biopsy
Percutaneous liver biopsy is diagnostic and is the standard
approach to assessing the degree of inflammation and fibrosis. The
risks of the procedure must be balanced against the impact of the
added information on management decisions and assessment of
prognosis. The histologic spectrum includes fatty liver, isolated
portal fibrosis, steatohepatitis, and cirrhosis. A risk score for
predicting advanced fibrosis, known as BARD, is based on body
mass index >28, AST/ALT ratio ≥ 0.8, and diabetes mellitus; it has
a 96% negative predictive value (ie, a low score reliably excludes
advanced fibrosis). Another risk score for advanced fibrosis based
on age, hyperglycemia, body mass index, platelet count, albumin,
and AST/ALT ratio has a positive predictive value of over 80%. A
clinical scoring system to predict the likelihood of NASH in
morbidly obese persons includes six predictive factors:
hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, sleep apnea, AST >27
units/L (0.54 mckat/L), ALT >27 units/L (0.54 mckat/L), and non-
black race.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of removing or modifying the offending factors.
Weight loss, dietary fat restriction, and exercise (through reduction
of abdominal obesity) often lead to improvement in liver tests and
steatosis in obese patients with NAFLD. Various drugs are under
study. Thiazolidinediones reverse insulin resistance and, in most
relevant studies, have improved both serum aminotransferase levels
and histologic features of steatohepatitis but lead to weight gain.
Vitamin E (to reduce oxidative stress) also appears to be of benefit.
Metformin, which reduces insulin resistance, improves abnormal
liver chemistries but may not reliably improve liver histology.
Pentoxifylline, which inhibits tumor necrosis factor, improves liver
biochemical test levels but is associated with a high rate of side
effects, particularly nausea. Betaine (a methyl donor) does not
appear to be of benefit. Ursodeoxycholic acid, 12–15 mg/kg/d, has
not consistently resulted in biochemical and histologic improvement
in patients with NASH but may be effective when given in
combination with vitamin E. Hepatic steatosis due to total parenteral
nutrition may be ameliorated—and perhaps prevented—with
supplemental choline. Other agents under study include orlistat, an
inhibitor of gastrointestinal lipases; recombinant human leptin;
glucagon-like protein-1-receptor agonists, which promote insulin
secretion; L-carnitine, which regulates the turnover of fatty acids in
phospholipid membranes; omega-3 fatty acids, which alter hepatic
gene expression to favor fatty acid oxidation over lipogenesis; and
losartan, an angiotensin antagonist. Statins are not contraindicated in
persons with NAFLD. Gastric bypass may be considered in
patients with a body mass index >35 and leads to improvement in
hepatic steatosis.
 Prognosis
Fatty liver often has a benign course and is readily reversible with
discontinuation of alcohol (or no more than one glass of wine per
day) or treatment of other underlying conditions; if untreated,
cirrhosis develops in 1–3% of patients. In patients with NAFLD,
the likelihood of NASH is increased by the following factors:
obesity, older age, non–African American ethnicity, female sex,
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, higher AST level, higher AST/ALT
ratio, and low platelet count. NASH may be associated with
hepatic fibrosis in 40% of cases; cirrhosis develops in 9–25%; and
decompensated cirrhosis occurs in 30–50% of cirrhotic patients
over 10 years. The course may be more aggressive in diabetic
persons than in nondiabetic persons. Mortality is increased in
patients with NAFLD and is more likely to be the result of
malignancy and ischemic heart disease than liver disease. Risk
factors for mortality are older age, male gender, white race, higher
body mass index, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cirrhosis.
Steatosis is a cofactor for the progression of fibrosis in patients with
other causes of chronic liver disease, such as hepatitis C.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is a complication of cirrhosis caused by
NASH as it is for other causes of cirrhosis. NASH accounts for a
substantial percentage of cases labeled as cryptogenic cirrhosis and
can recur following liver transplantation. Central obesity is an
independent risk factor for death from cirrhosis of any cause.
 When to Refer
Refer patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease who require
liver biopsy for diagnosis.
Lewis JR. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a review and update.
Dig Dis Sci. 2010 Mar;55(3):560–78. [PMID: 20101463]
 
Musso G et al. A meta-analysis of randomized trials for the
treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2010
Jul;52(1):79–104. [PMID: 20578268]
 
Promrat K et al. Randomized controlled trial testing the effects of
weight loss on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology. 2010
Jan;51(1):121–9. [PMID: 19827166]
 
Rakoski MO et al. Meta-analysis: insulin sensitizers for the
treatment of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther. 2010 Nov;32(10):1211–21. [PMID: 20955440]
 
Sanyal AJ et al; NASH CRN. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo
for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2010 May
6;362(18):1675–85. [PMID: 20427778]
 
CIRRHOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 End result of injury that leads to both fibrosis and nodular
regeneration.
 May be reversible if cause is removed.
 The clinical features result from hepatic cell dysfunction,
portosystemic shunting, and portal hypertension.
 
 General Considerations
Cirrhosis, the twelfth leading cause of death in the United States, is
the end result of hepatocellular injury that leads to both fibrosis and
nodular regeneration throughout the liver. Causes include chronic
viral hepatitis, alcohol, drug toxicity, autoimmune and metabolic liver
diseases, and miscellaneous disorders. Many patients have more
than one risk factor (eg, chronic hepatitis and alcohol use). Mexican
Americans and African Americans have a higher frequency of
cirrhosis than whites because of a higher rate of risk factors. In
persons at increased risk for liver injury (eg, heavy alcohol use,
obesity, iron overload), higher coffee and tea consumption has been
reported to reduce the risk of cirrhosis. Hospitalization rates for
cirrhosis and portal hypertension are rising in the United States. The
risk of hospitalization or death due to cirrhosis has been reported to
correlate with protein and cholesterol consumption and with
hyperuricemia and inversely with carbohydrate consumption.
The most common histologic classification divides cirrhosis into
micronodular, macronodular, and mixed forms. These are
descriptive terms rather than separate diseases, and each form may
be seen in the same patient at different stages of the disease. In
micronodular cirrhosis—typical of alcoholic liver disease (Laennec
cirrhosis)—the regenerating nodules are no larger than the original
lobules, ie, approximately 1 mm in diameter or less. Macronodular
cirrhosis is characterized by larger nodules, which can measure
several centimeters in diameter and may contain central veins. This
form corresponds more or less to post-necrotic (posthepatitic)
cirrhosis but does not necessarily follow episodes of massive
necrosis and stromal collapse. Clinically, cirrhosis is considered to
progress through three stages: compensated, compensated with
varices, and decompensated (ascites, variceal bleeding,
encephalopathy, or jaundice).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical features of cirrhosis result from hepatocyte dysfunction,
portosystemic shunting, and portal hypertension. Patients may have
no symptoms for long periods. The onset of symptoms may be
insidious or, less often, abrupt. Weakness, fatigability, disturbed
sleep, muscle cramps, and weight loss are common. In advanced
cirrhosis, anorexia is usually present and may be extreme, with
associated nausea and occasional vomiting. Abdominal pain may be
present and is related either to hepatic enlargement and stretching of
Glisson capsule or to the presence of ascites. Menstrual
abnormalities (usually amenorrhea), erectile dysfunction, loss of
libido, sterility, and gynecomastia in men may occur. Hematemesis
is the presenting symptom in 15–25%.
Skin manifestations consist of spider angioma (invariably on the
upper half of the body), palmar erythema (mottled redness of the
thenar and hypothenar eminences), and Dupuytren contractures.
Evidence of vitamin deficiencies (glossitis and cheilosis) is common.
Weight loss, wasting, and the appearance of chronic illness are
present. Jaundice—usually not an initial sign—is mild at first,
increasing in severity during the later stages of the disease. In 70%
of cases, the liver is enlarged, palpable, and firm if not hard and has
a sharp or nodular edge; the left lobe may predominate.
Splenomegaly is present in 35–50% of cases and is associated with
an increased risk of complications of portal hypertension. The
superficial veins of the abdomen and thorax are dilated, reflecting
the intrahepatic obstruction to portal blood flow, as do rectal
varices (hemorrhoids). The abdominal wall veins fill from below
when compressed. Ascites, pleural effusions, peripheral edema, and
ecchymoses are late findings. Encephalopathy characterized by
day–night reversal, asterixis, tremor, dysarthria, delirium,
drowsiness, and ultimately coma also occurs late except when
precipitated by an acute hepatocellular insult or an episode of
gastrointestinal bleeding. Fever may be a presenting symptom in up
to 35% of patients and usually reflects associated alcoholic
hepatitis, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, or intercurrent infection.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory abnormalities are either absent or minimal in early or
compensated cirrhosis. Anemia, a frequent finding, is often
macrocytic; causes include suppression of erythropoiesis by alcohol
as well as folate deficiency, hemolysis, hypersplenism, and occult or
overt blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract. The white blood cell
count may be low, reflecting hypersplenism, or high, suggesting
infection; thrombocytopenia, the most common cytopenia in
cirrhotic patients, is secondary to alcoholic marrow suppression,
sepsis, folate deficiency, or splenic sequestration. Prolongation of
the prothrombin time may result from reduced levels of clotting
factors (except factor VIII). However, bleeding risk correlates
poorly with the prothrombin time because of concomitant
abnormalities of fibrinolysis, and among hospitalized patients under
age 45, cirrhosis is associated with an increased risk of venous
thromboembolism.
Blood chemistries reflect hepatocellular injury and dysfunction,
manifested by modest elevations of AST and alkaline phosphatase
and progressive elevation of the bilirubin. Serum albumin decreases
as the disease progresses; γ-globulin is increased and may be as
high as in autoimmune hepatitis. The risk of diabetes mellitus is
increased in patients with cirrhosis, particularly when associated
with HCV infection, alcoholism, hemochromatosis, and NAFLD.
Vitamin D deficiency has been reported in as many as 91% of
patients with cirrhosis. Patients with alcoholic cirrhosis may have
elevated serum cardiac troponin I and brain natriuretic peptide
levels. Blunted cardiac inotropic and chronotropic responses to
exercise, stress, and drugs, as well as systolic and diastolic
ventricular 
dysfunction 
(“cirrhotic 
cardiomyopathy”) 
and
prolongation of the QT interval in the setting of a hyperkinetic
circulation, are common in cirrhosis of all causes, but overt heart
failure is rare in the absence of alcoholism. Relative adrenal
insufficiency appears to be common in patients with advanced
cirrhosis, even in the absence of sepsis.
Liver biopsy may show inactive cirrhosis (fibrosis with
regenerative nodules) with no specific features to suggest the
underlying cause. Alternatively, there may be additional features of
alcoholic liver disease, chronic hepatitis, NASH, or other specific
causes of cirrhosis. Combinations of routine blood tests (eg, AST,
platelet count), including the FibroSure test, and serum markers of
hepatic fibrosis (eg, hyaluronic acid, amino-terminal propeptide of
type III collagen, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 1) are
potential alternatives to liver biopsy for the diagnosis or exclusion of
cirrhosis. In persons with chronic hepatitis C, for example, a low
FibroSure score reliably excludes advanced fibrosis, a high score
reliably predicts advanced fibrosis, and intermediate scores are
inconclusive.
C. Imaging
Ultrasonography is helpful for assessing liver size and detecting
ascites or hepatic nodules, including small hepatocellular
carcinomas. Together with a Doppler study, it may establish
patency of the splenic, portal, and hepatic veins. Hepatic nodules
are characterized further by contrast-enhanced CT or MRI.
Nodules suspicious for malignancy may be biopsied under
ultrasound or CT guidance.
D. Other Examinations
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy confirms the presence of varices
and detects specific causes of bleeding in the esophagus, stomach,
and proximal duodenum. Liver biopsy may be performed by
laparoscopy or, in patients with coagulopathy and ascites, by a
transjugular approach. In selected cases, wedged hepatic vein
pressure measurement may establish the presence and cause of
portal hypertension. Transient elastography, which uses ultrasound
to determine liver stiffness, and magnetic resonance elastography
are available in a limited number of centers as noninvasive tests for
cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
 Differential Diagnosis
The most common causes of cirrhosis in the United States are
alcohol and chronic hepatitis C. NAFLD and hepatitis B are also
common causes. Hemochromatosis is the most commonly identified
genetic disorder that causes cirrhosis. Other metabolic diseases that
may lead to cirrhosis include Wilson disease and α1-antitrypsin (α1-
antiprotease) deficiency. Primary biliary cirrhosis occurs more
frequently in women than men. Secondary biliary cirrhosis may
result from chronic biliary obstruction due to a stone, stricture, or
neoplasm. Heart failure and constrictive pericarditis may lead to
hepatic fibrosis (“cardiac cirrhosis”) complicated by ascites and
may be mistaken for other causes of cirrhosis. Hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia can lead to portal hypertension because
of portosystemic shunting and nodular transformation of the liver as
well as high-output heart failure. Many cases of cirrhosis are
“cryptogenic,” in which unrecognized NAFLD may play a role.
Mutations in the gene encoding cytokeratin 8 have been associated
with some cases of cryptogenic cirrhosis.
 Complications
Upper gastrointestinal tract bleeding may occur from varices, portal
hypertensive gastropathy, or gastroduodenal ulcer (see Chapter
15). Varices may also result from portal vein thrombosis, which
may complicate cirrhosis. Liver failure may be precipitated by
alcoholism, surgery, and infection. Hepatic Kupffer cell
(reticuloendothelial) dysfunction and decreased opsonic activity lead
to an increased risk of systemic infection, which increase mortality
fourfold. Osteoporosis occurs in 12–55% of patients with cirrhosis.
The risk of hepatocellular carcinoma is increased greatly in persons
with cirrhosis (see Chapter 39).
 Treatment
A. General Measures
The most important principle of treatment is abstinence from
alcohol. The diet should be palatable, with adequate calories (25–
35 kcal/kg body weight per day in those with compensated
cirrhosis and 35–40 kcal/kg/d in those with malnutrition) and
protein (1–1.2 g/kg/d in those with compensated cirrhosis and 1.5
g/kg/d in those with malnutrition) and, if there is fluid retention,
sodium restriction. In the presence of hepatic encephalopathy,
protein intake should be reduced to no less than 60–80 g/d. The
benefit of using specialized supplements containing branched-chain
amino acids to prevent or treat hepatic encephalopathy or delay
progressive liver failure is uncertain. Vitamin supplementation is
desirable. Patients with cirrhosis should receive the HAV, HBV,
and pneumococcal vaccines and a yearly influenza vaccine. Liver
transplantation in appropriate candidates is curative, and
pharmacologic treatments to halt progression of or even reverse
cirrhosis are being developed.
B. Treatment of Complications
1. Ascites and edema—Diagnostic paracentesis is indicated for
patients with new ascites or who have been hospitalized for a
complication of cirrhosis. Serious complications, including bleeding,
infection, or bowel perforation, occur in 1.6% of procedures and
are associated with therapeutic paracentesis and possibly Child-
Turcotte-Pugh class C, platelet count <50,000/mcL (50 × 109/L),
and alcoholic cirrhosis. In patients with coagulopathy, however,
pre-paracentesis prophylactic transfusions do not appear to be
necessary. In addition to a cell count and culture, the ascitic albumin
level should be determined; a serum-ascites albumin gradient (serum
albumin minus ascitic albumin) ≥ 1.1 suggests portal hypertension.
An elevated ascitic adenosine deaminase level is suggestive of
tuberculous peritonitis, but the sensitivity of the test is reduced in
patients with portal hypertension. Occasionally, cirrhotic ascites is
chylous (rich in triglycerides); other causes of chylous ascites are
malignancy, tuberculosis, and recent abdominal surgery or trauma.
Ascites in patients with cirrhosis results from portal hypertension
(increased hydrostatic pressure); hypoalbuminemia (decreased
oncotic pressure); peripheral vasodilation, perhaps mediated by
endotoxin-induced release of nitric oxide from splanchnic and
systemic vasculature, with resulting increases in renin and
angiotensin levels and sodium retention by the kidneys; impaired
liver inactivation of aldosterone; and increased aldosterone
secretion secondary to increased renin production. In individuals
with ascites, the urinary sodium concentration is often < 10 mEq/L
(10 mmol/L). Free water excretion is also impaired in cirrhosis, and
hyponatremia may develop.
In all patients with cirrhotic ascites, dietary sodium intake may
initially be restricted to 2000 mg/d; the intake of sodium may be
liberalized slightly after diuresis ensues. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs are contraindicated, and angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists should be avoided.
In some patients, ascites diminishes promptly with bed rest and
dietary sodium restriction alone. Fluid intake (800–1000 mL/d) is
often restricted in patients with hyponatremia (serum sodium <125
mEq/L [125 mmol/L]). Treatment of severe hyponatremia (<120
mEq/L [120 mmol/L]) with vasopressin receptor antagonists
(vaptans) is under study.
A. DIURETICS—Spironolactone, generally in combination with
furosemide, should be used in patients who do not respond to salt
restriction. An initial trial of furosemide 80 mg intravenously
demonstrating a rise in urine sodium to 750 mmol in 8 hours may
predict response to diuretic therapy. The dose of spironolactone is
initially 100 mg orally daily and may be increased by 100 mg every
3–5 days (up to a maximal conventional daily dose of 400 mg/d,
although higher doses have been used) until diuresis is achieved,
typically preceded by a rise in the urinary sodium concentration. A
“spot” urine sodium concentration that exceeds the potassium
concentration correlates with a 24-hour sodium excretion >78
mmol/d, which predicts diuresis in patients adherent to a salt-
restricted diet. Monitoring for hyperkalemia is important. In patients
who cannot tolerate spironolactone because of side effects, such as
painful gynecomastia, amiloride (another potassium-sparing diuretic)
may be used in a dose of 5–10 mg orally daily. Diuresis is
augmented by the addition of a loop diuretic such as furosemide.
This potent diuretic, however, will maintain its effect even with a
falling glomerular filtration rate, with resulting prerenal azotemia. The
dose of oral furosemide ranges from 40 mg/d to 160 mg/d, and the
drug should be administered while blood pressure, urinary output,
mental status, and serum electrolytes (especially potassium) are
monitored.
The goal of weight loss in the ascitic patient without associated
peripheral edema should be no more than 1–1.5 lb/d (0.5–0.7
kg/d).
B. LARGE-VOLUME PARACENTESIS—In patients with massive ascites
and respiratory compromise, ascites refractory to diuretics
(“diuretic resistant”), or intolerable diuretic side effects (“diuretic
intractable”), large-volume paracentesis (>5 L) is effective.
Intravenous albumin concomitantly at a dosage of 6–8 g/L of ascites
fluid removed protects the intravascular volume and may prevent
post-paracentesis circulatory dysfunction, although the usefulness of
this practice is debated. Moreover, use of albumin adds
considerable expense. Large-volume paracentesis can be repeated
daily until ascites is largely resolved and may decrease the need for
hospitalization. If possible, diuretics should be continued in the hope
of preventing recurrent ascites.
C. TRANSJUGULAR INTRAHEPATIC PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNT
(TIPS)—TIPS is an effective treatment of variceal bleeding
refractory to standard therapy (eg, endoscopic band ligation or
sclerotherapy) and has shown benefit in the treatment of severe
refractory ascites. The technique involves insertion of an expandable
metal stent between a branch of the hepatic vein and the portal vein
over a catheter inserted via the internal jugular vein. Increased renal
sodium excretion and control of ascites refractory to diuretics can
be achieved in about 75% of selected cases. The success rate is
lower in patients with underlying chronic kidney disease. TIPS
appears to be the treatment of choice for refractory hepatic
hydrothorax (translocation of ascites across the diaphragm to the
pleural space); video-assisted thoracoscopy with pleurodesis using
talc may be effective when TIPS is contraindicated. Complications
of TIPS include hepatic encephalopathy in 20–30% of cases,
infection, shunt stenosis in up to 60% of cases, and shunt occlusion
in up to 30% of cases when bare stents are used; however,
polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stents are associated with long-
term patency rates of 80–90%. Long-term patency usually requires
periodic shunt revisions. In most cases, patency can be maintained
by balloon dilation, local thrombolysis, or placement of an additional
stent. TIPS is particularly useful in patients who require short-term
control of variceal bleeding or ascites until liver transplantation can
be performed. In patients with refractory ascites, TIPS results in
lower rates of ascites recurrence and hepatorenal syndrome but a
higher rate of hepatic encephalopathy than occurs with repeated
large-volume paracentesis; a benefit in survival has been
demonstrated in one study and a meta-analysis. Chronic kidney
disease, diastolic cardiac dysfunction, refractory encephalopathy,
and hyperbilirubinemia (>5 mg/dL [85.5 mcmol/L]) are associated
with mortality after TIPS.
D. PERITONEOVENOUS SHUNTS—Peritoneovenous shunts are
sometimes placed in patients with malignant ascites but are no
longer used for refractory cirrhotic ascites because of a
considerable 
complication 
rate: 
disseminated 
intravascular
coagulation in 65% of patients (25% symptomatic; 5% severe),
bacterial infections in 4–8%, heart failure in 2–4%, and variceal
bleeding from sudden expansion of intravascular volume. TIPS is
now preferred for refractory ascites.
2. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis—Spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis is heralded by abdominal pain, increasing ascites, fever,
and progressive encephalopathy in a patient with cirrhotic ascites;
symptoms are typically mild. (Analogously, spontaneous bacterial
empyema may complicate hepatic hydrothorax and is managed
similarly.) Risk factors in cirrhotic patients with ascites include
gastroesophageal variceal bleeding and possibly use of proton
pump inhibitors. Paracentesis reveals an ascitic fluid with, most
commonly, a total white cell count of up to 500 cells/mcL with a
high percentage of polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) (≥ 250/mcL)
and a protein concentration of 1 g/dL (10 g/L) or less,
corresponding to decreased ascitic opsonic activity. Rapid
diagnosis of bacterial peritonitis can be made with a high degree of
specificity with rapid reagent strips (“dipsticks”) that detect
leukocyte esterase in ascitic fluid, but the sensitivity is too low for
routine use. Cultures of ascites give the highest yield—80–90%
positive—using blood culture bottles inoculated at the bedside.
Common isolates are Escherichia coli and pneumococci. (Gram-
positive cocci are the most common isolates in patients who have
undergone invasive procedures such as central venous line
placement.) Anaerobes are uncommon. Pending culture results, if
there are 250 or more PMNs/mcL or symptoms or signs of
infection, intravenous antibiotic therapy should be initiated with
cefotaxime, 2 g every 8–12 hours for at least 5 days. Ceftriaxone
and amoxicillinclavulanic acid are alternatives. Oral ofloxacin, 400
mg twice daily for 7 days, or, in a patient not already taking a
fluoroquinolone for prophylaxis against bacterial peritonitis, a 2-day
course of intravenous ciprofloxacin, 200 mg twice daily, followed
by oral ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily for 5 days, may be
effective alternative regimens in selected patients. Supplemental
administration of intravenous albumin appears to reduce mortality,
particularly in patients with a serum creatinine > 1 mg/dL (83.3
mcmol/L), blood urea nitrogen > 30 mg/dL (10.8 mmol/L), or total
bilirubin > 4 mg/dL (68.4 mcmol/L). Response to therapy can be
documented, if necessary, by a decrease in the PMN count of at
least 50% on repeat paracentesis 48 hours after initiation of
therapy. The overall mortality rate is high—up to 30% during
hospitalization and up to 70% by 1 year. Patients with cirrhosis and
septic shock have a high frequency of relative adrenal insufficiency,
which if present requires administration of hydrocortisone. In
survivors of bacterial peritonitis, the risk of recurrent peritonitis may
be decreased by long-term norfloxacin, 400 mg orally daily
(although in recurrence the causative organism is often resistant to
fluoroquinolones); ciprofloxacin (eg, 500 mg orally once or twice a
day) or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (eg, one double-strength
tablet five times a week) are possible alternative agents. In high-risk
cirrhotic patients (eg, those with ascitic protein <1.5 g/dL and
serum bilirubin >3 mg/dL (51.3 mcmol/L), serum creatinine >1.2
mg/dL (99.96 mcmol/L), blood urea nitrogen ≥ 25 mg/dL (9
mmol/L), or sodium ≤ 130 mEq/L [130 mmol/L]), the risk of
peritonitis, hepatorenal syndrome, and mortality for at least 1 year
may be reduced by prophylactic norfloxacin, 400 mg orally once a
day. Oral norfloxacin (400 mg orally twice a day) or intravenous
ceftriaxone (1 g per day), which may be preferable, for 7 days
reduces the risk of bacterial peritonitis in patients with acute variceal
bleeding.
3. Hepatorenal syndrome—Hepatorenal syndrome occurs in up
to 10% of patients with advanced cirrhosis and ascites and is
characterized by azotemia (serum creatinine >1.5 mg/dL [124.95
mcmol/L]) in the absence of parenchymal kidney disease or shock
and by failure of kidney function to improve following 2 days of
diuretic withdrawal and volume expansion with albumin, 1 g/kg up
to a maximum of 100 g/d. Oliguria, hyponatremia, and a low urinary
sodium concentration are typical features. Hepatorenal syndrome is
diagnosed only when other causes of acute kidney injury (including
prerenal azotemia and acute tubular necrosis) have been excluded.
Type I hepatorenal syndrome is characterized by doubling of the
serum creatinine to a level >2.5 mg/dL (208.25 mcmol/L) or by
halving of the creatinine clearance to <20 mL/min (0.34 mL/s/1.73
m2 BSA) in < 2 weeks. Type II hepatorenal syndrome is more
slowly progressive and chronic. The pathogenesis involves intense
renal vasoconstriction, possibly because of impaired synthesis of
renal vasodilators such as prostaglandin E2 and decreased total
renal blood flow; histologically, the kidneys are normal. An acute
decrease in cardiac output is often the precipitating event. In
addition to discontinuation of diuretics, clinical improvement and
improvement in short-term survival may follow intravenous infusion
of albumin in combination with one of the following vasoconstrictor
regimens for 7–14 days: oral midodrine, an α-adrenergic drug, plus
the somatostatin analog octreotide, subcutaneously or intravenously;
intravenous terlipressin (a long-acting vasopressin analog that is not
available in the United States but that may be the preferred agent);
or intravenous norepinephrine. Prolongation of survival has been
associated with use of MARS, a modified dialysis method that
selectively removes albumin-bound substances. Improvement and
sometimes normalization of kidney function may also follow
placement of a TIPS. Continuous venovenous hemofiltration and
hemodialysis are of uncertain value in hepatorenal syndrome. Liver
transplantation is the treatment of choice, but many patients die
before a donor liver can be obtained. Mortality correlates with the
MELD score and presence of a systemic inflammatory response.
4. Hepatic encephalopathy—Hepatic encephalopathy is a state
of disordered central nervous system function resulting from failure
of the liver to detoxify noxious agents of gut origin because of
hepatocellular dysfunction and portosystemic shunting. A mutation
in the promoter region of the kidney-type glutaminase gene has
been reported to increase the risk of overt encephalopathy from
about 19% to 40% in patients with cirrhosis. The clinical spectrum
ranges from day-night reversal and mild intellectual impairment to
coma. Patients with minimal hepatic encephalopathy have no
recognizable clinical symptoms but demonstrate mild cognitive and
psychomotor deficits and attention deficit on standardized
psychometric tests and an increased rate of traffic accidents. The
stages of overt encephalopathy are: (1) mild confusion, (2)
drowsiness, (3) stupor, and (4) coma. Ammonia is the most readily
identified and measurable toxin but is not solely responsible for the
disturbed mental status. Central to the pathogenesis is low-grade
cerebral edema and astrocyte swelling accompanied by reduced
cerebral oxygen consumption and increased production of reactive
oxygen and nitrogen oxide species that trigger RNA and protein
modifications and neutrophil dysfunction and thereby affect brain
function. Factors that contribute to cerebral edema are ammonia,
hyponatremia, benzodiazepines, and cytokines. Bleeding into the
intestinal tract may significantly increase the amount of protein in the
bowel and precipitate encephalopathy. Other precipitants include
constipation, alkalosis, and potassium deficiency induced by
diuretics, opioids, hypnotics, and sedatives; medications containing
ammonium or amino compounds; paracentesis with consequent
hypovolemia; hepatic or systemic infection; and portosystemic
shunts (including TIPS). The diagnosis is based primarily on
detection of characteristic symptoms and signs, including asterixis.
The role of neuroimaging studies (eg, cerebral PET, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy) in the diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy
is evolving.
Dietary protein is withheld during acute episodes if the patient
cannot eat. When the patient resumes oral intake, protein intake
should be 60–80 g/d as tolerated; vegetable protein is better
tolerated than meat protein. Gastrointestinal bleeding should be
controlled and blood purged from the gastrointestinal tract. This can
be accomplished with 120 mL of magnesium citrate by mouth or
nasogastric tube every 3–4 hours until the stool is free of gross
blood, or by administration of lactulose. The value of treating
patients with minimal hepatic encephalopathy is uncertain; probiotic
agents may have some benefit.
Lactulose, a nonabsorbable synthetic disaccharide syrup, is
digested by bacteria in the colon to short-chain fatty acids, resulting
in acidification of colon contents. This acidification favors the
formation of ammonium ion in the NH4+ ↔ NH3 + H+ equation;
NH4+ is not absorbable, whereas NH3 is absorbable and thought to
be neurotoxic. Lactulose also leads to a change in bowel flora so
that fewer ammonia-forming organisms are present. When given
orally, the initial dose of lactulose for acute hepatic encephalopathy
is 30 mL three or four times daily. The dose should then be titrated
so that two or three soft stools per day are produced. When rectal
use is indicated because of the patient's inability to take medicines
orally, the dose is 300 mL of lactulose in 700 mL of saline or
sorbitol as a retention enema for 30–60 minutes; it may be repeated
every 4–6 hours. Continued use of lactulose after an episode of
acute encephalopathy reduces the frequency of recurrences. Lactilol
is a less sweet disaccharide alternative available as a powder in
some countries.
The ammonia-producing intestinal flora may also be controlled
with an oral antibiotic. The nonabsorbable agent rifaximin, 550 mg
orally twice daily, is preferred and has been shown as well to
maintain remission from and reduce the risk of rehospitalization for
hepatic encephalopathy over a 6-month period in patients also
taking lactulose. Metronidazole, 250 mg orally three times daily, has
also shown benefit. In the past, neomycin sulfate, 0.5–1 g orally
every 6 or 12 hours for 7 days, was used, but side effects (including
diarrhea, 
malabsorption, 
superinfection, 
ototoxicity, 
and
nephrotoxicity) were frequent, especially after prolonged use.
Patients who do not respond to lactulose alone may improve with a
course of an antibiotic added to treatment with lactulose.
Opioids and sedatives metabolized or excreted by the liver
should be avoided. If agitation is marked, oxazepam, 10–30 mg,
which is not metabolized by the liver, may be given cautiously by
mouth or by nasogastric tube. Zinc deficiency should be corrected,
if present, with oral zinc sulfate, 600 mg/d in divided doses. Sodium
benzoate, 5 g orally twice daily, ornithine aspartate, 9 g orally three
times daily, and L-acyl-carnitine, 4 g orally daily, may lower blood
ammonia levels, but there is less experience with these drugs than
with lactulose. The benzodiazepine competitive antagonist flumazenil
is effective in about 30% of patients with severe hepatic
encephalopathy, but the drug is short-acting and intravenous
administration is required. Use of special dietary supplements
enriched with branched-chain amino acids is usually unnecessary
except in occasional patients who are intolerant of standard protein
supplements. Treatment with acarbose (an α-glucosidase inhibitor)
and L-carnitine (an essential factor in the mitochrondrial transport of
long-chain fatty acids) is under study; other therapies being
evaluated include prebiotic and probiotic agents to modulate gut
flora and extracorporeal albumin dialysis (MARS).
5. Anemia and coagulopathy—For iron deficiency anemia,
ferrous sulfate, 0.3-g enteric-coated tablets, one tablet orally three
times daily after meals, is effective. Folic acid, 1 mg/d orally, is
indicated in the treatment of macrocytic anemia associated with
alcoholism. Transfusions with packed red blood cells may be
necessary to replace blood loss.
Severe hypoprothrombinemia may be treated with vitamin K (eg,
phytonadione, 5 mg orally or subcutaneously daily); however, this
treatment is ineffective when synthesis of coagulation factors is
impaired because of severe hepatic disease. In such cases,
correcting the prolonged prothrombin time requires large volumes of
fresh frozen plasma (see Chapter 13). Because the effect is
transient, plasma infusions are not indicated except for active
bleeding or before an invasive procedure, and even then, the value
of such treatment has been questioned because of concomitant
alterations in anti-hemostatic factors. Use of recombinant activated
factor VIIa may be an alternative, but it is expensive and poses a 1–
2% risk of thrombotic complications. Eltrombopag, an oral
thrombopoietin-receptor agonist, has shown promise in patients
with cirrhosis and severe thrombocytopenia.
6. Hemorrhage from esophageal varices—See Chapter 15.
7. 
Hepatopulmonary 
syndrome 
and 
portopulmonary
hypertension—Shortness of breath in patients with cirrhosis may
result from pulmonary restriction and atelectasis caused by massive
ascites. The hepatopulmonary syndrome—the triad of chronic liver
disease, an increased alveolar-arterial gradient while the patient is
breathing room air, and intrapulmonary vascular dilatations or
arteriovenous communications that result in a right-to-left
intrapulmonary shunt—occurs in 5–32% of patients with cirrhosis.
The syndrome is presumed to result from enhanced pulmonary
production of nitric oxide and polymorphisms in genes involved in
the regulation of angiogenesis but does not correlate with the
degrees of hepatic dysfunction and portal hypertension. Patients
often have greater dyspnea (platypnea) and arterial deoxygenation
(orthodeoxia) in the upright than in the recumbent position. The
diagnosis should be suspected in a cirrhotic patient with a pulse
oximetry level ≤ 96%.
Contrast-enhanced echocardiography is a sensitive screening test
for 
detecting 
pulmonary 
vascular 
dilatations, 
whereas
macroaggregated albumin lung perfusion scanning is more specific
and is used to confirm the diagnosis. High-resolution CT may be
useful for detecting dilated pulmonary vessels that may be amenable
to embolization in patients with severe hypoxemia (PO2 < 60 mm
Hg [7.8 kPa]) who respond poorly to supplemental oxygen.
Medical therapy has been disappointing; experimentally,
intravenous methylene blue, oral garlic powder, and oral norfloxacin
may improve oxygenation by inhibiting nitric oxide-induced
vasodilatation, and pentoxifylline may prevent hepatopulmonary
syndrome by inhibiting production of tumor necrosis factor. Long-
term oxygen therapy is recommended for severely hypoxemic
patients. The syndrome may reverse with liver transplantation,
although postoperative mortality is increased in patients with a
preoperative arterial PO2 < 50 mm Hg (6.5 kPa) or with substantial
intrapulmonary shunting. TIPS may provide palliation in patients
with hepatopulmonary syndrome awaiting transplantation.
Portopulmonary hypertension occurs in 0.7% of patients with
cirrhosis and is thought to result from an excess of circulating
vasoconstrictors, particularly endothelin-1. Female gender and
autoimmune hepatitis have been reported to be risk factors. In
cases confirmed by right-sided heart catheterization, treatment with
the pros-taglandin epoprostenol or the endothelin-receptor
antagonists bosentan or ambrisentan may reduce pulmonary
hypertension and thereby facilitate liver transplantation; β-blockers
worsen exercise capacity and are contraindicated. Liver
transplantation is contraindicated in patients with moderate to
severe pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary pressure > 35 mm
Hg).
C. Liver Transplantation
Liver transplantation is indicated in selected cases of irreversible,
progressive chronic liver disease, acute liver failure, and certain
metabolic diseases in which the metabolic defect is in the liver.
Absolute contraindications include malignancy (except relatively
small hepatocellular carcinomas in a cirrhotic liver), advanced
cardiopulmonary disease (except hepatopulmonary syndrome), and
sepsis. Relative contraindications include age over 70 years, morbid
obesity, portal and mesenteric vein thrombosis, active alcohol or
drug abuse, severe malnutrition, and lack of patient understanding.
With the emergence of effective antiretroviral therapy for HIV
disease, a major cause of mortality in these patients has shifted to
liver disease caused by HCV and HBV infection; preliminary
experience suggests that the outcome of liver transplantation is
comparable to that for non–HIV-infected liver transplant recipients.
Patients with alcoholism should be abstinent for 6 months. Liver
transplantation should be considered in patients with worsening
functional status, rising bilirubin, decreasing albumin, worsening
coagulopathy, refractory ascites, recurrent variceal bleeding, or
worsening encephalopathy. Combined liver-kidney transplantation
is indicated in patients with associated kidney failure presumed to
be irreversible. The major impediment to more widespread use of
liver transplantation is a shortage of donor organs. Increasingly,
adult living donor liver transplantation is an option for some patients.
Five-year survival rates as high as 80% are now reported.
Hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatitis B and C, and some cases of
Budd-Chiari syndrome and autoimmune liver disease may recur in
the transplanted liver. The incidence of recurrence of hepatitis B can
be reduced by preoperative and postoperative treatment with a
nucleoside or nucleotide analog and perioperative administration of
HBIG. Immunosuppression is achieved with combinations of
cyclosporine, tacrolimus or sirolimus, corticosteroids, azathioprine,
and mycophenolate mofetil and may be complicated by infections,
advanced chronic kidney disease, neurologic disorders, and drug
toxicity as well as graft rejection, vascular occlusion, or bile leaks.
Patients taking these drugs are at risk for obesity, diabetes mellitus,
and hyperlipidemia.
 Prognosis
Factors determining survival include the patient's ability to stop the
intake of alcohol as well as the Child-Turcotte-Pugh score (Table
16–6). The MELD score, which incorporates the serum bilirubin
and creatinine levels and the INR, is also a measure of mortality risk
in patients with end-stage liver disease and is particularly useful for
predicting short- and intermediate-term survival and complications
of cirrhosis (eg, bacterial peritonitis) and determining allocation
priorities for donor livers. The consistency of the MELD score
among different hospitals may be improved when the INR is
calibrated based on prothrombin time control samples that include
patients with liver disease rather than those taking oral
anticoagulants. A minimal MELD score of 14 is required for liver
transplant listing. In patients with a relatively low MELD score (<
21) and a low priority for liver transplantation, a low serum sodium
concentration (< 130 mEq/L [130 mmol/L]), an elevated hepatic
venous pressure gradient, persistent ascites, and a low health-
related quality of life appear to be additional independent predictors
of mortality, and modifications of the MELD score, including one
that incorporates the serum sodium (MELDNa), are under
consideration. Only 50% of patients with severe hepatic dysfunction
(serum albumin < 3 g/dL [30 g/L]), bilirubin >3 mg/dL [51.3
mcmol/L]), ascites, encephalopathy, cachexia, and upper
gastrointestinal bleeding) survive 6 months. The risk of death in this
subgroup of patients with advanced cirrhosis is associated with
chronic kidney disease, cognitive dysfunction, ventilatory
insufficiency, age ≥ 65 years, and prothrombin time ≥ 16 seconds.
Obesity and diabetes mellitus appear to be risk factors for clinical
deterioration and cirrhosis-related mortality, and the use of β-
blockers is associated with poor survival in patients with refractory
ascites. Patients with cirrhosis are at risk for the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma, with rates of 3–5% per year for alcoholic
and viral hepatitis-related cirrhosis. Liver transplantation has
markedly improved the outlook for patients with cirrhosis who are
candidates and are referred for evaluation early. Patients with
compensated cirrhosis are given additional priority for liver
transplantation if they are found to have a lesion > 2 cm in diameter
consistent with hepatocellular carcinoma. In-hospital mortality from
variceal bleeding in patients with cirrhosis has declined from over
40% in 1980 to 15% in 2000. Medical treatments to reverse
hepatic fibrosis are under investigation.
 
Table 16–6. Child-Turcotte-Pugh and Model for End-stage Liver
Disease (MELD) scoring systems for stagin
 
INR, international normalized ratio.
 When to Refer
 
•    For liver biopsy.
•    Before the MELD score is ≥ 14.
•    For upper endoscopy to screen for gastroesophageal
varices.
 When to Admit
 
•    Gastrointestinal bleeding.
•    Stage 3–4 hepatic encephalopathy.
•    Worsening kidney function.
•    Severe hyponatremia.
•    Profound hypoxia.
Arvaniti V et al. Infections in patients with cirrhosis increase
mortality four-fold and should be used in determining prognosis.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1246–56. [PMID:
20558165]
 
Bass NM et al. Rifaximin treatment in hepatic encephalopathy. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Mar 25;362(12):1071–81. [PMID: 20335583]
 
European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL clinical
practice guidelines on the management of ascites, spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis, and hepatorenal syndrome in cirrhosis. J
Hepatol. 2010 Sep;53(3):397–417. [PMID: 20633946]
 
Møller S et al. Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy. J Hepatol. 2010
Jul;53(1):179–90. [PMID: 20462649]
 
Rössle M et al. TIPS for the treatment of refractory ascites,
hepatorenal syndrome and hepatic hydrothorax: a critical update.
Gut. 2010 Jul;59(7):988–1000. [PMID: 20581246]
 
Watt KD et al. Metabolic syndrome and liver transplantation: a
review and guide to management. J Hepatol. 2010 Jul;53(1):199–
206. [PMID: 20451282]
 
PRIMARY BILIARY CIRRHOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Occurs in middle-aged women.
 Often asymptomatic.
 Elevation of alkaline phosphatase, positive antimitochondrial
antibody, elevated IgM, increased cholesterol.
 Characteristic liver biopsy.
 In later stages, can present with fatigue, jaundice, features of
cirrhosis, xanthelasma, xanthoma, steatorrhea.
 
 General Considerations
Primary biliary cirrhosis is a chronic disease of the liver
characterized by autoimmune destruction of small intrahepatic bile
ducts and cholestasis. It is insidious in onset, occurs usually in
women aged 40–60 years, and is often detected by the chance
finding of elevated alkaline phosphatase levels. Estimated incidence
and prevalence rates in the United States are 4.5 and 65.4 per
100,000, respectively, in women, and 0.7 and 12.1 per 100,000,
respectively, in men. The frequency of the disease among first-
degree relatives of affected persons is 1.3–6%, and the
concordance rate in identical twins is high. The disease is associated
with HLA DRB1*08 and DQB1, as well as the IL12A and
IL12RB2 genes, which encode interleukin-12α and interleukin 12
receptor β2, respectively. The disease may be associated with
Sjögren syndrome, autoimmune thyroid disease, Raynaud
syndrome, scleroderma, hypothyroidism, and celiac disease.
Infection 
with Novosphingobium 
aromaticivorans 
or
Chlamydophila pneumoniae may be triggering or causative in
primary biliary cirrhosis; other triggers, including viruses (such as
human betaretrovirus), lactobacillus vaccination to prevent recurrent
vaginitis, and xenobiotics, are also suspected. X-chromosome
monosomy may be a predisposing factor. A history of urinary tract
infections (caused by E coli) and smoking and possibly use of
hormone replacement therapy and hair dye are risk factors, and
clustering of cases in time and space argues for a causative role of
environmental agents.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Many patients are asymptomatic for years. The onset of clinical
illness is insidious and is heralded by fatigue (excessive daytime
somnolence) and pruritus. With progression, physical examination
reveals hepatosplenomegaly. Xanthomatous lesions may occur in
the skin and tendons and around the eyelids. Jaundice, steatorrhea,
and signs of portal hypertension are late findings. Autonomic
dysfunction, including orthostatic hypotension, and cognitive
dysfunction appear to be common. The risk of low bone density,
osteoporosis, and fractures is increased in patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis (who tend to be older women) possibly due in part
to polymorphisms of the vitamin D receptor.
B. Laboratory Findings
Blood counts are normal early in the disease. Liver biochemical
tests reflect cholestasis with elevation of alkaline phosphatase,
cholesterol (especially high-density lipoproteins), and, in later
stages, bilirubin. Antimitochondrial antibodies (directed against the
dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase component of pyruvate
dehydrogenase or other 2-oxo-acid enzymes in mitochondria) are
present in 95% of patients, and serum IgM levels are elevated.
ANA directed against the nuclear pore complex (eg, against gp210
in the nuclear envelope) may be detected in specialized laboratories.
 Diagnosis
The diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis is based on the detection
of cholestatic liver chemistries (often initially an isolated elevation of
the alkaline phosphatase) and antimitochondrial antibodies in serum.
Liver biopsy is not essential for diagnosis but permits histologic
staging: I, portal inflammation with granulomas; II, bile duct
proliferation, periportal inflammation; III, interlobular fibrous septa;
and IV, cirrhosis. Estimation of histologic stage by an “enhanced
liver fibrosis assay” that incorporates serum levels of hyaluronic
acid, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1, and procollagen III
aminopeptide has shown promise.
 Differential Diagnosis
The disease must be differentiated from chronic biliary tract
obstruction (stone or stricture), carcinoma of the bile ducts, primary
sclerosing cholangitis, sarcoidosis, cholestatic drug toxicity (eg,
chlorpromazine), and in some cases chronic hepatitis. Patients with
a clinical and histologic picture of primary biliary cirrhosis but no
anti-mitochondrial antibodies are said to have antimitochondrial
antibody-negative 
primary 
biliary 
cirrhosis 
(“autoimmune
cholangitis”), which has been associated with lower serum IgM
levels and a greater frequency of smooth muscle antibodies and
ANA. Many such patients are found to have antimitochondrial
antibodies by immunoblot against recombinant proteins (rather than
standard immunofluorescence). Some patients have overlapping
features of primary biliary cirrhosis and autoimmune hepatitis.
 Treatment
Cholestyramine (4 g) in water or juice three times daily may be
beneficial for pruritus; colestipol and colesevalam may be better
tolerated but have thus far not been shown to reduce pruritus.
Rifampin, 150–300 mg orally twice daily, is inconsistently beneficial.
Opioid antagonists (eg, naloxone, 0.2 mcg/kg/min by intravenous
infusion, or naltrexone, starting at 12.5 mg/d by mouth) show
promise in the treatment of pruritus but may cause opioid
withdrawal symptoms. The 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT3) serotonin
receptor antagonist ondansetron, 4 mg orally three times a day as
needed, and the selective serotonin uptake inhibitor sertraline, 75–
100 mg/d orally, may also provide some benefit. For refractory
pruritus, plasma-pheresis or extracorporeal albumin dialysis may be
needed. Modafinil, 100–200 mg/d orally, may improve daytime
somnolence. Deficiencies of vitamins A, D, and K may occur if
steatorrhea is present and are aggravated when cholestyramine or
colestipol is administered. See Chapter 26 for discussion of
prevention and treatment of osteoporosis and Chapter 20 for
discussion of the treatment of Sjögren syndrome.
Because of its lack of toxicity, ursodeoxycholic acid (13–15
mg/kg/d in one or two doses) is the preferred medical treatment
(and only treatment approved by the US FDA) for primary biliary
cirrhosis and has been shown to slow the progression of disease
(particularly in early-stage disease), stabilize histology, improve
long-term survival, reduce the risk of developing esophageal
varices, and delay (and possibly prevent) the need for liver
transplantation, although the benefit of the drug has been
questioned. Complete normalization of liver tests occurs in 20% of
treated patients within 2 years and 40% within 5 years, and survival
is similar to that of healthy controls when the drug is given to
patients with stage 1 or 2 primary biliary cirrhosis. Ursodeoxycholic
acid therapy has also been reported to reduce the risk of recurrent
colorectal adenomas in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. Side
effects include weight gain and rarely loose stools. Colchicine (0.6
mg orally twice daily) and methotrexate (15 mg/wk orally) have had
some reported benefit in improving symptoms and serum levels of
alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Methotrexate may also improve
liver histology in some patients, but overall response rates have
been disappointing. Penicillamine, prednisone, and azathioprine
have proved to be of no benefit. Budesonide may improve liver
histology but worsens bone density. Mycophenolate mofetil,
fenofibrate, and obeticholic acid (a farsenoid-X receptor agonist)
are under study. For patients with advanced disease, liver
transplantation is the treatment of choice.
 Prognosis
Without liver transplantation, survival averages 7–10 years once
symptoms develop but has improved for younger women since the
introduction of ursodeoxycholic acid. Progression to liver failure and
portal hypertension is associated with the presence of anti-gp210
and anticentromere antibodies, respectively, and may be
accelerated by smoking. Patients in whom the alkaline phosphatase
is less than three times normal, AST is less than two times normal,
and bilirubin is ≤ 1 mg/dL (17.1 mcmol/L) after 1 year of therapy
with ursodeoxycholic acid have a 10-year transplant-free survival
rate of 90%. In advanced disease, an adverse prognosis is indicated
by a high Mayo risk score that includes older age, high serum
bilirubin, edema, low serum albumin, and prolonged prothrombin
time as well as variceal hemorrhage. Fatigue is associated with an
increased risk of cardiac mortality. Among asymptomatic patients,
at least one-third will become symptomatic within 15 years. The
risk of hepatobiliary malignancies appears to be increased in
patients with primary biliary cirrhosis; risk factors include older age,
male sex, prior blood transfusions, advanced histologic stage, and
signs of cirrhosis or portal hypertension. Liver transplantation for
advanced primary biliary cirrhosis is associated with a 1-year
survival rate of 85–90%. The disease recurs in the graft in 20% of
patients by 3 years, but this does not seem to affect survival.
 When to Refer
 
•    For liver biopsy.
•    For liver transplant evaluation.
 When to Admit
 
•    Gastrointestinal bleeding.
•    Stage 3–4 hepatic encephalopathy.
•    Worsening kidney function.
•    Severe hyponatremia.
•    Profound hypoxia.
Abbas G et al. Fatigue in primary biliary cirrhosis. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jun;7(6):313–9. [PMID: 20458334]
 
Guañabens N et al. Low bone mass and severity of cholestasis
affect fracture risk in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Jun;138(7):2348–56. [PMID: 20178794]
 
Kuiper EM et al. The potent bile acid sequestrant colesevelam is
not effective in cholestatic pruritus: results of a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology. 2010
Oct;52(4):1334–40. [PMID: 20683930]
 
Poupon R. Primary biliary cirrhosis: a 2010 update. J Hepatol.
2010 May;52(5):745–58. [PMID: 20347176]
 
Prince MI et al. Case-control studies of risk factors for primary
biliary cirrhosis in two United Kingdom populations. Gut. 2010
Apr;59(4):508–12. [PMID: 20332522]
 
HEMOCHROMATOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually suspected because of elevated iron saturation or serum
ferritin or a family history.
 Most patients are asymptomatic; the disease is rarely recognized
clinically before the fifth decade.
 Hepatic abnormalities and cirrhosis, heart failure, hypogonadism,
and arthritis.
 HFE gene mutation (usually C282Y/C282Y) is found in most
cases.
 
 General Considerations
Hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive disease caused in many
cases by a mutation in the HFE gene on chromosome 6. The HFE
protein is thought to play an important role in the process by which
duodenal crypt cells sense body iron stores, leading in turn to
increased iron absorption from the duodenum. A decrease in the
synthesis or expression of hepcidin, the principal iron regulatory
hormone, is thought to be a key pathogenic factor in all forms of
hemochromatosis. About 85% of persons with well-established
hemochromatosis are homozygous for the C282Y mutation. The
frequency of the gene mutation averages 7% in Northern European
and North American white populations, resulting in a 0.5%
frequency of homozygotes (of whom 38–50% will develop
biochemical evidence of iron overload but only 28% of men and
1% of women will develop clinical symptoms). By contrast, the
gene mutation and hemochromatosis are uncommon in blacks and
Asian-American populations. A second genetic mutation (H63D)
may contribute to the development of iron overload in a small
percentage (1.5%) of persons who are compound heterozygotes
for C282Y and H63D; iron overload-related disease develops in
few patients (particularly those who have a comorbidity such as
diabetes mellitus and fatty liver). H63D homozygotes do not
develop hemochromatosis but may be at increased risk for
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Rare instances of hemochromatosis
result from mutations in the genes that encode transferrin receptor 2
and ferroportin. A juvenile-onset variant that is characterized by
severe iron overload, cardiac dysfunction, hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, and a high mortality rate is usually linked to a
mutation of a gene on chromosome 1q designated HJV that
produces a protein called hemojuvelin or, rarely, to a mutation in the
HAMP gene on chromosome 19 that encodes hepcidin but not to
the C282Y mutation.
Hemochromatosis is characterized by increased accumulation of
iron as hemosiderin in the liver, pancreas, heart, adrenals, testes,
pituitary, and kidneys. Cirrhosis is more likely to develop in affected
persons who drink alcohol excessively or have obesity-related
steatosis than in those who do not. Eventually, hepatic and
pancreatic insufficiency, heart failure, and hypogonadism may
develop; overall mortality is increased slightly. Heterozygotes do not
develop cirrhosis in the absence of associated disorders such as
viral hepatitis or NAFLD.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset of clinical disease is usually after age 50 years—earlier in
men than in women; however, because of widespread liver
biochemical testing and iron screening, the diagnosis is usually made
long before symptoms develop. Early symptoms are nonspecific
(eg, fatigue, arthralgia). Later clinical manifestations include
arthropathy (and the need for joint replacement surgery),
hepatomegaly and evidence of hepatic dysfunction (late finding),
skin pigmentation (combination of slate-gray due to iron and brown
due to melanin, sometimes resulting in a bronze color), cardiac
enlargement with or without heart failure or conduction defects,
diabetes mellitus with its complications, and erectile dysfunction in
men. Interestingly, population studies have shown an increased
prevalence of liver disease but not of diabetes mellitus, arthritis, or
heart disease in C282Y homozygotes. Bleeding from esophageal
varices may occur, and in patients in whom cirrhosis develops, there
is a 15–20% frequency of hepatocellular carcinoma. Affected
patients are at increased risk of infection with Vibrio vulnificus,
Listeria monocytogenes, Yersinia enterocolitica, and other
siderophilic organisms. The risk of porphyria cutanea tarda is
increased in persons with the C282Y or H63D mutation, and
C282Y homozygotes have twice the risk of colorectal and breast
cancer than persons without the C282Y variant.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings include mildly abnormal liver tests (AST,
alkaline phosphatase), an elevated plasma iron with >50%
transferrin saturation in men and 45% in women, and an elevated
serum ferritin (although a normal iron saturation and a normal ferritin
do not exclude the diagnosis). Affected men are more likely than
affected women to have an elevated ferritin level. Testing for HFE
mutations is indicated in any patient with evidence of iron overload.
C. Imaging
MRI and CT may show changes consistent with iron overload of
the liver, and MRI can quantitate hepatic iron stores. There is also
an emerging role for MRI for assessment of the degree of hepatic
fibrosis.
D. Liver Biopsy
In patients who are homozygous for C282Y, liver biopsy is often
indicated to determine whether cirrhosis is present. Biopsy can be
deferred, however, in patients in whom the serum ferritin level is
<1000 mcg/L, serum AST level is normal, and hepatomegaly is
absent; the likelihood of cirrhosis is low in these persons. The
combination of a serum ferritin level ≥ 1000 mcg/L and a serum
hyaluronic acid level ≥ 46.5 mcg/L has been reported to identify all
patients with cirrhosis, with a high specificity. Liver biopsy is also
indicated when iron overload is suspected even though the patient is
not homozygous for C282Y. In patients with hemochromatosis, the
liver biopsy characteristically shows extensive iron deposition in
hepatocytes and in bile ducts, and the hepatic iron index—hepatic
iron content per gram of liver converted to micromoles and divided
by the patient's age—is generally >1.9. Only 5% of patients with
hereditary hemochromatosis identified by screening in a primary
care setting have cirrhosis.
 Screening
HFE testing is recommended for all first-degree family members of
the proband; children of an affected person (C282Y homozygote)
need to be screened only if the patient's spouse carries the C282Y
o r H63D mutation. Screening all men of Northern European
ancestry over age 25 years by measurement of the transferrin
saturation or the unbound iron-binding capacity has been
recommended by some experts, but the value of screening has been
questioned because morbidity and mortality from hemochromatosis
are low. Patients with otherwise unexplained chronic liver disease,
chondrocalcinosis, erectile dysfunction, and type 1 diabetes mellitus
(especially late-onset) should be screened for iron overload.
 Treatment
Affected patients should avoid foods rich in iron (such as red meat),
alcohol, vitamin C, raw shellfish, and supplemental iron. Weekly
phlebotomies of 1 or 2 units (250–500 mL) of blood (each
containing about 250 mg of iron) is indicated in all symptomatic
patients, those with a serum ferritin level of at least 1000 mcg/L,
and those with an increased fasting iron saturation and should be
continued for up to 2–3 years to achieve depletion of iron stores.
The hematocrit and serum iron values should be monitored. When
iron store depletion is achieved (iron saturation <50% and serum
ferritin level <50 mcg/L), phlebotomies (every 2–4 months) to
maintain serum ferritin levels between 50 mcg/L and 100 mcg/L are
continued, although compliance has been reported to decrease with
time; administration of a proton pump inhibitor, which reduces
intestinal iron absorption, appears to decrease the maintenance
phlebotomy blood volume requirement. The chelating agent
deferoxamine is indicated for patients with hemochromatosis and
anemia or in those with secondary iron overload due to thalassemia
who cannot tolerate phlebotomies. The drug is administered
intravenously or subcutaneously in a dose of 20–40 mg/kg/d infused
over 24 hours and can mobilize 30 mg of iron per day; however,
treatment is painful and time-consuming. An oral chelator,
deferasirox, 20 mg/kg once daily, has been approved for treatment
of iron overload due to blood transfusions, and a dose of 10 mg/kg
daily may be appropriate in persons with hemochromatosis who
cannot tolerate phlebotomy; however, this agent has many side
effects 
and 
drug-drug 
interactions. 
Complications 
of
hemochromatosis—arthropathy, diabetes mellitus, heart disease,
portal hyper-tension, and hypopituitarism—also require treatment.
The course of the disease is favorably altered by phlebotomy
therapy. Fibrosis may regress, and in precirrhotic patients, cirrhosis
may be prevented. Cardiac conduction defects and insulin
requirements improve with treatment. In patients with cirrhosis,
varices may reverse, and the risk of variceal bleeding declines,
although the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma persists. In the past,
liver transplantation for advanced cirrhosis associated with severe
iron overload, including hemochromatosis, was reported to lead to
survival rates that were lower than those for other types of liver
disease because of cardiac complications and an increased risk of
infections, but since 1997, posttransplant survival rates have been
excellent.
 When to Refer
 
•    For liver biopsy.
•    For initiation of therapy.
European Association for the study of the Liver. EASL clinical
practice guidelines for HFE hemochromatosis. J Hepatol. 2010
Jul;53(1):3–22. [PMID: 20471131]
 
Osborne NJ et al. HFE C282Y homozygotes are at increased risk
of breast and colorectal cancer. Hepatology. 2010 Apr;51(4):
1311–8. [PMID: 20099304]
 
Phatak P et al. A phase 1/2, dose-escalation trial of deferasirox for
the treatment of iron overload in HFE-related hereditary
hemochromatosis. Hepatology. 2010 Nov;52(5):1671–779.
[PMID: 20814896]
 
Pietrangelo A. Hereditary hemochromatosis: pathogenesis,
diagnosis, and treatment. Gastroenterology. 2010
Aug;139(2):393–408. [PMID: 20542038]
 
Sahinbegovic E et al. Hereditary hemochromatosis as a risk factor
for joint replacement surgery. Am J Med. 2010 Jul;123(7):659–
62. [PMID: 20609690]
 
Weiss G. Genetic mechanisms and modifying factors in hereditary
hemochromatosis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Jan;7(1):50–8. [PMID: 19918260]
 
WILSON DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Excessive deposition of copper in the liver and brain.
 Rare autosomal recessive disorder that usually occurs in persons
under age 40.
 Serum ceruloplasmin, the plasma copper-carrying protein, is low.
 Urinary excretion of copper and hepatic copper concentration
are high.
 
 General Considerations
Wilson disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder that usually occurs in persons under age 40. The
worldwide prevalence is about 30 per million population. The
condition is characterized by excessive deposition of copper in the
liver and brain. The genetic defect, localized to chromosome 13,
has been shown to affect a copper-transporting adenosine
triphosphatase (ATP7B) in the liver and leads to copper
accumulation in the liver and oxidative damage of hepatic
mitochondria. Most patients are compound heterozygotes (ie, carry
two different mutations). Approximately 300 different mutations in
the Wilson disease gene have been identified, making genetic
diagnosis impractical except within families in which the mutation
has been identified in the index case. The H1069Q mutation
accounts for 37–63% of disease alleles in populations of Northern
European descent.
The major physiologic aberration in Wilson disease is excessive
absorption of copper from the small intestine and decreased
excretion of copper by the liver, resulting in increased tissue
deposition, especially in the liver, brain, cornea, and kidney.
 Clinical Findings
Wilson disease tends to present as liver disease in adolescents and
neuropsychiatric disease in young adults, but there is great
variability, and onset of symptoms after age 40 is more common
than previously thought. The diagnosis should always be considered
in any child or young adult with hepatitis, splenomegaly with
hypersplenism, Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia, portal
hypertension, and neurologic or psychiatric abnormalities. Wilson
disease should also be considered in persons under 40 years of age
with chronic or fulminant hepatitis.
Hepatic involvement may range from elevated liver biochemical
tests (although the alkaline phosphatase may be low) to cirrhosis
and portal hypertension. In a patient with acute liver failure, the
diagnosis of Wilson disease is suggested by an alkaline phosphatase
(in units/L)-to-total bilirubin (in mg/dL) ratio <4 and an AST-to-
ALT ratio > 2.2. The neurologic manifestations of Wilson disease
are related to basal ganglia dysfunction and include an akineticrigid
syndrome similar to parkinsonism, pseudosclerosis with tremor,
ataxia, and a dystonic syndrome. Dysarthria, dysphagia,
incoordination, and spasticity are common. Migraines, insomnia,
and seizures have been reported. Psychiatric features include
behavioral and personality changes and emotional lability and may
precede characteristic neurologic features. The pathognomonic sign
of the condition is the brownish or gray-green Kayser-Fleischer
ring, which represents fine pigmented granular deposits in Descemet
membrane in the cornea (Figure 16–4). The ring is usually most
marked at the superior and inferior poles of the cornea. It is
sometimes seen with the naked eye and is readily detected by slit-
lamp examination. It may be absent in patients with hepatic
manifestations only but is usually present in those with
neuropsychiatric disease. Renal calculi, aminoaciduria, renal tubular
acidosis, hypoparathyroidism, infertility, and hemolytic anemia may
occur in patients with Wilson disease.
 
Figure 16–4. Brownish Kayser-Fleischer ring at the rim of the
cornea in a patient with Wilson disease. (Courtesy of Marc Solioz,
University of Berne; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith
MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill
 
 Diagnosis
The diagnosis can be challenging and is generally based on
demonstration of increased urinary copper excretion (>40 mcg/24 h
and usually > 100 mcg/24 h) or low serum ceruloplasmin levels
(<20 mg/dL [200 mg/L]; <5 mg/dL [50 mg/L] is diagnostic), and
elevated hepatic copper concentration (>250 mcg/g of dry liver).
However, increased urinary copper and a low serum ceruloplasmin
level (by a standard immunologic assay) are neither completely
sensitive nor specific for Wilson disease, but an enzymatic assay for
ceruloplasmin appears to be more accurate. In equivocal cases
(when the serum ceruloplasmin level is normal), the diagnosis may
require demonstration of a rise in urinary copper determination after
a penicillamine challenge, although the test has been validated only
in children. Liver biopsy may show acute or chronic hepatitis or
cirrhosis. MRI of the brain may show evidence of increased basal
ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellar copper even early in the course of
the disease. If available, molecular analysis of ATP7B mutations can
be diagnostic.
 Treatment
Early treatment to remove excess copper is essential before it can
produce hepatic or neurologic damage. Early in the treatment
phase, restriction of dietary copper (shellfish, organ foods, nuts,
mushrooms, and chocolate) may be of value. Oral penicillamine
(0.75–2 g/d in divided doses taken 1 h before or 2 h after food) is
the drug of choice and enhances urinary excretion of chelated
copper. Oral pyridoxine, 50 mg per week, is added, since
penicillamine is an antimetabolite of this vitamin. If penicillamine
treatment cannot be tolerated because of gastrointestinal
intolerance, hypersensitivity, autoimmune reactions, nephrotoxicity,
or bone marrow toxicity, consider the use of another chelating agent
—trientine, 250–500 mg three times a day. Oral zinc acetate or zinc
gluconate, 50 mg three times a day, interferes with intestinal
absorption of copper, promotes fecal copper excretion, and may be
used as maintenance therapy after decoppering with a chelating
agent or as first-line therapy in presymptomatic or pregnant patients
and possibly in those with neurologic disease. Ammonium
tetrathiomolybdate, which complexes copper in the intestinal tract,
has shown promise as initial therapy for neurologic Wilson disease.
Treatment should continue indefinitely. The doses of penicillamine
and trientine should be reduced during pregnancy. Supplemental
vitamin E, an antioxidant, has been recommended but not rigorously
studied. Once the serum nonceruloplasmin copper level is within the
normal range (50–150 mcg/L), the dose of chelating agent can be
reduced to the minimum necessary for maintaining that level. The
prognosis is good in patients who are effectively treated before liver
or brain damage has occurred. Liver transplantation is indicated for
fulminant hepatitis (often after plasma exchange or dialysis with
MARS as a stabilizing measure), end-stage cirrhosis, and, in
selected cases, intractable neurologic disease, although survival is
lower when liver transplantation is undertaken for neurologic
disease than for liver disease. Family members, especially siblings,
require screening with serum ceruloplasmin, liver biochemical tests,
and slit-lamp examination or, if the causative mutation is known,
with mutation analysis.
 When to Refer
All patients with Wilson disease should be referred for diagnosis
and treatment.
 When to Admit
 
•    Acute liver failure.
•    Gastrointestinal bleeding.
•    Stage 3–4 hepatic encephalopathy.
•    Worsening kidney function.
•    Severe hyponatremia.
•    Profound hypoxia.
Lalioti V et al. Molecular pathology of Wilson's disease: a brief. J
Hepatol. 2010 Dec;53(6):1151–3. [PMID: 20832891]
 
Walshe JM. Monitoring copper in Wilson's disease. Adv Clin
Chem. 2010;50:151–63. [PMID: 20521445]
 
HEPATIC VEIN OBSTRUCTION (Budd-Chiari Syndrome)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Right upper quadrant pain and tenderness.
 Ascites.
 Imaging studies show occlusion/absence of flow in the hepatic
vein(s) or inferior vena cava.
 Clinical picture is similar in sinusoidal obstruction syndrome but
major hepatic veins are patent.
 
 General Considerations
Factors that predispose patients to hepatic vein obstruction, or
Budd-Chiari syndrome, including hereditary and acquired
hypercoagulable states, can be identified in 75% of affected
patients; multiple disorders are found in up to 45%. Up to 50% of
cases are associated with polycythemia vera or other
myeloproliferative disease (which has a risk of Budd-Chiari
syndrome of 1%). These cases are often associated with a specific
mutation (V617F) in the gene that codes for JAK2 tyrosine kinase
and may be subclinical. In some cases, an underlying predisposition
to thrombosis (eg, activated protein C resistance [factor V Leiden
mutation] [25% of cases], protein C or S or antithrombin
deficiency, hyperprothrombinemia [factor II G20210A mutation],
the 
methylenetetrahydrofolate 
reductase 
TT677 
mutation,
antiphospholipid antibodies) can be identified. Hepatic vein
obstruction may be associated with caval webs, right-sided heart
failure or constrictive pericarditis, neoplasms that cause hepatic vein
occlusion, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, Behçet syndrome,
blunt abdominal trauma, use of oral contraceptives, and pregnancy.
Some cytotoxic agents and pyrrolizidine alkaloids (Comfrey or
“bush teas”) may cause sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (previously
known as veno-occlusive disease because the terminal venules are
often occluded), which mimics Budd-Chiari syndrome clinically.
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome is common in patients who have
undergone bone marrow transplantation, particularly those with
pretransplant aminotransferase elevations or fever during
cytoreductive therapy with cyclophosphamide, azathioprine,
carmustine, busulfan, or etoposide or those receiving high-dose
cytoreductive therapy or high-dose total body irradiation. In India,
China, and South Africa, Budd-Chiari syndrome is associated with
a poor standard of living and often the result of occlusion of the
hepatic portion of the inferior vena cava, presumably due to prior
thrombosis. The clinical presentation is mild but the course is
frequently complicated by hepatocellular carcinoma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The presentation may be fulminant, acute, subacute, or chronic. An
insidious (subacute) onset is most common. Clinical manifestations
generally include tender, painful hepatic enlargement, jaundice,
splenomegaly, and ascites. With chronic disease, bleeding varices
and hepatic coma may be evident; hepatopulmonary syndrome may
occur.
B. Imaging
Hepatic imaging studies may show a prominent caudate lobe, since
its venous drainage may not be occluded. The screening test of
choice 
is 
contrast-enhanced, 
color, 
or 
pulsed-Doppler
ultrasonography, which has a sensitivity of 85% for detecting
evidence of hepatic venous or inferior vena caval thrombosis. MRI
with spin-echo and gradient-echo sequences and intravenous
gadolinium injection allows visualization of the obstructed veins and
collateral vessels. Direct venography can delineate caval webs and
occluded hepatic veins (“spider-web” pattern) most precisely.
C. Liver Biopsy
Percutaneous or transjugular liver biopsy, which may be considered
when the results of noninvasive imaging are inconclusive, frequently
shows characteristic centrilobular congestion and fibrosis and often
multiple large regenerating nodules. Liver biopsy is often
contraindicated in sinusoidal obstruction syndrome because of
thrombocytopenia, and the diagnosis is based on clinical findings.
 Treatment
Ascites should be treated with fluid and salt restriction and diuretics.
Treatable causes of Budd-Chiari syndrome should be sought.
Prompt recognition and treatment of an underlying hematologic
disorder may avoid the need for surgery; however, the optimal
anticoagulation regimen is uncertain, and anticoagulation is
associated with a high risk of bleeding, particularly in patients with
portal hypertension and those undergoing invasive procedures.
Low-molecular weight heparins are preferred over unfractionated
heparin 
because 
of 
a 
high 
rate 
of 
heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia with the latter. Infusion of a thrombolytic agent
into recently occluded veins has been attempted with success. In
patients with sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, defibrotide, an
adenosine receptor agonist that increases endogenous tissue
plasminogen activator levels, has shown promise. TIPS placement
may be attempted in patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome and
persistent hepatic congestion or failed thrombolytic therapy. Late
TIPS dysfunction is less frequent with the use of
polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stents than uncovered stents. TIPS
is now preferred over surgical decompression (side-to-side
portacaval, mesocaval, or mesoatrial shunt) which, in contrast to
TIPS, has not been proven to improve long-term survival. Older
age, a higher serum bilirubin level, and a greater INR predict a poor
outcome with TIPS. Balloon angioplasty, in some cases with
placement of an intravascular metallic stent, is preferred in patients
with an inferior vena caval web and is being performed increasingly
in patients with a short segment of thrombosis in the hepatic vein.
Liver transplantation is considered in patients with fulminant hepatic
failure, cirrhosis with hepatocellular dysfunction, and failure of a
portosystemic shunt, and outcomes have improved with the advent
of patient selection based on the MELD score. Patients often
require lifelong anticoagulation and treatment of the underlying
myeloproliferative disease; antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and
hydroxyurea has been suggested as an alternative to warfarin in
patients with a myeloproliferative disorder. The overall 5-year
survival rate is 50–90% with treatment (but <10% without
intervention). Adverse prognostic factors in patients with Budd-
Chiari syndrome are older age, high Child-Turcotte-Pugh score,
ascites, encephalopathy, elevated total bilirubin, prolonged
prothrombin time, elevated serum creatinine, concomitant portal
vein thrombosis, and histologic features of acute liver disease
superimposed on chronic liver injury; 3-month mortality may be
predicted by the Rotterdam score, which is based on
encephalopathy, ascites, prothrombin time, and bilirubin. A serum
ALT level at least fivefold above the upper limit of normal on
presentation indicates hepatic ischemia and also predicts a poor
outcome, particularly when the ALT level decreases slowly.
 When to Admit
All patients with hepatic vein obstruction should be hospitalized.
Jayanthi V et al. Budd-Chiari syndrome. Changing epidemiology
and clinical presentation. Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol. 2010
Mar;56(1):71–80. [PMID: 20190727]
 
Murad SD et al. Etiology, management, and outcome of the Budd-
Chiari syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Aug 4;151(3):167–75.
[PMID: 19652186]
 
Rautou PE et al. Bleeding in patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome.
J Hepatol. 2011 Jan;54(1):56–63. [PMID: 20889223]
 
Valla DC. Primary Budd-Chiari syndrome. J Hepatol. 2009
Jan;50(1):195–203. [PMID: 19012988]
 
THE LIVER IN HEART FAILURE
Ischemic hepatitis, also called ischemic hepatopathy, hypoxic
hepatitis, or shock liver, may affect up to 10% of patients in an
intensive care unit and results from an acute fall in cardiac output
due to acute myocardial infarction or arrhythmia, usually in a patient
with passive congestion of the liver. Clinical hypotension may be
absent (or unwitnessed). In some cases, the precipitating event is
arterial hypoxemia due to respiratory failure, sleep apnea, septic
shock, severe anemia, heat stroke, carbon monoxide poisoning,
cocaine use, or bacterial endocarditis. More than one precipitant is
common. The hallmark is a rapid and striking elevation of serum
aminotransferase levels (often >5000 units/L); an early rapid rise in
the serum lactate dehydrogenase level is also typical, but elevations
of serum alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin are usually mild. The
prothrombin time may be prolonged, and encephalopathy or
hepatopulmonary syndrome may develop. The mortality rate due to
the underlying disease is high, but in patients who recover, the
aminotransferase levels return to normal quickly, usually within 1
week—in contrast to viral hepatitis.
In patients with passive congestion of the liver due to right-
sided heart failure, the serum bilirubin level may be elevated,
occasionally as high as 40 mg/dL (684 mcmol/L), due in part to
hypoxia of perivenular hepatocytes, and the level is a predictor of
mortality and morbidity. Serum alkaline phosphatase levels are
normal or slightly elevated. Hepatojugular reflux is present, and with
tricuspid regurgitation the liver may be pulsatile. Ascites may be out
of proportion to peripheral edema, with a high serum ascites-
albumin gradient (≥ 1.1) and a protein content of more than 2.5
g/dL (25 g/L). A markedly elevated serum N-terminal-proBNP
level has been reported to distinguish ascites due to heart failure
from ascites due to cirrhosis. In severe cases, signs of
encephalopathy may develop.
Allen LA et al. Liver function abnormalities and outcome in
patients with chronic heart failure: data from the Candesartan in
Heart Failure: Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity
(CHARM) program. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009 Feb;11(2):170–7.
[PMID: 19168515]
 
Fuhrmann V et al. Hypoxic hepatitis–epidemiology,
pathophysiology and clinical management. Wien Klin Wochenschr.
2010 Mar;122(5–6):129–39. [PMID: 20361374]
 
Sheer TA et al. Usefulness of serum N-terminal-ProBNP in
distinguishing ascites due to cirrhosis from ascites due to heart
failure. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;44(1):e23–6. [PMID:
19448570]
 
NONCIRRHOTIC PORTAL HYPERTENSION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Splenomegaly or upper gastrointestinal bleeding from esophageal
or gastric varices in patients without liver disease.
 
 General Considerations
Noncirrhotic portal hypertension may be due to extrahepatic portal
vein obstruction (portal vein thrombosis often with cavernous
transformation [portal cavernoma]), splenic vein obstruction
(presenting as gastric varices without esophageal varices),
schistosomiasis, noncirrhotic portal fibrosis (hepatoportal sclerosis),
nodular regenerative hyperplasia, or arterial-portal vein fistula.
Portal vein thrombosis may occur in 10–25% of patients with
cirrhosis and may be associated with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Other risk factors are oral contraceptive use, pregnancy, chronic
inflammatory diseases, injury to the portal venous system (including
surgery), and other malignancies. Splenic vein thrombosis may
complicate pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer. Pylephlebitis (septic
thrombophlebitis of the portal vein) may complicate intra-abdominal
inflammatory disorders such as appendicitis or diverticulitis,
particularly when anaerobic organisms (especially Bacteroides
species) are involved. Nodular regenerative hyperplasia results
from altered hepatic perfusion and can be associated with collagen
vascular diseases; myeloproliferative disorders; and drugs, including
azathioprine, 5-fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin. In patients infected with
HIV, exposure to didanosine has been reported to account for
some cases of noncirrhotic portal hypertension due to nodular
regenerative hyperplasia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Acute portal vein thrombosis usually causes abdominal pain. Aside
from splenomegaly, the physical findings are not remarkable,
although hepatic decompensation can follow severe gastrointestinal
bleeding or a concurrent hepatic disorder, and intestinal infarction
may occur when portal vein thrombosis is associated with
mesenteric venous thrombosis. Ascites may occur in 25% of
persons with noncirrhotic portal hypertension. Minimal hepatic
encephalopathy is reported to be common in patients with
noncirrhotic portal vein thrombosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Liver biochemical test levels are usually normal, but there may be
findings of hypersplenism. An underlying hypercoagulable state is
found in many patients with portal vein thrombosis; this includes
myeloproliferative disorders (often associated with a specific
mutation [V617F] in the gene coding for JAK2 tyrosine kinase),
mutation G20210A of prothrombin, factor V Leiden mutation,
protein C and S deficiency, antiphospholipid syndrome, mutation
TT677 of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, elevated factor VIII
levels, hyperhomocysteinemia, and a mutation in the gene that codes
for thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor. It is possible,
however, that deficiency of protein C and S—as well as of
antithrombin—is a secondary phenomenon due to portosystemic
shunting and reduced hepatic blood flow.
C. Imaging
Color Doppler ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced CT are
usually the initial diagnostic tests for portal vein thrombosis.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the portal system is
generally confirmatory. Endoscopic ultrasonography may be helpful
in some cases. In patients with jaundice, magnetic resonance
cholangiography may demonstrate compression of the bile duct by a
large portal cavernoma.
D. Special Studies
Endoscopy shows esophageal or gastric varices. Needle biopsy of
the liver may be indicated to diagnose schistosomiasis, nodular
regenerative hyperplasia, and noncirrhotic portal fibrosis and may
demonstrate sinusoidal dilatation.
 Treatment
If splenic vein thrombosis is the cause of variceal bleeding,
splenectomy is curative. For other causes of noncirrhotic portal
hypertension, band ligation or sclerotherapy followed by β-blockers
to reduce portal pressure is initiated for variceal bleeding, and
portosystemic shunting (including TIPS) is reserved for failures of
endoscopic therapy; rarely progressive liver dysfunction requires
liver transplantation. Anticoagulation or thrombolytic therapy may
be indicated for isolated acute portal vein thrombosis (and leads to
recanalization in one-third) of cases and possibly acute splenic vein
thrombosis and continued long-term if a hypercoagulable disorder is
identified or if an acute portal vein thrombosis extends into the
mesenteric veins.
 When to Refer
All patients with noncirrhotic portal hypertension should be referred.
Plessier A et al; European Network for Vascular Disorders of the
Liver (EN-Vie). Acute portal vein thrombosis unrelated to
cirrhosis: a prospective multicenter follow-up study. Hepatology.
2010 Jan;51(1):210–8. [PMID: 19821530]
 
Spaander MC et al. Ascites in patients with noncirrhotic
nonmalignant extrahepatic portal vein thrombosis. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Aug;32(4):529–34. [PMID: 20497136]
 
Tsochatzis EA et al. Systematic review: portal vein thrombosis in
cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Feb 1;31(3):366–74.
[PMID: 19863496]
 
PYOGENIC HEPATIC ABSCESS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, right upper quadrant pain, jaundice.
 Often in setting of biliary disease, but up to 40% are
“cryptogenic” in origin.
 Detected by imaging studies.
 
 General Considerations
The incidence of liver abscess is 3.6 per 100,000 population in the
United States and has increased since the 1990s. The liver can be
invaded by bacteria via (1) the bile duct (ascending cholangitis); (2)
the portal vein (pylephlebitis); (3) the hepatic artery, secondary to
bacteremia; (4) direct extension from an infectious process; and (5)
traumatic implantation of bacteria through the abdominal wall. Risk
factors for liver abscess include older age and male gender.
Predisposing conditions include malignancy, diabetes mellitus,
inflammatory bowel disease, cirrhosis, and liver transplantation.
Ascending cholangitis resulting from biliary obstruction due to a
stone, stricture, or neoplasm is the most common identifiable cause
of hepatic abscess in the United States. In 10% of cases, liver
abscess is secondary to appendicitis or diverticulitis. At least 40%
of abscesses have no demonstrable cause and are classified as
cryptogenic. A dental source is identified in some cases. The most
frequently 
encountered 
organisms 
are E coli, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Proteus vulgaris, Enterobacter aerogenes, and
multiple microaerophilic and anaerobic species (eg, Streptococcus
milleri). Liver abscess caused by virulent strains of K pneumoniae
may be associated with septic ocular or central nervous system
complications. Staphylococcus aureus is usually the causative
organism in patients with chronic granulomatous disease.
Uncommon 
causative 
organisms 
include Salmonella,
Haemophilus, and Yersinia. Hepatic candidiasis, tuberculosis, and
actinomycosis are seen in immunocompromised patients and those
with hematologic malignancies. Rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma
can present as a pyogenic abscess because of tumor necrosis,
biliary obstruction, and superimposed bacterial infection (see
Chapter 39). The possibility of an amebic liver abscess must always
be considered (see Chapter 35).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The presentation is often insidious. Fever is almost always present
and may antedate other symptoms or signs. Pain may be a
prominent complaint and is localized to the right upper quadrant or
epigastric area. Jaundice, tenderness in the right upper abdomen,
and either steady or swinging fever are the chief physical findings.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory examination reveals leukocytosis with a shift to the left.
Liver biochemical tests are nonspecifically abnormal. Blood cultures
are positive in 50–100% of cases.
C. Imaging
Chest radiographs usually reveal elevation of the diaphragm if the
abscess is on the right side. Ultrasonography, CT, or MRI may
reveal the presence of intrahepatic lesions. On MRI, characteristic
findings include high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and rim
enhancement. The characteristic CT appearance of hepatic
candidiasis, usually seen in the setting of systemic candidiasis, is that
of multiple “bull's-eyes,” but imaging studies may be negative in
neutropenic patients.
 Treatment
Treatment should consist of antimicrobial agents (generally a third-
generation cephalosporin such as cefoperazone 1-2 g intravenously
every 12 hours and metronidazole 500 mg intravenously every 6
hours) that are effective against coliform organisms and anaerobes.
Antibiotics are administered for 2–3 weeks, and sometimes up to 6
weeks. If the abscess is at least 5 cm in diameter or the response to
antibiotic therapy is not rapid, intermittent needle aspiration,
percutaneous or endoscopic ultrasound-guided catheter drainage
or, if necessary, surgical (eg, laparoscopic) drainage should be
done. Other suggested indications for abscess drainage are patient
age of at least 55 years, symptom duration of at least 7 days, and
involvement of both lobes of the liver. The underlying source (eg,
biliary disease, dental infection) should be identified and treated.
The mortality rate is still substantial (≥ 5% in most studies) and is
highest in patients with underlying biliary malignancy or severe
multiorgan dysfunction. Other risk factors for mortality include older
age, cirrhosis, chronic kidney disease, and cancer. Hepatic
candidiasis often responds to intravenous amphotericin B (total
dose of 2–9 g). Fungal abscesses are associated with mortality
rates of up to 50% and are treated with intravenous amphotericin B
and drainage.
 When to Admit
Nearly all patients with pyogenic hepatic abscess should be
hospitalized.
Meddings L et al. A population-based study of pyogenic liver
abscesses in the United States: incidence, mortality, and temporal
trends. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jan;105(1):117–24. [PMID:
19888200]
 
Mezhir JJ et al. Current management of pyogenic liver abscess:
surgery is now second-line treatment. J Am Coll Surg. 2010
Jun;210(6):975–83. [PMID: 20510807]
 
Reid-Lombardo KM et al. Hepatic cysts and liver abscess. Surg
Clin North Am. 2010 Aug;90(4):679–97. [PMID: 20637941]
 
BENIGN LIVER NEOPLASMS
Benign neoplasms of the liver must be distinguished from
hepatocellular carcinoma and metastases (see Chapter 39). The
most common benign neoplasm of the liver is the cavernous
hemangioma, often an incidental finding on ultrasonography or CT.
This lesion may enlarge in women who take hormonal therapy and
must be differentiated from other space-occupying intrahepatic
lesions, usually by contrast-enhanced MRI, CT, or ultrasonography.
Rarely, fine-needle biopsy is necessary to differentiate these lesions
and does not appear to carry an increased risk of bleeding. Surgical
resection of cavernous hemangiomas is rarely necessary but may be
required for abdominal pain or rapid enlargement, to exclude
malignancy, or to treat Kasabach-Merritt syndrome (consumptive
coagulopathy complicating a hemangioma).
In addition to rare instances of sinusoidal dilatation and peliosis
hepatis, two distinct benign lesions with characteristic clinical,
radiologic, and histopathologic features have been described in
women taking oral contraceptives—focal nodular hyperplasia and
hepatic adenoma. Focal nodular hyperplasia occurs at all ages
and in both sexes and is probably not caused by the oral
contraceptives. It is often asymptomatic and appears as a
hypervascular mass, often with a central hypodense “stellate” scar
on CT or MRI. Microscopically, focal nodular hyperplasia consists
of hyperplastic units of hepatocytes with a central stellate scar
containing proliferating bile ducts. It is not a true neoplasm but a
nonspecific reaction to altered blood flow; focal nodular hyperplasia
is associated with an elevated angiopoietin 1/angiopoietin 2 mRNA
ratio and may also occur in patients with cirrhosis, with exposure to
certain drugs such as azathioprine, and in antiphospholipid
syndrome. The prevalence of hepatic hemangiomas is increased in
patients with focal nodular hyperplasia.
Hepatic adenoma occurs most commonly in women in the third
and fourth decades of life and is usually caused by oral
contraceptives; acute abdominal pain may occur if the tumor
undergoes necrosis or hemorrhage. The tumor may be associated
with mutations in: (1) the gene coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor
1α (HNF1α) (characterized by steatosis and a low risk of malignant
transformation, particularly in men, in whom concomitant metabolic
syndrome appears to increase the risk of malignant transformation);
(2) the gene coding for β-catenin (characterized by a high rate of
malignant transformation); or (3) neither gene (designated
inflammatory adenoma [previously termed “telangiectatic focal
nodular hyperplasia”], which is associated with a high body mass
index and serum biomarkers of inflammation such as C-reactive
protein). Rare instances of multiple hepatic adenomas in association
with maturity-onset diabetes of the young occur in families with a
germline mutation in HNF1α. Hepatic adenomas also occur in
patients with glycogen storage disease and familial adenomatous
polyposis. The tumor is hypovascular and reveals a cold defect on
liver scan. Grossly, the cut surface appears structureless. As seen
microscopically, the hepatic adenoma consists of sheets of
hepatocytes without portal tracts or central veins.
Cystic neoplasms of the liver, such as cystadenoma and
cystadenocarcinoma, must be distinguished from simple and
echinococcal cysts, von Meyenburg complexes (hamartomas), and
polycystic liver disease.
 Clinical Findings
The only physical finding in focal nodular hyperplasia or hepatic
adenoma is a palpable abdominal mass in a minority of cases. Liver
function is usually normal. Arterial phase helical CT and MRI with
contrast can distinguish an adenoma from focal nodular hyperplasia
in 80–90% of cases and may suggest a specific subtype of
adenoma (eg, homogeneous fat pattern in HNF1α-mutated
adenomas and marked and persistent arterial enhancement in
inflammatory adenomas).
 Treatment
Treatment of focal nodular hyperplasia is resection only in the
symptomatic patient; rarely is liver transplantation necessary. The
prognosis is excellent. Hepatic adenoma may undergo bleeding,
necrosis, and rupture, often after hormone therapy or in men, and
resection is advised if the tumor is >5 cm in diameter, even in
asymptomatic persons, or if symptomatic. In selected cases,
laparoscopic resection or percutaneous radiofrequency ablation
may be feasible. Regression of benign hepatic tumors may follow
cessation of oral contraceptives.
 When to Refer
 
•    Diagnostic uncertainty.
•    For surgery.
 When to Admit
 
•    Severe pain.
•    Rupture.
Bioulac-Sage P et al. Hepatocellular adenoma management and
phenotypic classification: the Bordeaux experience. Hepatology.
2009 Aug;50(2):481–9. [PMID: 19585623]
 
Buell JF et al. Management of benign hepatic tumors. Surg Clin
North Am. 2010 Aug;90(4):719–35. [PMID: 20637943]
 
Ercolani G et al. Liver transplantation for benign hepatic tumors: a
systematic review. Dig Surg. 2010;27(1):68–75. [PMID:
20357454]
 
Pulvirenti E et al. An update on indications for treatment of solid
hepatic neoplasms in noncirrhotic liver. Future Oncol. 2010
Aug;6(8):1243–50. [PMID: 20799871]
 
DISEASES OF THE BILIARY
TRACT
 
See Chapter 39 for Carcinoma of the Biliary Tract.
CHOLELITHIASIS (Gallstones)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often asymptomatic.
 Classic biliary pain characterized by infrequent episodes of
steady severe pain in epigastrium or right upper quadrant with
radiation to right scapula.
 Detected on ultrasonography.
 
 General Considerations
Gallstones are more common in women than in men and increase in
incidence in both sexes and all races with aging. In the United
States, the prevalence of gallstones is 5.5% in men and 8.6% in
women, with the highest rates in persons over age 60 and higher
rates in Mexican-Americans than in non-Hispanic whites and
African Americans. Although cholesterol gallstones are less
common in black people, cholelithiasis attributable to hemolysis
occurs in over a third of individuals with sickle cell disease. Native
Americans of both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres have a
high rate of cholesterol cholelithiasis, probably because of a
predisposition resulting from “thrifty” (LITH) genes that promote
efficient calorie utilization and fat storage. As many as 75% of Pima
and other American Indian women over the age of 25 years have
cholelithiasis. Other genetic mutations that predispose persons to
gallstones have been identified. Obesity is a risk factor for
gallstones, especially in women. Rapid weight loss, as occurs after
bariatric surgery, also increases the risk of symptomatic gallstone
formation. Diabetes mellitus, glucose intolerance, and insulin
resistance are risk factors for gallstones, and a high intake of
carbohydrate and high dietary glycemic load increase the risk of
cholecystectomy in women. The prevalence of gallbladder disease
is increased in men (but not women) with cirrhosis and hepatitis C
virus infection. Moreover, cholecystectomy has been reported to be
associated with an increased risk of cirrhosis, possibly because
gallstones and liver disease have some risk factors in common. A
low-carbohydrate diet, physical activity, and cardiorespiratory
fitness may help prevent gallstones. Consumption of caffeinated
coffee appears to protect against gallstones in women, and a high
intake of magnesium and of polyunsaturated and monounsaturated
fats reduces the risk of gallstones in men. A diet high in fiber, a diet
rich in fruits and vegetables, and statin use reduce the risk of
cholecystectomy, particularly in women. Hypertriglyceridemia may
promote gallstone formation by impairing gallbladder motility. The
incidence of gallstones is high in individuals with Crohn disease;
approximately one-third of those with inflammatory involvement of
the terminal ileum have gallstones due to disruption of bile salt
resorption that results in decreased solubility of the bile. Drugs such
as clofibrate, octreotide, and ceftriaxone can cause gallstones. In
contrast, aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may
protect against gallstones. Prolonged fasting (over 5–10 days) can
lead to formation of biliary “sludge” (microlithiasis), which usually
resolves with refeeding but can lead to gallstones or biliary
symptoms. Pregnancy, particularly in obese women and those with
insulin resistance, is associated with an increased risk of gallstones
and of symptomatic gallbladder disease. Hormone replacement
therapy appears to increase the risk of gallbladder disease and need
for cholecystectomy; the risk is lower with transdermal than oral
therapy.
Gallstones are classified according to their predominant chemical
composition as cholesterol or calcium bilirubinate stones. The latter
comprise <20% of the stones found in Europe or the United States
but 30–40% of stones found in Japan.
 Clinical Findings
Table 16–7 lists the clinical and laboratory features of several
diseases of the biliary tract as well as their treatment. Cholelithiasis
is frequently asymptomatic and is discovered in the course of
routine radiographic study, operation, or autopsy. There is generally
no need for prophylactic cholecystectomy in an asymptomatic
person unless the gallbladder is calcified, gallstones are over 3 cm in
diameter, or the patient is a Native American or a candidate for
bariatric surgery or cardiac transplantation. Symptoms (biliary pain)
develop in 10–25% of patients (1-4% annually), and acute
cholecystitis develops in 20% of these symptomatic persons over
time. Occasionally, small intestinal obstruction due to “gallstone
ileus” (or Bouveret syndrome when the obstructing stone is in
pylorus or duodenum) presents as the initial manifestation of
cholelithiasis.
 Treatment
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for
symptomatic gallbladder disease. Patients may go home within 1
day of the procedure and return to work within days (instead of
weeks for those undergoing open cholecystectomy). The procedure
is often performed on an outpatient basis and is suitable for most
patients, including those with acute cholecystitis. Conversion to a
conventional open cholecystectomy may be necessary in 2–8% of
cases (higher for acute cholecystitis than for uncomplicated
cholelithiasis). Bile duct injuries occur in 0.1% of cases done by
experienced surgeons. Cholecystectomy may increase the risk of
esophageal, proximal small intestinal, and colonic adenocarcinomas
because of increased duodenogastric reflux and changes in intestinal
exposure to bile. In pregnant patients a conservative approach to
biliary pain is advised, but for patients with repeated attacks of
biliary pain or acute cholecystitis, cholecystectomy can be
performed—even by the laparoscopic route—preferably in the
second trimester. Enterolithotomy alone is considered adequate
treatment in most patients with gallstone ileus. Cholecystectomy via
natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) has been
performed and is under study.
 
Table 16–7. Diseases of the biliar
 
ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; HIDA, hepatic
iminodiacetic 
acid; 
MRCP, 
magnetic 
resonance
cholangiopancreatography.
 
Cheno- and ursodeoxycholic acids are bile salts that when given
orally for up to 2 years dissolve some cholesterol stones and may
be considered in occasional, selected patients who refuse
cholecystectomy. The dose is 7 mg/kg/d of cheno or 8–13 mg/kg of
ursodeoxycholic acid in divided doses daily. They are most effective
in patients with a functioning gallbladder, as determined by
gallbladder visualization on oral cholecystography, and multiple
small “floating” gallstones (representing not more than 15% of
patients with gallstones). In half of patients, gallstones recur within 5
years after treatment is stopped. Ursodeoxycholic acid, 500–600
mg daily, reduces the risk of gallstone formation with rapid weight
loss. Cholesterol-lowering agents (statins, ezetimibe) and drugs that
act on specific nuclear receptors involved in cholesterol and bile
metabolism are under study for the treatment of cholelithiasis.
Lithotripsy in combination with bile salt therapy for single
radiolucent stones <20 mm in diameter was an option in the past
but is no longer generally used in the United States.
 When to Refer
Patients should be referred when they require surgery.
Di Ciaula A et al. Targets for current pharmacologic therapy in
cholesterol gallstone disease. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2010
Jun;39(2):245–64. [PMID: 20478485]
 
Gurusamy KS et al. Surgical treatment of gallstones. Gastroenterol
Clin North Am. 2010 Jun;39(2):229–44. [PMID: 20478484]
 
Ioannou GN. Cholelithiasis, cholecystectomy, and liver disease.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jun;105(6):1364–73. [PMID:
20068558]
 
ACUTE CHOLECYSTITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Steady, severe pain and tenderness in the right hypochondrium or
epigastrium.
 Nausea and vomiting.
 Fever and leukocytosis.
 
 General Considerations
Cholecystitis is associated with gallstones in over 90% of cases. It
occurs when a stone becomes impacted in the cystic duct and
inflammation develops behind the obstruction. Acalculous
cholecystitis should be considered when unexplained fever or right
upper quadrant pain occurs within 2–4 weeks of major surgery or
in a critically ill patient who has had no oral intake for a prolonged
period; multiorgan failure is often present. Acute cholecystitis may
be 
caused 
by 
infectious 
agents 
(eg, 
cytomegalovirus,
cryptosporidiosis, or microsporidiosis) in patients with AIDS or by
vasculitis (eg, polyarteritis nodosa).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The acute attack is often precipitated by a large or fatty meal and is
characterized by the sudden appearance of steady pain localized to
the epigastrium or right hypochondrium, which may gradually
subside over a period of 12–18 hours. Vomiting occurs in about
75% of patients and in half of instances affords variable relief. Right
upper quadrant abdominal tenderness (often with a Murphy sign, or
inhibition of inspiration by pain on palpation of the right upper
quadrant) is almost always present and is usually associated with
muscle guarding and rebound tenderness (Table 16–7). A palpable
gallbladder is present in about 15% of cases. Jaundice is present in
about 25% of cases and, when persistent or severe, suggests the
possibility of choledocholithiasis. Fever is typical.
B. Laboratory Findings
The white blood cell count is usually high (12,000–15,000/mcL).
Total serum bilirubin values of 1–4 mg/dL (17.1–68.4 mcmol/L)
may be seen even in the absence of bile duct obstruction. Serum
aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase levels are often elevated
—the former as high as 300 units/mL, or even higher when
associated with ascending cholangitis. Serum amylase may also be
moderately elevated.
C. Imaging
Plain films of the abdomen may show radiopaque gallstones in 15%
of cases. 99mTc hepatobiliary imaging (using iminodiacetic acid
compounds), also known as the hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA)
scan, is useful in demonstrating an obstructed cystic duct, which is
the cause of acute cholecystitis in most patients. This test is reliable
if the bilirubin is under 5 mg/dL (85.5 mcmol/L) (98% sensitivity
and 81% specificity for acute cholecystitis). False-positive results
can occur with prolonged fasting, liver disease, and chronic
cholecystitis, and the specificity can be improved by intravenous
administration of morphine, which induces spasm of the sphincter of
Oddi. Right upper quadrant abdominal ultrasonography, which is
often performed first, may show gallstones but is not as sensitive for
acute cholecystitis (67% sensitivity, 82% specificity); findings
suggestive of acute cholecystitis are gallbladder wall thickening,
pericholecystic fluid, and a sonographic Murphy sign.
 Differential Diagnosis
The disorders most likely to be confused with acute cholecystitis are
perforated peptic ulcer, acute pancreatitis, appendicitis in a high-
lying appendix, perforated colonic carcinoma or diverticulum of the
hepatic flexure, liver abscess, hepatitis, pneumonia with pleurisy on
the right side, and even myocardial ischemia. Definite localization of
pain and tenderness in the right upper quadrant, with radiation
around to the infrascapular area, strongly favors the diagnosis of
acute cholecystitis. True cholecystitis without stones suggests
acalculous cholecystitis.
 Complications
A. Gangrene of the Gallbladder
Continuation or progression of right upper quadrant abdominal pain,
tenderness, muscle guarding, fever, and leukocytosis after 24–48
hours suggests severe inflammation and possible gangrene of the
gallbladder, resulting from ischemia due to splanchnic
vasoconstriction and intravascular coagulation. Necrosis may
occasionally develop without definite signs in the obese, diabetic,
elderly, or immunosuppressed patient. Gangrene may lead to
gallbladder perforation, usually with formation of a pericholecystic
abscess and rarely to generalized peritonitis. Other serious acute
complications include emphysematous cholecystitis (secondary
infection with a gas-forming organism) and empyema.
B. Chronic Cholecystitis and Other Complications
Chronic cholecystitis results from repeated episodes of acute
cholecystitis or chronic irritation of the gallbladder wall by stones
and is characterized pathologically by varying degrees of chronic
inflammation of the gallbladder. Calculi are usually present. In about
4–5% of cases, the villi of the gallbladder undergo polypoid
enlargement due to deposition of cholesterol that may be visible to
the naked eye (“strawberry gallbladder,” cholesterolosis). In other
instances, hyperplasia of all or part of the gallbladder wall may be
so marked as to give the appearance of a myoma
(adenomyomatosis). Hydrops of the gallbladder results when acute
cholecystitis subsides but cystic duct obstruction persists, producing
distention of the gallbladder with a clear mucoid fluid. Occasionally,
a stone in the neck of the gallbladder may compress the bile duct
and cause jaundice (Mirizzi syndrome). Xanthogranulomatous
cholecystitis is a rare variant of chronic cholecystitis characterized
by grayish-yellow nodules or streaks, representing lipid-laden
macrophages, in the wall of the gallbladder.
Cholelithiasis with chronic cholecystitis may be associated with
acute exacerbations of gallbladder inflammation, bile duct stone,
fistulization to the bowel, pancreatitis and, rarely, carcinoma of the
gallbladder. Calcified (porcelain) gallbladder has generally been
thought to have a high association with gallbladder carcinoma and to
be an indication for cholecystectomy, although the risk of
gallbladder cancer may be higher when calcification is mucosal
rather than intramural.
 Treatment
Acute cholecystitis will usually subside on a conservative regimen
(withholding of oral feedings, intravenous alimentation, analgesics,
and intravenous antibiotics—generally a second- or third-generation
cephalosporin such as cefoperazone, 1–2 g intravenously every 12
hours, with the addition of metronidazole, 500 mg intravenously
every 6 hours; in severe cases, a fluoroquinolone such as
ciprofloxacin, 250 mg intravenously every 12 hours, plus
metronidazole may be given). Morphine or meperidine may be
administered for pain. Because of the high risk of recurrent attacks
(up to 10% by 1 month and over 30% by 1 year), cholecystectomy
—generally laparoscopically—should generally be performed within
2–4 days after admission to the hospital for acute cholecystitis. If
nonsurgical treatment has been elected, the patient (especially if
diabetic or elderly) should be watched carefully for recurrent
symptoms, evidence of gangrene of the gallbladder, or cholangitis.
In high-risk patients, ultrasound-guided aspiration of the gallbladder,
if feasible, percutaneous cholecystostomy, or endoscopic insertion
of a stent or nasobiliary drain into the gallbladder may postpone or
even avoid the need for surgery. Immediate cholecystectomy is
mandatory when there is evidence of gangrene or perforation.
Surgical treatment of chronic cholecystitis is the same as for acute
cholecystitis. If indicated, cholangiography can be performed during
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Choledocholithiasis can also be
excluded by either preoperative or postoperative ERCP or MRCP.
 Prognosis
The overall mortality rate of cholecystectomy is <0.2%, but
hepatobiliary tract surgery is a more formidable procedure in the
elderly, in whom mortality rates are higher. A technically successful
surgical procedure in an appropriately selected patient is generally
followed by complete resolution of symptoms.
 When to Admit
All patients with acute cholecystitis should be hospitalized.
Barie PS et al. Acute acalculous cholecystitis. Gastroenterol Clin
North Am. 2010 Jun;39(2):343–57. [PMID: 20478490]
 
Gurusamy K et al. Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
on the safety and effectiveness of early versus delayed
laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis. Br J Surg.
2010 Feb;97(2):141–50. [PMID: 20035546]
 
Huffman JL et al. Acute acalculous cholecystitis: a review. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jan;8(1):15–22. [PMID: 19747982]
 
PRE- & POSTCHOLECYSTECTOMY SYNDROMES
1. Precholecystectomy
In a small group of patients (mostly women) with biliary pain,
conventional radiographic studies of the upper gastrointestinal tract
and gallbladder—including cholangiography—are unremarkable. In
some such cases, emptying of the gallbladder may be markedly
reduced on gallbladder scintigraphy following injection of
cholecystokinin; cholecystectomy may be curative. Histologic
examination of the resected gallbladder may show chronic
cholecystitis or microlithiasis. An additional diagnostic consideration
is sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (see below).
2. Postcholecystectomy
Following cholecystectomy, some patients complain of continuing
symptoms, ie, right upper quadrant pain, flatulence, and fatty food
intolerance. The persistence of symptoms in this group of patients
suggests the possibility of an incorrect diagnosis prior to
cholecystectomy, eg, esophagitis, pancreatitis, radiculopathy, or
functional bowel disease. Choledocholithiasis or bile duct stricture
should be ruled out. Pain may also be associated with dilatation of
the cystic duct remnant, neuroma formation in the ductal wall,
foreign body granuloma, or traction on the bile duct by a long cystic
duct.
The clinical presentation of right upper quadrant pain, chills,
fever, or jaundice suggests biliary tract disease. Endoscopic
ultrasonography or retrograde cholangiography may be necessary
to demonstrate a stone or stricture. Biliary pain associated with
elevated liver biochemical tests or a dilated bile duct in the absence
of an obstructing lesion suggests sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
Biliary manometry may be useful for documenting elevated baseline
sphincter of Oddi pressures typical of sphincter dysfunction when
biliary pain is associated with elevated liver biochemical tests
(twofold) or a dilated bile duct (>12 mm) (type II sphincter of Oddi
dysfunction) but is not necessary when both are present (type I
sphincter of Oddi dysfunction) and is associated with a high risk of
pancreatitis. In the absence of either elevated liver biochemical tests
or a dilated bile duct (type III sphincter of Oddi dysfunction), a
nonbiliary source of symptoms should be suspected. (Analogous
criteria have been developed for pancreatic sphincter dysfunction.)
Biliary scintigraphy after intravenous administration of morphine and
MRCP following intravenous administration of secretin are under
study as screening tests for sphincter dysfunction. Endoscopic
sphincterotomy is most likely to relieve symptoms in patients with
types I or II sphincter of Oddi dysfunction or an elevated sphincter
of Oddi pressure, although many patients continue to have some
pain. In some cases, treatment with a calcium channel blocker,
long-acting nitrate, or phosphodiesterase inhibitor (eg, vardenafil) or
possibly injection of the sphincter with botulinum toxin may be
beneficial. In refractory cases, surgical sphincteroplasty or removal
of the cystic duct remnant may be considered.
 When to Refer
Patients with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction should be referred for
diagnostic procedures.
Baillie J. Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. Curr Gastroenterol Rep.
2010 Apr;12(2):130–4. [PMID: 20424985]
 
Girometti R et al. Post-cholecystectomy syndrome: spectrum of
biliary findings at magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography.
Br J Radiol. 2010 Apr;83(988):351–61. [PMID: 20335441]
 
CHOLEDOCHOLITHIASIS & CHOLANGITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often a history of biliary pain or jaundice.
 Sudden onset of severe right upper quadrant or epigastric pain,
which may radiate to the right scapula or shoulder.
 Occasional patients present with painless jaundice.
 Nausea and vomiting.
 Fever, which may be followed by hypothermia and gram-
negative shock, jaundice, and leukocytosis.
 Stones in bile duct most reliably detected by ERCP or
endoscopic ultrasonography.
 
 General Considerations
About 15% of patients with gallstones have choledocholithiasis (bile
duct stones). The percentage rises with age, and the frequency in
elderly people with gallstones may be as high as 50%. Bile duct
stones usually originate in the gallbladder but may also form
spontaneously in the bile duct after cholecystectomy. The risk is
increased twofold in persons with a juxtapapillary duodenal
diverticulum. Symptoms result if there is obstruction.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A history of biliary pain or prior jaundice may be obtained. Biliary
pain results from rapid increases in bile duct pressure due to
obstructed bile flow. The features that suggest the presence of a bile
duct stone are: (1) frequently recurring attacks of right upper
abdominal pain that is severe and persists for hours; (2) chills and
fever associated with severe pain; and (3) a history of jaundice
associated with episodes of abdominal pain (Table 16–7). The
combination of pain, fever (and chills), and jaundice represents
Charcot triad and denotes the classic picture of cholangitis. The
addition of altered mental status and hypotension (Reynolds
pentad) signifies acute suppurative cholangitis and is an endoscopic
emergency. According to the Tokyo guidelines (2006), the
diagnosis of acute cholangitis is established by the presence of (1)
the Charcot triad; or (2) two elements of the Charcot triad plus
laboratory evidence of an inflammatory response (eg, elevated
white blood cell count, C-reactive protein), elevated liver
biochemical test levels, and imaging evidence of biliary dilatation or
a cause of obstruction.
Hepatomegaly may be present in calculous biliary obstruction,
and tenderness is usually present in the right upper quadrant and
epigastrium. Bile duct obstruction lasting >30 days results in liver
damage leading to cirrhosis. Hepatic failure with portal hypertension
occurs in untreated cases.
B. Laboratory Findings
Acute obstruction of the bile duct typically produces a transient
albeit striking increase in serum aminotransferase levels (often
>1000 units/L [20 mckat/L]). Bilirubinuria and elevation of the
serum bilirubin are present if the bile duct remains obstructed; levels
commonly fluctuate. Serum alkaline phosphatase levels rise more
slowly. Not uncommonly, serum amylase elevations are present
because of secondary pancreatitis. When extrahepatic obstruction
persists for more than a few weeks, differentiation of obstruction
from chronic cholestatic liver disease becomes more difficult.
Leukocytosis is present in patients with cholangitis. Prolongation of
the prothrombin time can result from the obstructed flow of bile to
the intestine. In contrast to hepatocellular dysfunction,
hypoprothrombinemia due to obstructive jaundice will respond to
10 mg of parenteral vitamin K or water-soluble oral vitamin K
(phytonadione, 5 mg) within 24–36 hours.
C. Imaging
Ultrasonography and CT may demonstrate dilated bile ducts, and
radionuclide imaging may show impaired bile flow. Endoscopic
ultrasonography, 
helical 
CT, 
and 
magnetic 
resonance
cholangiography are accurate in demonstrating bile duct stones and
may be used in patients thought to be at intermediate risk for
choledocholithiasis (age >55 years, cholecystitis, bile duct diameter
> 6 mm on ultrasonography, serum bilirubin 1.8–4 mg/dL [30.78–
68.4 mcmol/L], elevated serum liver enzymes, pancreatitis). ERCP
(occasionally with intraductal ultrasonography) or percutaneous
transhepatic cholangiography provides the most direct and accurate
means of determining the cause, location, and extent of obstruction.
If the likelihood that obstruction is caused by a stone is high (bile
duct diameter >6 mm, bile duct stone seen on ultrasonography,
serum bilirubin >4 mg/dL [68.4 mcmol/L]) or cholangitis is present,
ERCP is the procedure of choice because it permits sphincterotomy
with stone extraction or stent placement. Meticulous technique is
required to avoid causing acute cholangitis.
 Differential Diagnosis
The most common cause of obstructive jaundice is a bile duct
stone. Next in frequency are neoplasms of the pancreas, ampulla of
Vater, or bile duct. Extrinsic compression of the bile duct may result
from metastatic carcinoma (usually from the gastrointestinal tract or
breast) involving porta hepatis lymph nodes or, rarely, from a large
duodenal diverticulum. Gallbladder cancer extending into the bile
duct often presents as obstructive jaundice. Chronic cholestatic liver
diseases (primarily biliary cirrhosis, sclerosing cholangitis, drug-
induced) must be considered. Hepatocellular jaundice can usually
be differentiated by the history, clinical findings, and liver
biochemical tests, but liver biopsy is necessary on occasion.
Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis should be considered in persons
from Asia (and occasionally elsewhere) with intrahepatic biliary
stones (particularly in the left ductal system) and recurrent
cholangitis.
 Treatment
A bile duct stone in a patient with cholelithiasis or cholecystitis is
usually treated by endoscopic sphincterotomy and stone extraction
followed by laparoscopic cholecystectomy within 72 hours. An
alternative approach, which may be associated with a shorter
duration of hospitalization, is laparoscopic cholecystectomy and bile
duct exploration. For the elderly (> 70 years) or poor-risk patient
with cholelithiasis and choledocholithiasis, cholecystectomy may be
deferred after endoscopic sphincterotomy because the risk of
subsequent cholecystitis is low. ERCP with sphincterotomy should
be performed before cholecystectomy in patients with gallstones
and cholangitis, jaundice (serum total bilirubin >4 mg/dL [68.4
mcmol/L]), a dilated bile duct (>6 mm), or stones in the bile duct
seen on ultrasonography or CT. (Stones may ultimately recur in up
to 12% of patients, particularly in the elderly, when the bile duct
diameter is ≥ 15 mm, or when brown pigment stones are found at
the time of the initial sphincterotomy.) Endoscopic balloon dilation
of the sphincter of Oddi may be associated with a higher rate of
pancreatitis than endoscopic sphincterotomy and is generally
reserved for patients with coagulopathy, in whom the risk of
bleeding is lower with balloon dilation than with sphincterotomy. In
patients with biliary pancreatitis that resolves rapidly, the stone
usually passes into the intestine, and ERCP prior to
cholecystectomy is not necessary if an intraoperative cholangiogram
is done.
Choledocholithiasis discovered at laparoscopic cholecystectomy
may be managed via laparoscopic or, if necessary, open bile duct
exploration or by postoperative endoscopic sphincterotomy.
Operative findings of choledocholithiasis are palpable stones in the
bile duct, dilatation or thickening of the wall of the bile duct, or
stones in the gallbladder small enough to pass through the cystic
duct. 
Laparoscopic 
intraoperative 
cholangiography 
(or
intraoperative ultrasonography) should be done at the time of
cholecystectomy in patients with liver enzyme elevations but a bile
duct diameter of <5 mm; if a ductal stone is found, the duct is
explored. 
In 
the 
postcholecystectomy 
patient 
with
choledocholithiasis, endoscopic sphincterotomy with stone
extraction is preferable to transabdominal surgery. Lithotripsy
(endoscopic or external), direct choledoscopy (cholangioscopy), or
biliary stenting may be a therapeutic consideration for large stones.
For the patient with a T tube and bile duct stone, the stone may be
extracted via the T tube.
Postoperative antibiotics are not administered routinely after
biliary tract surgery. Cultures of the bile are always taken at
operation. If biliary tract infection was present preoperatively or is
apparent at operation, ampicillin (500 mg every 6 hours
intravenously) with gentamicin (1.5 mg/kg intravenously every 8
hours) and metronidazole (500 mg intravenously every 6 hours) or
ciprofloxacin (250 mg intravenously every 12 hours) or a third-
generation cephalosporin (eg, cefoperazone, 1–2 g intravenous
every 12 hours) is administered postoperatively until the results of
sensitivity tests on culture specimens are available. A T-tube
cholangiogram should be done before the tube is removed, usually
about 3 weeks after surgery. A small amount of bile frequently leaks
from the tube site for a few days.
Urgent ERCP with sphincterotomy and stone extraction is
generally indicated for choledocholithiasis complicated by acute
cholangitis and is preferred to surgery. Before ERCP, liver function
should be evaluated thoroughly. The prothrombin time should be
restored to normal by parenteral administration of vitamin K (see
above). For mild-to-moderately severe community-acquired acute
cholangitis, ciprofloxacin, 500 mg intravenously every 12 hours,
penetrates well into bile and is effective treatment for cholangitis,
with the possible addition of metronidazole, 500 mg every 6-8
hours. Alternative regimens include intravenous ampicillin and
sulbactam, 3 g every 6 hours; cefoxitin, 1-2 g every 6 hours; or
ampicillin, 2 g every 6 hours, plus gentamicin, 1.7 mg/kg every 8
hours. Regimens for severe or hospital-acquired acute cholangitis
include intravenous piperacillin and tazobactam, 3.375 g every 6
hours; ticarcillin and clavulanate, 3.1 g every 6 hours; ceftriaxone,
1–2 g daily, plus metronidazole, 500 mg every 6–8 hours; or, in
patients at high risk for harboring antibiotic-resistant pathogens,
meropenem, 1 g every 8 hours. Aminoglycosides should not be
given for more than a few days because the risk of aminoglycoside
nephrotoxicity is increased in patients with cholestasis. Emergent
decompression of the bile duct, generally by ERCP, is required for
patients who are septic or fail to improve on antibiotics within 12–
24 hours. Medical therapy alone is most likely to fail in patients with
tachycardia, serum albumin <3 g/dL (30 g/L), marked
hyperbilirubinemia, high serum ALT level, high white blood cell
count, and prothrombin time > 14 seconds on admission. If
sphincterotomy cannot be performed, decompression by a biliary
stent or nasobiliary catheter can be done. Once decompression is
achieved, antibiotics are generally continued for at least another 3
days. Elective cholecystectomy can be undertaken after resolution
of cholangitis, unless the patient remains unfit for surgery. Mortality
from acute cholangitis has been reported to correlate with a high
total bilirubin level, prolonged partial thromboplastin time, and
presence of a liver abscess.
 When to Refer
All symptomatic patients with choledocholithiasis should be
referred.
 When to Admit
All patients with acute cholangitis should be hospitalized.
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Maple JT et al. The role
of endoscopy in the evaluation of suspected choledocholithiasis.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Jan;71(1):1–9. [PMID: 20105473]
 
Frossard JL et al. Detection and management of bile duct stones.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Oct;72(4):808–16. [PMID:
20883860]
 
Reinders JS et al. Early laparoscopic cholecystectomy improves
outcomes after endoscopic sphincterotomy for
choledochocystolithiasis. Gastroenterology. 2010
Jun;138(7):2315–20. [PMID: 20206179]
 
Rogers SJ et al. Prospective randomized trial of LC+LCBDE vs
ERCP/S+LC for common bile duct stone disease. Arch Surg.
2010 Jan;145(1):28–33. [PMID: 20083751]
 
BILIARY STRICTURE
Benign biliary strictures are the result of surgical (including liver
transplantation) anastomosis or injury in about 95% of cases. The
remainder of cases are caused by blunt external injury to the
abdomen, pancreatitis, erosion of the duct by a gallstone, or prior
endoscopic sphincterotomy.
Signs of injury to the duct may or may not be recognized in the
immediate postoperative period. If complete occlusion has
occurred, jaundice will develop rapidly; more often, however, a tear
has been made accidentally in the duct, and the earliest
manifestation of injury may be excessive or prolonged loss of bile
from the surgical drains. Bile leakage resulting in a bile collection
(biloma) may predispose to localized infection, which in turn
accentuates scar formation and the ultimate development of a
fibrous stricture.
Cholangitis is the most common complication of stricture.
Typically, the patient experiences episodes of pain, fever, chills, and
jaundice within a few weeks to months after cholecystectomy.
Physical findings may include jaundice during an attack of
cholangitis and right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness. Serum
alkaline phosphatase is usually elevated. Hyperbilirubinemia is
variable, fluctuating during exacerbations and usually remaining in
the range of 5–10 mg/dL (85.5–171 mcmol/L). Blood cultures may
be positive during an episode of cholangitis. Secondary biliary
cirrhosis will inevitably develop if a stricture is not treated.
MRCP can be valuable in demonstrating the stricture, whereas
ERCP permits biopsy and cytologic specimens to exclude
malignancy, sphincterotomy to allow closure of a bile leak, and
dilation and stent placement, thereby avoiding surgical repair in
some cases; when ERCP is unsuccessful, dilation of a stricture may
be accomplished by PTC. Placement of multiple plastic stents
appears to be more effective than placement of a single stent. Metal
stents, which often cannot be removed endoscopically, are generally
avoided in benign strictures unless life expectancy is < 2 years. The
use of covered metal stents, which are more easily removed
endoscopically than uncovered metal stents, as well as
bioabsorbable stents, is emerging as an alternative to use of plastic
stents. Strictures related to chronic pancreatitis are more difficult to
treat endoscopically than postsurgical strictures, and preliminary
reports suggest that they may be best managed with a temporary
covered metal stent. Following liver transplantation, endoscopic
management is more successful for anastomotic than for
nonanastomotic strictures, although results for nonanastomotic
strictures may be improved with the use of multiple plastic stents.
Results are disappointing for biliary strictures after live liver donor
liver transplantation, particularly in patients with a late-onset (after
24 weeks) stricture or with intrahepatic biliary dilatation; in addition,
the risk of post-ERCP pancreatitis appears to be increased. When
malignancy cannot be excluded with certainty, additional
endoscopic diagnostic approaches may be considered—if available
—including 
endoscopic 
ultrasonography, 
intraductal
ultrasonography, and direct choledoscopy (cholangioscopy).
Differentiation from cholangiocarcinoma may ultimately require
surgical exploration. Operative treatment of a stricture frequently
necessitates performance of an end-to-end ductal repair,
choledochojejunostomy, or hepaticojejunostomy to reestablish bile
flow into the intestine.
 When to Refer
All patients with biliary stricture should be referred.
 When to Admit
Patients with cholangitis should be hospitalized.
Costamagna G et al. Endotherapy of postoperative biliary
strictures with multiple stents: results after more than 10 years of
follow-up. Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Sep;72(3):551–7. [PMID:
20630514]
 
Tabibian JH et al. Endoscopic treatment with multiple stents for
post-liver-transplantation nonanastomotic biliary strictures.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2009 Jun;69(7):1236–43. [PMID:
19249040]
 
PRIMARY SCLEROSING CHOLANGITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most common in men aged 20–50 years.
 Often associated with ulcerative colitis.
 Progressive jaundice, itching, and other features of cholestasis.
 Diagnosis based on characteristic cholangiographic findings.
 At least 10% risk of cholangiocarcinoma.
 
 General Considerations
Primary sclerosing cholangitis is an uncommon disease
characterized by diffuse inflammation of the biliary tract leading to
fibrosis and strictures of the biliary system. The disease is most
common in men aged 20–50 years, with an incidence of 1 per
100,000 (possibly increasing) and a prevalence of 21 per 100,000
men and 6 per 100,000 women in the United States. The disease is
closely associated with ulcerative colitis (and in some cases with
Crohn colitis), which is present in approximately two-thirds of
patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis; however, clinically
significant sclerosing cholangitis develops in only 1–4% of patients
with ulcerative colitis. As in ulcerative colitis, smoking is associated
with a decreased risk of primary sclerosing cholangitis. Primary
sclerosing cholangitis is associated with the histocompatible antigens
HLA-B8 and -DR3 or -DR4, and first-degree relatives of patients
with primary sclerosing cholangitis have a fourfold increased risk of
primary sclerosing cholangitis and a threefold increased risk of
ulcerative colitis. The diagnosis of primary sclerosing cholangitis
may be difficult to make after biliary surgery.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Primary sclerosing cholangitis presents as progressive obstructive
jaundice, frequently associated with fatigue, pruritus, anorexia, and
indigestion. Patients may be diagnosed in the presymptomatic phase
because of an elevated alkaline phosphatase level. Complications of
chronic cholestasis, such as osteoporosis and malabsorption of fat-
soluble vitamins, may occur late in the course. Esophageal varices
on initial endoscopy are most likely in patients with a higher Mayo
risk score based on age, bilirubin, albumin, and AST and a higher
AST/ALT ratio, and new varices are likely to develop in those with
a lower platelet count and higher bilirubin at 2 years. In patients with
primary sclerosing cholangitis, ulcerative colitis is frequently
characterized by rectal sparing and backwash ileitis.
B. Diagnostic Findings
The diagnosis of primary sclerosing cholangitis is increasingly made
by magnetic resonance cholangiography, the sensitivity of which
approaches that of ERCP. Characteristic cholangiographic findings
are segmental fibrosis of bile ducts with saccular dilatations between
strictures. Biliary obstruction by a stone or tumor should be
excluded. The disease may be confined to small intrahepatic bile
ducts, in which case MRCP and ERCP are normal and the
diagnosis is suggested by liver biopsy findings. These patients have
a longer survival than patients with involvement of the large ducts
and do not appear to be at increased risk for cholangiocarcinoma
unless large-duct sclerosing cholangitis develops. Liver biopsy may
show characteristic periductal fibrosis (“onion-skinning”) and allows
staging, which is based on the degree of fibrosis. Perinuclear
ANCA (directed against myeloid-specific tubulin-beta isotype 5) as
well as antinuclear, anticardiolipin, antithyroperoxidase, and
anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies and rheumatoid factor
are frequently detected in serum. Occasional patients have clinical
and histologic features of both sclerosing cholangitis and
autoimmune hepatitis. An association with autoimmune pancreatitis
is also seen, and this entity (IgG4-associated cholangitis, or
sclerosing pancreaticocholangitis) is often responsive to
corticosteroids. Primary sclerosing cholangitis must be distinguished
from idiopathic adulthood ductopenia (a rare disorder that affects
young to middle-aged adults who manifest cholestasis resulting from
loss of interlobular and septal bile ducts yet who have a normal
cholangiogram and that is caused in some cases by a mutation in the
canalicular phospholipid transporter gene ABCB4) and from other
cholangiopathies (including primary biliary cirrhosis; cystic fibrosis;
eosinophilic cholangitis; AIDS cholangiopathy; allograft rejection;
graft-versus-host disease; ischemic damage [often with biliary
“casts,” a rapid progression to cirrhosis, and a poor outcome]
caused by hepatic artery thrombosis, shock, respiratory failure, or
drugs; intra-arterial chemotherapy; and sarcoidosis).
 Complications
Cholangiocarcinoma may complicate the course of primary
sclerosing cholangitis in up to 20% of cases (1.2% per year) and
may be difficult to diagnose by cytologic examination or biopsy
because of false-negative results. A serum CA 19-9 level >100
units/mL is suggestive but not diagnostic of cholangiocarcinoma.
Annual right-upper-quadrant ultrasonography and serum CA 19-9
testing are recommended for surveillance, with CT or MRI with
MRCP and biliary cytology if the results are abnormal. PET and
choledochoscopy may play roles in the early detection of
cholangiocarcinoma. Extensive surgical resection may result in 5-
year survival rates of >50%. Patients with ulcerative colitis and
primary sclerosing cholangitis are at high risk for colorectal
neoplasia. The risks of gallstones, cholecystitis, gallbladder polyps,
and gallbladder carcinoma appear to be increased in patients with
primary sclerosing cholangitis.
 Treatment
Episodes of acute bacterial cholangitis may be treated with
ciprofloxacin (750 mg twice daily orally or intravenously).
Ursodeoxycholic acid in standard doses (10–15 mg/kg/d orally)
may improve liver biochemical test results but does not appear to
alter the natural history and is no longer recommended for primary
sclerosing cholangitis. High-dose ursodeoxycholic acid (25–30
mg/kg/d) also has been shown not to reduce cholangiographic
progression and liver fibrosis, nor to improve survival or prevent
cholangiocarcinoma, and in one trial actually increased the risk of
death and need for liver transplantation. Other drugs such as
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and minocycline are under study. Careful
endoscopic evaluation of the biliary tree may permit balloon dilation
of localized strictures, and repeated dilation of a dominant stricture
may improve survival, although such patients have reduced survival
compared with patients who do not have a dominant stricture.
Short-term placement of a stent in a major stricture also may relieve
symptoms and improve biochemical abnormalities, with sustained
improvement after the stent is removed. However, long-term
stenting may increase the rate of complications such as cholangitis.
In patients without cirrhosis, surgical resection of a dominant bile
duct stricture may lead to longer survival than endoscopic therapy
by decreasing the subsequent risk of cholangiocarcinoma. In
patients with ulcerative colitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis is an
independent risk factor for the development of colorectal dysplasia
and cancer, and strict adherence to a colonoscopic surveillance
program is recommended. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid has
been reported to reduce the risk of colorectal dysplasia and
carcinoma in patients with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing
cholangitis. For patients with cirrhosis and clinical decompensation,
liver transplantation is the procedure of choice; primary sclerosing
cholangitis recurs in the graft in 30% of cases, with a possible
reduction in the risk of recurrence when colectomy has been
performed for ulcerative colitis before transplantation.
 Prognosis
Survival of patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis averages 12–
17 years. Adverse prognostic markers are older age,
hepatosplenomegaly, higher serum bilirubin and AST levels, lower
albumin levels, a history of variceal bleeding, a dominant bile duct
stricture, and extrahepatic duct changes. Variceal bleeding is also a
risk factor for cholangiocarcinoma. Actuarial survival rates with liver
transplantation are as high as 85% at 3 years, but rates are much
lower once cholangiocarcinoma has developed. Following
transplantation, patients have an increased risk of nonanastomotic
biliary strictures and—in those with ulcerative colitis—colon cancer.
The retransplantation rate is higher than that for primary biliary
cirrhosis. Those patients who are unable to undergo liver
transplantation will ultimately require high-quality palliative care (see
Chapter 5).
Chapman R et al. Diagnosis and management of primary sclerosing
cholangitis. Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):660–78. [PMID:
20101749]
 
Gotthardt DN et al. Endoscopic dilation of dominant stenoses in
primary sclerosing cholangitis: outcome after long-term treatment.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 Mar;71(3):527–34. [PMID:
20189511]
 
Mendes F et al. Primary sclerosing cholangitis: overview and
update. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Nov;7(11): 611–9.
[PMID: 20938459]
 
Treeprasertsuk S et al. The predictors of the presence of varices in
patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Hepatology. 2010
Apr;51(4):1302–10. [PMID: 20044810]
 
DISEASES OF THE PANCREAS
 
See Chapter 39 for Carcinoma of the Pancreas and Periampullary
Area.
ACUTE PANCREATITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Abrupt onset of deep epigastric pain, often with radiation to the
back.
 History of previous episodes, often related to alcohol intake.
 Nausea, vomiting, sweating, weakness.
 Abdominal tenderness and distention and fever.
 Leukocytosis, elevated serum amylase, elevated serum lipase.
 
General Considerations
Most cases of acute pancreatitis are related to biliary tract disease
(a passed gallstone, usually <5 mm in diameter) or heavy alcohol
intake. The exact pathogenesis is not known but may include edema
or obstruction of the ampulla of Vater, reflux of bile into pancreatic
ducts, and direct injury of pancreatic acinar cells by prematurely
activated pancreatic enzymes. Among the numerous other causes or
associations are hypercalcemia, hyperlipidemias (chylomicronemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, or both), abdominal trauma (including
surgery), 
drugs 
(including 
azathioprine, 
mercaptopurine,
asparaginase, pentamidine, didanosine, valproic acid, tetracyclines,
dapsone, isoniazid, metronidazole, estrogen and tamoxifen [by
raising serum triglycerides], sulfonamides, mesalamine, sulindac,
thiazides, simvastatin, enalapril, methyldopa, procainamide, and
possibly glucocorticoids, sitagliptin, and others), vasculitis, infections
(eg, mumps, cytomegalovirus, M avium complex), peritoneal
dialysis, cardiopulmonary bypass, ERCP, and genetic mutations that
also predispose to chronic pancreatitis (see later). In patients with
pancreas divisum, a congenital anomaly in which the dorsal and
ventral pancreatic ducts fail to fuse, acute pancreatitis may result
from stenosis of the minor papilla with obstruction to flow from the
accessory pancreatic duct, although concomitant mutations in the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene
have also been reported to account for acute pancreatitis in some
patients with pancreas divisum. Acute pancreatitis may also result
from anomalous union of the pancreaticobiliary duct. Rarely, acute
pancreatitis may be the presenting manifestation of a pancreatic or
ampullary neoplasm. Celiac disease appears to be associated with
an increased risk of acute and chronic pancreatitis. Apparently
“idiopathic” acute pancreatitis is often caused by occult biliary
microlithiasis and may be caused by sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
involving the pancreatic duct. Between 15% and 25% of cases are
truly idiopathic. Smoking increases the risk of alcoholic and
idiopathic pancreatitis, and older age and obesity increase the risk
of a severe course. The incidence of pancreatitis has increased since
1990.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Epigastric abdominal pain, generally abrupt in onset, is steady,
boring, and severe and often made worse by walking and lying
supine and better by sitting and leaning forward. The pain usually
radiates into the back but may radiate to the right or left. Nausea
and vomiting are usually present. Weakness, sweating, and anxiety
are noted in severe attacks. There may be a history of alcohol
intake or a heavy meal immediately preceding the attack or a history
of milder similar episodes or biliary pain in the past.
The abdomen is tender mainly in the upper part, most often
without guarding, rigidity, or rebound. The abdomen may be
distended, and bowel sounds may be absent with associated ileus.
Fever of 38.4–39°C, tachycardia, hypotension (even true shock),
pallor, and cool clammy skin are often present. Mild jaundice may
be seen. Occasionally, an upper abdominal mass due to the
inflamed pancreas or a pseudocyst may be palpated. Acute kidney
injury (usually due to prerenal cause) may occur early in the course
of acute pancreatitis.
B. Assessment of Severity
The severity of acute alcoholic pancreatitis can be assessed using
Ranson criteria (Table 16–8). The Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment (SOFA) score can be used to assess injury to other
organs, and the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation
(APACHE II) score is another tool for assessing severity. A simple
5-point clinical scoring system based on blood urea nitrogen >25
mg/dL (9 mmol/L), impaired mental status, systemic inflammatory
response syndrome, age >60 years, and pleural effusion (BISAP,
also known as Bedside Index for Severity in Acute Pancreatitis)
during the first 24 hours (before the onset of organ failure) identifies
patients at increased risk for mortality. More simply, an elevated
blood urea nitrogen level on admission and a rise in blood urea
nitrogen within the first 24 hours of hospitalization are independently
associated with increased mortality; the greater the rise in blood
urea nitrogen after admission, the greater the mortality rate. An early
rise in serum levels of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin has
also been proposed as a marker of severe acute pancreatitis. The
absence of rebound abdominal tenderness or guarding, a normal
hematocrit value, and a normal serum creatinine level (“harmless
acute pancreatitis score,” or HAPS) predicts a nonsevere course
with 98% accuracy.
 
Table 16–8. Ranson criteria for assessing the severity of acut
 
 
 
Three or more of the following predict a severe course
complicated by pancreatic necrosis with a sensitivity of 60–
80%
     Age over 55 years
     White blood cell count > 16 × 103/mcL (16 × 109/L)
     Blood glucose > 200 mg/dL (11 mmol/L)
     Serum lactic dehydrogenase > 350 units/L (7 mkat/L)
     Aspartate aminotransferase > 250 units/L (5 mkat/L)
Development of the following in the first 48 hours indicates
a worsening prognosis
     Hematocrit drop of more than 10 percentage points
     Blood urea nitrogen rise > 5 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L)
     Arterial PO2 of < 60 mm Hg (7.8 kPa)
     Serum calcium of < 8 mg/dL (0.2 mmol/L)
     Base deficit over 4 mEq/L
     Estimated fluid sequestration of > 6 L
Mortality rates correlate with the number of criteria
present1
Number of Criteria
Mortality Rate
0–2
    1%
3–4
  16%
5–6
  40%
7–8
100%
1An APACHE II score ≥ 8 also correlates with mortality.
C. Laboratory Findings
Serum amylase and lipase are elevated—usually more than three
times the upper limit of normal—within 24 hours in 90% of cases;
their return to normal is variable depending on the severity of
disease. Lipase remains elevated longer than amylase and is slightly
more accurate for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. Leukocytosis
(10,000–30,000/mcL), proteinuria, granular casts, glycosuria (10–
20% of cases), hyperglycemia, and elevated serum bilirubin may be
present. Blood urea nitrogen and serum alkaline phosphatase may
be elevated and coagulation tests abnormal. An elevated serum
creatinine level (>1.8 mg/dL [149.94 mcmol/L]) at 48 hours is
associated with the development of pancreatic necrosis. In patients
with clear evidence of acute pancreatitis, a serum ALT level of
more than 150 units/L (3 mkat/L) suggests biliary pancreatitis. A
decrease in serum calcium may reflect saponification and correlates
with severity of the disease. Levels lower than 7 mg/dL (1.75
mmol/L) (when serum albumin is normal) are associated with tetany
and an unfavorable prognosis. Patients with acute pancreatitis
caused by hypertriglyceridemia generally have fasting triglyceride
levels above 1000 mg/dL (10 mmol/L). An early rise in the
hematocrit value above 44% suggests hemoconcentration and
predicts pancreatic necrosis. An elevated C-reactive protein
concentration (> 150 mg/L [1500 mg/L]) at 48 hours suggests
severe disease.
Other tests that offer the possibility of simplicity, rapidity, ease of
use, and low cost—including urinary trypsinogen-2, trypsinogen
activation peptide, and carboxypeptidase B—are not widely
available. In patients in whom ascites or a left pleural effusion
develops, fluid amylase content is high. Electrocardiography may
show ST–T wave changes.
D. Imaging
Plain radiographs of the abdomen may show gallstones, a “sentinel
loop” (a segment of air-filled small intestine most commonly in the
left upper quadrant), the “colon cutoff sign”—a gas-filled segment
of transverse colon abruptly ending at the area of pancreatic
inflammation—or focal linear atelectasis of the lower lobe of the
lungs with or without pleural effusion. Ultrasonography is often not
helpful in diagnosing acute pancreatitis because of intervening bowel
gas but may identify gallstones in the gall-bladder. Unenhanced CT
is useful for demonstrating an enlarged pancreas when the diagnosis
of pancreatitis is uncertain, detecting pseudocysts, differentiating
pancreatitis from other possible intra-abdominal catastrophes, and
providing an initial assessment of prognosis (Table 16–9). Rapid-
bolus intravenous contrast-enhanced CT following aggressive
volume resuscitation is of particular value after the first 3 days of
severe acute pancreatitis for identifying areas of necrotizing
pancreatitis and assessing the degree of necrosis, although the use
of intravenous contrast may increase the risk of complications of
pancreatitis and of acute kidney injury and should be avoided when
the serum creatinine level is >1.5 mg/dL (124.95 mcmol/L). MRI
appears to be a suitable alternative to CT. Perfusion CT on day 3
demonstrating areas of ischemia in the pancreas has been reported
to predict the development of pancreatic necrosis. The presence of
a fluid collection in the pancreas correlates with an increased
mortality rate. CT-guided needle aspiration of areas of necrotizing
pancreatitis after the third day may disclose infection, usually by
enteric organisms, which invariably leads to death unless
debridement is ultimately performed. The presence of gas bubbles
on CT implies infection by gas-forming organisms. Endoscopic
ultrasonography is useful in identifying occult biliary disease (eg,
small stones, sludge), which, including microlithiasis, is present in a
majority of patients with apparently idiopathic acute pancreatitis,
and is indicated in persons over age 40 to exclude malignancy.
ERCP is generally not indicated after a first attack of acute
pancreatitis unless there is associated cholangitis or jaundice or a
bile duct stone is known to be present, but endoscopic
ultrasonography or MRCP should be considered, especially after
repeated attacks of idiopathic acute pancreatitis. In selected cases,
aspiration of bile for crystal analysis may confirm the suspicion of
microlithiasis, and manometry of the pancreatic duct sphincter may
detect sphincter of Oddi dysfunction as a cause of recurrent
pancreatitis.
 
Table 16–9. severity index for acut
 
1Severity index = CT Grade Points + Additional Points.
2Based on the severity index.
Adapted with permission from Balthazar EJ. Acute pancreatitis:
assessment of severity with clinical and CT evaluation. Radiology. 2002
Jun;223(3):603–13.
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute pancreatitis must be differentiated from an acutely perforated
duodenal ulcer, acute cholecystitis, acute intestinal obstruction,
leaking aortic aneurysm, renal colic, and acute mesenteric ischemia.
Serum amylase may also be elevated in high intestinal obstruction, in
gastroenteritis, in mumps not involving the pancreas (salivary
amylase), in ectopic pregnancy, after administration of opioids, and
after abdominal surgery. Serum lipase may also be elevated in many
of these conditions.
 Complications
Intravascular volume depletion secondary to leakage of fluids in the
pancreatic bed and ileus with fluid-filled loops of bowel may result
in prerenal azotemia and even acute tubular necrosis without overt
shock. This usually occurs within 24 hours of the onset of acute
pancreatitis and lasts 8–9 days. Some patients require peritoneal
dialysis or hemodialysis.
Sterile or infected necrotizing pancreatitis may complicate the
course of 5–10% of cases and accounts for most of the deaths. The
risk of infection does not correlate with the extent of necrosis.
Pancreatic necrosis is often associated with fever, leukocytosis,
and, in some cases, shock and is associated with organ failure (eg,
gastrointestinal bleeding, respiratory failure, or acute kidney injury)
in 50% of cases. Because infected pancreatic necrosis is almost
always an indication for debridement, fine-needle aspiration of
necrotic tissue under CT guidance should be performed (if
necessary, repeatedly) for Gram stain and culture.
A serious complication of acute pancreatitis is acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS); cardiac dysfunction may be
superimposed. It usually occurs 3–7 days after the onset of
pancreatitis in patients who have required large volumes of fluid and
colloid to maintain blood pressure and urinary output. Most patients
with ARDS require intubation and mechanical ventilation with
positive end-expiratory pressure.
Pancreatic abscess (also referred to as infected or suppurative
pseudocyst) is a suppurative process characterized by rising fever,
leukocytosis, and localized tenderness and an epigastric mass
usually 6 or more weeks into the course of acute pancreatitis. This
may be associated with a left-sided pleural effusion or an enlarging
spleen secondary to splenic vein thrombosis. In contrast to infected
necrosis, the mortality rate is low following drainage.
Pseudocysts, encapsulated fluid collections with high amylase
content, commonly appear in pancreatitis when CT is used to
monitor the evolution of an acute attack. Pseudocysts that are
smaller than 6 cm in diameter often resolve spontaneously. They
most commonly are within or adjacent to the pancreas but can
present almost anywhere (eg, mediastinal, retrorectal) by extension
along anatomic planes. Multiple pseudocysts are seen in 14% of
cases. Pseudocysts may become secondarily infected, necessitating
drainage as for an abscess. Pancreatic ascites may present after
recovery from acute pancreatitis as a gradual increase in abdominal
girth and persistent elevation of the serum amylase level in the
absence of frank abdominal pain. Marked elevations in ascitic
protein (>3 g/dL) and amylase (>1000 units/L [20 mkat/L])
concentrations are typical. The condition results from disruption of
the pancreatic duct or drainage of a pseudocyst into the peritoneal
cavity.
Rare complications of acute pancreatitis include hemorrhage
caused by erosion of a blood vessel to form a pseudoaneurysm and
colonic necrosis. Chronic pancreatitis develops in about 10% of
cases. Permanent diabetes mellitus and exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency occur uncommonly after a single acute episode.
 Treatment
A. Treatment of Acute Disease
1. Mild disease—In most patients, acute pancreatitis is a mild
disease 
(“nonsevere 
acute 
pancreatitis”) 
that 
subsides
spontaneously within several days. The pancreas is “rested” by a
regimen of withholding food and liquids by mouth, bed rest, and, in
patients with moderately severe pain or ileus and abdominal
distention or vomiting, nasogastric suction. Pain is controlled with
meperidine, up to 100–150 mg intramuscularly every 3–4 hours as
necessary. In those with severe liver or kidney dysfunction, the dose
may need to be reduced. Morphine has been thought to cause
sphincter of Oddi spasm but is now considered an acceptable
alternative, and given the potential side effects of meperidine, may
even be preferable. Oral intake of fluid and foods can be resumed
when the patient is largely free of pain and has bowel sounds (even
if the serum amylase is still elevated). Clear liquids are given first
(this step may be skipped in patients with mild acute pancreatitis),
followed by gradual advancement to a lowfat diet, guided by the
patient's tolerance and by the absence of pain. Pain may recur on
refeeding in 20% of patients. Following recovery from acute biliary
pancreatitis, laparoscopic cholecystectomy is generally performed,
preferably during the same admission, although in selected cases
endoscopic sphincterotomy alone may be done. In patients with
recurrent pancreatitis associated with pancreas divisum, insertion of
a stent in the minor papilla (or minor papilla sphincterotomy) may
reduce the frequency of subsequent attacks, although complications
of such therapy are frequent. Hypertriglyceridemia with acute
pancreatitis has been treated with insulin, heparin, or apheresis, but
the benefit of these approaches has not been proven.
2. Severe disease—In more severe pancreatitis—particularly
necrotizing pancreatitis—there may be considerable leakage of
fluids, necessitating large amounts of intravenous fluids (eg, 500–
1000 mL/h for several hours, then 250–300 mL/h) to maintain
intravascular volume. Monitoring in an intensive care unit is
required, and the importance of aggressive intravenous hydration
cannot be overemphasized. Calcium gluconate must be given
intravenously if there is evidence of hypocalcemia with tetany.
Infusions of fresh frozen plasma or serum albumin may be necessary
in patients with coagulopathy or hypoalbuminemia. With colloid
solutions, there may be an increased risk of developing ARDS. If
shock persists after adequate volume replacement (including
packed red cells), pressors may be required. For the patient
requiring a large volume of parenteral fluids, central venous pressure
and blood gases should be monitored at regular intervals. Parenteral
nutrition (including lipids) should be considered in patients who have
severe pancreatitis and ileus and will be without oral nutrition for at
least 7–10 days. Enteral nutrition via a nasojejunal or possibly
nasogastric feeding tube is preferable but may not be tolerated in
some patients with an ileus. The routine use of antibiotics to prevent
conversion of sterile pancreatic necrosis to infected necrosis is still
controversial and is not indicated in those with < 30% pancreatic
necrosis. Imipenem (500 mg every 8 hours intravenously) and
possibly cefuroxime (1.5 g intravenously three times daily, then 250
mg orally twice daily) administered for no more than 14 days to
patients with sterile pancreatic necrosis has been reported in some
studies to reduce the risk of pancreatic infection and mortality;
meropenem and the combination of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole
do not appear to reduce the frequency of infected necrosis,
multiorgan failure, or mortality. When infected necrosis is confirmed,
imipenem or meropenem should be continued. The role of
intravenous somatostatin in severe acute pancreatitis is uncertain,
and octreotide is thought to have no benefit. To date, probiotic
agents have not been shown to reduce infectious complications of
severe pancreatitis and may increase mortality. Allopurinol,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (administered rectally), and
ulinastatin, a protease inhibitor, have been reported to reduce the
frequency and severity of post-ERCP pancreatitis. There is
conflicting evidence about whether the risk of pancreatitis after
ERCP can be reduced by the administration of somatostatin,
octreotide, gabexate mesilate and other protease inhibitors, or
nitroglycerin. Lexipafant, an antagonist of platelet-activating factor,
appears to be of no benefit. Placement of a stent across the
pancreatic duct or orifice has been shown to reduce the risk of
post-ERCP pancreatitis and is a common practice.
B. Treatment of Complications and Follow-Up
p
p
A surgeon should be consulted in all cases of severe acute
pancreatitis. If the diagnosis is in doubt and investigation indicates a
strong possibility of a serious surgically correctable lesion (eg,
perforated peptic ulcer), exploratory laparotomy is indicated. When
acute pancreatitis is found unexpectedly, it is usually wise to close
without intervention. If the pancreatitis appears mild and
cholelithiasis or microlithiasis is present, cholecystectomy or
cholecystostomy may be justified. When severe pancreatitis results
from choledocholithiasis and jaundice (serum total bilirubin >5
mg/dL [85.5 mcmol/L]) or cholangitis is present, ERCP with
endoscopic sphincterotomy and stone extraction is indicated.
MRCP may be useful in selecting patients for therapeutic ERCP.
Endoscopic sphincterotomy does not appear to improve the
outcome of severe pancreatitis in the absence of cholangitis or
jaundice.
Necrosectomy may improve survival in patients with necrotizing
pancreatitis and clinical deterioration with multiorgan failure or lack
of resolution by 4 weeks and is nearly always indicated for infected
necrosis. The goal is to debride necrotic pancreas and surrounding
tissue and establish adequate drainage. Outcomes are best if
necrosectomy is delayed until the necrosis has organized, usually
about 4 weeks after disease onset. For patients who do not
respond to this approach, a “step-up” approach in which
nonsurgical drainage of walled-off pancreatic necrosis under
radiologic guidance with subsequent open surgical necrosectomy
has been shown to reduce mortality and resource utilization in
selected patients with necrotizing pancreatitis and confirmed or
suspected secondary infection. Endoscopic (transgastric or
transduodenal) drainage combined with percutaneous drainage and,
in some cases, laparoscopic guidance are additional options,
depending on local expertise. Treatment is labor intensive, and
multiple procedures are often required. Peritoneal lavage has not
been shown to improve survival in severe acute pancreatitis, in part
because the risk of late septic complications is not reduced.
The development of a pancreatic abscess is an indication for
prompt percutaneous or surgical drainage. Chronic pseudocysts
require endoscopic, percutaneous catheter, or surgical drainage
when infected or associated with persisting pain, pancreatitis, or bile
duct obstruction. For pancreatic infections, imipenem, 500 mg
every 8 hours intravenously, is a good choice of antibiotic because it
achieves bactericidal levels in pancreatic tissue for most causative
organisms. Pancreatic duct leaks and fistulas may require
endoscopic or surgical therapy.
 Prognosis
Mortality rates for acute pancreatitis have declined from at least
10% to around 5% since the 1980s, but the mortality rate for
severe acute pancreatitis (more than three Ranson criteria; Table
16–8) remains at least 20%, with rates of 10% and 25% in those
with sterile and infected necrosis, respectively. Severe acute
pancreatitis is predicted by features of the systemic inflammatory
response on admission. Half of the deaths occur within the first 2
weeks, usually from multiorgan failure. Multiorgan failure that
persists beyond the first 48 hours is associated with a mortality rate
of over 50%. Later deaths occur because of complications of
infected necrosis. The risk of death doubles when both organ failure
and infected necrosis are present. Moreover, hospital-acquired
infections increase the mortality of acute pancreatitis, independent of
severity. Recurrences are common in alcoholic pancreatitis but can
be reduced by repeated interventions against alcohol consumption
at regular intervals after discharge from the hospital. The risk of
chronic pancreatitis following an episode of acute alcoholic
pancreatitis is 13% in 10 years and 16% in 20 years.
 When to Admit
Nearly all patients with acute pancreatitis should be hospitalized.
Gluck M et al. Endoscopic and percutaneous drainage of
symptomatic walled-off pancreatic necrosis reduces hospital stay
and radiographic resources. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010
Dec;8(12):1083–8. [PMID: 20870036]
 
Gupta K et al. In the clinic. Acute pancreatitis. Ann Intern Med.
2010 Nov 2;153(9):ITC51–5. [PMID: 21041574]
 
Nitsche CJ et al. Drug induced pancreatitis. Best Pract Res Clin
Gastroenterol. 2010 Apr;24(2):143–55. [PMID: 20227028]
 
Papachristou GI et al. Comparison of BISAP, Ranson's,
APACHE-II, and CTSI scores in predicting organ failure,
complications, and mortality in acute pancreatitis. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2010 Feb;105(2):435–41. [PMID: 19861954]
 
Petrov MS et al. Organ failure and infection of pancreatic necrosis
as determinants of mortality in patients with acute pancreatitis.
Gastroenterology. 2010 Sep;139(3):813–20. [PMID: 20540942]
 
van Geenen EJ et al. Etiology and diagnosis of acute biliary
pancreatitis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Sep;7(9):495–
502. [PMID: 20703238]
 
van Santvoort HC et al; Dutch Pancreatitis Study Group. A step-
up approach or open necrosectomy for necrotizing pancreatitis. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 22;362(16):1491–502. [PMID:
20410514]
 
Wu BU et al. Acute pancreatitis part I: approach to early
management. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 May;8(5):410–6.
[PMID: 19896558]
 
Wu BU et al. Acute pancreatitis part II: approach to follow-up.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 May;8(5):417–22. [PMID:
20005980]
 
CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic or intermittent epigastric pain, steatorrhea, weight loss,
abnormal pancreatic imaging.
 A mnemonic for the predisposing factors of chronic pancreatitis is
TIGAR-O: toxic-metabolic, idiopathic, genetic, autoimmune,
recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis, or obstructive.
 
 General Considerations
Chronic pancreatitis occurs most often in patients with alcoholism
(70–80% of all cases). The risk of chronic pancreatitis increases
with the duration and amount of alcohol consumed, but pancreatitis
develops in only 5–10% of heavy drinkers. Tobacco smoking has
been reported to accelerate progression of alcoholic chronic
pancreatitis. About 2% of patients with hyperparathyroidism
develop pancreatitis. In tropical Africa and Asia, tropical
pancreatitis, related in part to malnutrition, is the most common
cause of chronic pancreatitis. A stricture, stone, or tumor
obstructing the pancreas can lead to obstructive chronic
pancreatitis. Autoimmune pancreatitis is associated with
hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG4 in particular) and often with
autoantibodies and other autoimmune diseases and is responsive to
corticosteroids. Type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis is characterized by
lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis on biopsy, associated bile
duct strictures, retroperitoneal fibrosis, renal and salivary gland
lesions, and a high rate of relapse after treatment. Type 2 is
characterized by idiopathic duct centric pancreatitis on biopsy, lack
of systemic IgG4 involvement, and lack of relapse after treatment.
About 10–20% of cases of chronic pancreatitis are idiopathic, with
either early onset (median age 23) or late onset (median age 62).
Genetic factors may predispose to chronic pancreatitis in some of
these cases, including mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, the pancreatic secretory
trypsin inhibitory gene (PSTI, serine protease inhibitor, SPINK1),
and 
possibly 
the 
gene 
for 
uridine 
5′-diphosphate
glucuronosyltransferase. Mutation of the cationic trypsinogen gene
on chromosome 7 (serine protease 1, PRSS1) is associated with
hereditary pancreatitis, transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait
with variable penetrance. A useful mnemonic for the predisposing
factors to chronic pancreatitis is TIGAR-O: toxic-metabolic,
idiopathic, genetic, autoimmune, recurrent and severe acute
pancreatitis, or obstructive.
The pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis may be explained by the
SAPE (sentinel acute pancreatitis event) hypothesis by which the
first (sentinel) acute pancreatitis event initiates an inflammatory
process that results in injury and later fibrosis (“necrosis-fibrosis”).
In many cases, chronic pancreatitis is a self-perpetuating disease
characterized by chronic pain or recurrent episodes of acute
pancreatitis and ultimately by pancreatic exocrine or endocrine
insufficiency (sooner in alcoholic pancreatitis than in other types).
After many years, chronic pain may resolve spontaneously or as a
result of surgery tailored to the cause of pain. Over 80% of adults
develop diabetes mellitus within 25 years after the clinical onset of
chronic pancreatitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Persistent or recurrent episodes of epigastric and left upper
quadrant pain with referral to the upper left lumbar region are
typical. The pain results in part from impaired inhibitory pain
modulation by the central nervous system. Anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, constipation, flatulence, and weight loss are common.
During attacks tenderness over the pancreas, mild muscle guarding,
and ileus may be noted. Attacks may last only a few hours or as
long as 2 weeks; pain may eventually be almost continuous.
Steatorrhea (as indicated by bulky, foul, fatty stools) may occur late
in the course.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum amylase and lipase may be elevated during acute attacks;
however, a normal amylase does not exclude the diagnosis. Serum
alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin may be elevated owing to
compression of the bile duct. Glycosuria may be present. Excess
fecal fat may be demonstrated on chemical analysis of the stool.
Pancreatic insufficiency generally is confirmed by response to
therapy with pancreatic enzyme supplements; the secretin
stimulation test can be used if available, as can detection of
decreased fecal chymotrypsin or elastase levels, although the latter
tests lack sensitivity and specificity. Vitamin B12 malabsorption is
detectable in about 40% of patients, but clinical deficiency of
vitamin B12 and fat-soluble vitamins is rare. Accurate diagnostic
tests are available for the major trypsinogen gene mutations, but
because of uncertainty about the mechanisms linking heterozygous
CFTR and PSTI mutations with pancreatitis, genetic testing for
mutations in these two genes is not currently recommended.
Elevated IgG4 levels, ANA, and antibodies to lactoferrin and
carbonic anhydrase II are often found in patients with autoimmune
pancreatitis (especially type 1); antibodies to peptide A1P1-7 and to
ubiquitin-protein ligase E3 component n-recognin 2 have been
reported in a high percentage of patients with autoimmune
pancreatitis but also in some patients with pancreatic cancer.
Pancreatic biopsy, if necessary, shows a lymphoplasmacytic
inflammatory infiltrate with characteristic IgG4 immunostaining,
which is also found in biopsy specimens of the major papilla, bile
duct, and salivary glands in type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis.
C. Imaging
Plain films show calcifications due to pancreaticolithiasis in 30% of
affected patients. CT may show calcifications not seen on plain films
as well as ductal dilatation and heterogeneity or atrophy of the
gland. Occasionally, the findings raise suspicion of pancreatic
cancer (“tumefactive chronic pancreatitis”). ERCP is the most
sensitive imaging study for chronic pancreatitis and may show
dilated ducts, intraductal stones, strictures, or pseudocyst, but the
results may be normal in patients with so-called minimal change
pancreatitis. MRCP and endoscopic ultrasonography (with
pancreatic tissue sampling) are less invasive alternatives to ERCP.
Endoscopic ultrasonographic (“Rosemont”) criteria for the diagnosis
of chronic pancreatitis include hyperechoic foci with shadowing
indicative of calculi in the main pancreatic duct and lobularity with
honeycombing of the pancreatic parenchyma. Characteristic imaging
features of autoimmune pancreatitis include diffuse enlargement of
the pancreas, a peripheral rim of hypoattenuation, and irregular
narrowing of the main pancreatic duct. In the United States, the
diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis is based on the HISORt
criteria: histology, imaging, serology, other organ involvement, and
response to corticosteroid therapy.
 Complications
Opioid addiction is common. Other frequent complications include
often brittle diabetes mellitus, pancreatic pseudocyst or abscess,
cholestatic liver enzymes with or without jaundice, bile duct
stricture, steatorrhea, malnutrition, and peptic ulcer. Pancreatic
cancer develops in 4% of patients after 20 years; the risk may relate
to tobacco and alcohol use. In patients with hereditary pancreatitis,
the risk of pancreatic cancer rises after age 50 years and reaches
19% by age 70 years (see Chapter 39).
 Treatment
Correctable coexistent biliary tract disease should be treated
surgically.
A. Medical Measures
A low-fat diet should be prescribed. Alcohol is forbidden because it
frequently precipitates attacks. Opioids should be avoided if
possible. Preferred agents for pain are acetaminophen, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, and tramadol, along with pain-modifying
agents such as tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin uptake
inhibitors, and gabapentin. Steatorrhea is treated with pancreatic
supplements that are selected on the basis of their high lipase
activity. A total dose of 30,000 units of lipase in capsules is given
with meals. Higher doses may be required in some cases. The
tablets should be taken at the start of, during, and at the end of a
meal. Concurrent administration of a H2-receptor antagonist (eg,
ranitidine, 150 mg orally twice daily), a proton pump inhibitor (eg,
omeprazole, 20–60 mg orally daily), or sodium bicarbonate, 650
mg orally before and after meals, decreases the inactivation of lipase
by acid and may thereby further decrease steatorrhea. In selected
cases of alcoholic pancreatitis and in cystic fibrosis, enteric-coated
microencapsulated preparations may offer an advantage. However,
in patients with cystic fibrosis, high-dose pancreatic enzyme therapy
has been associated with strictures of the ascending colon. Pain
secondary to idiopathic chronic pancreatitis may be alleviated in
some cases by the use of pancreatic enzymes (not enteric-coated)
or octreotide, 200 mcg subcutaneously three times daily.
Associated diabetes mellitus should be treated (see Chapter 27).
Autoimmune pancreatitis is treated with prednisone 40 mg/d orally
for 1–2 months, followed by a taper of 5 mg every 2–4 weeks.
Nonresponse or relapse occurs in 45% of cases (particularly in
those with concomitant IgG4-associated cholangitis); azathioprine
appears to reduce the risk of relapse. Other immunosuppressive
therapies are under study.
B. Surgical and Endoscopic Treatment
Endoscopic therapy or surgery may be indicated in chronic
pancreatitis to treat underlying biliary tract disease, ensure free flow
of bile into the duodenum, drain persistent pseudocysts, treat other
complications, eliminate obstruction of the pancreatic duct, attempt
to relieve pain, or exclude pancreatic cancer. Liver fibrosis may
regress after biliary drainage. Distal bile duct obstruction may be
relieved by endoscopic placement of multiple bile duct stents. When
obstruction of the duodenal end of the pancreatic duct can be
demonstrated by ERCP, dilation or placement of a stent in the duct
or resection of the tail of the pancreas with implantation of the distal
end of the duct by pancreaticojejunostomy may be successful.
When the pancreatic duct is diffusely dilated, anastomosis between
the duct after it is split longitudinally and a defunctionalized limb of
jejunum (modified Puestow procedure), in some cases combined
with resection of the head of the pancreas (Beger or Frey
procedure), is associated with relief of pain in 80% of cases. In
advanced cases, subtotal or total pancreatectomy may be
considered as a last resort but has variable efficacy and causes
pancreatic insufficiency and diabetes mellitus. Perioperative
administration of somatostatin or octreotide may reduce the risk of
postoperative pancreatic fistulas. Endoscopic or surgical (including
laparoscopic) drainage is indicated for symptomatic pseudo-cysts
and, in many cases, those over 6 cm in diameter. Endoscopic
ultrasonography may facilitate selection of an optimal site for
endoscopic drainage. Pancreatic ascites or pancreaticopleural
fistulas due to a disrupted pancreatic duct can be managed by
endoscopic placement of a stent across the disrupted duct.
Pancreatic sphincterotomy or fragmentation of stones in the
pancreatic duct by lithotripsy and endoscopic removal of stones
from the duct may relieve pain in selected patients. For patients with
chronic pain and nondilated ducts, a percutaneous celiac plexus
nerve block may be considered under either CT or endoscopic
ultrasound guidance, with pain relief (albeit often short-lived) in
approximately 50% of patients. A single session of radiotherapy to
the pancreas has been reported to relieve otherwise refractory pain.
 Prognosis
Chronic pancreatitis often leads to disability. The prognosis is best
in patients with recurrent acute pancreatitis caused by a remediable
condition, such as cholelithiasis, choledocholithiasis, stenosis of the
sphincter of Oddi, or hyperparathyroidism, and in those with
autoimmune 
pancreatitis. 
Medical 
management 
of 
the
hyperlipidemia frequently associated with the condition may also
prevent recurrent attacks of pancreatitis. In alcoholic pancreatitis,
pain relief is most likely when a dilated pancreatic duct can be
decompressed. In patients with disease not amenable to
decompressive surgery, addiction to opioids is a frequent outcome
of treatment. The quality of life is poorer in patients with constant
pain than in those with intermittent pain.
 When to Refer
All patients with chronic pancreatitis should be referred for
diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
 When to Admit
 
•    Severe pain.
•    New jaundice.
•    New fever.
Gumaste VV et al. Pseudocyst management: endoscopic drainage
and other emerging techniques. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2010 May–
Jun;44(5):326–31. [PMID: 20142757]
 
Ooi CY et al. Genetic testing in pancreatitis. Gastroenterology.
2010 Jun;138(7):2202–6. [PMID: 20416310]
 
Sah RP et al. Differences in clinical profile and relapse rate of type
1 versus type 2 autoimmune pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 2010
Jul;139(1):140–80. [PMID: 20353791]
 
Whitcomb DC et al. Pancrelipase delayed-release capsules
(CREON) for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency due to chronic
pancreatitis or pancreatic surgery: a double-blind randomized trial.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Oct;105(10):2276–86. [PMID:
20502447]
 
 
 
Breast Disorders
Armando E. Giuliano, MD
Sara A. Hurvitz, MD
BENIGN BREAST DISORDERS
 
FIBROCYSTIC CONDITION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painful, often multiple, usually bilateral masses in the breast.
 Rapid fluctuation in the size of the masses is common.
 Frequently, pain occurs or worsens and size increases during
premenstrual phase of cycle.
 Most common age is 30–50. Rare in postmenopausal women not
receiving hormonal replacement.
 
 General Considerations
Fibrocystic condition is the most frequent lesion of the breast.
Although commonly referred to as “fibrocystic disease,” it does not,
in fact, represent a pathologic or anatomic disorder. It is common in
women 30–50 years of age but rare in postmenopausal women
who are not taking hormonal replacement. Estrogen is considered a
causative factor. There may be an increased risk in women who
drink alcohol, especially women between 18 and 22 years of age.
Fibrocystic condition encompasses a wide variety of benign
histologic changes in the breast epithelium, some of which are found
so commonly in normal breasts that they are probably variants of
normal but have nonetheless been termed a “condition” or
“disease.”
The microscopic findings of fibrocystic condition include cysts
(gross and microscopic), papillomatosis, adenosis, fibrosis, and
ductal epithelial hyperplasia. Although fibrocystic condition has
generally been considered to increase the risk of subsequent breast
cancer, only the variants with a component of epithelial proliferation
(especially with atypia) represent true risk factors.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Fibrocystic condition may produce an asymptomatic mass in the
breast that is discovered by accident, but pain or tenderness often
calls attention to it. Discomfort often occurs or worsens during the
premenstrual phase of the cycle, at which time the cysts tend to
enlarge. Fluctuations in size and rapid appearance or disappearance
of a breast mass are common with this condition as are multiple or
bilateral masses and serous nipple discharge. Patients will give a
history of a transient lump in the breast or cyclic breast pain.
B. Diagnostic Tests
Mammography and ultrasonography should be used to evaluate a
mass in a patient with fibrocystic condition. Ultrasonography alone
may be used in women under 30 years of age. Because a mass due
to fibrocystic condition is difficult to distinguish from carcinoma on
the basis of clinical findings, suspicious lesions should be biopsied.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology may be used, but if a
suspicious mass that is nonmalignant on cytologic examination does
not resolve over several months, it should be excised. Surgery
should be conservative, since the primary objective is to exclude
cancer. Occasionally, core needle biopsy or FNA cytology will
suffice. Simple mastectomy or extensive removal of breast tissue is
rarely, if ever, indicated for fibrocystic condition.
 Differential Diagnosis
Pain, fluctuation in size, and multiplicity of lesions are the features
most helpful in differentiating fibrocystic condition from carcinoma.
If a dominant mass is present, the diagnosis of cancer should be
assumed until disproven by biopsy. Mammography may be helpful,
but the breast tissue in these young women is usually too radiodense
to permit a worthwhile study. Sonography is useful in differentiating
a cystic mass from a solid mass, especially in women with dense
breasts. Final diagnosis, however, depends on analysis of the
excisional biopsy specimen or needle biopsy.
 Treatment
When the diagnosis of fibrocystic condition has been established by
previous biopsy or is likely because the history is classic, aspiration
of a discrete mass suggestive of a cyst is indicated to alleviate pain
and, more importantly, to confirm the cystic nature of the mass. The
patient is reexamined at intervals thereafter. If no fluid is obtained by
aspiration, if fluid is bloody, if a mass persists after aspiration, or if
at any time during follow-up a persistent or recurrent mass is noted,
biopsy should be performed.
Breast pain associated with generalized fibrocystic condition is
best treated by avoiding trauma and by wearing a good supportive
brassiere during the night and day. Hormone therapy is not
advisable, because it does not cure the condition and has
undesirable side effects. Danazol (100–200 mg orally twice daily), a
synthetic androgen, is the only treatment approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with severe pain. This
treatment suppresses pituitary gonadotropins, but androgenic effects
(acne, edema, hirsutism) usually make this treatment intolerable; in
practice, it is rarely used. Similarly, tamoxifen reduces some
symptoms of fibrocystic condition, but because of its side effects, it
is not useful for young women unless it is given to reduce the risk of
cancer. Postmenopausal women receiving hormone replacement
therapy may stop or change doses of hormones to reduce pain. Oil
of evening primrose (OEP), a natural form of gamolenic acid, has
been shown to decrease pain in 44–58% of users. The dosage of
gamolenic acid is six capsules of 500 mg orally twice daily. Studies
have also demonstrated a lowfat diet or decreasing dietary fat
intake may reduce the painful symptoms associated with fibrocystic
condition. Further research is being done to determine the effects of
topical treatments such as topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs as well as topical hormonal drugs such as topical tamoxifen.
The role of caffeine consumption in the development and
treatment of fibrocystic condition is controversial. Some studies
suggest that eliminating caffeine from the diet is associated with
improvement while other studies refute the benefit entirely. Many
patients are aware of these studies and report relief of symptoms
after giving up coffee, tea, and chocolate. Similarly, many women
find vitamin E (400 international units daily) helpful; however, these
observations remain anecdotal.
 Prognosis
Exacerbations of pain, tenderness, and cyst formation may occur at
any time until menopause, when symptoms usually subside, except
in patients receiving hormonal replacement. The patient should be
advised to examine her own breasts regularly just after menstruation
and to inform her practitioner if a mass appears. The risk of breast
cancer developing in women with fibrocystic condition with a
proliferative or atypical component in the epithelium is higher than
that of the general population. These women should be monitored
carefully with physical examinations and imaging studies.
Huff JG. The sonographic findings and differing clinical implications
of simple, complicated, and complex breast cysts. J Natl Compr
Canc Netw. 2009 Nov;7(10):1101–4. [PMID: 19930976]
 
Kabat GC et al. A multi-center prospective cohort study of benign
breast disease and risk of subsequent breast cancer. Cancer
Causes Control. 2010 Jun;21(6):821–8. [PMID: 20084540]
 
Pruthi S et al. Vitamin E and evening primrose oil for management
of cyclical mastalgia: a randomized pilot study. Altern Med Rev.
2010 Apr;15(1):59–67. [PMID: 20359269]
 
Srivastava A et al. Evidence-based management of mastalgia: a
meta-analysis of randomised trials. Breast. 2007 Oct;16(5): 503–
12. [PMID: 17509880]
 
FIBROADENOMA OF THE BREAST
This common benign neoplasm occurs most frequently in young
women, usually within 20 years after puberty. It is somewhat more
frequent and tends to occur at an earlier age in black women.
Multiple tumors are found in 10–15% of patients.
The typical fibroadenoma is a round or ovoid, rubbery, discrete,
relatively movable, nontender mass 1–5 cm in diameter. It is usually
discovered accidentally. Clinical diagnosis in young patients is
generally not difficult. In women over 30 years, fibrocystic condition
of the breast and carcinoma of the breast must be considered.
Cysts can be identified by aspiration or ultrasonography.
Fibroadenoma does not normally occur after menopause but may
occasionally develop after administration of hormones.
No treatment is usually necessary if the diagnosis can be made by
needle biopsy or cytologic examination. Excision or vacuum-
assisted core needle removal with pathologic examination of the
specimen is performed if the diagnosis is uncertain. In a 2005 study,
cryoablation, or freezing of the fibroadenoma, appears to be a safe
procedure if the lesion is consistent with fibroadenoma on histology
prior to ablation. Cryoablation is not appropriate for all
fibroadenomas because some are too large to freeze or the
diagnosis may not be certain. The advantages of cryoablation over
observation are not clear. It is usually not possible to distinguish a
large fibroadenoma from a phyllodes tumor on the basis of needle
biopsy results or imaging alone.
Phyllodes tumor is a fibroadenoma-like tumor with cellular
stroma that grows rapidly. It may reach a large size and, if
inadequately excised, will recur locally. The lesion can be benign or
malignant. If benign, phyllodes tumor is treated by local excision
with a margin of surrounding breast tissue. The treatment of
malignant phyllodes tumor is more controversial, but complete
removal of the tumor with a rim of normal tissue avoids recurrence.
Because these tumors may be large, simple mastectomy is
sometimes necessary. Lymph node dissection is not performed,
since the sarcomatous portion of the tumor metastasizes to the lungs
and not the lymph nodes.
Barrio AV et al. Clinicopathologic features and long-term
outcomes of 293 phyllodes tumors of the breast. Ann Surg Oncol.
2007 Oct;14(10):2961–70. [PMID: 17562113]
 
Bode MK et al. Ultrasonography and core needle biopsy in the
differential diagnosis of fibroadenoma and tumor phyllodes. Acta
Radiol. 2007 Sep;48(7):708–13. [PMID: 17728999]
 
El Hag IA et al. Cytological clues in the distinction between
phyllodes tumor and fibroadenoma. Cancer Cytopathol. 2010 Feb
25;118(1):33–40. [PMID: 20094997]
 
Jayasinghe Y et al. Fibroadenomas in adolescence. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Oct;21(5):402–6. [PMID: 19606032]
 
Liang MI et al. Giant breast tumors: surgical management of
phyllodes tumors, potential for reconstructive surgery and a review
of literature. World J Surg Oncol. 2008 Nov 11;6:117. [PMID:
19014438]
 
Tse GM et al. Phyllodes tumor of the breast: an update. Breast
Cancer. 2010;17(1):29–34. [PMID: 19434472]
 
NIPPLE DISCHARGE
In order of decreasing frequency, the following are the most
common causes of nipple discharge in the nonlactating breast: duct
ectasia, intraductal papilloma, and carcinoma. The important
characteristics of the discharge and some other factors to be
evaluated by history and physical examination are as follows:
 
1. Nature of the discharge (serous, bloody, or other).
2. Association with a mass.
3. Unilateral or bilateral.
4. Single or multiple duct discharge.
5. Discharge is spontaneous (persistent or intermittent) or
g
p
(p
)
must be expressed.
6. Discharge is produced by pressure at a single site or by
general pressure on the breast.
7. Relation to menses.
8. Premenopausal or postmenopausal.
9. Patient is taking contraceptive pills or estrogen.
Spontaneous, unilateral, serous or serosanguineous discharge
from a single duct is usually caused by an intraductal papilloma or,
rarely, by an intraductal cancer. A mass may not be palpable. The
involved duct may be identified by pressure at different sites around
the nipple at the margin of the areola. Bloody discharge is
suggestive of cancer but is more often caused by a benign papilloma
in the duct. Cytologic examination may identify malignant cells, but
negative findings do not rule out cancer, which is more likely in
women over age 50 years. In any case, the involved duct—and a
mass if present—should be excised. A ductogram (a mammogram
of a duct after radiopaque dye has been injected) is of limited value
since excision of the suspicious ductal system is indicated regardless
of findings. Ductoscopy, evaluation of the ductal system with a small
scope inserted through the nipple, has been attempted but is not
effective management.
In premenopausal women, spontaneous multiple duct discharge,
unilateral or bilateral, most noticeable just before menstruation, is
often due to fibrocystic condition. Discharge may be green or
brownish. Papillomatosis and ductal ectasia are usually detected
only by biopsy. If a mass is present, it should be removed.
A milky discharge from multiple ducts in the nonlactating breast
may occur from hyperprolactinemia. Serum prolactin levels should
be obtained to search for a pituitary tumor. Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) helps exclude causative hypothyroidism. Numerous
antipsychotic drugs and other drugs may also cause a milky
discharge that ceases on discontinuance of the medication.
Oral contraceptive agents or estrogen replacement therapy may
cause clear, serous, or milky discharge from a single duct, but
multiple duct discharge is more common. In the premenopausal
woman, the discharge is more evident just before menstruation and
disappears on stopping the medication. If it does not stop, is from a
single duct, and is copious, exploration should be performed since
this may be a sign of cancer.
A purulent discharge may originate in a subareolar abscess and
require removal of the abscess and the related lactiferous sinus.
When localization is not possible, no mass is palpable, and the
discharge is nonbloody, the patient should be reexamined every 3
or 4 months for a year, and a mammogram and an ultrasound
should be performed. Although most discharge is from a benign
process, patients may find it annoying or disconcerting. Cytologic
examination of the nipple discharge for exfoliated cancer cells is
rarely helpful in determining a diagnosis. To eliminate the discharge,
proximal duct excision can be performed both for treatment and
diagnosis.
Denewer A et al. The role and limitations of mammary ductoscope
in management of pathologic nipple discharge. Breast J. 2008
Sep–Oct;14(5):442–9. [PMID: 18673337]
 
Gray RJ et al. Navigating murky waters: a modern treatment
algorithm for nipple discharge. Am J Surg. 2007 Dec;194(6):
850–4. [PMID: 18005783]
 
Kamali S et al. Ductoscopy in the evaluation and management of
nipple discharge. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010 Mar;17(3):778–83.
[PMID: 20012502]
 
Morrogh M et al. Lessons learned from 416 cases of nipple
discharge of the breast. Am J Surg. 2010 Jul;200(1):73–80.
[PMID: 20079481]
 
Zervoudis S et al. Nipple discharge screening. Womens Health
(Lond Engl). 2010 Jan;6(1):135–51. [PMID: 20050819]
 
FAT NECROSIS
Fat necrosis is a rare lesion of the breast but is of clinical
importance because it produces a mass (often accompanied by skin
or nipple retraction) that is indistinguishable from carcinoma even
with imaging studies. Trauma is presumed to be the cause, though
only about 50% of patients give a history of injury. Ecchymosis is
occasionally present. If untreated, the mass effect gradually
disappears. The safest course is to obtain a biopsy. Needle biopsy
is often adequate, but frequently the entire mass must be excised,
primarily to exclude carcinoma. Fat necrosis is common after
segmental resection, radiation therapy, or flap reconstruction after
mastectomy.
Li S et al. Surgical management of recurrent subareolar breast
abscesses: Mayo Clinic experience. Am J Surg. 2006 Oct; 192(4):
528–9. [PMID: 16978967]
 
Tan PH et al. Fat necrosis of the breast—a review. Breast. 2006
Jun;15(3):313–8. [PMID: 16198567]
 
BREAST ABSCESS
During nursing, an area of redness, tenderness, and induration may
develop in the breast. The organism most commonly found in these
abscesses is Staphylococcus aureus (see Puerperal Mastitis,
Chapter 19).
 
Figure 17–1. Breast abscess and cellulitis. (Courtesy of Richard
P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith
MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill
 
Infection in the nonlactating breast is rare. A subareolar abscess
may develop in young or middle-aged women who are not lactating
(Figure 17–1). These infections tend to recur after incision and
drainage unless the area is explored during a quiescent interval, with
excision of the involved lactiferous duct or ducts at the base of the
nipple. In the nonlactating breast, inflammatory carcinoma must
always be considered. Thus, incision and biopsy of any indurated
tissue with a small piece of erythematous skin is indicated when
suspected abscess or cellulitis in the nonlactating breast does not
resolve promptly with antibiotics. Often needle or catheter drainage
is adequate to treat an abscess, but surgical incision and drainage
may be necessary.
Bharat A et al. Predictors of primary breast abscesses and
recurrence. World J Surg. 2009 Dec;33(12):2582–6. [PMID:
19669231]
 
Rizzo M et al. Management of breast abscesses in nonlactating
women. Am Surg. 2010 Mar;76(3):292–5. [PMID: 20349659]
 
DISORDERS OF THE AUGMENTED BREAST
At least 4 million American women have had breast implants.
Breast augmentation is performed by placing implants under the
pectoralis muscle or, less desirably, in the subcutaneous tissue of the
breast. Most implants are made of an outer silicone shell filled with
a silicone gel, saline, or some combination of the two. Capsule
contraction or scarring around the implant develops in about 15–
25% of patients, leading to a firmness and distortion of the breast
that can be painful. Some require removal of the implant and
surrounding capsule. In 2006, the FDA reapproved silicone
implants for augmentation cosmetic surgery.
Implant rupture may occur in as many as 5–10% of women, and
bleeding of gel through the capsule is noted even more commonly.
Although silicone gel may be an immunologic stimulant, there is no
increase in autoimmune disorders in patients with such implants. The
FDA has advised symptomatic women with ruptured implants to
discuss possible surgical removal with their clinicians. However,
women who are asymptomatic and have no evidence of rupture of a
silicone gel prosthesis should probably not undergo removal of the
implant. Women with symptoms of autoimmune illnesses should
consider removal.
Studies have failed to show any association between implants
and an increased incidence of breast cancer. However, breast
cancer may develop in a patient with an augmentation prosthesis, as
it does in women without them. Detection in patients with implants is
more difficult because mammography is less able to detect early
lesions. Mammography is better if the implant is subpectoral rather
than subcutaneous. The prosthesis should be placed retropectorally
after mastectomy to facilitate detection of a local recurrence of
cancer, which is usually cutaneous or subcutaneous and is easily
detected by palpation.
If a cancer develops in a patient with implants, it should be
treated in the same manner as in women without implants. Such
women should be offered the option of mastectomy or breast-
conserving therapy, which may require removal or replacement of
the implant. Radiotherapy of the augmented breast often results in
marked capsular contracture. Adjuvant treatments should be given
for the same indications as for women who have no implants.
Araco A et al. Capsular contractures: a systematic review. Plast
Reconstr Surg. 2009 Dec;124(6):1808–19. [PMID: 19952637]
 
Handel N. The effect of silicone implants on the diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment of breast cancer. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2007 Dec;120(7 Suppl 1):81S–93S. [PMID: 18090817]
 
McCarthy CM et al. Breast cancer in the previously augmented
breast. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007 Jan;119(1):49–58. [PMID:
17255656]
 
Spear SL et al. History of breast implants and the food and drug
administration. Clin Plast Surg. 2009 Jan;36(1):15–21. [PMID:
19055957]
 
Zakhireh J et al. Application of screening principles to the
reconstructed breast. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan 1;28(1):173–80.
[PMID: 19884555]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE FEMALE
BREAST
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most women with breast cancer do not have identifiable risk
factors.
 Risk factors include delayed childbearing, positive family history
of breast cancer or genetic mutations (BRCA1, BRCA2), and
personal history of breast cancer or some types of proliferative
conditions.
 Early findings: Single, nontender, firm to hard mass with ill-
defined margins; mammographic abnormalities and no palpable
mass.
 Later findings: Skin or nipple retraction; axillary
lymphadenopathy; breast enlargement, erythema, edema, pain;
fixation of mass to skin or chest wall.
 
 Incidence & Risk Factors
Breast cancer will develop in one of eight American women. Next
to skin cancer, breast cancer is the most common cancer in women;
it is second only to lung cancer as a cause of death. In 2010, there
were approximately 207,090 new cases and 39,840 deaths from
breast cancer in women in the United States. An additional 54,010
cases of breast carcinoma in situ were detected, principally by
screening mammography. The incidence of breast cancer in the
United States has slightly decreased over time, possibly because of
diminished use of postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy.
Mortality has also decreased slightly due to early detection and
increased use of systemic therapy.
The most significant risk factor for the development of breast
cancer is age. A woman's risk of breast cancer rises with age and
the median age at which breast cancer is diagnosed is 61 years. A
significant family history of breast or ovarian cancer may also
indicate a high risk of developing breast cancer. Germline mutations
in the BRCA family of tumor suppressor genes accounts for
approximately 5% of breast cancer diagnoses and tend to cluster in
certain ethnic groups, including women of Ashkenazi Jewish
descent. Women with a mutation in the BRCA1 gene, located on
chromosome 17, have an estimated 85% chance of developing
breast cancer in their lifetime. Other genes associated with an
increased risk of breast and other cancers include BRCA2
(associated with a gene on chromosome 13); ataxia-telangiectasia
mutation; and mutation of the tumor suppressor gene p53.
Mutations in p53 have been found in approximately 1% of breast
cancers in women under 40 years of age. Genetic testing is
commercially available for women with a compelling family history.
Women with genetic mutations in whom breast cancer develops
may be treated in the same way as women who do not have
mutations (ie, lumpectomy), though there is an increased risk of
ipsilateral and contralateral recurrence after lumpectomy for these
women. Thus, women with genetic mutations leading to a high risk
of breast cancer often elect bilateral mastectomy. Some states have
enacted legislation to prevent insurance companies from considering
mutations as “preexisting conditions.”
Even when genetic testing fails to reveal a predisposing genetic
mutation, women with a strong family history of breast cancer are at
higher risk for development of breast cancer. Compared with a
woman with no affected family members, a woman who has one
first-degree relative (mother, daughter, or sister) with breast cancer
has double the risk of developing breast cancer and a woman with
two first-degree relatives with breast cancer has triple the risk of
developing breast cancer. Risk is further increased for women
whose affected family members were diagnosed before menopause
or were diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer. Lifestyle and
reproductive factors also contribute to risk of breast cancer.
Nulliparous women and women whose first full-term pregnancy
occurred after the age of 30 have an elevated risk. Late menarche
and artificial menopause are associated with a lower incidence,
whereas early menarche (under age 12) and late natural menopause
(after age 55) are associated with an increase in risk. Combined
oral contraceptive pills may increase the risk of breast cancer.
Several studies show that concomitant administration of
progesterone and estrogen to postmenopausal women may
markedly increase the incidence of breast cancer, compared with
the use of estrogen alone or with no hormone replacement
treatment. The Women's Health Initiative prospective randomized
study of hormone replacement therapy stopped treatment with
estrogen and progesterone early because of an increased risk of
breast cancer compared with untreated women or women treated
with estrogen alone. Alcohol consumption, high dietary intake of fat
and lack of exercise may also increase the risk for breast cancer.
Fibrocystic breast condition, when accompanied by proliferative
changes, papillomatosis, or atypical epithelial hyperplasia, and
increased breast density on mammogram are also associated with
an increased incidence. A woman who had cancer in one breast is
at increased risk for cancer developing in the other breast. In these
women, a contralateral cancer develops at the rate of 1% or 2%
per year. Women with cancer of the uterine corpus have a risk of
breast cancer significantly higher than that of the general population,
and women with breast cancer have a comparably increased risk of
endometrial cancer. Socioeconomic factors have also been
associated with breast cancer risk. Breast cancer tends to be
diagnosed more frequently in women of higher socioeconomic
status and is more frequent in white women than in African
American women. In general, rates reported from developing
countries are low, whereas rates are high in developed countries,
with the notable exception of Japan. Some of the variability may be
due to underreporting in the developing countries; however, a real
difference probably exists and may be accounted for by dietary
factors, particularly increased fat consumption and delayed child-
bearing in Western cultures as well as increased access to screening
procedures leading to earlier and more frequent diagnosis of cancer.
Women at greater than average risk for developing breast cancer
(Table 17–1) should be identified by their practitioners and
monitored carefully. Risk assessment models have been developed
and are being validated as tools to evaluate a woman's risk of
developing cancer. Those with an exceptional family history should
be counseled about the option of genetic testing. Some of these
high-risk women may consider prophylactic mastectomy,
oophorectomy, or tamoxifen, an FDA-approved preventive agent.
 
Table 17–1. Factors associated with increased risk of breas
 
Race
White
Age
Older
Family
history
Breast cancer in mother, sister, or daughter
(especially bilateral or premenopausal)
Genetics
BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation
Previous
medical
history
Endometrial cancer
Proliferative forms of fibrocystic disease
Cancer in other breast
Menstrual
history
Early menarche (under age 12)
Late menopause (after age 50)
Reproductive
history
Nulliparous or late first pregnancy
Prevention
The National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Project (NSABP)
conducted the first Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (BCPT) P-1,
which evaluated tamoxifen as a preventive agent in women with no
personal history of breast cancer but at high risk for developing the
disease. Women who received tamoxifen for 5 years had about a
50% reduction in noninvasive and invasive cancers compared with
women taking placebo. However, women over age 50 who
received the drug had an increased incidence of endometrial cancer
and deep venous thrombosis. Unfortunately, no survival data will be
produced from this trial because it was stopped.
The selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) raloxifene,
effective in preventing osteoporosis, is also effective in preventing
breast cancer. The initial study, Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene
Evaluations (MORE) trial, aimed at determining the effect of
raloxifene on bone, demonstrated that raloxifene also reduced
breast cancer risk in women being given the drug. After 8 years,
raloxifene demonstrated an overall reduction of invasive breast
cancer of 66%. Because this study was designed to determine the
effect of raloxifene on bone density, it was conducted in women at
lower risk for breast cancer. To better understand the preventive
effect of raloxifene in the high-risk population, a randomized study
comparing raloxifene with tamoxifen was conducted.
The NSABP Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2
trial compared raloxifene with tamoxifen for the prevention of breast
cancer in a high-risk population. With a median follow-up of 81
months, raloxifene was associated with a higher risk of invasive
breast cancer [RR raloxifene:tamoxifen 1.24 (95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.05–1.47), P = 0.01) but had an equivalent risk for
noninvasive disease [1.22 (95% CI, 0.95–1.59), P = 0.12)]
compared with tamoxifen. Uterine cancer, cataracts and
thromboembolic events were significantly lower in the raloxifene-
treated patients than in tamoxifen-treated patients. While SERMs
have been shown to be effective at reducing the risk of breast
cancer, the uptake of this intervention by women has been relatively
low, possibly due to the perceived risks and side effects of therapy.
Similar to SERMs, aromatase inhibitors (AI) have shown great
success in treating breast cancer with fewer side effects, although
bone loss is a significant side effect of this treatment. Several large
multicenter studies (eg, International Breast Cancer Intervention
Study II [IBIS-II] and National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical
Trials Group [NCIC CTG]) are underway to determine whether
AIs have a role in preventing breast cancer.
In addition to pharmaceutical therapy, patients continue to seek a
way to prevent breast cancer. There has been considerable
research on incorporating diet and exercise into the lifestyle of
women who may be at risk for cancer. The Women's Intervention
Nutrition Study was conducted to determine whether decreasing
dietary fat intake would reduce the incidence of breast cancer
recurrence after initial treatment. Although the trial demonstrated a
decrease in recurrence in the follow-up period, it did not reach
statistical significance.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; ACOG
Committee on Practice Bulletins—Gynecology; ACOG
Committee on Genetics; Society of Gynecologic Oncologists.
ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 103: Hereditary breast and ovarian
cancer syndrome. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Apr;113(4): 957–66.
[PMID: 19305347]
 
Amir E et al. Assessing women at high risk of breast cancer: a
review of risk assessment models. Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 May
19;102(10):680–91. [PMID: 20427433]
 
Arun B et al. Breast cancer prevention trials: large and small trials.
Semin Oncol. 2010 Aug;37(4):367–83. [PMID: 20816507]
 
Cummings SR et al. Prevention of breast cancer in
postmenopausal women: approaches to estimating and reducing
risk. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Mar 18;101(6):384–98. [PMID:
19276457]
 
Graeser MK et al. Contralateral breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Dec 10;27(35):
5887–92. [PMID: 19858402]
 
Jemal A et al. Cancer Statistics, 2010. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010
Sep–Oct;60(5):277–300. [PMID: 20610543]
 
Li CI et al. Alcohol consumption and risk of postmenopausal
breast cancer by subtype: the Women's Health Initiative
observational study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Sep
22;102(18):1422–31. [PMID: 20733117]
 
Nelson HD et al. Systematic review: comparative effectiveness of
medications to reduce risk for primary breast cancer. Ann Intern
Med. 2009 Nov 17;151(10):703–15, W-226-35. [PMID:
19920271]
 
Prentice RL et al. Low-fat dietary pattern and cancer incidence in
the women's health initiative dietary modification randomized
controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007 Oct 17;99(20): 1534–
43. [PMID: 17925539]
 
Ropka ME et al. Patient decisions about breast cancer
chemoprevention: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin
Oncol. 2010 Jun 20;28(18):3090–5. [PMID: 20458026]
 
Visvanathan K et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology
clinical practice guideline update on the use of pharmacologic
interventions including tamoxifen, raloxifene, and aromatase
inhibition for breast cancer risk reduction. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jul
1;27(19):3235–58. [PMID: 19470930]
 
Vogel VG et al; National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel
Project. Update of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and
Bowel Project Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2
Trial: preventing breast cancer. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010
Jun;3(6):696–706. [PMID: 20404000]
 
 Early Detection of Breast Cancer
A. Screening Programs
A number of large screening programs, consisting of physical and
mammographic examination of asymptomatic women, have been
conducted over the years. On average, these programs identify 10
cancers per 1000 women over the age of 50 and 2 cancers per
1000 women under the age of 50. Screening detects cancer before
it has spread to the lymph nodes in about 80% of the women
evaluated. This increases the chance of survival to about 85% at 5
years.
Both physical examination and mammography are necessary for
maximum yield in screening programs, since about 35–50% of early
breast cancers can be discovered only by mammography and
another 40% can be detected only by palpation. About one-third of
the abnormalities detected on screening mammograms will be found
to be malignant when biopsy is performed. The probability of
cancer on a screening mammogram is directly related to the Breast
Imaging Reporting and Data System (BIRADS) assessment, and
work-up should be performed based on this classification. Women
20–40 years of age should have a breast examination as part of
routine medical care every 2–3 years. Women over age 40 years
should have annual breast examinations. The sensitivity of
mammography varies from approximately 60% to 90%. This
sensitivity depends on several factors, including patient age (breast
density) and tumor size, location, and mammographic appearance.
In young women with dense breasts, mammography is less sensitive
than in older women with fatty breasts, in whom mammography can
detect at least 90% of malignancies. Smaller tumors, particularly
those without calcifications, are more difficult to detect, especially in
dense breasts. The lack of sensitivity and the low incidence of
breast cancer in young women have led to questions concerning the
value of mammography for screening in women 40–50 years of age.
The specificity of mammography in women under 50 years varies
from about 30% to 40% for nonpalpable mammographic
abnormalities to 85% to 90% for clinically evident malignancies.
Screening recommendations for women in their 40s are based, in
part, on trials from Sweden. Two trials showed a statistical
advantage for screening women in their 40s, and a meta-analysis
similarly revealed a statistical survival advantage for screened
women with longer follow-up. The National Cancer Advisory
Board recommended that women in their forties with average risk
factors have screening mammography every 1–2 years and that
women at higher risk seek medical advice on when to begin
screening. Studies continue to support the value of screening
mammography in women over 40 years (see Table 1–6). Such
women should have annual mammography and physical
examination.
The beneficial effect of screening in women aged 50–69 years is
undisputed and has been confirmed by all clinical trials. The efficacy
of screening in older women—those older than 70 years—is
inconclusive and is difficult to determine because few studies have
examined this population.
B. Self-Examination
Breast self-exam (BSE) has not been shown to improve survival.
Because of the lack of strong evidence demonstrating value, the
American Cancer Society no longer recommends monthly BSE
beginning at age 20 years. The recommendation is that patients be
made aware of the potential benefits, limitations, and harms
(increased biopsies or false-positive results) associated with BSE.
Women who choose to perform BSE should be advised regarding
the proper technique. Premenopausal women should perform the
examination 7–8 days after the start of the menstrual period. First,
breasts should be inspected before a mirror with the hands at the
sides, overhead, and pressed firmly on the hips to contract the
pectoralis muscles causing masses, asymmetry of breasts, and slight
dimpling of the skin to become apparent. Next, in a supine position,
each breast should be carefully palpated with the fingers of the
opposite hand. Some women discover small breast lumps more
readily when their skin is moist while bathing or showering. While
BSE is not a recommended practice, patients should recognize and
report any breast changes to their practitioners as it remains an
important facet of proactive care.
C. Imaging
Mammography is the most reliable means of detecting breast cancer
before a mass can be palpated. Slowly growing cancers can be
identified by mammography at least 2 years before reaching a size
detectable by palpation. Film screen mammography delivers < 0.4
cGy to the mid breast per view. Although full-field digital
mammography provides an easier method to maintain and review
mammograms, it has not been proven that it provides better images
or increases detection rates more than film mammography. In subset
analysis of a large study, digital mammography seemed slightly
y
g
y,
g
g p y
g y
superior in women with dense breasts. Computer-assisted detection
(CAD) has not shown any increase in detection of cancers and is
not 
routinely 
performed 
at 
centers 
with 
experienced
mammographers.
Calcifications are the most easily recognized mammographic
abnormality. The most common findings associated with carcinoma
of the breast are clustered polymorphic microcalcifications. Such
calcifications are usually at least five to eight in number, aggregated
in one part of the breast and differing from each other in size and
shape, often including branched or V- or Y-shaped configurations.
There may be an associated mammographic mass density or, at
times, only a mass density with no calcifications. Such a density
usually has irregular or ill-defined borders and may lead to
architectural distortion within the breast but may be subtle and
difficult to detect.
Indications for mammography are as follows: (1) to screen at
regular intervals asymptomatic women at high risk for developing
breast cancer (see above); (2) to evaluate each breast when a
diagnosis of potentially curable breast cancer has been made, and at
yearly intervals thereafter; (3) to evaluate a questionable or ill-
defined breast mass or other suspicious change in the breast; (4) to
search for an occult breast cancer in a woman with metastatic
disease in axillary nodes or elsewhere from an unknown primary;
(5) to screen women prior to cosmetic operations or prior to biopsy
of a mass, to examine for an unsuspected cancer; (6) to monitor
those women with breast cancer who have been treated with
breast-conserving surgery and radiation; and (7) to monitor the
contralateral breast in those women with breast cancer treated with
mastectomy.
Patients with a dominant or suspicious mass must undergo biopsy
despite mammographic findings. The mammogram should be
obtained prior to biopsy so that other suspicious areas can be noted
and the contralateral breast can be evaluated. Mammography is
never a substitute for biopsy because it may not reveal clinical
cancer, especially in a very dense breast, as may be seen in young
women with fibrocystic changes, and may not reveal medullary
cancers.
Communication and documentation among the patient, the
referring practitioner, and the interpreting physician are critical for
high-quality screening and diagnostic mammography. The patient
should be told about how she will receive timely results of her
mammogram; that mammography does not “rule out” cancer; and
that she may receive a correlative examination such as ultrasound at
the mammography facility if referred for a suspicious lesion. She
should also be aware of the technique and need for breast
compression and that this may be uncomfortable. The
mammography facility should be informed in writing by the clinician
of abnormal physical examination findings. The Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) Clinical Practice Guidelines
strongly recommend that all mammography reports be
communicated in writing to the patient and referring practitioner.
MRI and ultrasound may be useful screening modalities in women
who are at high risk for breast cancer but not for the general
population. The sensitivity of MRI is much higher than
mammography; however, the specificity is significantly lower and
this results in multiple unnecessary biopsies. The increased
sensitivity despite decreased specificity may be considered a
reasonable trade-off for those at increased risk for developing
breast cancer but not for normal-risk population. In 2009, the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines recommended
MRI in addition to screening mammography for high-risk women,
including those with BRCA1/2 mutations, those who have a lifetime
risk of breast cancer of > 20%, and those with a personal history of
lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). Women who received radiation
therapy to the chest in their teens or twenties are also known to be
at high risk for developing breast cancer and screening MRI may be
considered in addition to mammography. MRI is useful in women
with breast implants to determine the character of a lesion present in
the breast and to search for implant rupture and at times is helpful in
patients with prior lumpectomy and radiation.
Armstrong K et al. Screening mammography in women 40 to 49
years of age: a systematic review for the American College of
Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Apr 3;146(7):516–26. [PMID:
17404354]
 
Budakoglu II et al. The effectiveness of training for breast cancer
and breast self-examination in women aged 40 and over. J Cancer
Educ. 2007 Summer;22(2):108–11. [PMID: 17605625]
 
Feig SA. Screening mammography: a successful public health
initiative. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2006 Aug–Sep;20(2-3):
125–33. [PMID: 17199907]
 
Houssami N et al. Accuracy and surgical impact of magnetic
resonance imaging in breast cancer staging: systematic review and
meta-analysis in detection of multifocal and multicentric cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 2008 Jul 1;26(19):3248–58. [PMID: 18474876]
 
Jackson SL et al. Variability of interpretive accuracy among
diagnostic mammography facilities. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Jun
3;101(11):814–27. [PMID: 19470953]
 
James JJ et al. Mammographic features of breast cancers at single
reading with computer-aided detection and at double reading in a
large multicenter prospective trial of computer-aided detection:
CADET II. Radiology. 2010 Aug;256(2):379–86. [PMID:
20656831]
 
Karellas A et al. Breast cancer imaging: a perspective for the next
decade. Med Phys. 2008 Nov;35(11):4878–97. [PMID:
19070222]
 
Lehman CD et al. The role of MRI in breast cancer screening. J
Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2009 Nov;7(10):1109–15. [PMID:
19930977]
 
Le-Petross CH et al. Evolving role of imaging modalities in
inflammatory breast cancer. Semin Oncol. 2008 Feb;35(1): 51–
63. [PMID: 18308146]
 
Murphy CD et al. The American Cancer Society guidelines for
breast screening with magnetic resonance imaging: an argument for
genetic testing. Cancer. 2008 Dec 1;113(11):3116–20. [PMID:
18932252]
 
Van Ongeval Ch. Digital mammography for screening and
diagnosis of breast cancer: an overview. JBR-BTR. 2007 May–
Jun;90(3):163–6. [PMID: 17696081]
 
Vinnicombe S et al. Full-field digital versus screen-film
mammography: comparison within the UK breast screening
program and systematic review of published data. Radiology.
2009 May;251(2):347–58. [PMID: 19401569]
 
Warner E et al. Systematic review: using magnetic resonance
imaging to screen women at high risk for breast cancer. Ann Intern
Med. 2008 May 6;148(9):671–9. [PMID: 18458280]
 
Weaver DL et al. Pathologic findings from the Breast Cancer
Surveillance Consortium: population-based outcomes in women
undergoing biopsy after screening mammography. Cancer. 2006
Feb 15;106(4):732–42. [PMID: 16411214]
 
Whitman GJ et al. Workup and staging of locally advanced breast
cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2009 Oct;19(4):211–21. [PMID:
19732685]
 
 Clinical Findings Associated with Early
Detection of Breast Cancer
A. Symptoms and Signs
The presenting complaint in about 70% of patients with breast
cancer is a lump (usually painless) in the breast. About 90% of
these breast masses are discovered by the patient. Less frequent
symptoms are breast pain; nipple discharge; erosion, retraction,
enlargement, or itching of the nipple; and redness, generalized
hardness, enlargement, or shrinking of the breast. Rarely, an axillary
mass or swelling of the arm may be the first symptom. Back or
bone pain, jaundice, or weight loss may be the result of systemic
metastases, but these symptoms are rarely seen on initial
presentation.
The relative frequency of carcinoma in various anatomic sites in
the breast is shown in Figure 17–2.
Inspection of the breast is the first step in physical examination
and should be carried out with the patient sitting, arms at her sides
and then overhead. Abnormal variations in breast size and contour,
minimal nipple retraction, and slight edema, redness, or retraction of
the skin can be identified (Figure 17–3). Asymmetry of the breasts
and retraction or dimpling of the skin can often be accentuated by
having the patient raise her arms overhead or press her hands on
her hips to contract the pectoralis muscles. Axillary and
supraclavicular areas should be thoroughly palpated for enlarged
nodes with the patient sitting (Figure 17–4). Palpation of the breast
for masses or other changes should be performed with the patient
both seated and supine with the arm abducted (Figure 17–5).
Palpation with a rotary motion of the examiner's fingers as well as a
horizontal stripping motion has been recommended.
Breast cancer usually consists of a nontender, firm or hard mass
with poorly delineated margins (caused by local infiltration). Very
small (1–2 mm) erosions of the nipple epithelium may be the only
manifestation of Paget disease of the breast. Watery, serous, or
bloody discharge from the nipple is an occasional early sign but is
more often associated with benign disease.
 
Figure 17–2. Frequency of breast carcinoma at various anatomi
 
A small lesion, < 1 cm in diameter, may be difficult or impossible
for the examiner to feel but may be discovered by the patient. She
should always be asked to demonstrate the location of the mass; if
the practitioner fails to confirm the patient's suspicions and imaging
studies are normal, the examination should be repeated in 2–3
months, preferably 1–2 weeks after the onset of menses. During the
premenstrual phase of the cycle, increased innocuous nodularity
may suggest neoplasm or may obscure an underlying lesion. If there
is any question regarding the nature of an abnormality under these
circumstances, the patient should be asked to return after her
menses. Ultrasound is often valuable and mammography essential
when an area is felt by the patient to be abnormal but the physician
feels no mass. MRI may be considered, but the lack of specificity
should be discussed by the practitioner and the patient. MRI should
not be used to rule out cancer because MRI has a false-negative
rate of about 3–5%. Although lower than mammography, this false-
negative rate cannot permit safe elimination of the possibility of
cancer. False negatives are more likely seen in infiltrating lobular
carcinomas and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
 
Figure 17–3. Peau d'orange sign (resemblance to the skin of an
orange due to lymphedema) in advanced breast cancer. (Courtesy
of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine
RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill
 
 
Figure 17–4. Palpation of axillary region for enlarged lymp
 
Metastases tend to involve regional lymph nodes, which may be
palpable. One or two movable, nontender, not particularly firm
axillary lymph nodes 5 mm or less in diameter are frequently present
and are generally of no significance. Firm or hard nodes larger than
1 cm are typical of metastases. Axillary nodes that are matted or
fixed to skin or deep structures indicate advanced disease (at least
stage III). On the other hand, if the examiner thinks that the axillary
nodes are involved, that impression will be borne out by histologic
section in about 85% of cases. The incidence of positive axillary
nodes increases with the size of the primary tumor. Noninvasive
cancers (in situ) do not metastasize. Metastases are present in about
30% of patients with clinically negative nodes.
 
Figure 17–5. Palpation of breasts. Palpation is performed with
the patient supine and ar
 
In most cases, no nodes are palpable in the supraclavicular fossa.
Firm or hard nodes of any size in this location or just beneath the
clavicle are suggestive of metastatic cancer and should be biopsied.
Ipsilateral supraclavicular or infraclavicular nodes containing cancer
indicate that the tumor is in an advanced stage (stage III or IV).
Edema of the ipsilateral arm, commonly caused by metastatic
infiltration of regional lymphatics, is also a sign of advanced cancer.
B. Laboratory Findings
A consistently elevated sedimentation rate may be the result of
disseminated cancer. Liver or bone metastases may be associated
with elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase. Hypercalcemia is an
occasional important finding in advanced cancer of the breast.
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 15-3 or CA 27-29 may
be used as markers for recurrent breast cancer but are not helpful in
diagnosing early lesions. Many scientists are further investigating
breast cancer markers through proteomics and hormone assays.
These studies are ongoing and may prove to be helpful in early
detection or evaluation of prognosis.
C. Imaging for Metastases
For patients with suspicious symptoms or signs (bone pain,
abdominal symptoms, elevated liver enzymes) or locally advanced
disease (clinically abnormal lymph nodes or large primary tumors),
staging scans are indicated prior to surgery or systemic therapy.
Chest imaging with CT or radiographs may be done to evaluate for
pulmonary metastases. Abdominal imaging with CT or ultrasound
may be obtained to evaluate for liver metastases. Bone scans using
99mTc-labeled phosphates or phosphonates are more sensitive than
skeletal radiographs in detecting meta-static breast cancer. Bone
scanning has not proved to be of clinical value as a routine
preoperative test in the absence of symptoms, physical findings, or
abnormal alkaline phosphatase or calcium levels. The frequency of
abnormal findings on bone scan parallels the status of the axillary
lymph nodes on pathologic examination. Positron emission
tomography (PET) scanning alone or combined with CT (PET-CT)
is effective for detecting soft tissue or visceral metastases in patients
with symptoms or signs of meta-static disease.
D. Diagnostic Tests
1. Biopsy—The diagnosis of breast cancer depends ultimately on
examination of tissue or cells removed by biopsy. Treatment should
never be undertaken without an unequivocal histologic or cytologic
diagnosis of cancer. The safest course is biopsy examination of all
suspicious lesions found on physical examination or mammography,
or both. About 60% of lesions clinically thought to be cancer prove
on biopsy to be benign, while about 30% of clinically benign lesions
are found to be malignant. These findings demonstrate the fallibility
of clinical judgment and the necessity for biopsy.
All breast masses require a histologic diagnosis with one
probable exception, a nonsuspicious, presumably fibrocystic mass,
in a premenopausal woman. Rather, these masses can be observed
through one or two menstrual cycles. However, if the mass is not
cystic and does not completely resolve during this time, it must be
biopsied. Figures 17–6 
and 17–7 present algorithms for
management 
of 
breast 
masses 
in 
premenopausal 
and
postmenopausal patients.
The simplest biopsy method is needle biopsy, either by aspiration
of tumor cells (FNA cytology) or by obtaining a small core of tissue
with a hollow needle (core biopsy).
FNA cytology is a useful technique whereby cells are aspirated
with a small needle and examined cytologically. This technique can
be performed easily with virtually no morbidity and is much less
expensive than excisional or open biopsy. The main disadvantages
are that it requires a pathologist skilled in the cytologic diagnosis of
breast cancer and it is subject to sampling problems, particularly
because deep lesions may be missed. Furthermore, noninvasive
cancers usually cannot be distinguished from invasive cancers and
immunohistochemical tests to determine expression of hormone
receptors and the presence of the HER-2/neu oncogene cannot be
reliably performed on FNA biopsies. The incidence of false-positive
diagnoses is extremely low, perhaps 1–2%. The false-negative rate
is as high as 10%. Most experienced clinicians would not leave a
suspicious dominant mass in the breast even when FNA cytology is
negative unless the clinical diagnosis, breast imaging studies, and
cytologic studies were all in agreement, such as a fibrocystic lesion
or fibroadenoma.
Large-needle (core needle) biopsy removes a core of tissue
with a large cutting needle. Hand-held biopsy devices make large-
core needle biopsy of a palpable mass easy and cost effective in the
office with local anesthesia. As in the case of any needle biopsy, the
main problem is sampling error due to improper positioning of the
needle, giving rise to a false-negative test result. Core biopsy has
the advantage that tumor markers, such as estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and HER-2/neu overexpression can be
performed on cores of tissue.
Open biopsy under local anesthesia as a separate procedure
prior to deciding upon definitive treatment is the most reliable means
of diagnosis. Needle biopsy or aspiration, when positive, offers a
more rapid approach with less expense and morbidity, but when
nondiagnostic it must be followed by open biopsy. It generally
consists of an excisional biopsy, which is done through an incision
with the intent to remove the entire abnormality, not simply a
sample. Additional evaluation for metastatic disease and therapeutic
options can be discussed with the patient after the histologic or
cytologic diagnosis of cancer has been established. In situ cancers
are not easily diagnosed cytologically and usually require excisional
biopsy.
 
Figure 17–6. Evaluation of breast masses in premenopausal
women. (Adapted, with permission, from Chang S, Haigh PI,
Giuliano AE. Breast disease. In: Berek JS, Hacker NF [editors],
Practical Gynecologic Oncology, 4th edition, LWW
 
As an alternative in highly suspicious circumstances, the diagnosis
may be made on frozen section of tissue obtained by open biopsy
under general anesthesia. If the frozen section is positive, the
surgeon can proceed immediately with the definitive operation. This
one-step method is rarely used today except when a cytologic study
has suggested cancer but is not diagnostic and there is a high clinical
suspicion of malignancy in a patient well prepared for the diagnosis
of cancer and its treatment options.
In general, the two-step approach—outpatient biopsy followed
by definitive operation at a later date—is preferred in the diagnosis
and treatment of breast cancer, because patients can be given time
to adjust to the diagnosis of cancer, can consider alternative forms
of therapy, and can seek a second opinion if they wish. There is no
adverse effect from the short delay of the two-step procedure.
2. Ultrasonography—Ultrasonography is performed primarily to
differentiate cystic from solid lesions but may show signs suggestive
of carcinoma. Ultrasonography may show an irregular mass within a
cyst in the rare case of intracystic carcinoma. If a tumor is palpable
and feels like a cyst, an 18-gauge needle can be used to aspirate the
fluid and make the diagnosis of cyst. If a cyst is aspirated and the
fluid is nonbloody, it does not have to be examined cytologically. If
the mass does not recur, no further diagnostic test is necessary.
Nonpalpable mammographic densities that appear benign should be
investigated with ultrasound to determine whether the lesion is cystic
or solid. These may even be needle biopsied with ultrasound
guidance.
3. Mammography—When a suspicious abnormality is identified
by mammography alone and cannot be palpated by the clinician, the
lesion should be biopsied under mammographic guidance. In the
computerized stereotactic guided core needle technique, a
biopsy needle is inserted into the lesion with mammographic
guidance, and a core of tissue for histologic examination can then be
examined. Vacuum assistance increases the amount of tissue
obtained and improves diagnosis.
 
Figure 17–7. Evaluation of breast masses in post-menopausal
women. (Adapted, with permission, from Chang S, Haigh PI,
Giuliano AE. Breast disease. In: Berek JS, Hacker NF [editors],
Practical Gynecologic Oncology, 4th edition, LWW
 
Mammographic localization biopsy is performed by obtaining
a mammogram in two perpendicular views and placing a needle or
hook-wire near the abnormality so that the surgeon can use the
metal needle or wire as a guide during operation to locate the lesion.
After mammography confirms the position of the needle in relation
to the lesion, an incision is made and the subcutaneous tissue is
dissected until the needle is identified. Often, the abnormality cannot
even be palpated through the incision—as is the case with
microcalcifications—and thus it is essential to obtain a mammogram
of the specimen to document that the lesion was excised. At that
time, a second marker needle can further localize the lesion for the
pathologist. Stereotactic core needle biopsies have proved
equivalent to mammographic localization biopsies. Core biopsy is
preferable to mammographic localization for accessible lesions since
an operation can be avoided. A metal clip should be placed after
any image-guided core biopsy to facilitate finding the site of the
lesion if subsequent treatment is necessary.
4. Other imaging modalities—Other modalities of breast imaging
have been investigated for diagnostic purposes. Automated breast
ultrasonography is useful in distinguishing cystic from solid lesions
but should be used only as a supplement to physical examination
and mammography. Ductography may be useful to define the site of
a lesion causing a bloody discharge, but since biopsy is almost
always indicated, ductography may be omitted and the blood-filled
nipple system excised. Ductoscopy has shown some promise in
identifying intraductal lesions, especially in the case of pathologic
nipple discharge, but in practice, this technique is rarely used. MRI
is highly sensitive but not specific and should not be used for
screening except in highly selective cases. For example, MRI is
useful in differentiating scar from recurrence postlumpectomy and
may be valuable to screen high-risk women (eg, women with BRCA
mutations). It may also be of value to examine for multicentricity
when there is a known primary cancer; to examine the contralateral
breast in women with cancer; to examine the extent of cancer,
especially lobular carcinomas; or to determine the response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. PET scanning does not appear useful in
evaluating the breast itself but is valuable to examine regional
lymphatics and distant metastases.
5. Cytology—Cytologic examination of nipple discharge or cyst
fluid may be helpful on rare occasions. As a rule, mammography (or
ductography) and breast biopsy are required when nipple discharge
or cyst fluid is bloody or cytologically questionable. Ductal lavage, a
technique that washes individual duct systems with saline and
loosens epithelial cells for cytologic evaluation, is being evaluated as
a risk assessment tool but appears to be of little value.
 Differential Diagnosis
The lesions to be considered most often in the differential diagnosis
of breast cancer are the following, in descending order of frequency:
fibrocystic condition of the breast, fibroadenoma, intraductal
papilloma, lipoma, and fat necrosis.
 Staging
The American Joint Committee on Cancer and the International
Union Against Cancer have agreed on a TNM (tumor, regional
lymph nodes, distant metastases) staging system for breast cancer.
Using the TNM staging system enhances communication between
researchers and clinicians. Table 17–2 outlines the TNM
classification.
 Pathologic Types
Numerous pathologic subtypes of breast cancer can be identified
histologically (Table 17–3).
Except for the in situ cancers, the histologic subtypes have only a
slight bearing on prognosis when outcomes are compared after
accurate staging. Various histologic parameters, such as invasion of
blood vessels, tumor differentiation, invasion of breast lymphatics,
and tumor necrosis have been examined, but other than tumor grade
these have little prognostic value. Genetic analysis for certain high-
risk genes in the primary tumor appears to offer prognostic and
therapeutic information.
The noninvasive cancers by definition are confined by the
basement membrane of the ducts and lack the ability to spread.
However, in patients whose biopsies show noninvasive intraductal
cancer, associated invasive ductal cancers metastasize to lymph
nodes in about 1–3% of cases.
 
Table 17–2. TNM staging for breast cancer.
 
1Clinically apparent is defined as detected by imaging studies (excluding
lymphoscintigraphy) or by clinical examination or grossly visible
pathologically.
2Classification is based on axillary lymph node dissection with or without
sentinel lymph node dissection. Classification based solely on sentinel
lymph node dissection without subsequent axillary lymph node dissection
is designated (sn) for “sentinel node,” eg, pN0(i +)(sn).
3RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction.
4Not clinically apparent is defined as not detected by imaging studies
(excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or by clinical examination.
5T1 includes T1mic.
Reproduced, with permission, of the American Joint Committee on Cancer
(AJCC), Chicago, Illinois, AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th edition,
Springer-science and Business Media LLC, New York, 2010,
www.springer.com.
 Special Clinical Forms of Breast
Cancer
A. Paget Carcinoma
Paget carcinoma is not common (about 1% of all breast cancers). It
affects the nipple and may or may not be associated with a breast
mass. Over 85% of cases are associated with an underlying invasive
or noninvasive cancer, usually a well differentiated infiltrating ductal
carcinoma or a DCIS. The ducts of the nipple epithelium are
infiltrated, but gross nipple changes are often minimal, and a tumor
mass may not be palpable.
Because the nipple changes appear innocuous, the diagnosis is
frequently missed. The first symptom is often itching or burning of
the nipple, with superficial erosion or ulceration. These are often
diagnosed and treated as dermatitis or bacterial infection, leading to
delay or failure in detection. The diagnosis is established by biopsy
of the area of erosion. When the lesion consists of nipple changes
only, the incidence of axillary metastases is < 5%, and the prognosis
is excellent. When a breast mass is also present, the incidence of
axillary metastases rises, with an associated marked decrease in
prospects for cure by surgical or other treatment.
B. Inflammatory Carcinoma
This is the most malignant form of breast cancer and constitutes <
3% of all cases. The clinical findings consist of a rapidly growing,
sometimes painful mass that enlarges the breast. The overlying skin
becomes erythematous, edematous, and warm. Often there is no
distinct mass, since the tumor infiltrates the involved breast diffusely.
The inflammatory changes, often mistaken for an infection, are
caused by carcinomatous invasion of the subdermal lymphatics, with
resulting edema and hyperemia. If the practitioner suspects infection
but the lesion does not respond rapidly (1–2 weeks) to antibiotics,
biopsy should be performed. The diagnosis should be made when
the redness involves more than one-third of the skin over the breast
and biopsy shows infiltrating carcinoma with invasion of the
subdermal lymphatics. Metastases tend to occur early and widely,
and for this reason inflammatory carcinoma is rarely curable.
Radiation, hormone therapy, and chemotherapy are the measures
most likely to be of value rather than operation. Mastectomy is
indicated when chemotherapy and radiation have resulted in clinical
remission with no evidence of distant metastases. In these cases,
residual disease in the breast may be eradicated.
 
Table 17–3. Histologic types of breas
 
 
 
Type
Frequency of
Occurrence
Infiltrating ductal (not otherwise
specified)
80–90%
     Medullary
5–8%
     Colloid (mucinous)
2–4%
     Tubular
1–2%
     Papillary
1–2%
Invasive lobular
6–8%
Noninvasive
4–6%
     Intraductal
2–3%
     Lobular in situ
2–3%
Rare cancers
< 1%
     Juvenile (secretory)
     Adenoid cystic
     Epidermoid
     Sudoriferous
 Breast Cancer Occurring during
Pregnancy or Lactation
Breast cancer complicates approximately one in 3000 pregnancies.
The diagnosis is frequently delayed, because physiologic changes in
the breast may obscure the lesion. When the cancer is confined to
the breast, the 5-year survival rate is about 70%. In 60–70% of
patients, axillary metastases are already present, conferring a 5-year
survival rate of 30–40%. Pregnancy (or lactation) is not a
contraindication to operation or treatment, and therapy should be
based on the stage of the disease as in the nonpregnant (or
nonlactating) woman. Overall survival rates have improved, since
cancers are now diagnosed in pregnant women earlier than in the
past and treatment has improved. Breast-conserving surgery may
be performed—and radiation and chemotherapy given—even
during the pregnancy.
 Bilateral Breast Cancer
Bilateral breast cancer occurs in < 5% of cases, but there is as high
as a 20–25% incidence of later occurrence of cancer in the second
breast. Bilaterality occurs more often in familial breast cancer, in
women under age 50 years, and when the tumor in the primary
breast is lobular. The incidence of second breast cancers increases
directly with the length of time the patient is alive after her first
cancer—about 1–2% per year.
In patients with breast cancer, mammography should be
performed before primary treatment and at regular intervals
thereafter, to search for occult cancer in the opposite breast or
conserved ipsilateral breast. MRI may be useful in this high-risk
group.
 Noninvasive Cancer
Noninvasive cancer can occur within the ducts (DCIS) or lobules
(LCIS). LCIS, although thought to be a premalignant lesion or a
risk factor for breast cancer, in fact may behave like DCIS. In a
2004 analysis of multiple NSABP studies, invasive lobular breast
cancer not only developed in patients with LCIS but it developed in
the same breast and indexed location as the original LCIS. Although
more research needs to be done in this area, the invasive potential
of LCIS is being reconsidered. The subtype pleomorphic LCIS
may behave more like DCIS. DCIS tends to be unilateral and most
often progresses to invasive cancer if untreated. In approximately
40–60% of women who have DCIS treated with biopsy alone,
invasive cancer develops within the same breast.
The treatment of intraductal lesions is controversial. DCIS can be
treated by wide excision with or without radiation therapy or with
total mastectomy. Conservative management is advised in patients
with small lesions amenable to lumpectomy. Although research is
defining the malignant potential of LCIS, it can be managed with
observation. Patients unwilling to accept the increased risk of breast
cancer may be offered surgical excision of the area in question or
bilateral total mastectomy. Currently, the accepted standard of care
offers the alternative of chemoprevention, which is effective in
preventing invasive breast cancer in both LCIS and DCIS that has
been completely excised. Axillary metastases from in situ cancers
should not occur unless there is an occult invasive cancer. Sentinel
node biopsy may be indicated in large DCIS treated with
mastectomy.
Barnes DM et al. Pregnancy-associated breast cancer: a literature
review. Surg Clin North Am. 2007 Apr;87(2):417–30. [PMID:
17498535]
 
Bruening W et al. Systematic review: comparative effectiveness of
core-needle and open surgical biopsy to diagnose breast lesions.
Ann Intern Med. 2010 Feb 16;152(4):238–46. [PMID:
20008742]
 
Chen CY et al. Paget disease of the breast: changing patterns of
incidence, clinical presentation, and treatment in the U.S. Cancer.
2006 Oct 1;107(7):1448–58. [PMID: 16933329]
 
Chia S et al. Locally advanced and inflammatory breast cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 2008 Feb 10;26(5):786–90. [PMID: 18258987]
 
Dalberg K et al. Paget's disease of the nipple in a population based
cohort. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Sep;111(2):313–9.
[PMID: 17952590]
 
Hansen NM et al. Breast cancer: pre- and postoperative imaging
for staging. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2007 Apr;16(2):447–63.
[PMID: 17560522]
 
Ho BC et al. Lobular neoplasia of the breast: 68 years on.
Pathology. 2009 Jan;41(1):28–35. [PMID: 19089737]
 
Molckovsky A et al. Breast cancer in pregnancy: a literature
review. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Apr;108(3):333–8.
[PMID: 17530426]
 
Morrow M. Magnetic resonance imaging for screening, diagnosis,
and eligibility for breast-conserving surgery: promises and pitfalls.
Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2010 Jul;19(3):475–92. [PMID:
20620922]
 
Navrozoglou I et al. Breast cancer during pregnancy: a mini-
review. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2008 Aug;34(8):837–43. [PMID:
18343083]
 
Theriault R et al. Management of breast cancer in pregnancy. Curr
Oncol Rep. 2007 Jan;9(1):17–21. [PMID: 17164043]
 
Tohno E et al. Ultrasound screening of breast cancer. Breast
Cancer. 2009;16(1):18–22. [PMID: 19009372]
 
Veronesi U et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer: ten-
year results of a randomized controlled study. Ann Surg. 2010
Apr;251(4):595–600. [PMID: 20195151]
 
Virnig BA et al. Diagnosis and management of ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS). Evid Rep Technol Assess (Full Rep). 2009 Sep;
(185):1–549. [PMID: 20629475]
 
West JG et al. Multidisciplinary management of ductal carcinoma
in situ: a 10-year experience. Am J Surg. 2007 Oct;194(4): 532–
4. [PMID: 17826074]
 
Woodward WA et al. Inflammatory breast cancer. Semin Radiat
Oncol. 2009 Oct;19(4):256–65. [PMID: 19732690]
 
 Biomarkers & Gene Expression
Profiling
Determining the ER, PR and HER-2/neu status of the tumor at the
time of diagnosis of early breast cancer and, if possible, at the time
of recurrence is critical, both to gauge a patient's prognosis and to
determine the best treatment regimen. In addition to ER status and
PR status, the rate at which tumor divides (assessed by an
immunohistochemical stain for Ki-67) and the grade and
differentiation of the cells are also important prognostic factors.
These markers may be obtained on core biopsy or surgical
specimens. Patients whose tumors are hormone receptor-positive
tend to have a more favorable disease course than those whose
tumors are receptor-negative. Moreover, treatment with an anti-
hormonal agent is an essential component of therapy for hormone-
receptor positive breast cancer at any stage. While up to 60% of
patients with metastatic breast cancer will respond to hormonal
manipulation if their tumors are ER-positive, < 5% of patients with
metastatic, ER-negative tumors will respond.
Another key element in determining treatment and prognosis is
the amount of the HER-2/neu oncogene present in the cancer.
HER-2/neu overexpression is measured by an immunohistochemical
assay that is scored using a numerical system: 0 and 1+ are
considered 
negative 
for 
overexpression, 
2+ 
is
borderline/indeterminate, and 3+ is overexpression. In the case of
2+ expression, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is
recommended to more accurately assess HER-2/neu amplification.
According to the College of American Pathologists, a FISH score
of < 1.8 is negative for amplification, 1.8–2.2 is indeterminant, and
> 2.2 is amplified. The presence of HER-2/neu amplification and
overexpression predicts the response to trastuzumab.
Individually these biomarkers are predictive and thus provide
insight to guide appropriate therapy. Moreover, when combined
they provide useful information regarding risk of recurrence and
prognosis. In general, tumors that lack expression of HER-2/neu,
ER and PR (“triple negative”) have a higher risk of recurrence and
metastases and are associated with a worse survival compared with
other types. Neither endocrine therapy nor HER-2–targeted agents
are useful for this type of breast cancer, leaving chemotherapy as
the only treatment option. In contrast, patients with early stage,
hormone receptor-positive breast cancer may not benefit from the
addition of chemotherapy to hormonal treatments. Several
molecular tests have been developed to assess risk of recurrence
and to predict which patients are most likely to benefit from
chemotherapy. Oncotype DX (Genomic Health) evaluates the
expression of 21 genes relating to ER, PR, HER-2/neu, and
proliferation in a tumor specimen and categorizes a patient's risk of
recurrence (recurrence score) as high, intermediate, or low risk. In
addition to providing prognostic information, the test also has
predictive value since studies have shown that patients in the high-
risk category are most likely to respond to chemotherapy. This test
is primarily indicated for ER-positive, node-negative tumors but at
least one study has shown that it may also have value in node-
positive tumors. Recently, it was demonstrated that centralized
testing 
for 
ER, 
PR, HER-2 and Ki67 by standard
immunohistochemical techniques is able to provide as much
prognostic information as Oncotype DX. Mammaprint (Agendia) is
another assay that is available for evaluating prognosis. This 70-
gene signature is FDA-approved and may be performed on fresh
frozen tumor tissue taken at the time of a patient's surgery. This test
classifies patients into good and poor prognostic groups to predict
clinical outcome and may be used on patients with hormone
receptor positive or negative breast cancer. Several other assays
are in development to better stratify patients based on risk
assessment.
Albain KS et al; for The Breast Cancer Intergroup of North
America. Prognostic and predictive value of the 21-gene
recurrence score assay in postmenopausal women with node-
positive, oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer on
chemotherapy: a retrospective analysis of a randomised trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2010 Jan;11(1):55–65. [PMID: 20005174]
 
Badve S et al. Oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer: toward
bridging histopathological and molecular classifications. J Clin
Pathol. 2009 Jan;62(1):6–12. [PMID: 18794199]
 
Cuzick J et al. Prognostic value of a combined ER, PgR, Ki67,
HER2 immunohistochemical (HC4) score and comparison with the
GHI Recurrence Score—results from the Trans-ATAC. Cancer
Res. 2009;69(Suppl):503s.
 
Desmedt C et al; TRANSBIG Consortium. Strong time
dependence of the 76-gene prognostic signature for node-negative
breast cancer patients in the TRANSBIG multicenter independent
validation series. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 1;13(11):3207–14.
[PMID: 17545524]
 
Ferretti G et al. HER2/neu role in breast cancer: from a prognostic
foe to a predictive friend. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2007
Feb;19(1):56–62. [PMID: 17218853]
 
Retèl VP et al. Constructive Technology Assessment (CTA) as a
tool in coverage with evidence development: the case of the 70-
gene prognosis signature for breast cancer diagnostics. Int J
Technol Assess Health Care. 2009 Jan;25(1):73–83. [PMID:
19126254]
 
Sparano JA et al. Clinical application of gene expression profiling
in breast cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2010 Jul;19(3):581–
606. [PMID: 20620929]
 
Wolff AC et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology/College of
American Pathologists guideline recommendations for human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing in breast cancer. Arch
Pathol Lab Med. 2007;131(1):18–43. [PMID: 19548375]
 
 Treatment: Curative
Clearly, not all breast cancer is systemic at the time of diagnosis.
For this reason, a pessimistic attitude concerning the management of
breast cancer is unwarranted. Most patients with early breast
cancer can be cured. Treatment with a curative intent is advised for
clinical stage I, II, and III disease (see Tables 17–2, 39–4). Patients
with locally advanced (T3, T4) and even inflammatory tumors may
be cured with multimodality therapy, but in most, palliation is all that
can be expected. Palliative treatment is appropriate for all patients
with stage IV disease and for patients with unresectable local
cancers (see Palliative section).
A. Choice and Timing of Primary Therapy
The extent of disease and its biologic aggressiveness are the
principal determinants of the outcome of primary therapy. Clinical
and pathologic staging help in assessing extent of disease (see Table
17–2), but each is to some extent imprecise. Other factors such as
tumor grade, hormone receptor assays, and HER-2/neu oncogene
amplification are of prognostic value and are key to determining
systemic therapy, but are not important in determining the type of
local therapy.
Controversy has surrounded the choice of primary therapy of
stage I, II, and III breast carcinoma. Currently, the standard of care
for stage I, stage II, and most stage III cancer is surgical resection
followed by adjuvant radiation or systemic therapy, or both, when
indicated. Neoadjuvant therapy is becoming more popular since
large tumors may be shrunk by chemotherapy prior to surgery,
making some patients who require mastectomy candidates for
lumpectomy. It is important for patients to understand all of the
surgical options, including reconstructive options, prior to having
surgery. Patients with large primary tumors, inflammatory cancer, or
palpably enlarged lymph nodes should take the time needed to have
staging scans performed to rule out metastatic disease prior to
definitive surgery. In general, adjuvant systemic therapy is started
when the breast has adequately healed, usually within 4-8 weeks
after surgery. While no prospective studies have defined the
appropriate timing of adjuvant chemotherapy, one retrospective
population-based study has suggested that chemo-therapy should
be initiated within 12 weeks of surgery to avoid a compromise in
relapse free- and overall survival.
B. Surgical Resection
1. Breast-conserving therapy—Multiple, large, randomized
studies including the Milan and NSABP trials show that disease-
free and overall survival rates are similar for patients treated with
partial mastectomy plus axillary dissection followed by radiation
therapy and for those treated by modified radical mastectomy (total
mastectomy plus axillary dissection).
Twenty years of follow-up of the NSABP trial has shown that
lumpectomy with axillary dissection followed by postoperative
radiation therapy is as effective as modified radical mastectomy for
the management of patients with stage I and stage II breast cancer.
Tumor size is a major consideration in determining the feasibility
of breast conservation. The lumpectomy trial of the NSABP
randomized patients with tumors as large as 4 cm. To achieve an
acceptable cosmetic result, the patient must have a breast of
sufficient size to enable excision of a 4-cm tumor without
considerable deformity. Therefore, large size is only a relative
contraindication. Subareolar tumors, also difficult to excise without
deformity, are not contraindications to breast conservation.
Clinically detectable multifocality is a relative contraindication to
breast-conserving surgery, as is fixation to the chest wall or skin or
involvement of the nipple or overlying skin. The patient—not the
surgeon—should be the judge of what is cosmetically acceptable.
Given the relatively high risk of poor outcome after radiation,
concomitant scleroderma and active systemic lupus erythematosus
are relative contraindications to breast-conserving surgery. A
history of prior therapeutic radiation to the ipsilateral breast or chest
wall (or both) is also a contraindication for breast conservation.
Axillary dissection is valuable in preventing axillary recurrences,
in staging cancer, and in planning therapy. Intraoperative lymphatic
mapping and sentinel node biopsy identify lymph nodes most likely
to harbor metastases if present in the axillary nodes (Figure 17–8).
Sentinel node biopsy is a reasonable alternative to axillary dissection
in selected patients with invasive cancer. If sentinel node biopsy
reveals no evidence of axillary metastases, it is highly likely that the
remaining lymph nodes are free of disease and axillary dissection
may be omitted. A recent study from the American College of
Surgeons Oncology group randomized women with sentinel node
metastases to undergo completion axillary dissection or to receive
no further axillary treatment after lumpectomy; no difference in
survival was found, showing that axillary dissection for selected
node-positive women is not necessary. These results challenge
standard treatment regimens.
 
Figure 17–8. Sentinel node. (Used with permission from Giulian
 
Breast-conserving surgery with radiation is the preferred form of
treatment for patients with early-stage breast cancer. Despite the
numerous randomized trials showing no survival benefit of
mastectomy over breast-conserving partial mastectomy and
irradiation, breast-conserving surgery still appears underutilized.
2. Mastectomy—Modified radical mastectomy was the standard
therapy for most patients with early-stage breast cancer. This
operation removes the entire breast, overlying skin, nipple, and
areolar complex as well as the underlying pectoralis fascia with the
axillary lymph nodes in continuity. The major advantage of modified
radical mastectomy is that radiation therapy may not be necessary,
although radiation may be used when multiple lymph nodes are
involved with cancer. The disadvantage of mastectomy is the
cosmetic and psychological impact associated with breast loss.
Radical mastectomy, which removes the underlying pectoralis
muscle, should be performed rarely, if at all. Axillary node
dissection is not indicated for noninfiltrating cancers because nodal
metastases are rarely present. Skin-sparing mastectomy is currently
gaining favor but is not appropriate for all patients. Breast-
conserving surgery and radiation should be offered whenever
possible, since most patients would prefer to save the breast. Breast
reconstruction, immediate or delayed, should be discussed with
patients who choose or require mastectomy. Patients should have
an interview with a reconstructive plastic surgeon to discuss options
prior to making a decision regarding reconstruction. Time is well
spent preoperatively in educating the patient and family about these
matters.
C. Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy after partial mastectomy consists of 5–7 weeks of five
daily fractions to a total dose of 5000–6000 cGy. Most radiation
oncologists use a boost dose to the cancer location. Several studies
are underway examining the utility and recurrence rates after
intraoperative radiation or dose dense radiation in which the time
course of radiation is shortened. Accelerated partial breast
irradiation, in which only the portion of the breast from which the
tumor was resected is irradiated for 1–2 weeks, appears effective in
achieving local control. The American Society of Breast Surgeons
Registry Trial reported that in 1440 patients treated with
brachytherapy, the 3-year actuarial rate of ipsilateral breast cancer
recurrence was 2.15% and no unexpected adverse events were
seen. Long-term follow-up will be necessary as will results from
ongoing randomized clinical trials comparing brachytherapy to
standard external beam radiation.
Current studies suggest that radiotherapy after mastectomy may
improve recurrence rates and survival in patients with tumors ≥ 5
cm or positive lymph nodes. Researchers are also examining the
utility of axillary irradiation as an alternative to axillary dissection in
the clinically node-negative patient with sentinel node
micrometastases.
D. Adjuvant Systemic Therapy
The goal of systemic therapy, including hormone modulating drugs
(endocrine therapy), cytotoxic chemotherapy, and the HER-2/neu-
targeted agent trastuzumab, is to kill cancer cells that have escaped
the breast and axillary lymph nodes as micrometastases before they
become macrometastases (ie, stage IV cancer). Systemic therapy
improves survival and is advocated for most patients with curable
breast cancer. In practice, most medical oncologists are currently
using adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with either node-positive
or higher-risk (eg, hormone receptor-negative or HER-2/neu-
positive) node-negative breast cancer and using endocrine therapy
for all hormone receptor–positive invasive breast cancer unless
contraindicated. Prognostic factors other than nodal status that are
used to determine the patient's risks are tumor size, ER and PR
status, nuclear grade, histologic type, proliferative rate, oncogene
expression (Table 17–4), and patient's age and menopausal status.
In general, systemic chemotherapy decreases the chance of
recurrence by about 30% and hormonal modulation decreases the
risk of recurrence by 40–50% (for hormone receptor–positive
cancer). Systemic therapy is usually given sequentially, rather than
concurrently with radiation. In terms of sequencing, typically
chemotherapy is given before radiation and endocrine therapy is
started after radiation therapy.
The long-term advantage of systemic therapy has been well
established. All patients with invasive hormone receptor–positive
tumors should consider the use of hormone-modulating therapy.
Most patients with HER-2/neu-positive tumors should receive
trastuzumab-containing chemo-therapy regimens. In general,
adjuvant systemic chemo-therapy should not be given to women
who have small node-negative breast cancers with favorable
histologic findings and tumor markers. The ability to predict more
accurately which patients with HER-2/neu-negative, hormone
receptor-positive, lymph node-negative tumors should receive
chemotherapy is improving with the advent of prognostic tools, such
as Oncotype DX and Mammaprint. These tests are now undergoing
prospective evaluation in two clinical trials (TAILORx and
MINDACT).
 
Table 17–4. Prognostic factors in node-negative breas
 
1. Chemotherapy—The Early Breast Cancer Trialists'
Collaborative Group (EBCTCG) meta-analysis involving over
28,000 women enrolled in 60 trials of adjuvant polychemotherapy
versus no chemotherapy demonstrated a significant beneficial
impact of chemotherapy on clinical outcome in early breast cancer.
This study showed that adjuvant chemotherapy reduces the risk of
recurrence and breast cancer–specific mortality in all women but
also showed that women under the age of 50 derive the greatest
benefit. On the basis of the superiority of anthracycline-containing
regimens in metastatic breast cancer, both doxorubicin and
epirubicin have been studied extensively in the adjuvant setting.
Studies 
comparing 
Adriamycin 
(doxorubicin) 
and
cyclophosphamide (AC) or epirubicin and cyclophosphamide (EC)
with cyclophosphamide-methotrexate-5- fluorouracil (CMF) have
shown that treatments with anthracycline-containing regimens are at
least as effective, and perhaps more effective, than treatment with
CMF. The EBCTCG analysis including over 14,000 patients
enrolled in trials comparing anthracycline-based regimens to CMF,
showed a small but statistically significant improved disease-free
and overall survival with the use of anthracycline-based regimens. It
should be noted, however, that most of these studies included a
mixed population of HER-2/neu-positive and HER-2/neu-negative
breast cancer patients and were performed before the development
of trastuzumab. Retrospective analyses of a number of these studies
suggest that anthracyclines may be primarily effective in tumors with
HER-2/neu overexpression or alteration in the expression of
topoisomerase IIa (the target of anthracyclines and close to the
HER-2/neu gene). Given this, for HER-2/neu- negative, node-
negative breast cancer, four cycles of AC or six cycles of CMF are
probably equally effective.
When taxanes (T = paclitaxel and docetaxel) emerged in the
1990s, multiple trials were conducted to evaluate their use in
combination with anthracycline-based regimens. The majority of
these trials showed an improvement in disease-free survival and at
least one showed an improvement in overall survival with the
taxane-based regimen. A meta-analysis of taxane versus non-taxane
anthracycline-based regimen trials showed an improvement in
disease-free and overall survival for the taxane-based regimens.
The US Oncology trial 9735 compared four cycles of AC with
four cycles of Taxotere (docetaxel) and cyclophosph-amide (TC).
With a median of 7 years follow-up, this study showed a statistically
significantly improved disease-free survival and overall survival in
the patients who received TC. Until this, no trial had compared a
non-anthracycline, taxane-based regimen to an anthracycline-based
regimen.
An important ongoing study (US Oncology 06090) is
prospectively evaluating whether anthracyclines add any incremental
benefit to a taxane-based regimen by comparing six cycles of TAC
to six cycles of TC in HER-2/neu negative breast cancer patients. A
third arm was added to evaluate the benefit of adding bevacizumab,
a monoclonal antibody directed against vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), to TC. While awaiting the results of this trial,
oncologists are faced with choosing from among the above
treatment regimens for HER-2/neu-negative breast cancer. Given
the benefits described above, taxanes are now used for most
patients receiving chemotherapy for early breast cancer.
The overall duration of adjuvant chemotherapy still remains
uncertain. However, based on the meta-analysis performed in the
Oxford Overview (EBCTCG), the current recommendation is for
3–6 months of the commonly used regimens. Although it is clear
that dose intensity to a specific threshold is essential, there is little, if
any, evidence to support the long-term survival benefit of high-dose
chemotherapy with stem cell support.
Chemotherapy side effects are now generally well controlled.
Nausea and vomiting are abated with drugs that directly affect the
central nervous system, such as ondansetron and granisetron.
Infertility and premature ovarian failure are common side effects of
chemotherapy, especially in women over the age of 40, and should
be discussed with patients prior to starting treatment. The risk of
life-threatening neutropenia associated with chemotherapy can be
reduced by use of growth factors such as pegfilgrastim and
filgrastim (G-CSF), which stimulate proliferation and differentiation
of hematopoietic cells. Long-term toxicities from chemotherapy,
including 
cardiomyopathy 
(anthracyclines) 
and
leukemia/myelodysplasia (anthracyclines and alkylating agents),
remain a small but significant risk.
2. Targeted therapy
A . HER-2/NEU OVEREXPRESSION—Twenty percent of breast
cancers have overexpression or amplification of the HER-2/neu
oncogene. The poor prognosis associated with HER-2/neu
overexpression has been drastically improved with the development
of HER-2/neu-targeted therapy. Trastuzumab (Herceptin [H]), a
monoclonal antibody that binds to HER-2/neu receptors, has
proved effective in combination with chemotherapy in patients with
HER-2/neu overexpressing metastatic and early breast cancer. In
the adjuvant setting, the first and most commonly studied
chemotherapy backbone used with trastuzumab is AC-T. More
recently, the BCIRG006 study showed similar efficacy for AC-TH
and a nonanthracycline-containing regimen, TCH (docetaxel,
carboplatin, trastuzumab). Both were significantly better than AC-T
in terms of disease-free and overall survival and the TCH had a
lower risk of cardiac toxicity. Both AC-TH and TCH are now
FDA-approved for nonmetastatic, HER-2/neu-positive breast
cancer. In these regimens, trastuzumab is given with chemotherapy
and then continues beyond the course of chemotherapy to complete
a full year. One study has been reported that evaluated use of a
shorter course of trastuzumab (FinHer trial) in addition to
chemotherapy. Although this study showed benefits of adding a 9-
week course of trastuzumab to chemotherapy, the current standard
remains 1 full year of trastuzumab for adjuvant therapy. Another
study, Herceptin Adjuvant (HERA), is a three-arm study that is
comparing chemotherapy alone with sequential delivery of
trastuzumab after chemotherapy for 1 or 2 years. This study
demonstrated a benefit to the addition of trastuzumab for 1 year but
data regarding 2 years versus 1 year have not been reported. The
PHARE study is comparing 1 year to 6 months of trastuzumab
given after chemotherapy. At least one study (N9831) suggests that
concurrent, rather than sequential, delivery of trastuzumab with
chemotherapy may be more beneficial. Another question being
addressed in trials is whether to treat small (< 1 cm), node-negative
tumors with trastuzumab plus chemotherapy. Retrospective studies
have shown that even small (stage T1a, b) HER-2/neu-positive
tumors have a worse prognosis compared with same-sized HER-
2/neu-negative tumors. The NSABP B43 study is also ongoing to
evaluate whether the addition of trastuzumab to radiation therapy is
warranted for DCIS.
Cardiomyopathy develops in a small but significant percent (1–
4%) of patients who receive trastuzumab-based regimens. For this
reason, anthracyclines and trastuzumab are usually not given
concurrently and cardiac function is monitored periodically
throughout therapy.
B. ENDOCRINE THERAPY—Adjuvant hormone modulation therapy
is highly effective in decreasing recurrence and mortality by 25% in
women with hormone receptor-positive tumors regardless of
menopausal status. The traditional regimen has been 5 years of the
estrogen-receptor antagonist/agonist tamoxifen, and this remains the
standard for premenopausal women. Ovarian ablation in
premenopausal patients with ER-positive tumors may produce a
benefit similar to that of adjuvant systemic chemotherapy. Whether
the use of ovarian ablation plus tamoxifen (or ovarian ablation plus
an aromatase inhibitor [AI]) is more effective than either measure
alone is unclear and is currently being addressed in ongoing clinical
trials (Suppression of Ovarian Function Trial [SOFT] and
Tamoxifen and Exemestane Trial [TEXT]). AIs, including
anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane, reduce estrogen production
and are also effective in the adjuvant setting for postmenopausal
women. Approximately seven large randomized trials enrolling more
than 24,000 patients have compared the use of AIs with tamoxifen
or placebo as adjuvant therapy. All of these studies have shown
small but statistically significant improvements in disease-free
survival (absolute benefits of 2–6%) with the use of AIs. In
addition, AIs have been shown to reduce the risk of contralateral
breast cancers and to have fewer associated serious side effects
(such as endometrial cancers and thromboembolic events) than
tamoxifen. However, they are associated with accelerated bone loss
and an increased risk of fractures as well as a musculoskeletal
syndrome characterized by arthralgias or myalgias (or both) in up to
50% of patients. The American Society of Clinical Oncology and
National Comprehensive Cancer Network have recommended that
postmenopausal women with hormone receptor–positive breast
cancer be offered an AI either initially or after tamoxifen therapy.
3. Bisphosphonates—Two randomized studies (ZO-FAST and
ABCSG12) have evaluated the use of an adjuvant intravenous
bisphosphonate (zoledronic acid) in addition to standard local and
systemic therapy. The results showed a 35–40% relative reduction
in the risk of cancer recurrence for hormone receptor-positive
nonmetastatic breast cancer; these intriguing results have led to the
development of several ongoing randomized clinical trials evaluating
the use of bone-stabilizing agents for early breast cancer. Conflicting
results have been reported from the AZURE study. In this
randomized study that enrolled premenopausal and postmenopausal
patients, there was no disease-free or overall survival benefits
associated with the addition of zoledronic acid to endocrine
therapy. However, subset analysis in patients who were
postmenopausal for at least 5 years did demonstrate a significant
disease-free and overall survival benefit with the addition of the
bisphosphonate. Side effects associated with intravenous
bisphosphonate therapy include bone pain, fever, osteonecrosis of
the jaw (rare), and renal failure. Currently, the adjuvant use of
bisphosphonates and other bone stabilizing drugs, such as inhibitors
of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANK-B),
remains investigational.
4. Adjuvant therapy in older women—Data relating to the
optimal use of adjuvant systemic treatment for women over the age
of 65 are limited. Results from the EBCTCG overview indicates
that while adjuvant chemotherapy yields a smaller benefit for older
women compared with younger women, it still improves clinical
outcomes. Moreover, individual studies do show that older women
with higher risk disease derive benefits from chemotherapy. One
study compared the use of oral chemotherapy (capecitabine) to
standard chemotherapy in older women and concluded that
standard chemotherapy is preferred. Another study (USO TC vs
AC) showed that women over the age of 65 derive similar benefits
from the taxane-based regimen as women who are younger. The
benefits of endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive disease
appear to be independent of age. In general, decisions relating to
the use of systemic therapy should take into account a patient's
comorbidities and physiological age, more so than chronologic age.
E. Neoadjuvant Therapy
The use of chemotherapy or endocrine therapy prior to resection of
the primary tumor (neoadjuvant) is gaining popularity. This enables
the assessment of in vivo chemo-sensitivity. Patients with hormone
receptor-negative breast cancer are more likely to have a
pathologic complete response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy than
those with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. A complete
pathologic response at the time of surgery is associated with
improvement in survival. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy also increases
the chance of breast conservation by shrinking the primary tumor in
women who would otherwise need mastectomy for local control.
Survival after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is similar to that seen with
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Neoadjuvant AI therapy has
been evaluated in a phase II study involving 115 postmenopausal
patients with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. The overall
response rate was 62% in this study, and 38% of patients initially
ineligible for breast conservation were able to have lumpectomy.
There is considerable concern as to the timing of sentinel lymph
node biopsy (SLNB), since the chemotherapy may affect any
cancer present in the lymph nodes. Several studies have shown that
sentinel node biopsy can be done after neoadjuvant therapy. Many
physicians recommend performing SLNB before administering the
chemotherapy in order to avoid a false-negative result and to aid in
planning subsequent radiation therapy. If a complete dissection is
necessary, this can be performed at the time of the definitive breast
surgery.
Important questions remaining to be answered are the timing and
duration of adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemo-therapy, which
chemotherapeutic agents should be applied for which subgroups of
patients, the use of combinations of hormonal therapy and
chemotherapy as well as possibly targeted therapy, and the value of
prognostic factors other than hormone receptors in predicting
response to therapy.
 Treatment: Palliative
Only 10% of patients have de novo metastatic breast cancer at the
time of diagnosis. However, in most patients who have a breast
cancer recurrence after initial local and adjuvant therapy, the
recurrence presents as metastatic rather than local (in breast)
disease. Breast cancer most commonly metastasizes to the liver,
lungs and bone, causing symptoms such as fatigue, change in
appetite, abdominal pain, respiratory symptoms or bone pain.
A. Radiotherapy and Bisphosphonates
Palliative radiotherapy may be advised for primary treatment of
locally advanced cancers with distant metastases to control
ulceration, pain, and other manifestations in the breast and regional
nodes. Irradiation of the breast and chest wall and the axillary,
internal mammary, and supraclavicular nodes should be undertaken
in an attempt to cure locally advanced and inoperable lesions when
there is no evidence of distant metastases. A small number of
patients in this group are cured in spite of extensive breast and
regional node involvement.
Palliative irradiation is of value also in the treatment of certain
bone or soft-tissue metastases to control pain or avoid fracture.
Radiotherapy is especially useful in the treatment of isolated bony
metastases, chest wall recurrences, brain metastases, and acute
spinal cord compression.
In addition to radiotherapy, bisphosphonate therapy has shown
excellent results in delaying and reducing skeletal events in women
with bony metastases. Zoledronic acid is an FDA-approved
intravenous bisphosphonate given monthly for bone metastases from
breast cancer. Denosumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody that
targets RANK-ligand, was approved by the FDA in 2010 for the
treatment of advanced breast cancer causing bone metastases,
based on data showing that it reduced the time to first skeletal-
related event (eg, pathologic fracture) compared to zoledronic acid.
Caution should be exercised when combining radiation therapy
with chemotherapy because toxicity of either or both may be
augmented by the concurrent administration. In general, only one
type of therapy should be given at a time unless it is necessary to
irradiate a destructive lesion of weight-bearing bone while the
patient is receiving another regimen. The regimen should be changed
only if the disease is clearly progressing. This is especially difficult to
determine for patients with destructive bone metastases, since
changes in the status of these lesions are difficult to determine
radiographically.
B. Targeted Therapy
1. Endocrine therapy for metastatic disease—Targeted therapy
refers to agents that are directed specifically against a protein or
molecule expressed uniquely on tumor cells or in the tumor
microenvironment. The first targeted therapy was the use of
antiestrogen therapy in hormone receptor–positive breast cancer.
The administration of hormones (eg, estrogens, androgens,
progestins; see Table 17–5); ablation of the ovaries, adrenals, or
pituitary; administration of drugs that block hormone receptors (eg,
antiestrogens such as tamoxifen) or drugs that block the synthesis of
hormones (eg, AIs) have all been shown to be effective in hormone
receptor–positive metastatic breast cancer. Palliative treatment of
metastatic cancer should be based on the ER status of the primary
tumor or the metastases. Because only 5–10% of women with ER-
negative tumors respond, they should not receive endocrine therapy
except in unusual circumstances, eg, in an older patient who cannot
tolerate chemotherapy. The rate of response is nearly equal in
premenopausal and postmenopausal women with ER-positive
tumors. A favorable response to hormonal manipulation occurs in
about one-third of patients with metastatic breast cancer. Of those
whose tumors contain ER, the response is about 60% and perhaps
as high as 80% for patients whose tumors contain PR as well.
Women with ER-positive tumors who do not respond to first-line
endocrine therapy or experience progression should be given a
different form of hormonal manipulation. The initial endocrine
treatment used is referred to as primary hormonal manipulation;
subsequent endocrine treatment is called secondary or tertiary
hormonal manipulation.
Because the quality of life during endocrine manipulation is
usually superior to that during cytotoxic chemotherapy, it is best to
try endocrine manipulation whenever possible. However, when
receptor status is unknown, disease is progressing rapidly or
involves visceral organs, chemotherapy should be used as first-line
treatment.
A. THE PREMENOPAUSAL PATIENT
(1) Primary hormonal therapy—The potent SERM tamoxifen
is by far the most common and preferred method of hormonal
manipulation in the premenopausal patient, in large part because it
can be given with less morbidity and fewer side effects than
cytotoxic chemotherapy. Tamoxifen is given orally in a dose of 20
mg daily. The average remission associated with tamoxifen lasts
about 12 months.
There is no significant difference in survival or response between
tamoxifen therapy and bilateral oophorectomy. Bilateral
oophorectomy is less desirable than tamoxifen in premenopausal
women because tamoxifen is so well tolerated. However,
oophorectomy can be achieved rapidly and safely either by surgery,
by irradiation of the ovaries if the patient is a poor surgical
candidate, or by chemical ovarian ablation using a gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) analog. Oophorectomy presumably
works by eliminating estrogens, progestins, and androgens, which
stimulate growth of the tumor. AIs should not be used in a patient
with functioning ovaries since they do not block ovarian production
of estrogen.
 
Table 17–5. Agents commonly used for hormonal management of
metastatic breas
 
AI, aromatase inhibitor; SERM, selective estrogen receptor modulator.
 
(2) Secondary or tertiary hormonal therapy— Patients who
do not respond to tamoxifen or ovarian ablation may be treated
with chemotherapy or may try a second endocrine regimen, such as
GnRH analog plus AI. Whether to opt for chemotherapy or another
endocrine measure depends largely on the sites of metastatic
disease (visceral being more serious than bone-only, thus sometimes
warranting the use of chemotherapy), the disease burden, the rate of
growth of disease, and patient preference. Patients who take
chemotherapy and then later have progressive disease may
subsequently respond to another form of endocrine treatment
(Table 17–5). The optimal choice for secondary endocrine
manipulation has not been clearly defined for the premenopausal
patient.
Patients who improve after oophorectomy but subsequently
relapse should receive tamoxifen or an AI; if one fails, the other may
be tried. Megestrol acetate, a progesterone agent, may also be
considered. Adrenalectomy or hypophysectomy, procedures rarely
done today, induced regression in 30–50% of patients who
previously responded to oophorectomy. Pharmacologic hormonal
manipulation has replaced these invasive procedures.
B. THE POSTMENOPAUSAL PATIENT
(1) Primary hormonal therapy— For postmenopausal women
with metastatic breast cancer amenable to endocrine manipulation,
tamoxifen or an AI is the initial therapy of choice. The side effect
profile of AIs differs from tamoxifen and may be more effective.
The main side effects of tamoxifen are nausea, skin rash, and hot
flushes. Rarely, tamoxifen induces hypercalcemia in patients with
bony metastases. Tamoxifen also increases the risk of venous
thromboembolic events and uterine hyperplasia and cancer. The
main side effects of AIs include hot flushes, vaginal dryness, and
joint stiffness; however, osteoporosis and bone fractures are
significantly higher than with tamoxifen.
(2) Secondary or tertiary hormonal therapy— AIs are also
used for the treatment of advanced breast cancer in
postmenopausal women after tamoxifen treatment. In the event that
the patient responds to AI but then has progression of disease, an
antiestrogen, fulvestrant, has shown efficacy with about 20–30% of
women benefiting from use. Postmenopausal patients who do not
respond to SERM or AI should be given cytotoxic drugs.
Postmenopausal women who respond initially to a SERM or AI but
later manifest progressive disease may be crossed over to another
hormonal therapy. If they do not respond, they should receive
cytotoxic drugs. Androgens (such as testosterone) have many
toxicities and should be used infrequently. As in premenopausal
patients, neither hypophysectomy nor adrenalectomy should be
performed. High-dose estrogen therapy has also paradoxically been
shown to induce responses in advanced breast cancer. A study that
evaluated the use of low-dose (6 mg) versus high-dose (30 mg)
estradiol daily orally for postmenopausal women with metastatic
AI-resistant breast cancer showed that the two doses yielded
similar clinical benefit rates (29% and 28%, respectively) and, as
expected, the higher dose was associated with more adverse events
than the low dose. Interestingly, seven patients who progressed
after an initial response to estradiol were re-treated with an AI and,
of these, two patients had a partial response and one had stable
disease, indicating resensitization to the AI.
2. HER-2/neu targeted agents—For patients with HER-2/neu
overexpressing or amplified tumors, trastuzumab plus chemotherapy
has been shown to increase survival. Lapatinib is a newer oral
targeted drug that works by inhibiting the intracellular tyrosine
kinases of the epidermal growth factor and HER-2/neu receptors.
This drug is FDA-approved for the treatment of trastuzumab-
resistant HER-2/neu-positive metastatic breast cancer in
combination with capecitabine, thus, a completely oral regimen. The
combination of trastuzumab plus lapatinib has been shown to be
more effective than lapatinib alone for trastuzumab-resistant
metastatic breast cancer. Moreover, several trials have now shown
a significant clinical benefit for continuing HER-2/neu-targeted
agents beyond progression. Multiple drugs targeting the HER-2/neu
pathway are in development, with promising phase I and II clinical
trial results reported for many. A few of these therapeutics in
development include T-DM1, neratinib, pertuzumab, everolimus,
afatinib, and a HER-2/neu-targeted vaccine.
3. Targeting angiogenesis—Bevacizumab is a monoclonal
antibody directed against VEGF. This growth factor stimulates
endothelial proliferation and neoangiogenesis in cancer. A phase III
randomized trial (E2100) in women with metastatic breast cancer
showed increased response rate and progression-free survival rate
with the combination of bevacizumab and paclitaxel as first-line
treatment compared with paclitaxel alone; however, there was no
significant overall survival benefit. This led to the accelerated FDA
approval of bevacizumab in early 2008. Since that time, two
additional prospective randomized clinical trials (AVADO and
RIBBON-1) have reported that the addition of bevacizumab to
standard chemotherapy improves disease-free survival and
objective response rates compared with single-agent chemotherapy
alone. A benefit in overall survival has not been demonstrated. The
RIBBON-2 study is the first randomized study to show a benefit (in
terms of response rate and progression-free survival) with the use of
bevacizumab plus chemotherapy as second-line therapy for
metastatic breast cancer. While these initial results are promising,
studies are now underway to define which patients and tumor types
are most likely to benefit from antiangiogenic agents. Side effects
from 
bevacizumab 
include 
hypertension, 
bleeding, 
and
thromboembolic events. Although none of these studies was
sufficiently large to examine overall survival with statistical certainty,
the lack of survival benefit may result in the FDA revoking its
approval of bevacizumab for meta-static breast cancer in 2011.
4. Targeting “triple-negative” breast cancer—Until very
recently, breast cancers lacking expression of the hormone
receptors, ER and PR, and HER-2/neu have only been amenable to
therapy with cytotoxic chemo-therapy. This type of “triple-negative”
breast cancer, while heterogeneous, generally behaves aggressively
and is associated with a poor prognosis. Newer classes of targeted
agents are being evaluated specifically for triple-negative breast
cancer. Some triple-negative breast cancers may be characterized
by an inability to repair double-strand DNA breaks (due to
mutation or epigenetic silencing of the BRCA gene). Poly-ADP
ribosepolymerase inhibitors (PARP-i) are a new class of agents
that prevent the repair of single strand DNA breaks and are
showing promise in BRCA-mutated and triple- negative breast
cancer. One relatively small randomized clinical trial evaluating
gemcitabine plus carboplatin with or without a PARP-i (BSI-201)
for triple-negative metastatic breast cancer showed improved
clinical outcomes, including improved overall survival for PARP-i-
treated patients. Research in this area is rapidly expanding with
multiple clinical trials ongoing.
C. Palliative Chemotherapy
Cytotoxic drugs should be considered for the treatment of
metastatic breast cancer (1) if visceral metastases are present
(especially brain, liver, or lymphangitic pulmonary), (2) if hormonal
treatment is unsuccessful or the disease has progressed after an
initial response to hormonal manipulation, or (3) if the tumor is ER-
negative. Prior adjuvant chemotherapy does not seem to alter
response rates in patients who relapse. A number of chemotherapy
drugs (including vinorel bine, paclitaxel, docetaxel, gemcitabine,
ixabepilone, carboplatin, cisplatin, capecitabine, albumin-bound
paclitaxel, eribulin, and liposomal doxorubicin) may be used as
single agents with first-line objective response rates ranging from
30% to 50%.
Combination chemotherapy yields statistically significantly higher
response rates and progression-free survival rates, but has not been
conclusively shown to improve overall survival rates compared with
sequential single-agent therapy. Combinations that have been tested
in phase III studies and have proven efficacy compared with single-
agent 
therapy 
include 
capecitabine/docetaxel,
gemcitabine/paclitaxel, and capecitabine/ixabepilone (see Tables
39–10 and 39–11). Various other combinations of drugs have been
tested in phase II studies, and a number of clinical trials are ongoing
to identify effective combinations. For patients whose tumors have
progressed after several lines of therapy and who are considering
additional therapy, clinical trial participation with experimental drugs
in phase I, II, or III testing should be encouraged.
In the past, high-dose chemotherapy and autologous bone
marrow or stem cell transplantation aroused widespread interest for
the treatment of metastatic breast cancer. However, multiple clinical
trials failed to show any improvement in survival with high-dose
chemotherapy with stem cell transplant over conventional
chemotherapy and the procedure is now rarely, if ever, performed
for stage IV breast cancer.
Albain KS et al. Gemcitabine plus paclitaxel versus paclitaxel
monotherapy in patients with metastatic breast cancer and prior
anthracycline treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Aug 20;
26(24):3950–7. [PMID: 18711184]
 
American College of Radiology. Practice guideline for the breast
conservation therapy in the management of invasive breast
carcinoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2007 Aug;205(2):362–376. [PMID:
17660085]
 
Arimidex, Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination (ATAC) Trialists'
Group; Forbes JF et al. Effect of anastrozole and tamoxifen as
adjuvant treatment for early-stage breast cancer: 100-month
analysis of the ATAC trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008 Jan;9(1):45–53.
[PMID: 18083636]
 
BIG 1-98 Collaborative Group; Mouridsen H et al. Letrozole
therapy alone or in sequence with tamoxifen in women with breast
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009 Aug 20;361(8):766–76. [PMID:
19692688]
 
Coleman RE et al. Adjuvant treatment with zoledronic acid in stage
II/III breast cancer. The AZURE Trial (BIG 01/04). San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium, 2010; Abstract S4-5.
 
Coombes RC et al; Intergroup Exemestane Study. Survival and
safety of exemestane versus tamoxifen after 2-3 years' tamoxifen
treatment: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007 Feb
17;369(9561):559–70. [PMID: 17307102]
 
De Laurentiis M et al. Taxane-based combinations as adjuvant
chemotherapy of early breast cancer: a meta-analysis of
randomized trials. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jan 1:26(1):44–53. [PMID:
18165639]
 
Dienstmann R et al. Evidence-based neoadjuvant endocrine
therapy for breast cancer. Clin Breast Cancer. 2006
Oct;7(4):315–20. [PMID: 17092398]
 
Ellis MJ et al. Lower-dose vs high-dose oral estradiol therapy of
hormone receptor-positive, aromatase inhibitor-resistant advanced
breast cancer: a phase 2 randomized study. JAMA. 2009 Aug
19;302(7):774–80. [PMID: 19690310]
 
Fitzal F et al. Breast conservation: evolution of surgical strategies.
Breast J. 2006 Sep–Oct;12(5 Suppl 2):S165–73. [PMID:
16958997]
 
Gennari A et al. HER2 status and efficacy of adjuvant
anthracyclines in early breast cancer: a pooled analysis of
randomized trials. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Jan 2;100(1):14–20.
[PMID: 18159072]
 
Giuliano AE et al. Axillary dissection vs no axillary dissection in
women with invasive breast cancer and sentinel node metastasis: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2011 Feb 9; 305(6):569–75.
[PMID: 21304082]
 
Gnant M et al; ABCSG-12 Trial Investigators. Endocrine therapy
plus zoledronic acid in premenopausal breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Feb 12;360(7):679–91. [PMID: 19213681]
 
Gonzalez-Angulo AM et al. High risk of recurrence for patients
with breast cancer who have human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2-positive, node-negative tumors 1 cm or smaller. J Clin
Oncol. 2009 Dec 1;27(34):5700–6. [PMID: 19884543]
 
Hurvitz SA et al. What's positive about triple negative breast
cancer? Future Oncol. 2009 Sep;5(7):1015–25. [PMID:
19792970]
 
Ingle JN et al. Fulvestrant in women with advanced breast cancer
after progression on prior aromatase inhibitor therapy: North
Central Cancer Treatment Group Trial N0032. J Clin Oncol. 2006
Mar 1;24(7):1052–6. [PMID: 16505423]
 
Iwata H. Neo (adjuvant) trastuzumab treatment: current
perspectives. Breast Cancer. 2009;16(4):288–94. [PMID:
19609648]
 
Joensuu H et al. Fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide
with either docetaxel or vinorelbine, with or without trastuzumab,
as adjuvant treatments of breast cancer: final results of the FinHer
Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Dec 1;27(34):5685–92. [PMID:
19884557]
 
Jones SE et al. Docetaxel with cyclophosphamide is associated
with an overall survival benefit compared with doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide: 7-year follow-up of US Oncology Research
Trial 9735. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Mar 10;27(8): 1177–83. [PMID:
19204201]
 
Khan SA et al. Optimal surgical treatment of breast cancer:
implications for local control and survival. J Surg Oncol. 2010 Jun
15;101(8):677–86. [PMID: 20512943]
 
Lee MC et al. Management of patients with locally advanced
breast cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 2007 Apr;87(2):379–98.
[PMID: 17498533]
 
Leonard C et al. Prospective trial of accelerated partial breast
intensity-modulated radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2007 Apr 1;67(5):1291–8. [PMID: 17234359]
 
Lohrisch C et al. Impact on survival of time from definitive surgery
to initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy for early-stage breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Oct 20;24(30):4888–94. [PMID:
17015884]
 
Maughan KL et al. Treatment of breast cancer. Am Fam
Physician. 2010 Jun 1;81(11):1339–46. [PMID: 20521754]
 
Mieog JS et al. Preoperative chemotherapy for women with
operable breast cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Apr
18; (2):CD005002. [PMID: 17443564]
 
Miller K et al. Paclitaxel plus bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone
for metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007 Dec
27;357(26):2666–76. [PMID: 18160686]
 
Muss HB et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in older women with
early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009 May 14;
360(20):2055–65. [PMID: 19439741]
 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Guidelines:
Breast Cancer. http://www.nccn.org/professionals/
physician_gls/f_guidelines.asp
 
Nelson JC et al. Four-year clinical update from the American
Society of Breast Surgeons MammoSite brachytherapy trial. Am J
Surg. 2009 Jul;198(1):83–91. [PMID: 19268900]
 
Nielsen KV et al. The value of TOP2A gene copy number
variation as a biomarker in breast cancer: update of DBCG trial
89D. Acta Oncol. 2008;47(4):725–34. [PMID: 18465341]
 
Olson JA Jr et al. Improved surgical outcomes for breast cancer
patients receiving neoadjuvant aromatase inhibitor therapy: results
from a multicenter phase II trial. J Am Coll Surg. 2009
May;208(5):906–14. [PMID: 19476859]
 
Orlando L et al. Management of advanced breast cancer. Ann
Oncol. 2007 Jun;18(Suppl 6):vi74–6. [PMID: 17591838]
 
Pal SK et al. Adjuvant systemic therapy for older adults with
early-stage breast cancer. Womens Health (Lond Engl). 2009
May;5(3):251–62. [PMID: 19392611]
Perez EA et al. Cardiac safety analysis of doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide followed by paclitaxel with or without
trastuzumab in the North Central Cancer Treatment Group N9831
adjuvant breast cancer trial. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Mar
10;26(8):1231–8. [PMID: 18250349]
 
Perez EA et al. Results of chemotherapy alone, with sequential or
concurrent addition of 52 Weeks of trastuzumab in the NCCTG
N9831 HER2-Positive Adjuvant Breast Cancer Trial. San
Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, 2009; Abstract 80.
 
Pruthi S et al. A multidisciplinary approach to the management of
breast cancer, part 2: therapeutic considerations. Mayo Clin Proc.
2007 Sep;82(9):1131–40. [PMID: 17803883]
 
Saurel CA et al. Changes to adjuvant systemic therapy in breast
cancer: a decade in review. Clin Breast Cancer. 2010
Jun;10(3):196–208. [PMID: 20497918]
 
Seidman AD. Systemic treatment of breast cancer. Two decades
of progress. Oncology (Williston Park). 2006 Aug;20(9): 983–90.
[PMID: 16986346]
 
Slamon DJ et al. Use of chemotherapy plus a monoclonal antibody
against HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses
HER2. N Engl J Med. 2001 Mar 15;344(11):783–92. [PMID:
11248153]
 
Slamon DJ et al. Phase III randomized trial comparing doxorubicin
and cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel (AC→T) with
doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel and
trastuzumab (AC→TH) with docetaxel, carboplatin and
trastuzumab (TCH) in HER2-neu-positive early breast cancer
patients: BCIRG 006 Study. San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposium, 2009; Abstract 62.
 
Smith I et al. 2-year follow-up of trastuzumab after adjuvant
chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast cancer: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2007 Jan 6;369(9555):29–36. [PMID:
17208639]
 
Stopeck AT et al. Denosumab compared with zoledronic acid for
the treatment of bone metastases in patients with advanced breast
cancer: a randomized, double-blind study. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Dec
10;28(35):5132–9. [PMID: 21060033]
 
Swain SM et al. Longer therapy, iatrogenic amenorrhea, and
survival in early breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jun
3;362(22):2053–65. [PMID: 20519679]
 
Thomas ES et al. Ixabepilone plus capecitabine for metastatic
breast cancer progressing after anthracycline and taxane treatment.
J Clin Oncol. 2007 Nov 20;25(33):5210–7. [PMID: 17968020]
 
Veronesi U et al. Breast conservation: current results and future
perspectives at the European Institute of Oncology. Int J Cancer.
2007 Apr 1;120(7):1381–6. [PMID: 17211883]
 
Veronesi U et al. Lessons from the initial adjuvant cyclophosph-
amide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil studies in operable breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jan;26(3):342–4. [PMID: 18202404]
 
Veronesi U et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer: ten-
year results of a randomized controlled study. Ann Surg. 2010
Apr;251(4):595–600. [PMID: 20195151]
 
Von Minckwitz G et al. Trastuzumab beyond progression in human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive advanced breast
cancer: a German Breast Group 26/Breast International Group 03-
05 Study. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Apr 20;27(12):1999–2006. [PMID:
19289619]
 
Voogd AC et al. Prognosis of patients with locally recurrent breast
cancer. Am J Surg. 2007 Jan;193(1):138. [PMID: 17188110]
 
Waljee JF et al. Neoadjuvant systemic therapy and the surgical
management of breast cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 2007
Apr;87(2):399–415. [PMID: 17498534]
 
 Prognosis
Stage of breast cancer is the most reliable indicator of prognosis
(Table 17–6). Axillary lymph node status is the best-analyzed
prognostic factor and correlates with survival at all tumor sizes.
When cancer is localized to the breast with no evidence of regional
spread after pathologic examination, the clinical cure rate with most
accepted methods of therapy is 75% to > 90%. In fact, patients
with small mammographically detected biologically favorable tumors
and no evidence of axillary spread have a 5-year survival rate >
95%. When the axillary lymph nodes are involved with tumor, the
survival rate drops to 50–70% at 5 years and probably around 25–
40% at 10 years. Increasingly, the use of biologic markers, such as
ER, PR, grade, and HER-2/neu, is helping to identify high-risk
tumor types as well as direct treatment used (see Biomarkers &
Gene Expression Profiling). Gene analysis studies, such as
Oncotype Dx, can predict disease-free survival for some subsets of
patients.
The mortality rate of breast cancer patients exceeds that of age-
matched normal controls for nearly 20 years. Thereafter, the
mortality rates are equal, though deaths that occur among breast
cancer patients are often directly the result of tumor. Five-year
statistics do not accurately reflect the final outcome of therapy.
 
Table 17–6. approximate survival (%) of patients with breast
cancer by TN
 
 
In general, breast cancer appears to be somewhat more
malignant in younger than in older women, and this may be related
to the fact that fewer younger women have ER-positive tumors.
Adjuvant systemic chemotherapy, in general, improves survival by
about 30% and adjuvant hormonal therapy by about 25%.
For those patients whose disease progresses despite treatment,
studies suggest supportive group therapy may improve survival. As
they approach the end of life, such patients will require meticulous
palliative care (see Chapter 5).
Kim C et al. Gene-expression-based prognostic assays for breast
cancer. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun;7(6):340–7. [PMID:
20440284]
 
Wishart GC et al. PREDICT: a new UK prognostic model that
predicts survival following surgery for invasive breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(1):R1. [PMID: 20053270]
 
 Follow-up Care
After primary therapy, patients with breast cancer should be
monitored long-term in order to detect recurrences and to observe
the opposite breast for a second primary carcinoma. Local and
distant recurrences occur most frequently within the first 2–5 years.
During the first 2 years, most patients should be examined every 6
months (with mammogram every 6 months on the affected breast),
then annually thereafter. The patient should examine her own
breasts monthly, and a mammogram should be obtained annually.
Special attention is paid to the contralateral breast because a new
primary breast malignancy will develop in 20–25% of patients. In
some cases, metastases are dormant for long periods and may
appear 10–15 years or longer after removal of the primary tumor.
Although studies have failed to show an adverse effect of hormonal
replacement in disease-free patients, it is rarely used after breast
cancer treatment, particularly if the tumor was hormone receptor
positive. Even pregnancy has not been associated with shortened
survival of patients rendered disease free—yet many oncologists are
reluctant to advise a young patient with breast cancer that it is safe
to become pregnant, and most will not support prescribing hormone
replacement for the postmenopausal breast cancer patient. The use
of estrogen replacement for conditions such as osteoporosis and hot
flushes may be considered for a woman with a history of breast
cancer after discussion of the benefits and risks, but it is not
routinely recommended.
A. Local Recurrence
The incidence of local recurrence correlates with tumor size, the
presence and number of involved axillary nodes, the histologic type
of tumor, the presence of skin edema or skin and fascia fixation with
the primary tumor, and the type of definitive surgery and local
irradiation. Local recurrence on the chest wall after total
mastectomy and axillary dissection develops in as many as 8% of
patients. When the axillary nodes are not involved, the local
recurrence rate is < 5%, but the rate is as high as 25% when they
are heavily involved. A similar difference in local recurrence rate
was noted between small and large tumors. Factors such as
multifocal cancer, in situ tumors, positive resection margins,
chemotherapy, and radiotherapy have an effect on local recurrence
in patients treated with breast-conserving surgery.
Chest wall recurrences usually appear within the first several
years but may occur as late as 15 or more years after mastectomy.
All suspicious nodules and skin lesions should be biopsied. Local
excision or localized radiotherapy may be feasible if an isolated
nodule is present. If lesions are multiple or accompanied by
evidence of regional involvement in the internal mammary or
supraclavicular nodes, the disease is best managed by radiation
treatment of the entire chest wall including the parasternal,
supraclavicular, and axillary areas and usually by systemic therapy.
Local recurrence after mastectomy usually signals the presence of
widespread disease and is an indication for studies to search for
evidence of metastases. Distant metastases will develop within a
few years in most patients with locally recurrent tumor after
mastectomy. When there is no evidence of metastases beyond the
chest wall and regional nodes, irradiation for cure after complete
local excision should be attempted. After partial mastectomy, local
recurrence does not have as serious a prognostic significance as
after mastectomy. However, those patients in whom a recurrence
develops have a worse prognosis than those who do not. It is
speculated that the ability of a cancer to recur locally after
radiotherapy is a sign of aggressiveness and resistance to therapy.
Completion of the mastectomy should be done for local recurrence
after partial mastectomy; some of these patients will survive for
prolonged periods, especially if the breast recurrence is DCIS or
occurs more than 5 years after initial treatment. Systemic
chemotherapy or hormonal treatment should be used for women in
whom disseminated disease develops or those in whom local
recurrence occurs.
B. Breast Cancer Survivorship Issues
Given that most women with non-metastatic breast cancer will be
cured, a significant number of women face survivorship issues
stemming from either the diagnosis or the treatment of the breast
cancer. These challenges include psychological struggles, upper
extremity lymphedema, cognitive decline (also called “chemo
y y p
,
g
(
brain”), weight management problems, cardiovascular issues, bone
loss, post-menopausal side effects, and fatigue. One randomized
study reported that survivors who received psychological
intervention from the time of diagnosis had a lower risk of
recurrence and breast cancer-related mortality. A randomized study
in older, overweight cancer survivors showed that diet and exercise
reduced the rate of self-reported functional decline compared with
no intervention. Cognitive dysfunction is a commonly reported
symptom experienced by women who have undergone systemic
treatment for early breast cancer. Studies are ongoing to understand
the pathophysiology leading to this syndrome. An interesting study
reported that 200 mg of modafinil daily improved speed and quality
of memory as well as attention for breast cancer survivors dealing
with cognitive dysfunction. This promising study requires validation
in a larger clinical trial.
1. Edema of the arm—Significant edema of the arm occurs in
about 10–30% of patients after axillary dissection with or without
mastectomy. It occurs more commonly if radiotherapy has been
given or if there was postoperative infection. Partial mastectomy
with radiation to the axillary lymph nodes is followed by chronic
edema of the arm in 10–20% of patients. Sentinel lymph node
dissection has proved to be a more accurate form of axillary staging
without the side effects of edema or infection. It does not replace
axillary dissection if the sentinel lymph nodes are involved with
metastases. Judicious use of radiotherapy, with treatment fields
carefully planned to spare the axilla as much as possible, can greatly
diminish the incidence of edema, which will occur in only 5% of
patients if no radio-therapy is given to the axilla after a partial
mastectomy and lymph node dissection.
Late or secondary edema of the arm may develop years after
treatment, as a result of axillary recurrence or infection in the hand
or arm, with obliteration of lymphatic channels. When edema
develops, a careful examination of the axilla for recurrence or
infection is performed. Infection in the arm or hand on the dissected
side should be treated with antibiotics, rest, and elevation. If there is
no sign of recurrence or infection, the swollen extremity should be
treated with rest and elevation. A mild diuretic may be helpful. If
there is no improvement, a compressor pump or manual
compression decreases the swelling, and the patient is then fitted
with an elastic glove or sleeve. Most patients are not bothered
enough by mild edema to wear an uncomfortable glove or sleeve
and will treat themselves with elevation or manual compression
alone. Benzopyrones have been reported to decrease lymphedema
but are not approved for this use in the United States. Rarely,
edema may be severe enough to interfere with use of the limb.
Traditionally, patients were advised to avoid weight lifting with the
ipsilateral arm to prevent a worsening in lymphedema. However, a
prospective randomized study has shown that twice weekly
progressive weight lifting improves lymphedema symptoms and
exacerbations and improves extremity strength.
2. Breast reconstruction—Breast reconstruction is usually
feasible after total or modified radical mastectomy. Reconstruction
should be discussed with patients prior to mastectomy, because it
offers an important psychological focal point for recovery.
Reconstruction is not an obstacle to the diagnosis of recurrent
cancer. The most common breast reconstruction has been
implantation of a silicone gel or saline prosthesis in the subpectoral
plane between the pectoralis minor and pectoralis major muscles.
Alternatively, autologous tissue can be used for reconstruction.
Autologous tissue flaps are aesthetically superior to implant
reconstruction in most patients. They also have the advantage of not
feeling like a foreign body to the patient. The most popular
autologous technique currently is the trans-rectus abdominis muscle
flap (TRAM flap), which is done by rotating the rectus abdominis
muscle with attached fat and skin cephalad to make a breast
mound. The free TRAM flap is done by completely removing a
small portion of the rectus with overlying fat and skin and using
microvascular surgical techniques to reconstruct the vascular supply
on the chest wall. A latissimus dorsi flap can be swung from the
back but offers less fullness than the TRAM flap and is therefore
less acceptable cosmetically. An implant often is used to increase
the fullness with a latissimus dorsi flap. Reconstruction may be
performed immediately (at the time of initial mastectomy) or may be
delayed until later, usually when the patient has completed adjuvant
therapy. When considering reconstructive options, concomitant
illnesses should be considered, since the ability of an autologous flap
to survive depends on medical comorbidities. In addition, the need
for radiotherapy may affect the choice of reconstruction as radiation
may increase fibrosis around an implant or decrease the volume of a
flap.
3. Risks of pregnancy—Data are insufficient to determine
whether interruption of pregnancy improves the prognosis of
patients who are identified to have potentially curable breast cancer
and who receive definitive treatment during pregnancy.
Theoretically, the high levels of estrogen produced by the placenta
as the pregnancy progresses could be detrimental to the patient with
occult metastases of hormone-sensitive breast cancer. However,
retrospective studies have not shown a worse prognosis for women
with gestational breast cancer. The decision whether or not to
terminate the pregnancy must be made on an individual basis, taking
into account the clinical stage of the cancer, the overall prognosis
for the patient, the gestational age of the fetus, the potential for
premature ovarian failure in the future with systemic therapy, and the
patient's wishes. Women with early-stage gestational breast cancer
who choose to continue their pregnancy should undergo surgery to
remove the tumor and systemic therapy if indicated. Retrospective
reviews of patients treated with anthracycline-containing regimens
for gestational cancers (including leukemia and lymphomas) have
established the relative safety of these regimens during pregnancy
for both the patient and the fetus. Taxane-based and trastuzumab-
based regimens have not been evaluated extensively, however.
Obviously, radiation therapy should be delayed until the pregnant
patient has delivered.
Equally important is the advice regarding future pregnancy (or
abortion in case of pregnancy) to be given to women of child-
bearing age who have had definitive treatment for breast cancer. To
date, no adverse effect of pregnancy on survival of women who
have had breast cancer has been demonstrated. When counseling
patients, oncologists must take into consideration the patients'
overall prognosis, age, comorbidities, and life goals.
In patients with inoperable or metastatic cancer (stage IV
disease), induced abortion is usually advisable because of the
possible adverse effects of hormonal treatment, radiotherapy, or
chemotherapy upon the fetus in addition to the expectant mother's
poor prognosis.
Andersen BL et al. Psychologic intervention improves survival for
breast cancer patients: a randomized clinical trial. Cancer. 2008
Dec 15;113(12):3450–8. [PMID: 19016270]
 
Banks E et al. Pregnancy in women with a history of breast cancer.
BMJ. 2007 Jan 27;334(7586):166–7. [PMID: 17255571]
 
Chalasani P et al. Caring for the breast cancer survivor: a guide for
primary care physicians. Am J Med. 2010 Jun; 123(6):489–95.
[PMID: 20569749]
 
Dian D et al. Quality of life among breast cancer patients
undergoing autologous breast reconstruction versus breast
conserving therapy. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2007
Apr;133(4):247–52. [PMID: 17096124]
 
Hu E et al. Breast reconstruction. Surg Clin North Am. 2007
Apr;87(2):453–67. [PMID: 17498537]
 
Kim C et al. Gene-expression-based prognostic assays for breast
cancer. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun;7(6):340–7. [PMID:
20440284]
 
Kohli S et al. The effect of modafinil on cognitive function in breast
cancer survivors. Cancer. 2009 Jun 15;115(12):2605–16. [PMID:
19309747]
 
Kronowitz SJ et al. Advances and surgical decision-making for
breast reconstruction. Cancer. 2006 Sep 1;107(5):893–907.
[PMID: 16862569]
 
Morey MC et al. Effects of home-based diet and exercise on
functional outcomes among older, overweight long-term cancer
survivors: RENEW: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009
May 13;301(18):1883–91. [PMID: 19436015]
 
Pomahac B et al. New trends in breast cancer management: is the
era of immediate breast reconstruction changing? Ann Surg. 2006
Aug;244(2):282–8. [PMID: 16858192]
 
Rawson AE et al. Current concepts in breast reconstruction. W V
Med J. 2009 Oct;105 Spec No:16-22. [PMID: 19999261]
 
Rourke LL et al. Breast cancer and lymphedema: a current
overview for the healthcare provider. Womens Health (Lond
Engl). 2010 May;6(3):399–406. [PMID: 20426606]
 
Sakorafas GH et al. Lymphedema following axillary lymph node
dissection for breast cancer. Surg Oncol. 2006 Nov; 15(3):153–
65. [PMID: 17187979]
 
Salhab M et al. Skin-sparing mastectomy and immediate breast
reconstruction: patient satisfaction and clinical outcome. Int J Clin
Oncol. 2006 Feb;11(1):51–4. [PMID: 16508729]
 
Sammarco A. Quality of life of breast cancer survivors: a
comparative study of age cohorts. Cancer Nurs. 2009 Sep–
Oct;32(5):347–56. [PMID: 19661800]
 
Schmitz KH et al. Weight lifting in women with breast-cancer-
related lymphedema. N Engl J Med. 2009 Aug 13;361(7):664–
73. [PMID: 19675330]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE MALE
BREAST
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A painless lump beneath the areola in a man usually over 50
years of age.
 Nipple discharge, retraction, or ulceration may be present.
 Generally poorer prognosis than in women.
 
 General Considerations
Breast cancer in men is a rare disease; the incidence is only about
1% of that in women. The average age at occurrence is about 60
years and there may be an increased incidence of breast cancer in
men with prostate cancer. As in women, hormonal influences are
probably related to the development of male breast cancer. There is
a high incidence of both breast cancer and gynecomastia in Bantu
men, theoretically owing to failure of estrogen inactivation by a liver
damaged by associated liver disease. It is important to note that
first-degree relatives of men with breast cancer are considered to
be at high risk. This risk should be taken into account when
discussing options with the patient and family. In addition, BRCA2
mutations are common in men with breast cancer. Men with breast
cancer, especially with a history of prostate cancer, should receive
genetic counseling. The prognosis, even in stage I cases, is worse in
men than in women. Blood-borne metastases are commonly present
when the male patient appears for initial treatment. These
metastases may be latent and may not become manifest for many
years.
 Clinical Findings
A painless lump, occasionally associated with nipple discharge,
retraction, erosion, or ulceration, is the primary complaint.
Examination usually shows a hard, ill-defined, nontender mass
beneath the nipple or areola. Gynecomastia not uncommonly
precedes or accompanies breast cancer in men. Nipple discharge is
an uncommon presentation for breast cancer in men but is an
ominous finding associated with carcinoma in nearly 75% of cases.
Breast cancer staging is the same in men as in women.
Gynecomastia and metastatic cancer from another site (eg,
prostate) must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Benign
tumors are rare, and biopsy should be performed on all males with
a defined breast mass.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of modified radical mastectomy in operable
patients, who should be chosen by the same criteria as women with
the disease. Breast conserving therapy is rarely performed.
Irradiation is the first step in treating localized metastases in the skin,
lymph nodes, or skeleton that are causing symptoms. Examination
of the cancer for hormone receptor proteins is of value in predicting
response to endocrine ablation. Men commonly have ER-positive
tumors and rarely have overexpression of HER-2/neu. Adjuvant
systemic therapy and radiation is used for the same indications as in
breast cancer in women.
Because breast cancer in men is frequently a disseminated
disease, endocrine therapy is of considerable importance in its
management. Tamoxifen is the main drug for management of
advanced breast cancer in men. Tamoxifen (20 mg orally daily)
should be the initial treatment. There is little experience with AIs
though they should be effective. Castration in advanced breast
cancer is a successful measure and more beneficial than the same
procedure in women but is rarely used. Objective evidence of
regression may be seen in 60–70% of men with hormonal therapy
for metastatic disease—approximately twice the proportion in
women. The average duration of tumor growth remission is about
30 months, and life is prolonged. Bone is the most frequent site of
metastases from breast cancer in men (as in women), and hormonal
therapy relieves bone pain in most patients so treated. The longer
the interval between mastectomy and recurrence, the longer the
remission following treatment is likely. As in women, there is
correlation between ERs of the tumor and the likelihood of
remission following hormonal therapy.
AIs should replace adrenalectomy in men as they have in women.
Corticosteroid therapy alone has been considered to be efficacious
but probably has no value when compared with major endocrine
ablation. Either tamoxifen or AIs may be primary or secondary
hormonal manipulation.
Estrogen therapy—5 mg of diethylstilbestrol three times daily
orally—may be effective hormonal manipulation after others have
been successful and failed, just as in women. Androgen therapy
may exacerbate bone pain. Chemotherapy should be administered
for the same indications and using the same dosage schedules as for
women with metastatic disease or for adjuvant treatment.
 Prognosis
The prognosis of breast cancer is poorer in men than in women.
The crude 5- and 10-year survival rates for clinical stage I breast
cancer in men are about 58% and 38%, respectively. For clinical
stage II disease, the 5- and 10-year survival rates are
approximately 38% and 10%. The survival rates for all stages at 5
and 10 years are 36% and 17%. For those patients whose disease
progresses despite treatment, meticulous efforts at palliative care
are essential (see Chapter 5).
Fentiman IS et al. Male breast cancer. Lancet. 2006 Feb 18;
367(9510):595–604. [PMID: 16488803]
 
Karhu R et al. Large genomic BRCA2 rearrangements and male
breast cancer. Cancer Detect Prev. 2006;30(6):530–4. [PMID:
17113724]
 
Nahleh ZA. Hormonal therapy for male breast cancer: a different
approach for a different disease. Cancer Treat Rev. 2006
Apr;32(2):101–5. [PMID: 16472925]
 
Wauters CA et al. Is cytology useful in the diagnostic workup of
male breast lesions? A retrospective study over a 16-year period
and review of the recent literature. Acta Cytol. 2010 May–
Jun;54(3):259–64. [PMID: 20518408]
 
Zurrida S et al. Male breast cancer. Future Oncol. 2010 Jun;
6(6):985–91. [PMID: 20528235]
 
 
 
Gynecologic Disorders
H. Trent MacKay, MD, MPH
ABNORMAL PREMENOPAUSAL BLEEDING
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Blood loss of over 80 mL per cycle.
 Excessive bleeding, often with the passage of clots, may occur at
regular menstrual intervals (menorrhagia) or irregular intervals
(dysfunctional uterine bleeding).
 Etiology most commonly dysfunctional uterine bleeding on a
hormonal basis.
 
 General Considerations
Normal menstrual bleeding lasts an average of 4 days (range, 2–7
days), with a mean blood loss of 40 mL. Blood loss of over 80 mL
per cycle is abnormal and frequently produces anemia. When there
are < 21 days between the onset of bleeding episodes, the cycles
are likely to be anovular. Ovulation bleeding, a single episode of
spotting between regular menses, is quite common. Heavier or
irregular intermenstrual bleeding warrants investigation.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is associated with anovulation,
with overgrowth of the endometrium due to estrogen stimulation
without progesterone to stabilize growth. Anovulation is most
common in teenagers, in women aged late 30s to late 40s, and in
extremely obese women or those with polycystic ovary syndrome.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The diagnosis usually depends on the following: (1) A careful
description of the duration and amount of flow, related pain, and
relationship to the last menstrual period (LMP), with the presence
of blood clots or the degree of inconvenience caused by the
bleeding serving as useful indicators; (2) A history of pertinent
illnesses or weight change; (3) A history of medications taken in the
past month; (4) A history of coagulation disorders in the patient or
family members; (5) A pelvic examination to look for vulvar, vaginal
or cervical lesions, pregnancy, uterine myomas, adnexal masses, or
infection.
B. Laboratory Studies
Cervical samples should be obtained for cytology and culture. A
hemoglobin and hematocrit and a pregnancy test should be done,
and studies of thyroid function and coagulation disorders should be
considered. Up to 18% of women with severe menorrhagia may
have a coagulopathy. Tests for ovulation in cyclic menorrhagia
include basal body temperature records, serum progesterone
measured 1 week before the expected onset of menses, or an
endometrial biopsy specimen for secretory activity shortly before
the onset of menstruation.
C. Imaging
Ultrasound may be useful to evaluate endometrial thickness or to
diagnose intrauterine or ectopic pregnancy or adnexal masses.
Endovaginal ultrasound with saline infusion sonohysterography may
be used to diagnose endometrial polyps or subserous myomas.
MRI can definitively diagnose submucous myomas and
adenomyosis.
D. Cervical Biopsy and Endometrial Curettage
Biopsy, curettage, or aspiration of the endometrium and curettage
of the endocervix may be necessary to diagnose the cause of
bleeding. These and other invasive gynecologic diagnostic
procedures are described in Table 18–1. Polyps, endometrial
hyperplasia, and submucous myomas are commonly identified in this
way. If cancer of the cervix is suspected, colposcopically directed
biopsies and endocervical curettage are indicated as first steps.
E. Hysteroscopy
Hysteroscopy can visualize endometrial polyps, submucous
myomas, and exophytic endometrial cancers, followed by removal
of the polyp or myoma and endometrial sampling.
 
Table 18–1. Common gynecologic diagnosti
 
Colposcopy
     Visualization of cervical, vaginal, or vulvar epithelium
under 5–50× magnification with and without dilute acetic
acid to identify abnormal areas requiring biopsy. An office
procedure.
D&C
     Dilation of the cervix and curettage of the entire
endometrial cavity, using a metal curette or suction
cannula and often using forceps for the removal of
endometrial polyps. Can usually be done in the office
under local anesthesia.
Endometrial biopsy
     Removal of one or more areas of the endometrium by
means of a curette or small aspiration device without
cervical dilation. Diagnostic accuracy similar to D&C. An
office procedure performed under local anesthesia.
Endocervical curettage
     Removal of endocervical epithelium with a small curette
for diagnosis of cervical dysplasia and cancer. An office
procedure performed under local anesthesia.
Hysteroscopy
     Visual examination of the uterine cavity with a small
fiberoptic endoscope passed through the cervix. Biopsies,
and excision of myomas can be performed. Can be done
in the office under local anesthesia or in the operating
room under general anesthesia.
Saline infusion sonohysterography
     Introduction of saline solution into endometrial cavity
with a catheter to visualize submucous myomas or
endometrial polyps by transvaginal ultrasound. May be
performed in the office with oral analgesia.
Hysterosalpingography
     Injection of radiopaque dye through the cervix to
visualize the uterine cavity and oviducts. Mainly used in
investigation of infertility.
Laparoscopy
     Visualization of the abdominal and pelvic cavity through
a small fiberoptic endoscope passed through a
subumbilical incision. Permits diagnosis, tubal
sterilization, and treatment of many conditions previously
requiring laparotomy. General anesthesia is usually used.
 Treatment
Premenopausal patients with abnormal uterine bleeding include
those with submucosal myomas, infection, early abortion,
thrombophilias, or pelvic neoplasms. The history, physical
examination, laboratory findings, and endometrial sampling should
identify such patients, who require definitive therapy. A large group
of patients remain, most of whom have dysfunctional uterine
bleeding on the basis of anovulation.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding can usually be treated hormonally.
Women over the age of 35 should routinely have endometrial
sampling to rule out endometrial hyperplasia or carcinoma prior to
initiation of hormonal therapy. Progestins, which limit and stabilize
endometrial growth, are generally effective. Medroxyprogesterone
acetate, 10 mg/d orally, or norethindrone acetate, 5 mg/d orally,
should be given for 10–14 days starting on day 15 of the cycle,
following which withdrawal bleeding (so-called medical curettage)
will occur. The treatment is repeated for several cycles; it can be
reinstituted if amenorrhea or dysfunctional bleeding recurs. In
women who are bleeding actively, any of the combination oral
contraceptives can be given four times daily for 1 or 2 days
followed by two pills daily through day 5 and then one pill daily
through day 20; after withdrawal bleeding occurs, pills are taken in
the usual dosage for three cycles. In cases of intractable heavy
bleeding, danazol, 200 mg orally four times daily, is sometimes used
to create an atrophic endometrium. Alternatively, a GnRH agonist
such as depot leuprolide, 3.75 mg intramuscularly monthly, or
nafarelin, 0.2–0.4 mg intranasally twice daily, can be used for up to
6 months to create a temporary cessation of menstruation by
ovarian suppression.
In cases of heavy bleeding, intravenous conjugated estrogens, 25
mg every 4 hours for three or four doses, can be used, followed by
oral conjugated estrogens, 2.5 mg daily, or ethinyl estradiol, 20 mcg
orally daily, for 3 weeks, with the addition of medroxyprogesterone
acetate, 10 mg orally daily for the last 10 days of treatment, or a
combination oral contraceptive daily for 3 weeks. This will thicken
the endometrium and control the bleeding. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as naproxen or mefenamic
acid, in the usual anti-inflammatory doses will often reduce blood
loss in menorrhagia—even that associated with a copper
intrauterine device (IUD).
If the abnormal bleeding is not controlled by hormonal treatment,
hysteroscopy, saline infusion sonohysterography, or a D&C is
necessary to check for polyps, submucous myomas, or endometrial
cancer. In the absence of specific pathology, bleeding unresponsive
to medical therapy may be treated with endometrial ablation,
levonorgestrelreleasing IUD, or hysterectomy. While hysterectomy
was used commonly in the past for bleeding unresponsive to
medical therapy, the low risk of complications and the good short-
term results of both endometrial ablation and levonorgestrel-
releasing IUD make them attractive alternatives to hysterectomy.
Endometrial ablation may be performed through the hysteroscope
with laser photocoagulation or electrocautery. Nonhysteroscopic
techniques include balloon thermal ablation, cryoablation, free-fluid
thermal ablation, impedence bipolar radiofrequency ablation, and
microwave ablation. The latter methods are welladapted to
outpatient therapy under local anesthesia.
The levonorgestrel-releasing IUD markedly reduces menstrual
blood loss and may be a good alternative to other therapies.
However, while short-term results with endometrial ablation and
levonorgestrel-releasing IUD are satisfactory, at 5 years after either
the endometrial ablation procedure or placement of the
levonorgestrel IUD, up to 40% of women will have had either
repeat ablation procedures or a hysterectomy.
 When to Refer
 
•    If bleeding is not controlled with first-line therapy.
•    If expertise is needed for a surgical procedure.
 When to Admit
If bleeding is uncontrollable with first-line therapy and the patient is
not hemodynamically stable.
Casablanca Y. Management of dysfunctional uterine bleeding.
Obstet Gynecol Clin N Am. 2008 Jun;35(2):219–34. [PMID:
18486838]
 
Maness DL et al. How best to manage dysfunctional uterine
bleeding. J Fam Pract. 2010 Aug;59(8):449–58. [PMID:
20714455]
 
POSTMENOPAUSAL VAGINAL BLEEDING
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Vaginal bleeding that occurs 6 months or more following
cessation of menstrual function.
 Bleeding is usually painless.
 Bleeding may be a single episode of spotting or profuse bleeding
for days or months.
 
 General Considerations
Vaginal bleeding that occurs 6 months or more following cessation
of menstrual function should be investigated. The most common
causes are atrophic endometrium, endometrial proliferation or
hyperplasia, endometrial or cervical cancer, and administration of
estrogens with or without added progestin. Other causes include
atrophic vaginitis, trauma, endometrial polyps, friction ulcers of the
cervix associated with prolapse of the uterus, and blood dyscrasias.
Uterine bleeding is usually painless, but pain will be present if the
cervix is stenotic, if bleeding is severe and rapid, or if infection or
torsion or extrusion of a tumor is present. The patient may report a
single episode of spotting or profuse bleeding for days or months.
 Diagnosis
The vulva and vagina should be inspected for areas of bleeding,
ulcers, or neoplasms. A cytologic smear of the cervix and vaginal
pool should be taken. If available, transvaginal sonography should
be used to measure endometrial thickness. A measurement of 4 mm
or less indicates a low likelihood of hyperplasia or endometrial
cancer. If the thickness is > 4 mm or there is a heterogeneous
appearance to the endometrium, it should be determined if the
thickening is global or focal. Sonohysterography may assist in
making this distinction. If the thickening is global, endometrial
biopsy or D&C is appropriate. If focal, guided sampling with
hysteroscopy should be done.
 Treatment
Simple endometrial hyperplasia calls for cyclic progestin therapy
(medroxyprogesterone acetate, 10 mg/d orally, or norethindrone
acetate, 5 mg/d orally) for 21 days of each month for 3 months.
Repeat sampling should be performed. If endometrial hyperplasia
with atypia or if carcinoma of the endometrium is found,
hysterectomy is necessary.
 When to Refer
 
•    Expertise in performing ultrasonography is required.
•    Complex endometrial hyperplasia with atypia is present.
•    Hysteroscopy is indicated.
Goldstein SR. The role of transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial
biopsy in the evaluation of the menopausal endometrium. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Jul;201(1):5–11. [PMID: 19576369]
 
PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME (Premenstrual Tension)
The premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a recurrent, variable cluster
of troublesome physical and emotional symptoms that develop
during the 7–14 days before the onset of menses and subside when
menstruation occurs. PMS intermittently affects about 40% of all
premenopausal women, primarily those 25–40 years of age. In
about 5–8% of affected women, the syndrome may be severe.
Although not every woman experiences all the symptoms or signs at
one time, many describe bloating, breast pain, ankle swelling, a
sense of increased weight, skin disorders, irritability, aggressiveness,
depression, inability to concentrate, libido change, lethargy, and
food cravings. When emotional or mood symptoms predominate,
along with physical symptoms, and there is a clear functional
impairment, the term “premenstrual dysphoric disorder” (PMDD)
may be applied. The pathogenesis of PMS/PMDD is still uncertain,
and current treatment methods are mainly empiric. The clinician
should provide support for both the patient's emotional and physical
distress. This includes the following:
1. Careful evaluation of the patient, with understanding,
explanation, and reassurance.
2. Advise the patient to keep a daily diary of all symptoms
for 2–3 months, to evaluate the timing and characteristics
of her symptoms. If her symptoms occur throughout the
month rather than in the 2 weeks before menses, she may
have depression or other emotional problems in addition to
PMS.
3. For mild to moderate symptoms, a program of aerobic
exercise; reduction of caffeine, salt, and alcohol intake; and
an increase in dietary calcium (to 1200 mg per day),
vitamin D (to 800 international units per day), and complex
carbohydrates in the diet may be helpful.
4. When physical symptoms predominate, spironolactone,
100 mg orally daily during the luteal phase, is effective for
reduction of bloating and breast tenderness. Oral
contraceptives 
or 
injectable 
progestin 
depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) will decrease
breast pain and cramping. A combined oral contraceptive
containing the progestin drospirenone with a 4-day pill-free
interval has been approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for the treatment of PMDD. NSAIDs,
such as mefenamic acid, 500 mg orally three times a day,
will reduce a number of symptoms but not breast pain.
5. When mood disorders predominate, several serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (such as fluoxetine, 20 mg orally, either
daily or only on symptom days) have been shown to be
effective in relieving tension, irritability, and dysphoria with
few side effects.
6. When the above regimens are not effective, ovarian
function can be suppressed with continuous high-dose
progestin (20–30 mg/d of oral medroxyprogesterone
acetate [MPA] or 150 mg of DMPA orally every 3 months or
GnRH agonist with add-back therapy, such as conjugated
equine 
estrogen, 
0.625 
mg 
orally 
daily 
with
medroxyprogesterone acetate, 2.5–5 mg orally daily.
Brown J et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr
15; (2):CD001396. [PMID: 19370564]
 
Lopez LM et al. Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone for
premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr
15; (2):CD001396. [PMID: 19370644]
 
Vigod SN et al. Understanding and treating premenstrual
dysphoric disorder: an update for the women's health practitioner.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2009 Dec;36(4):907–24. [PMID:
19944308]
 
Yonkers KA et al. Premenstrual syndrome. Lancet. 2008 Apr
5;371(9619):1200–10. [PMID: 18395582]
 
DYSMENORRHEA
1. Primary Dysmenorrhea
Primary dysmenorrhea is menstrual pain associated with ovulatory
cycles in the absence of pathologic findings. The pain usually begins
within 1–2 years after the menarche and may become more severe
with time. The frequency of cases increases up to age 20 and then
decreases with age and markedly with parity. Fifty to 75 percent of
women are affected at some time and 5–6% have incapacitating
pain.
 Clinical Findings
Primary dysmenorrhea is low, midline, wave-like, cramping pelvic
pain often radiating to the back or inner thighs. Cramps may last for
1 or more days and may be associated with nausea, diarrhea,
headache, and flushing. The pain is produced by uterine
vasoconstriction, anoxia, and sustained contractions mediated by
prostaglandins. The pelvic examination is normal between menses;
examination during menses may produce discomfort, but there are
no pathologic findings.
 Treatment
NSAIDs (ibuprofen, ketoprofen, mefenamic acid, naproxen) and
the cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor celecoxib are generally
helpful. The medication should be started 1–2 days before expected
menses. Ovulation can be suppressed and dysmenorrhea usually
prevented by oral contraceptives, depot-medroxyprogesterone
acetate, or levonorgestrel-releasing IUD. For women who do not
wish to use hormonal contraception, other therapies that have
shown at least some benefit include local heat; thiamine, 100 mg/d
orally; vitamin E, 200 units/d orally from 2 days prior to and for the
first 3 days of menses; and highfrequency transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation.
2. Secondary Dysmenorrhea
Secondary dysmenorrhea is menstrual pain for which an organic
cause exists. It usually begins well after menarche, sometimes even
as late as the third or fourth decade of life.
 Clinical Findings
The history and physical examination commonly suggest
endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Other causes
may be submucous myoma, adenomyosis, IUD use, cervical
stenosis with obstruction, or blind uterine horn (rare).
 Diagnosis
Laparoscopy is often needed to differentiate endometriosis from
PID. Submucous myomas can be detected most reliably by MRI
but also by hysterogram, by hysteroscopy, or by passing a sound or
curette over the uterine cavity during D&C. Adenomyosis, the
presence of islands of endometrial tissue in the myometrium, may be
diagnosed with ultrasound or, preferably, with MRI. Cervical
stenosis may result from induced abortion, creating crampy pain at
the time of expected menses with no blood flow; this is easily cured
by passing a sound into the uterine cavity after administering a
paracervical block.
 Treatment
A. Specific Measures
Periodic use of analgesics, including the NSAIDs given for primary
dysmenorrhea, may be beneficial, and oral contraceptives may give
relief, particularly in endometriosis. Danazol and GnRH agonists are
effective in the treatment of endometriosis (see below).
Adenomyosis may respond to the levonorgestrel-releasing
intrauterine system (LNGIUS), uterine artery embolization, or
hormonal approaches used to treat endometriosis, but hysterectomy
remains the treatment of choice for women who have completed
child-bearing.
B. Surgical Measures
If disability is marked or prolonged, laparoscopy or exploratory
laparotomy is usually warranted. Definitive surgery depends on the
degree of disability and the findings at operation.
 When to Refer
 
•    Standard therapy fails to relieve pain.
•    Suspicion of pelvic pathology, such as endometriosis,
leiomyomas, or adenomyosis.
Sanfilippo J et al. Evaluation and management of dysmenorrhea in
adolescents. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Jun;51(2):257–67.
[PMID: 18463457]
 
Sheng J et al. The LNG-IUS study on adenomyosis: a 3-year
follow-up study of the efficacy and side effects of the use of the
levonorgestrel intrauterine system of the treatment of dysmenorrhea
associated with adenomyosis. Contraception. 2009
Mar;79(3):189–93. [PMID: 19185671]
 
Wong CL et al. Oral contraceptive pill as treatment for primary
dysmenorrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr 15;
(2):CD002120. [PMID: 19370576]
 
VAGINITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Vaginal irritation.
 Pruritus.
 Pain.
 Unusual discharge.
 
 General Considerations
Inflammation and infection of the vagina are common gynecologic
problems, resulting from a variety of pathogens, allergic reactions to
vaginal contraceptives or other products, vaginal atrophy, or the
friction of coitus. The normal vaginal pH is 4.5 or less, and
Lactobacillus is the predominant organism. At the time of the
midcycle estrogen surge, clear, elastic, mucoid secretions from the
cervical os are often profuse. In the luteal phase and during
pregnancy, vaginal secretions are thicker, white, and sometimes
adherent to the vaginal walls. These normal secretions can be
confused with vaginitis by concerned women.
 Clinical Findings
When the patient complains of vaginal irritation, pain, or unusual
discharge, a history should be taken, noting the onset of the LMP;
recent sexual activity; use of contraceptives, tampons, or douches;
and the presence of vaginal burning, pain, pruritus, or unusually
profuse or malodorous discharge. The physical examination should
include careful inspection of the vulva and speculum examination of
the vagina and cervix. The cervix is sampled for gonococcus and
Chlamydia if appropriate. A specimen of vaginal discharge is
examined under the microscope in a drop of 0.9% saline solution to
look for trichomonads or clue cells and in a drop of 10% potassium
hydroxide to search for Candida. The vaginal pH should be tested;
it is frequently > 4.5 in infections due to trichomonads and bacterial
vaginosis. A bimanual examination to look for evidence of pelvic
infection should follow. Point-of-care testing is available for all three
organisms that cause vaginitis. It can be used if microscopy is not
available or for confirmatory testing of microscopy.
A. Vulvovaginal Candidiasis
Pregnancy, diabetes, and use of broad-spectrum antibiotics or
corticosteroids predispose patients to Candida infections. Heat,
moisture, and occlusive clothing also contribute to the risk. Pruritus,
vulvovaginal erythema, and a white curd-like discharge that is not
malodorous are found (Figure 18–1). Microscopic examination with
10% potassium hydroxide reveals filaments and spores. Cultures
with Nickerson medium may be used if Candida is suspected but
not demonstrated.
 
Figure 18–1. Cervical candidiasis. (Public Health Image Library
 
B. Trichomonas vaginalis Vaginitis
This protozoal flagellate infects the vagina, Skene ducts, and lower
urinary tract in women and the lower genitourinary tract in men. It is
sexually transmitted. Pruritus and a malodorous frothy, yellow-green
discharge occur, along with diffuse vaginal erythema and red
macular lesions on the cervix in severe cases (Figure 18–2). Motile
organisms with flagella are seen by microscopic examination of a
wet mount with saline solution.
C. Bacterial Vaginosis
This condition is considered to be a polymicrobial disease that is not
sexually transmitted. An overgrowth of Gardnerella and other
anaerobes is often associated with increased malodorous discharge
without obvious vulvitis or vaginitis. The discharge is grayish and
sometimes frothy, with a pH of 5.0–5.5. An amine-like (“fishy”)
odor is present if a drop of discharge is alkalinized with 10%
potassium hydroxide. On wet mount in saline, epithelial cells are
covered with bacteria to such an extent that cell borders are
obscured (clue cells, Figure 18–3). Vaginal cultures are generally
not useful in diagnosis.
D. Condylomata Acuminata (Genital Warts)
Warty growths on the vulva, perianal area, vaginal walls, or cervix
are caused by various types of the human papillomavirus (HPV).
They are sexually transmitted. Pregnancy and immunosuppression
favor growth. Vulvar lesions may be obviously wart-like or may be
diagnosed only after application of 4% acetic acid (vinegar) and
colposcopy, when they appear whitish, with prominent papillae.
Fissures may be present at the fourchette. Vaginal lesions may show
diffuse hypertrophy or a cobblestone appearance. Cervical lesions
may be visible only by colposcopy after pretreatment with 4%
acetic acid. These lesions may be related to dysplasia and cervical
cancer. Vulvar cancer is also currently considered to be associated
with HPV infection.
 
Figure 18–2. strawberry cervix in Trichomonas vaginalis
infection, with inflammation and punctate hemorrhages. (Courtesy of
Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill
 
 
Figure 18–3. Clue cells seen in bacterial vaginosis due to
Gardnerella vaginalis. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD;
used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ
Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill
 
 Treatment
A. Vulvovaginal Candidiasis
A variety of regimens are available to treat vulvovaginal candidiasis.
Women with uncomplicated vulvovaginal candidiasis will usually
respond to a 1to 3-day regimen of a topical azole. Women with
complicated infection (including four or more episodes in 1 year,
severe signs and symptoms, non-albicans species, uncontrolled
diabetes, HIV infection, corticosteroid treatment, or pregnancy)
should receive 7–14 days of a topical regimen or two doses of
fluconazole 3 days apart. (Pregnant women should use only topical
azoles.) In recurrent nonalbicans infections, 600 mg of boric acid in
a gelatin capsule intravaginally once daily for 2 weeks is
approximately 70% effective. If recurrence occurs, referral to an
infectious disease specialist is indicated.
1. Single-dose regimens—Effective single-dose regimens include
miconazole, 1200-mg vaginal suppository; tioconazole, 6.5%
cream, 5 g vaginally; sustained-release butoconazole, 2% cream, 5
g vaginally; or fluconazole, 150 mg oral tablet in a single dose.
2. Three-day regimens—Effective 3-day regimens include
butoconazole (2% cream, 5 g vaginally once daily), clotrimazole
(2% cream, 5 g vaginally once daily), terconazole (0.8% cream, 5
g, or 80-mg vaginal suppository once daily), or miconazole (200 mg
vaginal suppository once daily).
3. Seven-day regimens—The following regimens are given once
daily: clotrimazole (1% cream), miconazole (2% cream, 5 g, or 100
mg vaginal suppository), or terconazole (0.4% cream, 5 g).
4. Fourteen-day regimen—An effective 14-day regimen is
nystatin (100,000-unit vaginal tablet once daily).
5. Recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis (maintenance therapy)
—Clotrimazole (500 mg vaginal suppository once weekly or 200
mg cream twice weekly) or fluconazole (100, 150, or 200 mg orally
once weekly) are effective regimens for maintenance therapy for up
to 6 months.
B. Trichomonas vaginalis Vaginitis
Treatment of both partners simultaneously is recommended;
metronidazole or tinidazole, 2 g orally as a single dose or 500 mg
orally twice a day for 7 days, is usually used.
In the case of treatment failure with metronidazole in the absence
of reexposure, the patient should be re-treated with metronidazole,
500 mg orally twice a day for 7 days, or tinidazole 2 g orally as a
single dose. If treatment failure occurs again, give metronidazole or
tinidazole, 2 g orally once daily for 5 days. If this is not effective in
eradicating 
the 
organisms, 
metronidazole 
and 
tinidazole
susceptibility testing can be arranged with the CDC at 404-718-
4141 or at http://www.cdc.gov/std. Women infected with T
vaginalis are at increased risk for concurrent infection with other
sexually transmitted diseases.
C. Bacterial Vaginosis
The recommended regimens are metronidazole, 500 mg orally twice
daily for 7 days, clindamycin vaginal cream (2%, 5 g), once daily
for 7 days, or metronidazole gel (0.75%, 5 g), twice daily for 5
days. Alternative regimens include clindamycin, 300 mg orally twice
daily for 7 days, clindamycin ovules, 100 g intravaginally at bedtime
for 3 days, tinidazole 2 g orally once daily for 3 days, or tinidazole 1
g orally once daily for 7 days.
D. Condylomata Acuminata
Recommended treatments for vulvar warts include podophyllum
resin 10–25% in tincture of benzoin (do not use during pregnancy
or on bleeding lesions) or 80–90% trichloroacetic or bichloroacetic
acid, carefully applied to avoid the surrounding skin. Surgical
removal may be accomplished with tangential scissor excision,
tangential shave excision, curettage, or electrotherapy. The pain of
bichloroacetic or trichloroacetic acid application can be lessened by
a sodium bicarbonate paste applied immediately after treatment.
Podophyllum resin must be washed off after 2–4 hours. Freezing
with liquid nitrogen or a cryoprobe and electrocautery are also
effective. Patientapplied regimens include podofilox 0.5% solution
or gel, imiquimod 5% cream, or sinecatechins 15% ointment.
Vaginal warts may be treated with cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
or trichloroacetic acid. Extensive warts may require treatment with
CO2 laser under local or general anesthesia. Interferon is not
recommended for routine use because it is very expensive,
associated with systemic side effects, and no more effective than
other therapies. Routine examination of sex partners is not
necessary for the management of genital warts since the risk of
reinfection is probably minimal and curative therapy to prevent
transmission is not available. However, partners may wish to be
examined for detection and treatment of genital warts and other
sexually transmitted diseases. While condom use does not appear
to prevent HPV transmission, it may result in accelerated regression
of associated lesions, including untreated cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) and in accelerated clearance of genital HPV
infection in women.
Allsworth JE et al. Trichomoniasis and other sexually transmitted
infections: results from the 2001–2004 National Health and
Nutrition Examination Surveys. Sex Transm Dis. 2009
Dec;36(12):738–44. [PMID: 19734826]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. [PMID:
21160459]
 
CERVICAL POLYPS
Cervical polyps commonly occur after menarche and are
occasionally noted in postmenopausal women. The cause is not
known, but inflammation may play an etiologic role. The principal
symptoms are discharge and abnormal vaginal bleeding. However,
abnormal bleeding should not be ascribed to a cervical polyp
without sampling the endocervix and endometrium. The polyps are
visible in the cervical os on speculum examination.
Cervical polyps must be differentiated from polypoid neoplastic
disease of the endometrium, small submucous pedunculated
myomas, and endometrial polyps. Cervical polyps rarely contain
dysplasia (0.5%) or malignant (0.5%) foci.
 Treatment
Asymptomatic polyps in women under age 45 may be left
untreated. Cervical polyps can generally be removed in the office by
avulsion with a uterine packing forceps or ring forceps. If the cervix
is soft, patulous, or definitely dilated and the polyp is large, surgical
D&C is required (especially if the pedicle is not readily visible).
Hysteroscopy may aid removal and lead to identification of
concomitant endometrial disease. If there is suspicion of endometrial
disease, cervical polypectomy should be accompanied by
endometrial sampling.
 When to Refer
 
•    Polyp with a wide base is present.
•    Inability to differentiate endocervical from endometrial
polyp.
Younis MT et al. Women with asymptomatic cervical polyps may
not need to see a gynaecologist or have them removed: an
observational retrospective study of 1126 cases. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2010 Jun;150(2):190–4. [PMID:
20206432]
 
BARTHOLIN DUCT CYCSTS & ABSCESSES
Trauma or infection may involve the Bartholin duct, causing
obstruction of the gland. Drainage of secretions is prevented,
leading to pain, swelling, and abscess formation (Figure 18–4). The
infection usually resolves and pain disappears, but stenosis of the
duct outlet with distention often persists. Reinfection causes
recurrent tenderness and further enlargement of the duct.
The principal symptoms are periodic painful swelling on either
side of the introitus and dyspareunia. A fluctuant swelling 1–4 cm in
diameter in the inferior portion of either labium minus is a sign of
occlusion of Bartholin duct. Tenderness is evidence of active
infection.
Pus or secretions from the gland should be cultured for
Chlamydia and other pathogens and treated accordingly (see
Chapter 33); frequent warm soaks may be helpful. If an abscess
develops, aspiration or incision and drainage are the simplest forms
of therapy, but the problem may recur. Marsupialization (in the
absence of an abscess), incision and drainage with the insertion of
an indwelling Word catheter, or laser treatment will establish a new
duct opening. Antibiotics are unnecessary unless cellulitis is present.
An asymptomatic cyst does not require therapy.
 
Figure 18–4. Right-sided Bartholin cyst (abscess). (Courtesy of
Susan Lindsley, Public Health Image Library
 
 When to Refer
Surgical therapy (marsupialization) is indicated.
Pundir J et al. A review of the management of diseases of the
Bartholin's gland. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2008 Feb;28(2):161–5.
[PMID: 18393010]
 
CERVICAL INTRAEPITHELIAL NEOPLASIA (Dysplasia
of the Cervix)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The presumptive diagnosis is made by an abnormal Pap smear of
an asymptomatic woman with no grossly visible cervical changes.
 Diagnose by colposcopically directed biopsy.
 Increased in women with HIV.
 
 General Considerations
The squamocolumnar junction of the cervix is an area of active
squamous cell proliferation. In childhood, this junction is located on
the exposed vaginal portion of the cervix. At puberty, because of
hormonal influence and possibly because of changes in the vaginal
pH, the squamous margin begins to encroach on the single-layered,
mucus-secreting epithelium, creating an area of metaplasia
(transformation zone). Factors associated with coitus (see
Prevention, below) may lead to cellular abnormalities, which over a
period of time can result in the development of squamous cell
dysplasia or cancer. There are varying degrees of dysplasia (Table
18–2), defined by the degree of cellular atypia; all types must be
observed and treated if they persist or become more severe.
 
Table 18–2. Classification systems for Papanicolao
 
ASC-US, atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; CIN,
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia; SIL, squamous intraepithelial lesion.
 Clinical Findings
There are no specific symptoms or signs of CIN. The presumptive
diagnosis is made by cytologic screening of an asymptomatic
population with no grossly visible cervical changes. All visibly
abnormal cervical lesions should be biopsied (Figure 18–5).
 
Figure 18–5. Erosion of the cervix due to cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN), a precursor lesion to cervical cancer. (Public
Health Image Library
 
Diagnosis
A. Cytologic Examination (Papanicolaou Smear)
Screening should begin at age 21. Testing should be done every 2
years from ages 21 to 29. Women 30 years of age or older who
have had three consecutive negative cytologies may be screened
every 3 years. Screening may be done with either liquid-based or
conventional cytology. Women with risk factors that place them at
higher risk for CIN may require more frequent screening. These risk
factors include HIV infection, immunosuppression, exposure to
diethylstilbesterol in utero, and previous treatment for CIN 2, CIN
3, or cervical cancer. After age 65 or 70, if there have been no
abnormalities on the last three cytologic tests, screening may be
discontinued. Specimens should be taken from a nonmenstruating
patient, spread on a single slide, and fixed or rinsed directly into
preservative solution if liquid-based cytology is to be used. A
specimen should be obtained from the squamocolumnar junction
with a wooden or plastic spatula and from the endocervix with a
cotton swab or nylon brush.
Cytologic reports from the laboratory may describe findings in
one of several ways (see Table 18–2). The Bethesda System uses
the terminology “atypical squamous cells of unknown significance”
(ASC-US) and “squamous intraepithelial lesions,” either low-grade
(LSIL) or highgrade (HSIL). Cytopathologists consider a Pap
smear to be a medical consultation and will recommend further
diagnostic procedures, treatment for infection, and comments on
factors preventing adequate evaluation of the specimen. Either
immediate colposcopy or triage with reflex testing for high-risk
HPV types with thin layer cytologic smears can be used for ASC-
US in premenopausal women age 21 years or older. Women
younger than 21 years with ASC-US should have repeat cytology
at 12 months and be referred for colposcopy if ASC-US is still
present. The routine use of combined cytologic screening and reflex
highrisk HPV testing is appropriate in women over the age of 30
who are being screened no more frequently than every 3 years.
Women who have undergone complete hysterectomy for benign
disease do not need to be screened.
B. Colposcopy
Women with ASC-US and a negative HPV screening may be
followed-up in 1 year. If the HPV screen is positive, colposcopy
should be performed. If HPV screening is unavailable, repeat
cytology may be done at 4to 6-month intervals until two
consecutive normal results, or the patient may be referred directly
for colposcopy. All patients with SIL or atypical glandular cells
should undergo colposcopy. Viewing the cervix with 10–20 ×
magnification allows for assessment of the size and margins of an
abnormal transformation zone and determination of extension into
the endocervical canal. The application of 3–5% acetic acid
(vinegar) dissolves mucus, and the acid's desiccating action
sharpens the contrast between normal and actively proliferating
squamous epithelium. Abnormal changes include white patches and
vascular atypia, which indicate areas of greatest cellular activity.
Paint the cervix with Lugol solution (strong iodine solution [Schiller
test]). Normal squamous epithelium will take the stain; nonstaining
squamous epithelium should be biopsied. (The single-layered,
mucus-secreting endocervical tissue will not stain either but can
readily be distinguished by its darker pink, shinier appearance.)
C. Biopsy
Colposcopically directed punch biopsy and endocervical curettage
are office procedures. If colposcopy is not available, the normal-
appearing cervix shedding atypical cells can be evaluated by
endocervical curettage and multiple punch biopsies of nonstaining
squamous epithelium or biopsies from each quadrant of the cervix.
Data from both cervical biopsy and endocervical curettage are
important in deciding on treatment.
 Prevention
Cervical infection with the HPV is associated with a high percentage
of all cervical dysplasias and cancers. There are over 70 recognized
HPV subtypes, of which types 6 and 11 tend to cause genital warts
and mild dysplasia, while types 16, 18, 31, and others cause higher-
grade cellular changes. The FDA has approved two vaccines to
prevent cervical cancer and vaginal and vulvar pre-cancers caused
by HPV types 16 and 18, and to protect against low-grade and
precancerous lesions caused by HPV types 16 and 18. The bivalent
vaccine (known as Cervarix) provides protection against HPV
types 16 and 18. The quadrivalent HPV 6/11/16/18 L1 virus-like-
particle vaccine (known as Gardasil) also provides protection
against genital warts caused by HPV types 6 and 11. Gardasil is
recommended for all girls and women aged 9 to 26. Both vaccines
provide partial protection against several other HPV types that
cause approximately 30% of cervical cancers. Because complete
coverage of all carcinogenic HPV types is not provided by either
vaccine, all women need to have regular cytologic screening as
outlined above.
In addition to vaccination, measures to prevent cervical cancer
include regular cytologic screening to detect abnormalities, limiting
the number of sexual partners, using a diaphragm or condom for
coitus, and stopping smoking or exposure to second-hand smoke.
 Treatment
Treatment varies depending on the degree and extent of CIN.
Biopsies should always precede treatment.
A. Cauterization or Cryosurgery
The use of either hot cauterization or freezing (cryosurgery) is
effective for noninvasive small lesions visible on the cervix without
endocervical extension.
B. CO2 Laser
This well-controlled method minimizes tissue destruction. It is
colposcopically directed and requires special training. It may be
used with large visible lesions. In current practice, it involves the
vaporization of the transformation zone on the cervix and the distal
5–7 mm of endocervical canal.
C. Loop Excision
When the CIN is clearly visible in its entirety, a wire loop can be
used for excisional biopsy. Cutting and hemostasis are effected with
a low-voltage electrosurgical machine. This office procedure with
local anesthesia is quick and uncomplicated.
D. Conization of the Cervix
Conization is surgical removal of the entire transformation zone and
endocervical canal. It should be reserved for cases of severe
dysplasia or cancer in situ (CIN III), particularly those with
endocervical extension. The procedure can be performed with the
scalpel, the CO2 laser, the needle electrode, or by large-loop
excision.
E. Follow-Up
Because recurrence is possible—especially in the first 2 years after
treatment—and because the false-negative rate of a single cervical
cytologic test is 20%, close follow-up after colposcopy and biopsy
is imperative. For CIN II or III, cytologic examination or cytology
and colposcopy should be repeated at 4to 6-month intervals for up
to 2 years. For CIN I, cytology should be performed at 6 and 12
months or HPV DNA testing can be done at 12 months. If testing is
normal, routine cytologic screening can be resumed.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with CIN II/III should be referred to an
experienced colposcopist.
•    Patients requiring conization biopsy should be referred
to a gynecologist.
ACOG Committee on Gynecological Practice. ACOG committee
opinion No. 431: Routine pelvic examination and cervical cytology
screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 May;113(5):1190-3. [PMID:
19384150]
 
American College of Obstetricians-Gynecologists. ACOG
Practice Bulletin No. 109: Cervical cytology screening. Obstet
Gynecol. 2009 Dec;114(6):1409–20.
 
American College of Obstetricians-Gynecologists. ACOG
Practice Bulletin No. 99: Management of abnormal cervical
cytology and histology. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Dec;112(6):1419–
44. [PMID: 19037054]
 
Bornstein J. The HPV vaccines-which to prefer? Obstet Gynecol
Surv. 2009 May;64(5):345–50. [PMID: 19386141]
 
Siebers AG et al. Comparison of liquid-based cytology with
conventional cytology for detection of cervical cancer precursors.
2009 Oct;302(16):1757–64. [PMID: 19861667]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE CERVIX
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Abnormal uterine bleeding and vaginal discharge.
 Cervical lesion may be visible on inspection as a tumor or
ulceration.
 Vaginal cytology usually positive; must be confirmed by biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
Cervical cancer can be considered a sexually transmitted disease.
Both squamous cell and adenocarcinoma of the cervix are
etiologically related to infection with HPV, primarily types 16 and
18. Smoking and possibly dietary factors such as decreased
circulating vitamin A appear to be cofactors. While squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) accounts for 85% of cervical cancers, the
incidence of SCC is decreasing while the incidence of
adenocarcinoma of the cervix is increasing.
SCC appears first in the intraepithelial layers (the preinvasive
stage, or carcinoma in situ). Preinvasive cancer (CIN III) is a
common diagnosis in women 25–40 years of age. Two to 10 years
are required for carcinoma to penetrate the basement membrane
and invade the tissues. After invasion, death usually occurs within
3–5 years in untreated or unresponsive patients.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The most common signs are metrorrhagia, postcoital spotting, and
cervical ulceration. Bloody or purulent, odorous, nonpruritic
discharge may appear after invasion. Bladder and rectal dysfunction
or fistulas and pain are late symptoms.
B. Cervical Biopsy and Endocervical Curettage, or Conization
These procedures are necessary steps after a positive Papanicolaou
smear to determine the extent and depth of invasion of the cancer.
Even if the smear is positive, treatment is never justified until
definitive diagnosis has been established through biopsy.
C. “Staging,” or Estimate of Gross Spread of Cancer of the Cervix
The depth of penetration of the malignant cells beyond the basement
membrane is a reliable clinical guide to the extent of primary cancer
within the cervix and the likelihood of metastases. It is customary to
stage cancers of the cervix under anesthesia. Further assessment
may be carried out by abdominal and pelvic CT/positron emission
tomography (PET) scanning or MRI.
 Complications
Metastases to regional lymph nodes occur with increasing frequency
from stage I to stage IV. Paracervical extension occurs in all
directions from the cervix. The ureters are often obstructed lateral
to the cervix, causing hydroureter and hydronephrosis and
consequently impaired kidney function. Almost two-thirds of
patients with untreated carcinoma of the cervix die of uremia when
ureteral obstruction is bilateral. Pain in the back, in the distribution
of the lumbosacral plexus, is often indicative of neurologic
involvement. Gross edema of the legs may be indicative of vascular
and lymphatic stasis due to tumor.
Vaginal fistulas to the rectum and urinary tract are severe late
complications. Hemorrhage is the cause of death in 10–20% of
patients with extensive invasive carcinoma.
Prevention
The FDA has approved a quadrivalent HPV 6/11/16/18 L1 virus-
like-particle vaccine, known as Gardasil and a bivalent HPV 16/18
vaccine, known as Cervarix, to prevent cervical cancer caused by
HPV types 16 and 18, and to protect against low-grade and
precancerous lesions caused by these types (see Cervical
Intraepithelial Neoplasia, above).
 Treatment
A. Emergency Measures
Vaginal hemorrhage originates from gross ulceration and cavitation
in stage II–IV cervical carcinoma. Ligation and suturing of the
cervix are usually not feasible, but ligation of the uterine or
hypogastric arteries may be lifesaving when other measures fail.
Styptics such as Monsel solution or acetone are effective, although
delayed sloughing may result in further bleeding. Wet vaginal
packing is helpful. Emergency irradiation usually controls bleeding.
B. Specific Measures
1. Carcinoma in situ (stage 0)—In women who have completed
childbearing, total hysterectomy is the treatment of choice. In
women who wish to retain the uterus, acceptable alternatives
include cervical conization or ablation of the lesion with cryotherapy
or laser. Close follow-up with Papanicolaou smears every 3 months
for 1 year and every 6 months for another year is necessary after
cryotherapy or laser.
2. Invasive carcinoma—Microinvasive carcinoma (stage IA1) is
treated with simple, extrafascial hysterectomy. Stages IA2, IB1,
and IIA cancers may be treated with either radical hysterectomy
with concomitant radiation and chemotherapy or with radiation plus
chemotherapy alone. Women with stage IB1 may be candidates for
fertility-sparing surgery that includes radical trachelectomy and
lymph node dissection with preservation of the uterus and ovaries.
Stages IB2, IIB, III and IV cancers are treated with radiation
therapy plus concurrent cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
 Prognosis
The overall 5-year relative survival rate for carcinoma of the cervix
is 68% in white women and 55% in black women in the United
States. Survival rates are inversely proportionate to the stage of
cancer: stage 0, 99–100%; stage IA, > 95%; stage IB–IIA, 80–
90%; stage IIB, 65%; stage III, 40%; and stage IV, < 20%.
 When to Refer
All patients with invasive cervical carcinoma (stage 1A or higher)
should be referred to a gynecologic oncologist.
Barbera L et al. Management of early and locally advanced
cervical cancer. Semin Oncol. 2009 Apr;36(2):155–69. [PMID:
19332250]
 
Kim JH et al. Fertility-sparing laparoscopic radical trachelectomy
for young women with early stage cervical cancer. BJOG. 2009
Dec 10. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20015309]
 
Whitcomb BP. Gynecologic malignancies. Surg Clin North Am.
2008 Apr;88(2):301–17. [PMID: 18381115]
 
LEIOMYOMA OF THE UTERUS (Fibroid Tumor)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Irregular enlargement of the uterus (may be asymptomatic).
 Heavy or irregular vaginal bleeding, dysmenorrhea.
 Acute and recurrent pelvic pain if the tumor becomes twisted on
its pedicle or infarcted.
 Symptoms due to pressure on neighboring organs (large tumors).
 
 General Considerations
Uterine leiomyoma is the most common benign neoplasm of the
female genital tract. It is a discrete, round, firm, often multiple
uterine tumor composed of smooth muscle and connective tissue.
The most convenient classification is by anatomic location: (1)
intramural, (2) submucous, (3) subserous, (4) intraligamentous, (5)
parasitic (ie, deriving its blood supply from an organ to which it
becomes attached), and (6) cervical. A submucous myoma may
become pedunculated and descend through the cervix into the
vagina.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In nonpregnant women, myomas are frequently asymptomatic.
However, they can cause urinary frequency, dysmenorrhea, heavy
bleeding (often with anemia), or other complications due to the
presence of an abdominal mass. Occasionally, degeneration occurs,
causing intense pain. Infertility may be due to a myoma that
significantly distorts the uterine cavity.
B. Laboratory Findings
Iron-deficiency anemia may result from blood loss; in rare cases,
polycythemia is present, presumably as a result of the production of
erythropoietin by the myomas.
C. Imaging
Ultrasonography will confirm the presence of uterine myomas and
can be used sequentially to monitor growth. When multiple
subserous or pedunculated myomas are being followed,
ultrasonography is important to exclude ovarian masses. MRI can
delineate intramural and submucous myomas accurately.
Hysterography or hysteroscopy can also confirm cervical or
submucous myomas.
 Differential Diagnosis
Irregular myomatous enlargement of the uterus must be
differentiated from the similar but symmetric enlargement that may
occur with pregnancy or adenomyosis (the presence of endometrial
glands and stroma in the myometrium). Subserous myomas must be
distinguished from ovarian tumors. Leiomyosarcoma is an unusual
tumor occurring in 0.5% of women operated on for symptomatic
myoma. It is very rare under the age of 40 and increases in
incidence thereafter.
 Treatment
A. Emergency Measures
If the patient is markedly anemic as a result of long, heavy menstrual
periods, preoperative treatment with depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate, 150 mg intramuscularly every 28 days, or danazol, 400–
800 mg orally daily, will slow or stop bleeding, and medical
treatment of anemia can be given prior to surgery. Emergency
surgery is required for acute torsion of a pedunculated myoma. The
only emergency indication for myomectomy during pregnancy is
torsion; abortion is not an inevitable result.
B. Specific Measures
Women who have small asymptomatic myomas should be examined
at 6-month intervals. If necessary, elective myomectomy can be
done to preserve the uterus. Myomas do not require surgery on an
urgent basis unless they cause significant pressure on the ureters,
bladder, or bowel or severe bleeding leading to anemia or unless
they are undergoing rapid growth. Cervical myomas larger than 3–4
cm in diameter or pedunculated myomas that protrude through the
cervix must be removed. Submucous myomas can be removed
using a hysteroscope and laser or resection instruments.
Because the risk of surgical complications increases with the
increasing size of the myoma, preoperative reduction of myoma size
is desirable. GnRH analogs such as depot leuprolide, 3.75 mg
intramuscularly monthly, or nafarelin, 0.2–0.4 mg intranasally twice
a day, are used preoperatively for 3to 4-month periods to induce
reversible hypogonadism, which temporarily reduces the size of
myomas, suppresses their further growth, and reduces surrounding
vascularity. Low-dose (5–10 mg/d) mifepristone and other selective
progesterone-receptor modulators have shown some promise for
long-term medical treatment of myomas.
C. Surgical Measures
Surgical measures available for the treatment of myoma are
laparoscopic or abdominal myomectomy and total or subtotal
abdominal, vaginal, or laparoscopy-assisted vaginal hysterectomy.
Myomectomy is the treatment of choice for women who wish to
preserve fertility. Transcatheter bilateral uterine artery embolization
appears to be a safe and effective alternative to myomectomy,
although definitive comparative data on subsequent pregnancy
outcomes are lacking. Myolysis with MRI-guided high frequency
focused ultrasound is another alternative, but long-term outcome
data, particularly on pregnancy outcomes, are lacking.
 Prognosis
Surgical therapy is curative. Future pregnancies are not endangered
by myomectomy, although cesarean delivery may be necessary after
wide dissection with entry into the uterine cavity.
 When to Refer
Refer to a gynecologist for treatment of symptomatic leiomyomata.
 When to Admit
For acute abdomen associated with an infarcted leiomyoma.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG
Practice Bulletin. Alternatives to hysterectomy in the management
of leiomyomas. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Aug;112(2 Pt 1): 387–400.
[PMID: 18669742]
 
Bagaria M et al. Low-dose mifepristone in treatment of uterine
leiomyoma: a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2009 Feb;49(1): 77-83.
[PMID: 19281585]
 
Bradley LD. Uterine fibroid embolization: a viable alternative to
hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Aug;201(2):127–35.
[PMID: 19646564]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE ENDOMETRIUM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Abnormal bleeding is the presenting sign in 80% of cases.
 Pap smear is frequently negative.
 After a negative pregnancy test, endometrial tissue is required to
confirm the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Adenocarcinoma of the endometrium is the second most common
cancer of the female genital tract. It occurs most often in women
50–70 years of age. Obesity, nulliparity, diabetes, and polycystic
ovaries with prolonged anovulation, unopposed estrogen therapy,
and the extended use of tamoxifen for the treatment of breast
cancer are also risk factors. Women with a family history of colon
cancer (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Lynch
syndrome) are at significantly increased risk, with a lifetime
incidence as high as 30%.
Abnormal bleeding is the presenting sign in 80% of cases.
Endometrial carcinoma may cause obstruction of the cervix with
collection of pus (pyometra) or blood (hematometra) causing lower
abdominal pain. However, pain generally occurs late in the disease,
with metastases or infection.
Papanicolaou smears of the cervix occasionally show atypical
endometrial cells but are an insensitive diagnostic tool. Endocervical
and endometrial sampling is the only reliable means of diagnosis.
Simultaneous hysteroscopy can be a valuable addition in order to
localize polyps or other lesions within the uterine cavity. Vaginal
ultrasonography may be used to determine the thickness of the
endometrium as an indication of hypertrophy and possible
neoplastic change.
Pathologic assessment is important in differentiating hyperplasias,
which often can be treated with cyclic oral progestins.
 Prevention
Prompt endometrial sampling for patients who report abnormal
menstrual bleeding or postmenopausal uterine bleeding will reveal
many incipient as well as clinical cases of endometrial cancer.
Younger women with chronic anovulation are at risk for endometrial
hyperplasia and subsequent endometrial cancer. They can reduce
the risk of hyperplasia almost completely with the use of oral
contraceptives or cyclic progestin therapy.
 Staging
Examination under anesthesia, endometrial and endocervical
sampling, chest radiography, intravenous urography, cystoscopy,
sigmoidoscopy, transvaginal sonography, and MRI will help
determine the extent of the disease and its appropriate treatment.
The staging is based on the surgical and pathologic evaluation.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy. Peritoneal material for cytologic examination is
routinely taken and lymph node sampling may be done. If invasion
deep into the myometrium has occurred or if sampled lymph nodes
are positive for tumor, postoperative irradiation is indicated. The
role of adjuvant chemotherapy alone or with irradiation is currently
under investigation, although one study has shown a modest
increase in survival with chemotherapy alone versus whole
abdominal radiation alone in women with stage III–IV disease.
Palliation of advanced or metastatic endometrial adenocarcinoma
may be accomplished with large doses of progestins, eg,
medroxyprogesterone, 400 mg intramuscularly weekly, or
megestrol acetate, 80–160 mg daily orally.
 Prognosis
With early diagnosis and treatment, the overall 5-year survival is
80–85%. With stage I disease, the depth of myometrial invasion is
the strongest predictor of survival, with a 98% 5-year survival with
< 66% depth of invasion and 78% survival with 66% or greater
invasion.
 When to Refer
All patients with endometrial carcinoma should be referred to a
gynecologic oncologist.
Goldstein SR. The role of transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial
biopsy in the evaluation of the menopausal endometrium. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Jul;201(1):5–11. [PMID: 19576369]
 
Sorosky JI. Endometrial cancer. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Feb;111
(2 Pt 1):436–47. [PMID: 18238985]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE VULVA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of genital warts.
 History of prolonged vulvar irritation, with pruritus, local
discomfort, or slight bloody discharge.
 Early lesions may suggest or include non-neoplastic epithelial
disorders.
 Late lesions appear as a mass, an exophytic growth, or a firm,
ulcerated area in the vulva.
 Biopsy is necessary to make the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
The majority of cancers of the vulva are squamous lesions that
classically have occurred in women over 50 years of age. Several
subtypes (particularly 16, 18, and 31) of HPV have been identified
in some but not all vulvar cancers. As with squamous cell lesions of
the cervix, a grading system of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN)
from mild dysplasia to carcinoma in situ has been established.
 Differential Diagnosis
Benign vulvar disorders that must be excluded in the diagnosis of
carcinoma of the vulva include chronic granulomatous lesions (eg,
lymphogranuloma venereum, syphilis), condylomas, hidradenoma,
or neurofibroma. Lichen sclerosus and other associated leukoplakic
changes in the skin should be biopsied. The likelihood that a
superimposed vulvar cancer will develop in a woman with a
nonneoplastic epithelial disorder (vulvar dystrophy) ranges from 1%
to 5%.
 Diagnosis
Biopsy is essential for the diagnosis of VIN and vulvar cancer and
should be performed with any localized atypical vulvar lesion,
including white patches. Multiple skinpunch specimens can be taken
in the office under local anesthesia, with care to include tissue from
the edges of each lesion sampled. Preoperative colposcopy of
vulva, vagina, and cervix can help in planning further treatment.
 Staging
Pelvic CT scan or MRI to rule out lymphadenopathy can assist in
planning surgery.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Early diagnosis and treatment of irritative or other predisposing
causes, such as lichen sclerosis and VIN, should be pursued. A 7:3
combination of betamethasone and crotamiton is particularly
effective for itching. After an initial response, fluorinated steroids
should be replaced with hydrocortisone because of their skin
atrophying effect. For lichen sclerosus, recommended treatment is
clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% twice daily for 2–3 weeks,
then once daily until symptoms resolve. Application one to three
times a week can be used for long-term maintenance therapy.
B. Surgical Measures
High-grade VIN may be treated with a variety of approaches
including topical chemotherapy, laser ablation, wide local excision,
skinning vulvectomy, and simple vulvectomy. Small, invasive basal
cell carcinoma of the vulva should be excised with a wide margin. If
the VIN is extensive or multicentric, laser therapy or superficial
surgical removal of vulvar skin may be required. In this way, the
clitoris and uninvolved portions of the vulva may be spared.
Invasive carcinoma confined to the vulva without evidence of
spread to adjacent organs or to the regional lymph nodes is treated
with wide local excision and inguinal lymphadenectomy or wide
local excision alone if invasion is < 1 mm. Patients with more
advanced 
disease 
may 
receive 
preoperative 
radiation,
chemotherapy, or both.
 Prognosis
Basal cell carcinomas very seldom metastasize, and carcinoma in
situ by definition has not metastasized. With adequate excision, the
prognosis for both lesions is excellent. Patients with invasive vulvar
squamous cell carcinoma 2 cm in diameter or less, without inguinal
lymph node metastases, have an 85–90% 5-year survival rate. If
the lesion is > 2 cm and lymph node involvement is present, the
likelihood of 5-year survival is approximately 40%.
 When to Refer
All patients with invasive vulvar carcinoma should be referred to a
gynecologic oncologist.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG
Practice Bulletin No. 93: Diagnosis and management of vulvar skin
disorders. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 May;111(5):1243–53. [PMID:
18448767]
 
Moore DH. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy in the treatment
of squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: are two therapies better
than one? Gynecol Oncol. 2009 Jun;113(3):379–83. [PMID:
19232700]
 
ENDOMETRIOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pelvic pain related to menstrual cycle.
 Dysmenorrhea.
 Dyspareunia.
 Increased frequency among infertile women.
 
 General Considerations
Endometriosis is an aberrant growth of endometrium outside the
uterus, particularly in the dependent parts of the pelvis and in the
ovaries and is the most common cause of secondary dysmenorrhea.
While retrograde menstruation is the most widely accepted cause,
its pathogenesis and natural course are not fully understood. The
overall prevalence in the United States is 6–10% and is fourfold to
fivefold greater among infertile women.
 Clinical Findings
Women with endometriosis will complain of pelvic pain, which may
be associated with infertility, dyspareunia, or rectal pain with
bleeding. Initially, pain tends to start 2–7 days before the onset of
menses and becomes increasingly severe until flow slackens. With
increasing duration of disease, pain may become continuous. Pelvic
examination may disclose tender nodules in the cul-de-sac or
rectovaginal septum, uterine retroversion with decreased uterine
mobility, cervical motion tenderness, or an adnexal mass or
tenderness. However, most women with endometriosis have a
normal pelvic examination.
Endometriosis must be distinguished from PID, ovarian
neoplasms, and uterine myomas. Bowel invasion by endometrial
tissue may produce blood in the stool that must be distinguished
from bowel neoplasm. Paradoxically, the severity of pain associated
with endometriosis may be inversely related to the anatomic extent
of the disease.
Imaging is of limited value. Ultrasound examination will often
reveal complex fluid-filled masses that cannot be distinguished from
neoplasms. MRI is more sensitive and specific than ultrasound,
particularly in the diagnosis of retroperitoneal lesions. However, the
clinical diagnosis of endometriosis is presumptive and usually
confirmed by laparoscopy.
 Treatment
A. Medical Treatment
Medical treatment, using a variety of hormonal therapies, is effective
in the amelioration of pain associated with endometriosis. However,
there is no evidence that any of these agents increase the likelihood
of pregnancy. Their preoperative use is of questionable value in
reducing the difficulty of surgery. Most of these regimens are
designed to inhibit ovulation over 4–9 months and lower hormone
levels, thus preventing cyclic stimulation of endometriotic implants
and inducing atrophy. The optimum duration of therapy is not clear,
and the relative merits in terms of side effects and long-term risks
and benefits show insignificant differences when compared with
each other and, in mild cases, with placebo. Current research for
more effective and acceptable long-term medical therapy is focusing
on aromatase inhibitors, selective progesterone receptor
modulators, and the levonorgestrel intrauterine system. Commonly
used medical regimens include the following:
 
1. The GnRH analogs such as nafarelin nasal spray, 0.2–
0.4 mg twice daily, or long-acting injectable leuprolide
acetate, 3.75 mg intramuscularly monthly, used for 6
months, suppress ovulation. Side effects of vasomotor
symptoms and bone demineralization may be relieved by
“add-back” therapy such as conjugated equine estrogen,
0.625 mg and norethindrone, 5 mg orally daily.
2. Danazol is used for 4–6 months in the lowest dose
necessary to suppress menstruation, usually 200–400 mg
orally twice daily. Danazol has a high incidence of
androgenic side effects, including decreased breast size,
weight gain, acne, and hirsutism.
3. Any of the combination oral contraceptives, the
contraceptive patch, or vaginal ring may be used
continuously for 6–12 months. Breakthrough bleeding can
be treated with conjugated estrogens, 1.25 mg orally daily
for 1 week, or estradiol, 2 mg daily orally for 1 week.
4. Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 100 mg intramuscularly
every 2 weeks for four doses and then 100 mg every 4
weeks; add oral estrogen or estradiol valerate, 30 mg
intramuscularly, for breakthrough bleeding. Use for 6–9
months.
5. Low-dose oral contraceptives can also be given
cyclically; prolonged suppression of ovulation will often
inhibit further stimulation of residual endometriosis,
especially if taken after one of the therapies mentioned
above.
6. Aromatase inhibitors, such as letrozole, 2.5 mg orally
daily, have been shown, on an investigational basis, to be
useful in the treatment of endometriosis resistant to other
therapies.
7. Analgesics, with or without opioids, may be needed
during menses. NSAIDs may be helpful.
B. Surgical Measures
Surgical treatment of endometriosis—particularly extensive disease
—is effective both in reducing pain and in promoting fertility.
Laparoscopic ablation of endometrial implants along with uterine
nerve ablation significantly reduces pain. Ablation of implants and, if
necessary, removal of ovarian endometriomas enhance fertility,
although subsequent pregnancy rates are related to the severity of
disease. Women with disabling pain who no longer desire
childbearing can be treated definitively with total abdominal
hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy (TAH-BSO).
Hormone replacement may be used in premenopausal women to
relieve vasomotor symptoms. However, there may be recurrence of
disease and associated pain.
 Prognosis
The prognosis for reproductive function in early or moderately
advanced endometriosis is good with conservative therapy. TAH-
BSO is curative for patients with severe and extensive
endometriosis with pain.
 When to Refer
Refer to a gynecologist for laparoscopic diagnosis or treatment.
 When to Admit
Rarely necessary except for acute abdomen associated with
ruptured or bleeding endometrioma.
Giudice LC. Clinical practice. Endometriosis. N Engl J Med. 2010
Jun 24;362(25):2389-98. [PMID: 20573927]
 
Kadri H et al. Hormone therapy for endometriosis and surgical
menopause. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):
CD005997. [PMID: 19160262]
 
Practice Committee of American Society for Reproductive
Medicine. Treatment of pelvic pain associated with endometriosis.
Fertil Steril. 2008 Nov;90(5 Suppl):S260–9. [PMID: 19007642]
 
PELVIC ORGAN PROLAPSE
 General Considerations
Cystocele, rectocele, and enterocele are vaginal hernias commonly
seen in multiparous women. Cystocele is a hernia of the bladder
wall into the vagina, causing a soft anterior fullness. Cystocele may
be accompanied by urethrocele, which is not a hernia but a sagging
of the urethra following its detachment from the pubic symphysis
during childbirth. Rectocele is a herniation of the terminal rectum
into the posterior vagina, causing a collapsible pouch-like fullness.
Enterocele is a vaginal vault hernia containing small intestine, usually
in the posterior vagina and resulting from a deepening of the pouch
of Douglas. Two or all three types of hernia may occur in
combination. Risk factors may include vaginal birth, genetic
predisposition, advancing age, prior pelvic surgery, connective
tissue disorders, and increased intra-abdominal pressure associated
with obesity or straining associated with chronic constipation.
 Classification
A simple classification system, the Baden-Walker System,
standardizes the degree of descent of the anterior vaginal wall,
cervix or vaginal apex, and the posterior vaginal wall. The degree of
prolapse can be evaluated by having the woman perform the
Valsalva maneuver while in the lithotomy position. In stage I
prolapse, the presenting anatomy descends halfway to the hymen; in
stage II prolapse, to the hymen; in stage III prolapse, halfway past
the hymen; and in stage IV prolapse, there is the maximum possible
descent. Evaluation of the ability to empty the bladder should be
evaluated by measuring postvoid residual. If stress incontinence is
not present on Valsalva, the prolapse should be reduced to evaluate
the possibility of potential post-repair incontinence.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms of pelvic organ prolapse may include sensation of a
bulge or protrusion in the vagina, urinary or fecal incontinence, a
sense of incomplete bladder emptying, and dyspareunia. The cause
of pelvic organ prolapse, including prolapse of the uterus, vaginal
apex, and anterior or posterior vaginal walls, is likely multifactorial.
 Treatment
The type of therapy depends on the extent of prolapse and the
patient's age and her desire for menstruation, pregnancy, and coitus.
A. General Measures
Supportive measures include a high-fiber diet and laxatives to
improve constipation. Weight reduction in obese patients and
limitation of straining and lifting are helpful. Pessaries may reduce
cystocele, rectocele, or enterocele temporarily and are helpful in
women who do not wish to undergo surgery or who are chronically
ill.
B. Surgical Measures
The only cure for symptomatic cystocele, rectocele, enterocele, or
stress urinary incontinence is corrective surgery. The most common
surgical procedure is vaginal or abdominal hysterectomy with
vaginal vault suspension by either uterosacral or sacrospinous
fixation vaginally or abdominal sacral colpopexy. Since stress
incontinence is common after vault suspension procedures, an
antiincontinence procedure should be considered. If the patient
desires pregnancy, a partial resection of the cervix with plication of
the cardinal ligaments can be attempted. For elderly women who do
not desire coitus, colpocleisis, the partial obliteration of the vagina,
is surgically simple and effective. Uterine suspension with
sacrospinous cervicocolpopexy may be an effective approach in
older women who wish to avoid hysterectomy but preserve coital
function.
 When to Refer
 
•    Refer to urogynecologist or gynecologist for stress
urinary incontinence or stage III prolapse.
•    Refer if nonsurgical therapy is ineffective.
ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins–Gynecology. ACOG
Practice Bulletin No. 85: Pelvic organ prolapse. Obstet Gynecol.
2007 Sep;110(3):717–29. [PMID: 17766624]
 
Lapitan MC et al. Open retropubic colposuspension for urinary
incontinence in women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr
15; (2):CD002912. [PMID: 19370577]
 
Schaffer JI (editor). Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive
Surgery. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am [entire issue]. 2009 Sep
1;36(3):401–722. [PMID: 19932406–19932423]
 
PELVIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASE (Salpingitis,
Endometritis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Uterine, adnexal, or cervical motion tenderness.
 Absence of a competing diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) is a polymicrobial infection of
the upper genital tract associated with the sexually transmitted
organisms N gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis as well as
endogenous 
organisms, 
including 
anaerobes, Haemophilus
influenzae, enteric gramnegative rods, and streptococci. It is most
common in young, nulliparous, sexually active women with multiple
partners. Other risk markers include nonwhite race, douching, and
smoking. The use of oral contraceptives or barrier methods of
contraception may provide significant protection.
Tuberculous salpingitis is rare in the United States but more
common in developing countries; it is characterized by pelvic pain
and irregular pelvic masses not responsive to antibiotic therapy. It is
not sexually transmitted.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with PID may have lower abdominal pain, chills and fever,
menstrual disturbances, purulent cervical discharge, and cervical
and adnexal tenderness. Right upper quadrant pain (Fitz-Hugh and
Curtis syndrome) may indicate an associated perihepatitis.
However, diagnosis of PID is complicated by the fact that many
women may have subtle or mild symptoms that are not readily
recognized as PID, such as postcoital bleeding, urinary frequency,
or low back pain.
B. Minimum Diagnostic Criteria
Women with uterine, adnexal, or cervical motion tenderness should
be considered to have PID and be treated with antibiotics unless
there is a competing diagnosis such as ectopic pregnancy or
appendicitis.
C. Additional Criteria
The following criteria may be used to enhance the specificity of the
diagnosis: (1) oral temperature > 38.3 °C, (2) abnormal cervical or
vaginal discharge with white cells on saline microscopy (>1
leukocyte per epithelial cell), (3) elevated erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, (4) elevated C-reactive protein, and (5) laboratory
documentation of cervical infection with N gonorrhoeae or C
trachomatis. Endocervical culture should be performed routinely,
but treatment should not be delayed while awaiting results.
D. Definitive Criteria
In selected cases where the diagnosis based on clinical or
laboratory evidence is uncertain, the following criteria may be used:
(1) histopathologic evidence of endometritis on endometrial biopsy,
(2) transvaginal sonography or MRI showing thickened fluid-filled
tubes with or without free pelvic fluid or tubo-ovarian complex, and
(3) laparoscopic abnormalities consistent with PID.
 Differential Diagnosis
Appendicitis, ectopic pregnancy, septic abortion, hemorrhagic or
ruptured ovarian cysts or tumors, twisted ovarian cyst, degeneration
of a myoma, and acute enteritis must be considered. PID is more
likely to occur when there is a history of PID, recent sexual contact,
recent onset of menses, or an IUD in place or if the partner has a
sexually transmitted disease. Acute PID is highly unlikely when
recent intercourse has not taken place or an IUD is not being used.
A sensitive serum pregnancy test should be obtained to rule out
ectopic pregnancy. Culdocentesis will differentiate hemoperitoneum
(ruptured ectopic pregnancy or hemorrhagic cyst) from pelvic
sepsis (salpingitis, ruptured pelvic abscess, or ruptured appendix).
Pelvic and vaginal ultrasonography is helpful in the differential
diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy of over 6 weeks. Laparoscopy is
often used to diagnose PID, and it is imperative if the diagnosis is
not certain or if the patient has not responded to antibiotic therapy
after 48 hours. The appendix should be visualized at laparoscopy to
rule out appendicitis. Cultures obtained at the time of laparoscopy
are often specific and helpful.
 Treatment
A. Antibiotics
Early treatment with appropriate antibiotics effective against N
gonorrhoeae, C trachomatis, and the endogenous organisms
listed above is essential to prevent long-term sequelae. The sexual
partner should be examined and treated appropriately. Most
women with mild to moderate disease can be treated successfully as
an outpatient. The recommended outpatient regimen is a single dose
of cefoxitin, 2 g intramuscularly, with probenecid, 1 g orally, or
ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly plus doxycycline, 100 mg orally
twice daily, for 14 days, with or without metronidazole 500 mg
orally twice daily for 14 days. Adding metronidazole will treat
bacterial vaginosis that is frequently associated with PID. For
patients with severe disease or those who meet the other criteria for
hospitalization, there are two recommended regimens. One regimen
includes cefotetan, 2 g intravenously every 12 hours, or cefoxitin, 2
g intravenously every 6 hours, plus doxycycline 100 mg orally or
intravenously every 12 hours. The other recommended regimen is
clindamycin, 900 mg intravenously every 8 hours, plus gentamicin, a
loading dose of 2 mg/kg intravenously or intramuscularly followed
by a maintenance dose of 1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours (or as a single
daily dose, 3–5 mg/kg). These regimens should be continued for a
minimum of 24 hours after the patient shows significant clinical
improvement. Then, an oral regimen should be continued for 14
days. Tetracycline, 100 mg orally twice daily, is recommended if no
tuboovarian abscess is present. If a tubo-ovarian abscess is present,
clindamycin, 450 mg orally four times a day, should be given for 14
days.
B. Surgical Measures
Tubo-ovarian abscesses may require surgical excision or
transcutaneous or transvaginal aspiration. Unless rupture is
suspected, institute high-dose antibiotic therapy in the hospital, and
monitor therapy with ultrasound. In 70% of cases, antibiotics are
effective; in 30%, there is inadequate response in 48–72 hours, and
surgical intervention is required. Unilateral adnexectomy is
acceptable for unilateral abscess. Hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy may be necessary for overwhelming
infection or in cases of chronic disease with intractable pelvic pain.
 Prognosis
In spite of treatment, long-term sequelae, including repeated
episodes of infection, chronic pelvic pain, dyspareunia, ectopic
pregnancy, or infertility, develop in onefourth of women with acute
disease. The risk of infertility increases with repeated episodes of
salpingitis: it is estimated at 10% after the first episode, 25% after a
second episode, and 50% after a third episode.
 When to Admit
The following patients with acute PID should be admitted for
intravenous antibiotic therapy:
 
•    The patient has a tubo-ovarian abscess.
•    The patient is pregnant.
•    The patient is unable to follow or tolerate an outpatient
regimen.
•    The patient has not responded clinically to outpatient
therapy.
•    The patient has severe illness, nausea and vomiting, or
high fever.
•    Another surgical emergency such as appendicitis
cannot be ruled out.
Soper DE. Pelvic inflammatory disease. Obstet Gynecol. 2010
Aug;116(2 Pt 1):419–28. [PMID: 20664404]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. [PMID:
21160459]
 
OVARIAN CANCER & OVARIAN TUMORS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Vague gastrointestinal discomfort.
 Pelvic pressure and pain.
 Many cases of early-stage cancer are asymptomatic.
 Pelvic examination, serum Ca 125, and ultrasound are mainstays
of diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Ovarian tumors are common. Most are benign, but malignant
ovarian tumors are the leading cause of death from reproductive
tract cancer. The wide range of types and patterns of ovarian
tumors is due to the complexity of ovarian embryology and
differences in tissues of origin.
In women with no family history of ovarian cancer, the lifetime
risk is 1.6%, whereas a woman with one affected first-degree
relative has a 5% lifetime risk. With two or more affected first-
degree relatives, the risk is 7%. Approximately 3% of women with
two or more affected first-degree relatives will have a hereditary
ovarian cancer syndrome with a lifetime risk of 40%. Women with a
BRCA1 gene mutation have a 45% lifetime risk of ovarian cancer
and those with a BRCA2 mutation a 25% risk. Consideration
should be given to screening these women every 6 months with
transvaginal sonography and serum CA 125 testing, starting at age
35 or 5–10 years earlier than the earliest age that ovarian cancer
was first diagnosed in a family member. Because this screening
regimen has not been shown to reduce mortality, oophorectomy is
recommended by age 35 or whenever childbearing is completed
because of the high risk of disease. The benefits of such screening
for women with one or no affected first-degree relatives are
unproved, and the risks associated with unnecessary surgical
procedures outweigh the benefits in low-risk women.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Unfortunately, most women with both benign and malignant ovarian
neoplasms are either asymptomatic or experience only mild
nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms or pelvic pressure. Women
with early disease are typically detected on routine pelvic
examination. Women with advanced malignant disease may
experience abdominal pain and bloating, and a palpable abdominal
mass with ascites is often present.
B. Laboratory Findings
An elevated serum CA 125 (>35 units) indicates a greater
likelihood that an ovarian tumor is malignant. CA 125 is elevated in
80% of women with epithelial ovarian cancer overall but in only
50% of women with early disease. Furthermore, serum CA 125
may be elevated in premenopausal women with benign disease such
as endometriosis.
C. Imaging Studies
Transvaginal sonography is useful for screening high-risk women but
has inadequate sensitivity for screening lowrisk women. Ultrasound
is helpful in differentiating ovarian masses that are benign and likely
to resolve spontaneously from those with malignant potential. Color
Doppler imaging may further enhance the specificity of ultrasound
diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Once an ovarian mass has been detected, it must be categorized as
functional, benign neoplastic, or potentially malignant. Predictive
factors include age, size of the mass, ultrasound configuration, CA
125 levels, the presence of symptoms, and whether the mass is
unilateral or bilateral. In a premenopausal woman, an asymptomatic,
mobile, unilateral, simple cystic mass < 7.5 cm may be observed for
4–6 weeks. Most will resolve spontaneously. If the mass is larger or
unchanged on repeat pelvic examination and transvaginal
sonography, surgical evaluation is required.
Most ovarian masses in postmenopausal women require surgical
evaluation. However, a postmenopausal woman with an
asymptomatic unilateral simple cyst < 5 cm in diameter and a
normal CA 125 level may be followed closely with transvaginal
sonography. All others require surgical evaluation.
Laparoscopy may be used when an ovarian mass is small enough
to be removed with a laparoscopic approach. If malignancy is
suspected, because of findings on transvaginal ultrasound with
morphologic scoring, color Doppler assessment of vascular quality,
and serum CA 125 level, then laparotomy is preferable.
 Treatment
If a malignant ovarian mass is suspected, surgical evaluation should
be performed by a gynecologic oncologist. For benign neoplasms,
tumor removal or unilateral oophorectomy is usually performed. For
ovarian cancer in an early stage, the standard therapy is complete
surgical staging followed by abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingooophorectomy 
with 
omentectomy 
and 
selective
lymphadenectomy. With more advanced disease, aggressive
removal of all visible tumor improves survival. Except for women
with low-grade ovarian cancer in an early stage, postoperative
chemotherapy 
is 
indicated 
(see Table 39–10). Several
chemotherapy regimens are effective, such as the combination of
cisplatin or carboplatin with paclitaxel, with clinical response rates
of up to 60–70% (see Table 39–11).
 Prognosis
Unfortunately, approximately 75% of women with ovarian cancer
are diagnosed with advanced disease after regional or distant
metastases have become established. The overall 5-year survival is
approximately 17% with distant metastases, 36% with local spread,
and 89% with early disease.
 When to Refer
If a malignant mass is suspected, surgical evaluation should be
performed by a gynecologic oncologist.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Practice
Bulletin. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 89: Elective and
riskreducing salpingo-oophorectomy. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Jan;
111(1):231–41. [PMID: 18165419]
 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Practice
Bulletin. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 103: Hereditary breast and
ovarian cancer syndrome. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Apr;
113(4):957–66. [PMID: 19305347]
 
Schorge JO et al. SGO White paper on ovarian cancer: etiology,
screening and surveillance. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 Oct; 119(1):7–
17. [PMID: 20692025]
 
Winter-Roach BA et al. Adjuvant (post-surgery) chemotherapy
for early stage epithelial ovarian cancer. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2009 Jul 8; (3):CD004706. [PMID: 19588360]
 
POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Clinical or biochemical evidence of hyperandrogenism.
 Oligoovulation or anovulation.
 Polycystic ovaries on ultrasonography.
 
General Considerations
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine
disorder of unknown etiology affecting 5–10% of women of
reproductive age. It is characterized by chronic anovulation,
polycystic ovaries, and hyperandrogenism. It is associated with
hirsutism, obesity, as well as an increased risk of diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular disease, and metabolic syndrome. Unrecognized or
untreated PCOS is an important risk factor for cardiovascular
disease.
Women with Cushing syndrome, congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
and androgen-secreting adrenal tumors also tend to have high
circulating androgen levels and anovulation with polycystic ovaries;
these disorders must be ruled out in women with presumed PCOS.
 Clinical Findings
PCOS is manifested by hirsutism (50% of cases), obesity (80%),
and virilization (20%). Fifty percent of patients have amenorrhea,
30% have abnormal uterine bleeding, and 20% have normal
menstruation. In addition, they show insulin resistance and
hyperinsulinemia, and these women are at increased risk for early-
onset type 2 diabetes. The patients are generally infertile, although
they may ovulate occasionally. They have an increased long-term
risk of cancer of the endometrium because of unopposed estrogen
secretion.
 Differential Diagnosis
Anovulation in the reproductive years may also be due to: (1)
premature ovarian failure (high FSH and LH levels); (2) rapid
weight loss, extreme physical exertion (normal FSH and LH levels
for age), or obesity; (3) discontinuation of hormonal contraceptives
(anovulation for 6 months or more occasionally occurs); (4)
pituitary adenoma with elevated prolactin (galactorrhea may or may
not be present); and (5) hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism. To rule
out other etiologies in women with suspected PCOS, serum FSH,
LH, prolactin, and TSH should be checked. Women with clinical
evidence of androgen excess should have total testosterone and sex
hormone-binding globulin or free (bioavailable) testosterone, and
17-hydroxyprogesterone measured. Because of the high risk of
insulin resistance and dyslipidemia, all women with PCOS should
have a 2-hour glucose determination after a 75-g glucose load and
a lipid and lipoprotein profile. Women with stigmata of Cushing
syndrome should have a 24-hour urinary free-cortisol or a low-
dose dexamethasone suppression test.
 Treatment
In obese patients with PCOS, weight reduction and exercise are
often effective in reversing the metabolic effects and in inducing
ovulation. For those women who do not respond to weight loss and
exercise, metformin therapy may be helpful. For women who are
seeking pregnancy and remain anovulatory, clomiphene or other
drugs can be used for ovulatory stimulation (see section on Infertility
below). The addition of dexamethasone, 0.5 mg orally at bedtime,
to a clomiphene regimen may increase the likelihood of ovulation by
suppression of ACTH and any circulating adrenal androgens. For
women who are unresponsive to clomiphene, adding the oral
hypoglycemic agent, metformin, 500 mg three times daily, may
enhance the likelihood of ovulation. These agents reduce the
hyperinsulinemia and hyperandrogenemia in PCOS. If induction of
ovulation fails with the above regimens, treatment with low-dose
gonadotropins or laparoscopic “ovarian drilling” may be
considered. Women with PCOS are at greater risk than normal
women for twin gestation with ovulation induction.
If the patient does not desire pregnancy, medroxyprogesterone
acetate, 10 mg/d orally for the first 10 days of each month, should
be given to ensure regular shedding of the endometrium and avoid
hyperplasia. If contraception is desired, a low-dose combination
oral contraceptive can be used; this is also useful in controlling
hirsutism, for which treatment must be continued for 6–12 months
before results are seen.
Dexamethasone, 0.5 mg orally each night, is helpful in women
with excess adrenal androgen secretion. Spironolactone, an
aldosterone antagonist, is also useful for hirsutism in doses of 25 mg
three or four times daily. Flutamide, 125–250 mg orally daily, and
finasteride, 5 mg orally daily, are also effective for treating hirsutism.
Because these three agents are potentially teratogenic, they should
be used only in conjunction with secure contraception. Topical
eflornithine cream applied to affected facial areas twice daily for 6
months may be helpful in the majority of women. Hirsutism may also
be managed with depilatory creams, electrolysis, and laser therapy.
The combination of laser therapy and topical eflornithine may be
particularly effective.
Weight loss, exercise, and treatment of unresolved metabolic
derangements are important in preventing cardiovascular disease.
Women with PCOS should be managed aggressively and should
have regular monitoring of lipid profiles and glucose as well as
consideration of regular measurement of carotid intimal medial
thickness, starting at age 30, and coronary calcium screening,
starting at age 45.
 When to Refer
 
•    If expertise in diagnosis is needed.
•    If patient is infertile.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG
Practice Bulletin No. 108: Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome. Obstet
Gynecol. 2009 Oct;114(4):936–49. [PMID: 19888063]
 
Nestler JE. Metformin for the treatment of the polycystic ovarian
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 3;358(1):47–54. [PMID:
18172174]
 
Wild RA et al. Assessment of cardiovascular risk in women with
the polycystic ovary syndrome: a consensus statement by the
Androgen Excess and Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (AE-PCOS)
Society. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;95(5):2038–49.
[PMID: 20375205]
 
FEMALE SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
 General Considerations
Female sexual dysfunction is a common problem. Depending on the
questions asked, surveys have shown that from 35% to 98% of
women report sexual concerns. Questions related to sexual
functioning should be asked as part of the routine medical history.
Three helpful questions are: “Are you currently involved in a sexual
relationship?”, “With men, women, or both?”, and “Are there any
sexual concerns or pain with sex?”. If the woman is not involved in
a sexual relationship, she should be asked about any concerns that
are contributing to a lack of sexual behavior. If a history of sexual
dysfunction is elicited, a complete history of factors that may affect
sexual function should be taken. These factors include her
reproductive history (including pregnancies and mode of delivery)
as well as history of infertility, sexually transmitted diseases, rape or
sexual abuse, gynecologic or urologic disorders, endocrine
abnormalities (such as diabetes mellitus or thyroid disease),
neurologic problems, cardiovascular disease, psychiatric disease,
and current prescription and over-the-counter medication use. A
detailed history of the specific sexual dysfunction should be elicited,
and a gynecologic examination should focus on findings that may
contribute to her sexual complaints.
 Etiology
A. Disorders of Sexual Desire
Sexual desire in women is a complex and poorly understood
phenomenon. Emotion is a key factor in sexual desire. Anger
toward a partner, fear or anxiety related to previous sexual
encounters, or history of sexual abuse may contribute. Physical
factors, such as chronic illness, fatigue, depression, and specific
medical disorders (such as diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, or
adrenal insufficiency) may contribute to a lack of desire. Attitudes
toward aging and menopause may play a role. In addition, sexual
desire may be influenced by other sexual dysfunctions, such as
arousal disorders, dyspareunia, or anorgasmia.
B. Sexual Arousal Disorders
Sexual arousal disorders may be both subjective and objective.
Sexual stimulation normally leads to genital vasocongestion and
lubrication. Some women may have a physiologic response to
sexual stimuli but may not subjectively feel aroused because of
factors such as distractions; negative expectations; anxiety; fatigue;
depression; or medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) or oral contraceptives. Other women may lack
both a subjective and physiologic response to sexual stimuli related
to vaginal atrophy.
C. Orgasmic Disorders
In spite of subjective and physiologic arousal, women may
experience a marked delay in orgasm, diminished sensation of an
orgasm, or anorgasmia. The etiology is complex and typically
multifactorial, but the disorder is usually amenable to treatment.
D. Dyspareunia
Dyspareunia may be caused by vulvovaginitis; vulvar disease,
including lichen planus, lichen sclerosus, and lichen simplex
chronicus; pelvic disease, such as endometriosis or chronic PID;
vulvodynia; vaginal atrophy; or vaginismus. Vulvodynia is the most
frequent cause of dyspareunia in premenopausal women. It is
characterized by a sensation of burning along with other symptoms,
including pain, itching, stinging, irritation, and rawness. The
discomfort may be constant or intermittent, focal or diffuse, and
experienced as either deep or superficial. There are generally no
physical findings except minimal erythema that may be associated in
a subset of patients with vulvodynia, those with vulvar vestibulitis.
Vulvar vestibulitis is normally asymptomatic, but pain is associated
with touching or pressure on the vestibule, such as with vaginal entry
or insertion of a tampon. Pain occurring with deep thrusting during
coitus is usually due to acute or chronic infection of the cervix,
uterus, or adnexa; endometriosis; adnexal tumors; or adhesions
resulting from prior pelvic disease or operation. Vaginismus is
voluntary or involuntary contraction of the muscles around the
introitus. It results from fear, pain, sexualal trauma, or a negative
attitude toward sex, often learned in childhood.
 Treatment
A. Disorders of Sexual Desire
In the absence of specific medical disorders, arousal or orgasmic
disorders or dyspareunia, the focus of therapy is psychological.
Cognitive behavioral therapy, sexual therapy, and marital therapy
may all play a role. Success with pharmacologic therapy,
particularly the use of dopamine agonists or testosterone with
estrogen has been reported, but data from large long-term clinical
trials are lacking.
B. Sexual Arousal Disorders
As with disorders of sexual desire, arousal disorders may respond
to psychological therapy. Specific pharmacologic therapy is lacking.
The use of the phosphodiesterase inhibitors used in men does not
appear to benefit the majority of women with sexual arousal
disorders. However, there is some evidence to suggest a role for
sildenafil in women with sexual dysfunction due to multiple sclerosis,
type 1 diabetes mellitus, spinal cord injury, and antidepressant
medications, if other, better established, approaches fail.
C. Orgasmic Disorders
For many women, brief sexual counseling along with the use of
educational books (such as For Yourself, by Lonnie Barbach) may
be adequate therapy. Also, the FDA has approved a vacuum
device, the EROS-CTD, that increases clitoral enlargement and
improves the likelihood of orgasm.
D. Dyspareunia
Specific medical disorders, such as endometriosis, vulvovaginitis, or
vaginal atrophy, should be treated as outlined in other sections of
this chapter. Lichen planus and lichen simplex chronicus are
addressed in chapter 6. Lichen sclerosus, a thinning and whitening
of the vulvar epithelium is treated with clobetasol propionate 0.05%
ointment, applied twice daily for 2-3 months.
Vaginismus may be treated initially with sexual counseling and
education on anatomy and sexual functioning. The patient can be
instructed in self-dilation, using a lubricated finger or test tubes of
graduated sizes. Before coitus (with adequate lubrication) is
attempted, the patient—and then her partner—should be able to
easily and painlessly introduce two fingers into the vagina.
Penetration should never be forced, and the woman should always
be the one to control the depth of insertion during dilation or
intercourse. Injection of botulinum toxin has been used successfully
in refractory cases.
Since the cause of vulvodynia is unknown, management is
difficult. Few treatment approaches have been subjected to
methodologically rigorous trials. A variety of topical agents have
been tried, although only topical anesthetics (eg, estrogen cream
and a compounded mixture of topical amitriptyline 2% and baclofen
2% in a water washable base) have been useful in relieving
vulvodynia. Useful oral medications include tricyclic antidepressants,
such as amitriptyline in gradually increasing doses from 10 mg/d to
75–100 mg/d; various SSRIs; and anticonvulsants, such as
gabapentin, starting at 300 mg three times daily and increasing to
1200 mg three times daily. Biofeedback and physical therapy, with
a physical therapist experienced with the treatment of vulvar pain,
have been shown to be helpful. Surgery—usually consisting of
vestibulectomy—has been useful for women with introital
dyspareunia.
 When to Refer
 
•    When symptoms or concerns persist despite first-line
therapy.
•    For expertise in surgical procedures.
Brown DA et al. Assessing the clinical efficacy of sildenafil for the
treatment of female sexual dysfunction. Ann Pharmacother. 2009
Jul;43(7):1275–85. [PMID: 19509350]
 
Frank JE et al. Diagnosis and treatment of female sexual
dysfunction. Am Fam Physician. 2008 Mar 1;77(5):635–42.
[PMID: 18350761]
 
Kammerer-Doak D et al. Female sexual function and dysfunction.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2008 Jun;35(2):169–83. [PMID:
18486835]
 
Steege JF et al. Evaluation and treatment of dyspareunia. Obstet
Gynecol. 2009 May;113(5):1124–36. [PMID: 19384129]
 
INFERTILITY
A couple is said to be infertile if pregnancy does not result after 1
year of normal sexual activity without contraceptives. About 25% of
couples experience infertility at some point in their reproductive
lives; the incidence of infertility increases with age, with a decline in
fertility beginning in the early 30s and accelerating in the late 30s.
The male partner contributes to about 40% of cases of infertility,
and a combination of factors is common.
A. Initial Testing
During the initial interview, the clinician can present an overview of
infertility and discuss a plan of study. Separate private consultations
are then conducted, allowing appraisal of psychosexual adjustment
without embarrassment or criticism. Pertinent details (eg, sexually
transmitted disease or prior pregnancies) must be obtained. The ill
effects of cigarettes, alcohol, and other recreational drugs on male
fertility should be discussed. Prescription medications that impair
male potency and factors that may lead to scrotal hyperthermia,
such as tight underwear or frequent use of saunas or hot tubs,
should be discussed. The gynecologic history should include the
menstrual pattern, the use and types of contraceptives, douching,
libido, sex techniques, frequency and success of coitus, and
correlation of intercourse with time of ovulation. Family history
includes repeated spontaneous abortions and maternal DES use.
General physical and genital examinations are performed on the
female partner, including screening pelvic ultrasound and
hysterosalpingography if there is a history suggestive of pelvic
disease. Basic laboratory studies include complete blood count,
urinalysis, cervical culture for Chlamydia, rubella antibody
determination, and thyroid function tests. Tay-Sachs screening
should be offered if both parents are Ashkenazi Jews as well as
couples of French-Canadian or Cajun ancestry; sickle cell screening
should be offered if both parents are black.
If the woman has regular menses, the likelihood of ovulatory
cycles is very high. A luteal phase serum progesterone above 3
ng/mL establishes ovulation. Couples should be advised that coitus
resulting in conception occurs during the 6-day period ending with
the day of ovulation. Self-performed urine tests for the midcycle LH
surge at ovulation can enhance basal temperature charting. Semen
analysis is recommended; the male partner is instructed to bring a
complete ejaculate for analysis. Men must abstain from sexual
activity for at least 3 days before the semen is obtained. A clean,
dry, wide-mouthed bottle for collection is preferred. Semen should
be examined within 1–2 hours after collection. Semen is considered
normal with the following minimum values: volume, 2.0 mL;
concentration, 20 million sperm per milliliter; motility, ≥ 50%
forward progression, ≥ 25% rapid progression; and normal forms,
30%. If the sperm count is abnormal, further evaluation includes
physical examination of the male partner and a search for exposure
to environmental and workplace toxins, alcohol or drug abuse.
B. Further Testing
1. Gross deficiencies of sperm (number, motility, or
appearance) require repeat analysis. Zona-free hamster
egg penetration tests are available to evaluate the ability of
human sperm to fertilize an egg.
2. Obvious obstruction of the uterine tubes requires
assessment for microsurgery or in vitro fertilization.
3. Absent or infrequent ovulation requires additional
laboratory evaluation. Elevated FSH and LH levels indicate
ovarian failure causing premature menopause. Elevated
LH levels in the presence of normal FSH levels confirm the
presence of polycystic ovaries. Elevation of blood prolactin
(PRL) levels suggests pituitary microadenoma. In women
over age 35, evaluation of ovarian reserve should be
assessed. A markedly elevated FSH (>15–20 international
units/L) on day 3 of the menstrual cycle suggests
inadequate ovarian reserve. Other evaluations such as the
Clomiphene Citrate Challenge Test, with measurement of
FSH on day 10 after administration of clomiphene from day
5–9, and detection of low (<0.15 ng/mL) anti-mullerian
hormone may provide additional evidence of diminished
ovarian reserve and the need for donor eggs.
4. Ultrasound monitoring of folliculogenesis may reveal the
occurrence of unruptured luteinized follicles.
5. Hysterosalpingography using an oil dye is performed
within 3 days following the menstrual period if structural
abnormalities are suspected. This radiographic study will
demonstrate 
uterine 
abnormalities 
(septa, 
polyps,
submucous myomas) and tubal obstruction. A repeat
radiograph 24 hours later will confirm tubal patency if there
is wide pelvic dispersion of the dye. This test has been
associated with an increased pregnancy rate if an oil-
based rather than water-soluble contrast medium is used. If
the woman has had prior pelvic inflammation, one should
give doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily, beginning
immediately before and for 7 days after the radiographic
study.
6. If hysterosalpingography or history suggests tubal
disease, and in vitro fertilization (IVF) is recommended as
the primary treatment option, laparoscopy is indicated. In
unexplained infertility, approximately 25% of women whose
basic evaluation is normal will have abnormal findings on
laparoscopy that explain their infertility (eg, peritubal
adhesions, endometriotic implants).
 Treatment
A. Medical Measures
Fertility may be restored by treatment of endocrine abnormalities,
particularly hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Antibiotic treatment
of cervicitis is of value. Women who engage in vigorous athletic
training often have low sex hormone levels; fertility improves with
reduced exercise and some weight gain.
B. Surgical Measures
Excision of ovarian tumors or ovarian foci of endometriosis can
improve fertility. Microsurgical relief of tubal obstruction due to
salpingitis or tubal ligation will reestablish fertility in a significant
number of cases, although with severe disease or proximal
obstruction, IVF is preferable. Peritubal adhesions or endometriotic
implants often can be treated via laparoscopy.
In a male with a varicocele, sperm characteristics are often
improved following surgical treatment.
C. Induction of Ovulation
1. 
Clomiphene 
citrate—Clomiphene 
citrate 
stimulates
gonadotropin release, especially LH. Consequently, plasma estrone
(E1) and estradiol (E2) also rise, reflecting ovarian follicle
maturation. If E2 rises sufficiently, an LH surge occurs to trigger
ovulation.
After a normal menstrual period or induction of withdrawal
bleeding with progestin, one should give 50 mg of clomiphene orally
daily for 5 days. If ovulation does not occur, the dosage is
increased to 100 mg daily for 5 days. If ovulation still does not
occur, the course is repeated with 150 mg daily and then 200 mg
daily for 5 days, with the addition of chorionic gonadotropin,
10,000 units intramuscularly, 7 days after clomiphene.
The rate of ovulation following this treatment is 90% in the
absence of other infertility factors. The pregnancy rate is high.
Twinning occurs in 5% of these patients, and three or more fetuses
are found in rare instances (<0.5% of cases).
In the presence of increased androgen production (DHEA-S >
200 mcg/dL), the addition of dexamethasone, 0.5 mg orally, or
prednisone, 5 mg orally, at bedtime, improves the response to
clomiphene. Dexamethasone should be discontinued after
pregnancy is confirmed.
2. Letrozole—The aromatase inhibitor, letrozole, appears to be at
least as effective as clomiphene for ovulation induction in women
with PCOS. There is a reduced risk of multiple pregnancy, a lack of
antiestrogenic effects, and a reduced need for ultrasound
monitoring. The dose is 5–7.5 mg daily, starting on day 3 of the
menstrual cycle.
3. Bromocriptine—Bromocriptine is used only if PRL levels are
elevated and there is no withdrawal bleeding following progesterone
administration (otherwise, clomiphene is used). The initial dosage is
2.5 mg orally once daily, increased to two or three times daily in
increments of 1.25 mg. The drug is discontinued once pregnancy
has occurred.
4. Human menopausal gonadotropins (hMG) or recombinant
FSH—hMG or recombinant FSH is indicated in cases of
hypogonadotropism and most other types of anovulation resistant to
clomiphene treatment. Because of the complexities, laboratory tests,
and expense associated with this treatment, these patients should be
referred to an infertility specialist.
D. Treatment of Endometriosis
See above.
E. Artificial Insemination in Azoospermia
If azoospermia is present, artificial insemination by a donor usually
results in pregnancy, assuming female function is normal. The use of
frozen sperm is currently preferable to fresh sperm because the
frozen specimen can be held pending cultures and blood test results
for sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV infection.
F. Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART)
Couples who have not responded to traditional infertility treatments,
including those with tubal disease, severe endometriosis,
oligospermia, and immunologic or unexplained infertility, may benefit
from IVF, gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), and zygote
intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT). These techniques are complex and
require a highly organized team of specialists. All of the procedures
involve ovarian stimulation to produce multiple oocytes, oocyte
retrieval by transvaginal sonography–guided needle aspiration, and
handling of the oocytes outside the body. With IVF, the eggs are
fertilized in vitro and the embryos transferred to the uterine fundus.
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) allows fertilization with a
single sperm. It was originally intended for couples with male factor
infertility, but it is now used in more than half of all IVF procedures
in the United States.
GIFT involves the placement of sperm and eggs in the uterine
tube by laparoscopy or minilaparotomy. With ZIFT, fertilization
occurs in vitro, and the early development of the embryo occurs in
the uterine tube after transfer by laparoscopy or minilaparotomy.
The latter two procedures are used infrequently.
 Prognosis
The prognosis for conception and normal pregnancy is good if
minor (even multiple) disorders can be identified and treated; it is
poor if the causes of infertility are severe, untreatable, or of
prolonged duration (over 3 years).
It is important to remember that in the absence of identifiable
causes of infertility, 60% of couples will achieve a pregnancy within
3 years. Couples with unexplained infertility who do not achieve
pregnancy within 3 years may be offered ovulation induction or
assisted reproductive technology. Women over the age of 35
should be offered a more aggressive approach, with consideration
of ART within 3–6 months of not achieving pregnancy with more
conservative approaches. Also, offering appropriately timed
information about adoption is considered part of a complete
infertility regimen.
 When to Refer
Refer to reproductive endocrinologist if ART are indicated.
Casper RF. Letrozole versus clomiphene citrate: which is better for
ovulation induction? Fertil Steril. 2009 Sep;92(3):858–9. [PMID:
17588568]
 
Devroey P et al; Evian Annual Reproduction (EVAR) Workshop
Group 2008. Approaches to improve the diagnosis and
management of infertility. Hum Reprod Update. 2009 Jul–Aug;
15(4):391–408. [PMID: 19380415]
 
Pauli SA et al. Current status of the approach to assisted
reproduction. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2009 Jun;56(3):467–88.
[PMID: 19501687]
 
Sunderam S et al. Assisted reproductive technology surveillance–
United States, 2006. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). MMWR Surveill Summ. 2009 Jun 12; 58(5):1–25.
[PMID: 19521336]
 
CONTRACEPTION
Voluntary control of childbearing benefits women, men, and their
children. Contraception should be available to all women and men
of reproductive age. Education about and access to contraception
are especially important for sexually active teenagers and for
women following childbirth or abortion.
1. Oral Contraceptives
A. Combined Oral Contraceptives
1. Efficacy and methods of use—Combined oral contraceptives
have a perfect use failure rate of 0.3% and a typical use failure rate
of 8%. Their primary mode of action is suppression of ovulation.
The pills can be initially started on the first day of the menstrual
cycle, the first Sunday after the onset of the cycle or on any day of
the cycle. If started on any day other than the first day of the cycle,
a backup method should be used. There are also pills packaged to
be taken continuously for 84 days, followed by 7 days of placebos
as well as a pill packaged for 365 days, to be taken continuously
without a break. If an active pill is missed at any time, and no
intercourse occurred in the past 5 days, two pills should be taken
immediately and a backup method should be used for 7 days. If
intercourse occurred in the previous 5 days, emergency
contraception should be used immediately, and the pills restarted
the following day. A backup method should be used for 5 days.
2. Benefits of oral contraceptives—Noncontraceptive benefits
of oral contraceptives include lighter menses, reducing the likelihood
of anemia. Dysmenorrhea is relieved for most women. Functional
ovarian cysts are less likely with oral contraceptive use. The risk of
ovarian and endometrial cancer is decreased. The risks of salpingitis
and ectopic pregnancy may be diminished. Acne is usually
improved. The frequency of developing myomas is lower in long-
term users (>4 years). There is a beneficial effect on bone mass.
3. Selection of an oral contraceptive—Any of the combination
oral contraceptives containing 35 mcg or less of ethinyl estradiol or
3 mg of estradiol valerate are suitable for most women. There is
some variation in potency of the various progestins in the pills, but
there are essentially no clinically significant differences for most
women among the progestins in the low-dose pills. Women who
have acne or hirsutism may benefit from use of one of the pills
containing 
the 
third-generation 
progestins, 
desogestrel,
drospirenone, or norgestimate, as they are the least androgenic. A
combination regimen with 84 active and 7 inert pills that results in
only four menses per year is available. There is also a combination
regimen that is taken continuously with no regular menses. At the
end of one years' use, 58% of the women had amenorrhea, and
nearly 80% reported no bleeding requiring sanitary protection. The
low-dose oral contraceptives commonly used in the United States
are listed in Table 18–3.
4. Drug interactions—Several drugs interact with oral
contraceptives to decrease their efficacy by causing induction of
microsomal enzymes in the liver, or by other mechanisms. Some
commonly prescribed drugs in this category are phenytoin,
phenobarbital (and other barbiturates), primidone, topiramate,
carbamazepine, and rifampin and St. John's Wort. Women taking
these drugs should use another means of contraception for
maximum safety.
 
Table 18–3. Commonly used low-dose ora
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare),
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
2Generic equivalent available.
3Multiple other brands available.
 
Antiretroviral medications, specifically ritonavirboosted protease
inhibitors, may significantly decrease the efficacy of combined oral
contraceptives, and the concomitant use of oral contraceptives may
increase the toxicity of these antiretroviral agents. Non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors have smaller effects on oral
contraceptive efficacy, while nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors appear to have no effect.
5. Contraindications and adverse effects—Oral contraceptives
have been associated with many adverse effects; they are
contraindicated in some situations and should be used with caution
in others (Table 18–4).
A. MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION—The risk of heart attack is higher
with use of oral contraceptives, particularly with pills containing 50
mcg of estrogen or more. Cigarette smoking, obesity, hypertension,
diabetes, or hypercholesterolemia increases the risk. Young
nonsmoking women have minimal increased risk. Smokers over age
35 and women with other cardiovascular risk factors should use
other methods of birth control.
 
Table 18–4. Contraindications to use of ora
 
Absolute contraindications
     Pregnancy
     Thrombophlebitis or thromboembolic disorders (past or
present)
     Stroke or coronary artery disease (past or present)
     Cancer of the breast (known or suspected)
     Undiagnosed abnormal vaginal bleeding
     Estrogen-dependent cancer (known or suspected)
g
p
(
p
)
     Benign or malignant tumor of the liver (past or present)
     Uncontrolled hypertension
     Diabetes mellitus with vascular disease
     Age over 35 and smoking > 15 cigarettes daily
     Known thrombophilia
     Migraine with aura
     Active hepatitis
     Surgery or orthopedic injury requiring prolonged
immobilization
Relative contraindications
     Migraine without aura
     Hypertension
     Heart or kidney disease
     Diabetes mellitus
     Gallbladder disease
     Cholestasis during pregnancy
     Sickle cell disease (S/S or S/C type)
     Lactation
B. THROMBOEMBOLIC DISEASE—An increased rate of venous
thromboembolism is found in oral contraceptive users, especially if
the dose of estrogen is 50 mcg or more. While the overall risk is
very low (15 per 100,000 womanyears), several studies have
reported a twofold increased risk in women using oral
contraceptives containing the progestins gestodene (not available in
the United States) or desogestrel compared with women using oral
contraceptives with levonorgestrel and norethindrone. Women in
whom thrombophlebitis develops should stop using this method, as
should those at risk for thrombophlebitis because of surgery,
fracture, serious injury, or immobilization. Women with a known
thrombophilia should not use oral contraceptives.
C. CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE—Overall, a small increased risk of
hemorrhagic stroke and subarachnoid hemorrhage and a somewhat
greater increased risk of thrombotic stroke have been found;
smoking, hypertension, and age over 35 years are associated with
increased risk. Women should stop using contraceptives if such
warning symptoms as severe headache, blurred or lost vision, or
other transient neurologic disorders develop.
D. CARCINOMA—A relationship between long-term (3–4 years)
oral contraceptive use and occurrence of cervical dysplasia and
cancer has been found in various studies. A 2002 study showed
that there is no increased risk of breast cancer in women aged 35–
64 who are current or former users of oral contraceptives. Women
with a family history of breast cancer or women who started oral
contraceptive use at a young age are not at increased risk.
Combination oral contraceptives reduce the risk of endometrial
carcinoma by 40% after 2 years of use and 60% after 4 or more
years of use. The risk of ovarian cancer is reduced by 30% with pill
use for < 4 years, by 60% with use for 5–11 years, and by 80%
after 12 or more years. Rarely, oral contraceptives have been
associated with the development of benign or malignant hepatic
tumors; this may lead to rupture of the liver, hemorrhage, and death.
The risk increases with higher dosage, longer duration of use, and
older age.
E. HYPERTENSION—Oral contraceptives may cause hypertension
in some women; the risk is increased with longer duration of use
and older age. Women in whom hypertension develops while using
oral contraceptives should use other contraceptive methods.
However, with regular blood pressure monitoring, nonsmoking
women under the age of 40 with well-controlled mild hypertension
may use oral contraceptives.
F. HEADACHE—Migraine or other vascular headaches may occur
or worsen with pill use. If severe or frequent headaches develop
while using this method, it should be discontinued. Women with
migraine headaches with an aura should not use oral contraceptives.
G. LACTATION—Combined oral contraceptives can impair the
quantity and quality of breast milk. While it is preferable to avoid
the use of combination oral contraceptives during lactation, the
effects on milk quality are small and are not associated with
developmental abnormalities in infants. Combination oral
contraceptives should be started no earlier than 6 weeks
postpartum to allow for establishment of lactation. Progestin-only
pills, levonorgestrel implants, and depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate are alternatives with no adverse effects on milk quality.
H. OTHER DISORDERS—Depression may occur or be worsened
with oral contraceptive use. Fluid retention may occur. Patients who
had cholestatic jaundice during pregnancy may develop it while
taking birth control pills.
6. Minor side effects—Nausea and dizziness may occur in the
first few months of pill use. A weight gain of 2–5 lb commonly
occurs. Spotting or breakthrough bleeding between menstrual
periods may occur, especially if a pill is skipped or taken late; this
may be helped by switching to a pill of slightly greater potency (see
section 3, above) or by switching to a triphasic regimen. Missed
menstrual periods may occur, especially with low-dose pills. A
pregnancy test should be performed if pills have been skipped or if
two or more menstrual periods are missed. Fatigue and decreased
libido can occur. Chloasma may occur, as in pregnancy, and is
increased by exposure to sunlight.
B. Progestin Minipill
1. Efficacy and methods of use—A formulation containing 0.35
mg of norethindrone is available in the United States. The efficacy is
similar to that of combined oral contraceptives. The minipill is
believed to prevent conception by causing thickening of the cervical
mucus to make it hostile to sperm, alteration of ovum transport
(which may account for the slightly higher rate of ectopic pregnancy
with these pills), and inhibition of implantation. Ovulation is inhibited
inconsistently with this method. The minipill is begun on the first day
of a menstrual cycle and then taken continuously for as long as
contraception is desired.
2. Advantages—The low dose and absence of estrogen make the
minipill safe during lactation; it may increase the flow of milk. It is
often tried by women who want minimal doses of hormones and by
patients who are over age 35. They lack the cardiovascular side
effects of combination pills. The minipill can be safely used by
women with sickle cell disease (S/S or S/C).
3. Complications and contraindications—Minipill users often
have bleeding irregularities (eg, prolonged flow, spotting, or
amenorrhea); such patients may need regular pregnancy tests.
Ectopic pregnancies are more frequent, and complaints of
abdominal pain should be investigated with this in mind. The
absolute contraindications and many of the relative contraindications
listed in Table 18–4 apply to the minipill. Minor side effects of
combination oral contraceptives such as weight gain and mild
headache may also occur with the minipill.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. U.S. medical
eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2010. MMWR Recomm
Rep. 2010 Jun 18:59(No.RR-4):1–85. [PMID: 20559203]
 
Cremer M et al. Recent innovations in oral contraception. Semin
Reprod Med. 2010 Mar;28(2):140–6. [PMID: 20391327]
 
2. Contraceptive Injections & Implants (Long-Acting
Progestins)
The injectable progestin depot medroxyprogesterone acetate
(DMPA) is approved for contraceptive use in the United States.
There is extensive worldwide experience with this method over the
past 3 decades. The medication is given as a deep intramuscular
injection of 150 mg every 3 months and has a contraceptive efficacy
of 99.7%. A subcutaneous preparation, containing 104 mg of
DMPA is available in the United States. Common side effects
include irregular bleeding, amenorrhea, weight gain, and headache.
It is associated with bone mineral loss that is usually reversible after
discontinuation of the method. Users commonly have irregular
bleeding initially and subsequently develop amenorrhea. Ovulation
may be delayed after the last injection. Contraindications are similar
to those for the minipill.
A single-rod, subdermal progestin implant, Implanon, is
approved for use in the United States. Implanon is a 40-mm by 2-
mm rod containing 68 mg of the progestin etonogestrel that is
inserted in the inner aspect of the nondominant arm. Insertion and
removal are much simpler and faster than with Norplant. Hormone
levels drop rapidly after removal, and there is no delay in the return
of fertility. In clinical trials, the pregnancy rate was 0.0% with 3
years of use. The side effect profile is similar to minipills, Depo-
Provera, and Norplant. Irregular bleeding has been the most
common reason for discontinuation.
McDonald-Mosley R et al. Contraceptive implants. Semin Reprod
Med. 2010 Mar;28(2):110–17. [PMID: 20352560]
 
Roy G. Injectable contraception. Semin Reprod Med. 2010 Mar;
28(2):126–32. [PMID: 20352562]
 
3. Other Hormonal Methods
A transdermal contraceptive patch containing 150 mcg
norelgestromin and 20 mcg ethinyl estradiol and measuring 20 cm2
is available. The patch is applied to the lower abdomen, upper
torso, or buttock once a week for 3 consecutive weeks, followed
by 1 week without the patch. It appears that the average steady-
state concentration of ethinyl estradiol with the patch is
approximately 60% higher than with a 35 mcg pill. However, there
is currently no evidence for an increased incidence of estrogen-
related side effects. The mechanism of action, side effects, and
efficacy are similar to those associated with oral contraceptives,
although compliance may be better. However, discontinuation for
side effects is more frequent.
A contraceptive vaginal ring that releases 120 mcg of
etonogestrel and 15 mcg of ethinyl estradiol daily is available. The
ring is soft and flexible and is placed in the upper vagina for 3
weeks, removed, and replaced 1 week later. The efficacy,
mechanism of action, and systemic side effects are similar to those
associated with oral contraceptives. Ring users may experience an
increased incidence of vaginal discharge.
Lopez LM et al. Skin patch and vaginal ring versus combined oral
contraceptives for contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2010 Mar 17; (3):CD003552. [PMID: 20238323]
 
4. Intrauterine Devices
IUDs available in the United States include the Mirena (which
releases levonorgestrel) and the copper-bearing TCu380A. The
mechanism of action of IUDs is thought to involve either spermicidal
or inhibitory effects on sperm capacitation and transport. IUDs are
not abortifacients.
The Mirena is effective for 5 years, and the TCu380A for 10
years. The hormone-containing IUDs have the advantage of
reducing cramping and menstrual flow.
The IUD is an excellent contraceptive method for most women.
The devices are highly effective, with failure rates similar to those
achieved with surgical sterilization. Nulliparity is not a
contraindication to IUD use. Women who are not in mutually
monogamous relationships should use condoms for protection from
sexually transmitted diseases. The Mirena may have a protective
effect against upper tract infection similar to that of the oral
contraceptives.
A. Insertion
Insertion can be performed during or after the menses, at midcycle
to prevent implantation, or later in the cycle if the patient has not
become pregnant. Both types of IUDs may be inserted up to 48
hours after vaginal delivery, or prior to closure of the uterus at the
time of cesarean section. If breastfeeding, insertion of the Mirena
should be delayed until 4 weeks or more postpartum. Insertion
immediately following abortion is acceptable if there is no sepsis and
if follow-up insertion a month later will not be possible; otherwise, it
is wise to wait until 4 weeks postabortion.
B. Contraindications & Complications
Contraindications to use of IUDs are outlined in Table 18–5.
1. Pregnancy—A copper-containing IUD can be inserted within 5
days following a single episode of unprotected mid-cycle coitus as a
postcoital contraceptive. An IUD should not be inserted into a
pregnant uterus. If pregnancy occurs as an IUD failure, there is a
greater chance of spontaneous abortion if the IUD is left in situ
(50%) than if it is removed (25%). Spontaneous abortion with an
IUD in place is associated with a high risk of severe sepsis, and
death can occur rapidly. Women using an IUD who become
pregnant should have the IUD removed if the string is visible. It can
be removed at the time of abortion if this is desired. If the string is
not visible and the patient wants to continue the pregnancy, she
should be informed of the serious risk of sepsis and, occasionally,
death with such pregnancies. She should be informed that any flu-
like symptoms such as fever, myalgia, headache, or nausea warrant
immediate medical attention for possible septic abortion.
 
Table 18–5. Contraindications to IU
 
Absolute contraindications
     Pregnancy
     Acute or subacute pelvic inflammatory disease or
purulent cervicitis
     Significant anatomic abnormality of uterus
     Unexplained uterine bleeding
     Active liver disease (Mirena only)
Relative contraindications
     History of pelvic inflammatory disease since the last
pregnancy
     Lack of available follow-up care
     Menorrhagia or severe dysmenorrhea (copper IUD)
     Cervical or uterine neoplasia
IUD, intrauterine device.
Since the ratio of ectopic to intrauterine pregnancies is increased
among IUD wearers, clinicians should search for adnexal masses in
early pregnancy and should always check the products of
conception for placental tissue following abortion.
2. Pelvic infection—There is an increased risk of pelvic infection
during the first month following insertion. The subsequent risk of
pelvic infection appears to be primarily related to the risk of
acquiring sexually transmitted infections. Infertility rates do not
appear to be increased among women who have previously used
the currently available IUDs. At the time of insertion, women with
an increased risk of sexually transmitted diseases should be
screened for gonorrhea and Chlamydia. Women with a history of
recent or recurrent pelvic infection are not good candidates for IUD
use.
3. Menorrhagia or severe dysmenorrhea—The copper IUD
can cause heavier menstrual periods, bleeding between periods, and
more cramping, so it is generally not suitable for women who
already suffer from these problems. However, hormone-releasing
IUDs can be tried in these cases, as they often cause decreased
bleeding and cramping with menses. NSAIDs are also helpful in
decreasing bleeding and pain in IUD users.
4. Complete or partial expulsion—Spontaneous expulsion of the
IUD occurs in 10–20% of cases during the first year of use. Any
IUD should be removed if the body of the device can be seen or
felt in the cervical os.
5. Missing IUD strings—If the transcervical tail cannot be seen,
this may signify unnoticed expulsion, perforation of the uterus with
abdominal migration of the IUD, or simply retraction of the string
into the cervical canal or uterus owing to movement of the IUD or
uterine growth with pregnancy. Once pregnancy is ruled out, one
should probe for the IUD with a sterile sound or forceps designed
for IUD removal, after administering a paracervical block. If the
IUD cannot be detected, pelvic ultrasound will demonstrate the
IUD if it is in the uterus. Alternatively, obtain anteroposterior and
lateral x-rays of the pelvis with another IUD or a sound in the uterus
as a marker, to confirm an extrauterine IUD. If the IUD is in the
abdominal cavity, it should generally be removed by laparoscopy or
laparotomy. Perforations of the uterus are less likely if insertion is
performed slowly, with meticulous care taken to follow directions
applicable to each type of IUD.
Shimoni N. Intrauterine contraceptives: a review of uses, side
effects and candidates. Semin Reprod Med. 2010 Mar;28(2):
118–25. [PMID: 20352561]
 
5. Diaphragm & Cervical Cap
The diaphragm (with contraceptive jelly) is a safe and effective
contraceptive method with features that make it acceptable to some
women and not others. Failure rates range from 6% to 16%,
depending on the motivation of the woman and the care with which
the diaphragm is used. The advantages of this method are that it has
no systemic side effects and gives significant protection against
pelvic infection and cervical dysplasia as well as pregnancy. The
disadvantages are that it must be inserted near the time of coitus and
that pressure from the rim predisposes some women to cystitis after
intercourse.
The cervical cap (with contraceptive jelly) is similar to the
diaphragm but fits snugly over the cervix only (the diaphragm
stretches from behind the cervix to behind the pubic symphysis).
The cervical cap is more difficult to insert and remove than the
diaphragm. The main advantages are that it can be used by women
who cannot be fitted for a diaphragm because of a relaxed anterior
vaginal wall or by women who have discomfort or develop
repeated bladder infections with the diaphragm. However, failure
rates are 9% (perfect use) and 16% (typical use) in nulliparous
women and 26% (perfect use) and 32% (typical use) in parous
women.
Because of the small risk of toxic shock syndrome, a cervical cap
or diaphragm should not be left in the vagina for over 12–18 hours,
nor should these devices be used during the menstrual period.
6. Contraceptive Foam, Cream, Film, Sponge, Jelly, &
Suppository
These products are available without prescription, are easy to use,
and are fairly effective, with typical failure rates of 10–22%. All
contain the spermicide nonoxynol-9, which also has some virucidal
and bactericidal activity. Nonoxynol-9 does not appear to
adversely affect the vaginal colonization of hydrogen peroxide-
producing lactobacilli. A 2002 study suggests that nonoxynol-9 is
not protective against HIV infection, particularly in women who
have frequent intercourse. The FDA now requires products
containing nonoxynol-9 to include a warning that the products do
not protect against HIV or other sexually transmitted diseases and
that use of these products can irritate the vagina and rectum and
may increase the risk of getting the AIDS virus from an infected
partner. Recent data suggest that low-risk women using a
nonoxynol-9 product, with coital activity two to three times per
week, are not at increased risk for epithelial disruption, compared
with couples using condoms alone.
Harwood B et al. Cervicovaginal colposcopic lesions associated
with 5 nonoxynol-9 spermicide formulations. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 2008 Jan;198(1):32.e1–7. [PMID: 18166301]
 
7. Condom
The male condom of latex or animal membrane affords good
protection against pregnancy—equivalent to that of a diaphragm
and spermicidal jelly; latex (but not animal membrane) condoms
also offer protection against many sexually transmitted diseases,
including HIV. When a spermicide, such as vaginal foam, is used
with the condom, the failure rate approaches that of oral
contraceptives. The disadvantages of condoms are dulling of
sensation and spillage of semen due to tearing, slipping, or leakage
with detumescence of the penis.
Two female condoms, one made of polyurethane and the other
of synthetic nitrile, are available in the United States. The reported
failure rates range from 5% to 21%; the efficacy is comparable to
that of the diaphragm. These are the only female-controlled method
that offers significant protection from both pregnancy and sexually
transmitted diseases.
8. Contraception Based on Awareness of Fertile Periods
These methods are most effective when the couple restricts
intercourse to the postovular phase of the cycle or uses a barrier
method at other times. Well-instructed, motivated couples may be
able to achieve low pregnancy rates with fertility awareness
methods. However, properly done randomized clinical trials
comparing the efficacy of most of these methods with other
contraceptive methods do not exist.
A. “Symptothermal” Natural Family Planning
The basis for this approach is patient-observed increase in clear
elastic cervical mucus, brief abdominal midcycle discomfort
(“mittelschmerz”), and a sustained rise of the basal body
temperature about 2 weeks after onset of menstruation.
Unprotected intercourse is avoided from shortly after the menstrual
period, when fertile mucus is first identified, until 48 hours after
ovulation, as identified by a sustained rise in temperature and the
disappearance of clear elastic mucus.
B. Calendar Method
After the length of the menstrual cycle has been observed for at
least 8 months, the following calculations are made: (1) The first
fertile day is determined by subtracting 18 days from the shortest
cycle, and (2) the last fertile day is determined by subtracting 11
days from the longest cycle. For example, if the observed cycles run
from 24 to 28 days, the fertile period would extend from the sixth
day of the cycle (24 minus 18) through the 17th day (28 minus 11).
Day 1 of the cycle is the first day of menses.
C. Basal Body Temperature Method
This method indicates the safe time for intercourse after ovulation
has passed. The temperature must be taken immediately upon
awakening, before any activity. A slight drop in temperature often
occurs 12–24 hours before ovulation, and a rise of about 0.4°C
occurs 1–2 days after ovulation. The elevated temperature
continues throughout the remainder of the cycle. Data suggest that
the risk of pregnancy increases starting 5 days prior to the day of
ovulation, peaks on the day of ovulation, and then rapidly decreases
to zero by the day after ovulation.
D. Standard Days Method
This fertility awareness method requires the use of a set of beads
that reminds the couple to avoid intercourse (or use a barrier
method of contraception) during days 8 through 19 of the menstrual
cycle. The beads are in a circle and color-coded to show the days
when a woman is likely to become pregnant and the days that are
“safe” during the cycle. A movable ring is repositioned to a new
bead each day starting on the first day of menses. In a small
multicenter trial, the perfect use failure rate was 5% and the typical
use failure rate was 12%. The method is applicable to women with
a history of menstrual cycles between 29 and 32 days.
E. TwoDay Method
The TwoDay method requires that women be able to identify
cervical secretions by observation or touching them in underwear or
toilet paper, by touching the genitals, or by the sensation of wetness
in the genital area or on underwear. The woman then uses a two-
question algorithm to determine whether she is fertile. She asks
herself: (1) Did I note secretions today? and (2) Did I note
secretions yesterday? If the answer to either of these questions is
“yes,” she should consider herself fertile. In a multicenter study of
450 women, effectiveness with perfect use was 96.5% and with
typical use 76.3%.
Pallone SR et al. Fertility awareness-based methods: another
option for family planning. J Am Board Fam Med. 2009
MarApr;22(2):147-57. [PMID: 19264938]
 
9. Emergency Contraception
If unprotected intercourse occurs in midcycle and if the woman is
certain she has not inadvertently become pregnant earlier in the
cycle, the following regimens are effective in preventing
implantation. These methods should be started as soon as possible
and within 120 hours after unprotected coitus. (1) Levonorgestrel,
1.5 mg orally as a single dose (available in the United States
prepackaged as Plan B and available over-the-counter for women
aged 17 years and above), has a 1% failure rate, when taken within
72 hours. It remains efficacious up to 120 hours after intercourse,
though less so compared with earlier use. (2) If the levonorgestrel
regimen is not available, a combination oral contraceptive containing
ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel given in a regimen of two to six
tablets initially, followed by two to six tablets 12 hours later may be
used. At least 20 brands of pills may be used in this way. For
specific instructions for each pill brand, consult www.not-2-
late.com. Used within 72 hours, the failure rate of these regimens is
approximately 3%, but antinausea medication is often necessary. (3)
Ulipristal, 30 mg orally as a single dose, has been shown to be more
effective than levonorgestrel, particularly when used between 72
and 120 hours. It is available by prescription in the United States.
(4) IUD insertion within 5 days after one episode of unprotected
midcycle coitus will also prevent pregnancy; copper-bearing IUDs
have been tested for this purpose.
Information on clinics or individual clinicians providing emergency
contraception in the United States may be obtained by calling 1-
888-668-2528.
Glasier AF et al. Ulipristal acetate versus levonorgestrel for
emergency contraception: a randomized non-inferiority trial and
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2010 Feb 13;375(9714):555–62. [PMID:
20116841]
 
10. Abortion
Since the legalization of abortion in the United States in 1973, the
related maternal mortality rate has fallen markedly, because illegal
and self-induced abortions have been replaced by safer medical
procedures. Abortions in the first trimester of pregnancy are
performed by vacuum aspiration under local anesthesia or with
medical regimens. Dilation and evacuation, a variation of vacuum
aspiration is generally used in the second trimester. Techniques
utilizing intra-amniotic instillation of hypertonic saline solution or
various prostaglandins regimens, along with medical or osmotic
dilators are occasionally used after 18 weeks. Several medical
abortion regimens utilizing mifepristone and multiple doses of
misoprostol have been reported as being effective in the second
trimester. Overall, legal abortion in the United States has a mortality
rate of < 1:100,000. Rates of morbidity and mortality rise with
length of gestation. Currently in the United States, 88% of abortions
are performed before 13 weeks' gestation and only 1.3% are
performed after 20 weeks. If abortion is chosen, every effort should
be made to encourage the patient to seek an early procedure. While
numerous state laws limiting access to abortion and a federal law
banning a rarely-used variation of dilation and evacuation have been
enacted, abortion remains legal and available until fetal viability
under Roe v. Wade.
Complications resulting from abortion include retained products
of conception (often associated with infection and heavy bleeding)
and unrecognized ectopic pregnancy. Immediate analysis of the
removed tissue for placenta can exclude or corroborate the
diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. Women who have fever, bleeding,
or abdominal pain after abortion should be examined; use of broad-
spectrum antibiotics and reaspiration of the uterus are frequently
necessary. Hospitalization is advisable if acute salpingitis requires
intravenous administration of antibiotics. Complications following
illegal abortion often need emergency care for hemorrhage, septic
shock, or uterine perforation.
Rh immune globulin should be given to all Rh-negative women
following abortion. Prophylactic antibiotics are indicated for surgical
abortion; for example a one-dose regimen of doxycycline, 200 mg
orally 1 hour before the procedure. Many clinics prescribe
tetracycline, 500 mg orally four times daily for 5 days after the
procedure, as presumptive treatment for Chlamydia.
Mifepristone (RU 486) is approved by the FDA as an oral
abortifacient at a dose of 600 mg on day 1, followed by 400 mcg
orally of misoprostol on day 3. This combination is 95% successful
in terminating pregnancies of up to 9 weeks' duration with minimum
complications. A more commonly used, evidence-based regimen is
mifepristone, 200 mg orally on day 1, followed by misoprostol, 800
mcg vaginally either immediately or within 6–8 hours. Although not
approved by the FDA for this indication, a combination of
intramuscular methotrexate, 50 mg/m2 of body surface area,
followed 3–7 days later by vaginal misoprostol, 800 mcg, is 98%
successful in terminating pregnancy at 8 weeks or less. Minor side
effects, such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, are common with
these regimens. There is a 5–10% incidence of hemorrhage or
incomplete abortion requiring curettage. There is a 2005 report of
four deaths occurring within 1 week of medical abortion, associated
with endometritis and toxic shock caused by Clostridium sordellii.
To improve diagnosis and treatment of this entity, clinicians should
be aware of the constellation of presenting symptoms of
tachycardia, hypotension, edema, hemoconcentration, profound
leukocytosis, and absence of fever.
Lièvre M et al. Meta-analysis of 200 or 600 mg mifepristone in
association with two prostaglandins for termination of early
pregnancy. Contraception. 2009 Jul;80(1):95–100. [PMID:
19501223]
 
Lipp A. A review of developments in medical termination of
pregnancy. J Clin Nurs. 2008 Jun;17(11):1411–8. [PMID:
18482139]
 
11. Sterilization
In the United States, sterilization is the most popular method of birth
control for couples who want no more children. Although
sterilization is reversible in some instances, reversal surgery in both
men and women is costly, complicated, and not always successful.
Therefore, patients should be counseled carefully before sterilization
and should view the procedure as permanent.
Vasectomy is a safe, simple procedure in which the vas deferens
is severed and sealed through a scrotal incision under local
anesthesia. Long-term follow-up studies on vasectomized men
show no excess risk of cardiovascular disease. Several studies have
shown a possible association with prostate cancer, but the evidence
is weak and inconsistent.
Female sterilization procedures include laparoscopic bipolar
electrocoagulation, or plastic ring application on the uterine tubes,
or minilaparotomy with Pomeroy tubal resection. The advantages of
laparoscopy are minimal postoperative pain, small incisions, and
rapid recovery. The advantages of minilaparotomy are that it can be
performed with standard surgical instruments under local or general
anesthesia. However, there is more postoperative pain and a longer
recovery period. The cumulative 10-year failure rate for all methods
combined is 1.85%, varying from 0.75% for postpartum partial
salpingectomy and laparoscopic unipolar coagulation to 3.65% for
spring clips; this fact should be discussed with women
preoperatively. Some studies have found an increased risk of
menstrual irregularities as a longterm complication of tubal ligation,
but findings in different studies have been inconsistent. Two
methods of transcervical sterilization, Essure and Adiana, can be
performed as outpatient procedures. Essure involves the placement
of an expanding microcoil of titanium into the proximal uterine tube
under hysteroscopic guidance. The efficacy rate at 1 year is 99.8%.
Adiana involves hysteroscopically guided superficial radiofrequency
damage to the tubal lumen and immediate placement of a
nonabsorbable silicone elastomer matrix in the tube to allow tissue
in-growth. The efficacy rate at 1 year is 98.9%. Both procedures
should have tubal occlusion confirmed at 3 months with a
hysterosalpingogram.
 When to Refer
Refer to experienced clinicians for Implanon or other subcutaneous
insertion, IUD insertion, tubal occlusion or ligation, vasectomy, or
therapeutic abortion.
Castaño PM et al. Transcervical sterilization. Semin Reprod Med.
2010 Mar;28(2):103–9. [PMID: 20352559]
 
Peterson HB. Sterilization. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Jan;111(1):
189–203. [PMID: 18165410]
 
RAPE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Women neither secretly want to be raped nor do they expect,
encourage, or enjoy rape.
 Rape is always a terrifying experience in which most victims fear
for their lives.
 The rapist is usually a hostile man who uses sexual intercourse to
terrorize and humiliate a woman.
 
 General Considerations
Rape, or sexual assault, is legally defined in different ways in various
jurisdictions. Clinicians and emergency department personnel who
deal with rape victims should be familiar with the laws pertaining to
sexual assault in their own state. From a medical and psychological
viewpoint, it is essential that persons treating rape victims recognize
the nonconsensual and violent nature of the crime. About 95% of
reported rape victims are women. Penetration may be vaginal, anal,
or oral and may be by the penis, hand, or a foreign object. The
absence of genital injury does not imply consent by the victim. The
assailant may be unknown to the victim or, more frequently, may be
an acquaintance or even the spouse.
“Unlawful sexual intercourse,” or statutory rape, is intercourse
with a female before the age of majority even with her consent.
Rape represents an expression of anger, power, and sexuality on
the part of the rapist. The rapist is usually a hostile man who uses
sexual intercourse to terrorize and humiliate a woman. Women
neither secretly want to be raped nor do they expect, encourage, or
enjoy rape.
Rape involves severe physical injury in 5–10% of cases and is
always a terrifying experience in which most victims fear for their
lives. Consequently, all victims suffer some psychological aftermath.
Moreover, some rape victims may acquire sexually transmissible
disease or become pregnant.
Because rape is a personal crisis, each patient will react
differently, but anxiety disorders and posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) are common sequelae. The rape trauma syndrome
comprises two principal phases. (1) Immediate or acute: Shaking,
sobbing, and restless activity may last from a few days to a few
weeks. The patient may experience anger, guilt, or shame or may
repress these emotions. Reactions vary depending on the victim's
personality and the circumstances of the attack. (2) Late or chronic:
Problems related to the attack may develop weeks or months later.
The lifestyle and work patterns of the individual may change. Sleep
disorders or phobias often develop. Loss of self-esteem can rarely
lead to suicide.
Clinicians and emergency department personnel who deal with
rape victims should work with community rape crisis centers or
other sources of ongoing psychological support and counseling.
 General Office Procedures
The clinician who first sees the alleged rape victim should be
empathetic. Begin with a statement such as, “This is a terrible thing
that has happened to you. I want to help.”
 
1. Secure written consent from the patient, guardian, or next
of kin for gynecologic examination and for photographs if
they are likely to be useful as evidence. If police are to be
notified, do so, and obtain advice on the preservation and
transfer of evidence.
2. Obtain and record the history in the patient's own words.
The sequence of events, ie, the time, place, and
circumstances, must be included. Note the date of the
LMP, whether or not the woman is pregnant, and the time of
the most recent coitus prior to the sexual assault. Note the
details of the assault such as body cavities penetrated, use
of foreign objects, and number of assailants. Note whether
the victim is calm, agitated, or confused (drugs or alcohol
may be involved). Record whether the patient came directly
to the hospital or whether she bathed or changed her
clothing. Record findings but do not issue even a tentative
diagnosis lest it be erroneous or incomplete.
3. Have the patient disrobe while standing on a white sheet.
Hair, dirt, and leaves, underclothing, and any torn or stained
clothing should be kept as evidence. Scrape material from
beneath fingernails and comb pubic hair for evidence.
Place all evidence in separate clean paper bags or
envelopes and label carefully.
4. Examine the patient, noting any traumatized areas that
should be photographed. Examine the body and genitals
with a Wood light to identify semen, which fluoresces;
positive areas should be swabbed with a premoistened
swab and air-dried in order to identify acid phosphatase.
Colposcopy can be used to identify small areas of trauma
from forced entry especially at the posterior fourchette.
5. Perform a pelvic examination, explaining all procedures
and obtaining the patient's consent before proceeding
gently with the examination. Use a narrow speculum
lubricated with water only. Collect material with sterile
cotton swabs from the vaginal walls and cervix and make
two air-dried smears on clean glass slides. Wet and dry
swabs of vaginal secretions should be collected and
refrigerated for subsequent acid phosphatase and DNA
evaluation. Swab the mouth (around molars and cheeks)
and anus in the same way, if appropriate. Label all slides
carefully. Collect secretions from the vagina, anus, or mouth
with a premoistened cotton swab, place at once on a slide
with a drop of saline, and cover with a coverslip. Look for
motile or nonmotile sperm under high, dry magnification,
and record the percentage of motile forms.
6. Perform appropriate laboratory tests as follows. Culture
the vagina, anus, or mouth (as appropriate) for N
gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia. Perform a Papanicolaou
smear of the cervix, a wet mount for T vaginalis, a baseline
pregnancy test, and VDRL test. A confidential test for HIV
viral load or antibody can be obtained if desired by the
patient. Antibody testing can be repeated in 2–4 months if
initially negative. Repeat the pregnancy test if the next
menses is missed, and repeat the VDRL test in 6 weeks.
Obtain blood (10 mL without anticoagulant) and urine (100
mL) specimens if there is a history of forced ingestion or
injection of drugs or alcohol.
7. Transfer clearly labeled evidence, eg, laboratory
specimens, directly to the clinical pathologist in charge or
to the responsible laboratory technician, in the presence of
witnesses (never via messenger), so that the rules of
evidence will not be breached.
 Treatment
Give analgesics or sedatives if indicated. Administer tetanus toxoid
if deep lacerations contain soil or dirt particles.
Give ceftriaxone, 125 mg intramuscularly, to prevent gonorrhea.
In addition, give metronidazole, 2 g as a single dose, and
azithromycin 1 g orally or doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for
7 days to treat chlamydial infection. Incubating syphilis will probably
be prevented by these medications, but the VDRL test should be
repeated 6 weeks after the assault.
Prevent pregnancy by using one of the methods discussed under
Emergency Contraception, if necessary (this chapter).
Vaccinate against hepatitis B. Consider HIV prophylaxis (see
Chapter 31).
Because women who are sexually assaulted are at increased risk
for long-term psychological sequelae, such as PTSD and anxiety
disorders, it is critical that the patient and her family and friends
have a source of ongoing counseling and psychological support.
 When to Refer
All women who seek care for sexual assault should be referred to a
facility that has expertise in the management of victims of sexual
assault and is capable of performing expert forensic examination, if
requested.
Vickerman KA et al. Rape treatment outcome research: empirical
findings and state of the literature. Clin Psychol Rev. 2009
Jul;29(5):431–48. [PMID: 19442425]
 
MENOPAUSAL SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cessation of menses due to aging or to bilateral oophorectomy.
 Elevation of FSH and LH levels.
 Hot flushes and night sweats (in 80% of women).
 Decreased vaginal lubrication; thinned vaginal mucosa with or
without dyspareunia.
 
 General Considerations
The term “menopause” denotes the final cessation of menstruation,
either as a normal part of aging or as the result of surgical removal
of both ovaries. In a broader sense, as the term is commonly used,
it denotes a 1to 3-year period during which a woman adjusts to a
diminishing and then absent menstrual flow and the physiologic
changes that may be associated—hot flushes, night sweats, and
vaginal dryness.
The average age at menopause in Western societies today is 51
years. Premature menopause is defined as ovarian failure and
menstrual cessation before age 40; this often has a genetic or
autoimmune basis. Surgical menopause due to bilateral
oophorectomy is common and can cause more severe symptoms
owing to the sudden rapid drop in sex hormone levels.
There is no objective evidence that cessation of ovarian function
is associated with severe emotional disturbance or personality
changes. However, mood changes toward depression and anxiety
can occur at this time. Furthermore, the time of menopause often
coincides with other major life changes, such as departure of
children from the home, a midlife identity crisis, or divorce. These
events, coupled with a sense of the loss of youth, may exacerbate
the symptoms of menopause and cause psychological distress.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Cessation of menstruation—Menstrual cycles generally
become irregular as menopause approaches. Anovular cycles occur
more often, with irregular cycle length and occasional menorrhagia.
Menstrual flow usually diminishes in amount owing to decreased
estrogen secretion, resulting in less abundant endometrial growth.
Finally, cycles become longer, with missed periods or episodes of
spotting only. When no bleeding has occurred for 1 year, the
menopausal transition can be said to have occurred. Any bleeding
after this time warrants investigation by endometrial curettage or
aspiration to rule out endometrial cancer.
2. Hot flushes—Hot flushes (feelings of intense heat over the trunk
and face, with flushing of the skin and sweating) occur in > 80% of
women as a result of the decrease in ovarian hormones. Hot flushes
can begin before the cessation of menses. The etiology of hot
flushes is unknown. They typically persist for 2 to 3 years, but up to
16% of women aged 67 may continue to experience symptoms.
Hot flushes are more severe in women who undergo surgical
menopause. Occurring at night, they often cause sweating and
insomnia and result in fatigue on the following day.
3. Vaginal atrophy—With decreased estrogen secretion, thinning
of the vaginal mucosa and decreased vaginal lubrication occur and
may lead to dyspareunia. The introitus decreases in diameter. Pelvic
examination reveals pale, smooth vaginal mucosa and a small cervix
and uterus. The ovaries are not normally palpable after the
menopause. Continued sexual activity will help prevent tissue
shrinkage.
4. Osteoporosis—Osteoporosis may occur as a late sequela of
menopause.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum FSH and LH levels are elevated. Vaginal cytologic
examination will show a low estrogen effect with predominantly
parabasal cells, indicating lack of epithelial maturation due to
hypoestrinism.
 Treatment
A. Natural Menopause
Education and support from health providers, midlife discussion
groups, and reading material will help most women having difficulty
adjusting to the menopause. Physiologic symptoms can be treated
as follows.
1. Vasomotor symptoms—For women with moderate to severe
vasomotor symptoms, estrogen or estrogen/progestin regimens are
the most effective approach to symptom relief. Conjugated
estrogens, 0.3 mg, 0.45 mg, or 0.625 mg; 17-beta-estradiol, 0.5 or
1 mg; or estrone sulfate, 0.625 mg can be given once daily orally;
or estradiol can be given transdermally as skin patches that are
changed once or twice weekly and secrete 0.05–0.1 mg of
hormone daily. Unless the patient has undergone hysterectomy, a
combination regimen of an estrogen with a progestin such as
medroxyprogesterone, 1.5 or 2.5 mg, or norethindrone, 0.1, 0.25,
or 0.5 mg, should be used to prevent endometrial hyperplasia or
cancer. There is also a patch available containing estradiol and the
progestin levonorgestrel. The oral hormones can be given in several
differing regimens. Give estrogen on days 1–25 of each calendar
month, with 5–10 mg of oral medroxyprogesterone acetate added
on days 14–25. Withhold hormones from day 26 until the end of
the month, when the endometrium will be shed, producing a light,
generally painless monthly period. Alternatively, give the estrogen
along with a progestin daily, without stopping. This regimen causes
some initial bleeding or spotting, but within a few months it
produces an atrophic endometrium that will not bleed. If the patient
has had a hysterectomy, a progestin need not be used.
Data from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) study suggest
that women should not use combination progestinestrogen therapy
for more than 3 or 4 years. In this study, the increased risk of
cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, and breast cancer
with this regimen outweighed the benefits. Women who cannot find
relief with alternative approaches may wish to consider continuing
use of combination therapy after a thorough discussion of the risks
and benefits. Alternatives to hormone therapy for vasomotor
symptoms include SSRIs such as paroxetine, 12.5 mg or 25 mg/d
orally, or venlafaxine, 75 mg/d orally. Gabapentin, an antiseizure
medication, is also effective at 900 mg/d orally. Clonidine given
orally or transdermally, 100–150 mcg daily, may also reduce the
frequency of hot flushes, but its use is limited by side effects,
including dry mouth, drowsiness, and hypotension. There is some
evidence that soy isoflavones may be effective in treating
menopausal symptoms. Other compounds including red clover and
black cohosh have not been shown to be effective. Because little is
known about adverse effects, particularly with long-term use,
dietary supplements should be used with caution.
2. Vaginal atrophy—A vaginal ring containing 2 mg of estradiol
can be left in place for 3 months and is suitable for long-term use.
Short-term use of estrogen vaginal cream will relieve symptoms of
atrophy, but because of variable absorption, therapy with either the
vaginal ring or systemic hormone replacement is preferable. A low-
dose estradiol tablet (10 mcg) is available and is inserted in the
vagina daily for 2 weeks and then twice a week for long-term use.
Testosterone propionate 1–2%, 0.5–1 g, in a vanishing cream base
used in the same manner is also effective if estrogen is
contraindicated. A bland lubricant such as unscented cold cream or
water-soluble gel can be helpful at the time of coitus.
3. Osteoporosis—(See also discussion in Chapter 26.) Women
should ingest at least 800 mg of calcium daily throughout life. In
addition, 1 g of elemental calcium should be taken as a daily
supplement at the time of the menopause and thereafter; calcium
supplements should be taken with meals to increase their
absorption. Vitamin D, 800 international units/d from food, sunlight,
or supplements, is necessary to enhance calcium absorption and
maintain bone mass. A daily program of energetic walking and
exercise to strengthen the arms and upper body helps maintain bone
mass.
Women most at risk for osteoporotic fractures should consider
bisphosphonates, raloxifene, or hormone replacement therapy. This
includes white and Asian women, especially if they have a family
history of osteoporosis; are thin, short, cigarette smokers, and
physically inactive; or have had a low calcium intake in adult life.
B. Risks of Hormone Therapy
Double-blinded randomized, controlled trials have shown no overall
cardiovascular benefit with estrogen-progestin replacement therapy
in a group of postmenopausal women with or without established
coronary disease. Both in the WHI trial and the Heart and
Estrogen/Progestin Replace ment Study (HERS), the overall health
risks (increased risk of coronary heart events; strokes;
thromboembolic disease; gallstones; and breast cancer, including an
increased risk of mortality from breast cancer) exceeded the
benefits from the use of combination estrogen and progesterone. An
ancillary study of the WHI study showed that not only did estrogen-
progestin hormone replacement therapy not benefit cognitive
function but there was a small increased risk of cognitive decline in
that group compared with women in the placebo group. The
unopposed estrogen arm of the WHI trial demonstrated a decrease
in the risk of hip fracture, a small but nonsignificant decrease in
breast cancer, but an increased risk of stroke and no evidence of
protection from coronary heart disease. The study also showed a
small increase in the combined risk of mild cognitive impairment and
dementia with estrogen use compared with placebo, similar to the
estrogen-progestin arm. Women who have been receiving long-
term estrogen-progestin hormone replacement therapy, even in the
absence of complications should be encouraged to stop, especially
if they do not have menopausal symptoms. However, the risks
appear to be lower in women starting therapy at the time of
menopause and higher in previously untreated women starting
therapy long after menopause. Therapy should be individualized as
the risk-benefit profile varies with age and individual risk factors.
(See also discussions of estrogen and progestin replacement
therapy in Chapter 26.)
C. Surgical Menopause
The abrupt hormonal decrease resulting from oophorectomy
generally results in severe vasomotor symptoms and rapid onset of
dyspareunia and osteoporosis unless treated. Estrogen replacement
is generally started immediately after surgery. Conjugated estrogens
1.25 mg orally, estrone sulfate 1.25 mg orally, or estradiol 2 mg
orally is given for 25 days of each month. After age 45–50 years,
this dose can be tapered to 0.625 mg of conjugated estrogens or
equivalent.
North American Menopause Society. Estrogen and progestogen
use in postmenopausal women: 2010 position statement of The
North American Menopause Society. Menopause. 2010
Mar;17(2):242–55. [PMID: 20154637]
 
Shen W et al. Treatment strategies for hot flushes. Expert Opin
Pharmacother. 2009 May;10(7):1133–44. [PMID: 19405789]
 
Wren BG. The benefits of oestrogen following menopause: why
hormone replacement therapy should be offered to
postmenopausal women. Med J Aust. 2009 Mar 16;190(6):321–
5. [PMID: 19296814]
 
 
 
Obstetrics & Obstetric
Disorders
Vanessa L. Rogers, MD
Kevin C. Worley, MD
DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY
It is advantageous to diagnose pregnancy as promptly as possible
when a sexually active woman misses a menstrual period or has
symptoms suggestive of pregnancy. In the event of a desired
pregnancy, prenatal care can begin early, and potentially harmful
medications and activities such as drug and alcohol use, smoking,
and occupational chemical exposure can be halted. In the event of
an unwanted pregnancy, counseling about adoption or termination
of the pregnancy can be provided at an early stage.
 Pregnancy Tests
All urine or blood pregnancy tests rely on the detection of human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) produced by the placenta. hCG
levels increase shortly after implantation, approximately double
every 48 hours, reach a peak at 50–75 days, and fall to lower
levels in the second and third trimesters. Laboratory and home
pregnancy tests use monoclonal antibodies specific for hCG. These
tests are performed on serum or urine and are accurate at the time
of the missed period or shortly after it.
Compared with intrauterine pregnancies, ectopic pregnancies
may show lower levels of hCG that plateau or fall in serial
determinations. Quantitative assays of hCG repeated at 48-hour
intervals are used in the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy as well as in
cases of molar pregnancy, threatened abortion, and missed
abortion. Comparison of hCG levels between laboratories may be
misleading in a given patient because different international
standards may produce results that vary by as much as twofold.
hCG levels can also be problematic because they require a series of
measurements. Progesterone levels, however, remain relatively
stable in the first trimester. A single measurement of progesterone is
the best indicator of whether a pregnancy is viable, although there is
a broad indeterminate zone. A value < 5 ng/mL (16 nmol/L)
predicts pregnancy failure while a value > 25 ng/mL (80 nmoL/L)
indicates a pregnancy will be successful. There is uncertainty when
the value is between these two points. Combining several serum
biomarkers may provide a better prediction of pregnancy viability.
El Bishry G et al. The role of single serum progesterone
measurement in conjunction with beta hCG in the management of
suspected ectopic pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2008
May;28(4): 413–7. [PMID: 18604677]
 
 Manifestations of Pregnancy
The following symptoms and signs are usually due to pregnancy, but
none are diagnostic. A record of the time and frequency of coitus is
helpful for diagnosing and dating a pregnancy.
A. Symptoms
Amenorrhea, nausea and vomiting, breast tenderness and tingling,
urinary frequency and urgency, “quickening” (perception of first
movement noted at about the 18th week), weight gain.
B. Signs (in Weeks from Last Menstrual Period)
Breast changes (enlargement, vascular engorgement, colostrum)
start to occur very early in pregnancy and continue until the
postpartum period. Cyanosis of the vagina and cervical portio and
softening of the cervix occur in about the seventh week. Softening
of the cervicouterine junction takes place in the eighth week, and
generalized enlargement and diffuse softening of the corpus occurs
after the eighth week. When a woman's abdomen will start to
enlarge depends on her body habitus but typically starts in the
sixteenth week.
The uterine fundus is palpable above the pubic symphysis by 12–
15 weeks from the last menstrual period and reaches the umbilicus
by 20–22 weeks. Fetal heart tones can be heard by Doppler at 10–
12 weeks of gestation and at 20 weeks with an ordinary fetoscope.
 Differential Diagnosis
The nonpregnant uterus enlarged by myomas can be confused with
the gravid uterus, but it is usually very firm and irregular. An ovarian
tumor may be found midline, displacing the nonpregnant uterus to
the side or posteriorly. Ultrasonography and a pregnancy test will
provide accurate diagnosis in these circumstances.
ESSENTIALS OF PRENATAL CARE
The first prenatal visit should occur as early as possible after the
diagnosis of pregnancy and should include the following: history,
physical examination, laboratory tests, advice to the patient, and
tests and procedures.
 History
The patient's age, ethnic background, and occupation should be
obtained. The onset of the last menstrual period and its normality,
possible conception dates, bleeding after the last menstruation,
medical history, all prior pregnancies (duration, outcome, and
complications), and symptoms of present pregnancy should be
documented. The patient's nutritional habits should be discussed
with her, as well as any use of caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, or drugs
(Table 19–1 and 19–2). Determine whether there is any family
history of congenital anomalies and heritable diseases, a personal
history of childhood varicella, or prior sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs) or risk factors for HIV infection.
 Physical Examination
Height, weight, and blood pressure should be measured, and a
general physical examination should be done, including a breast
examination. Abdominal and pelvic examination should include the
following: (1) estimate of uterine size or measure of fundal height;
(2) evaluation of bony pelvis for symmetry and adequacy; (3)
evaluation of cervix for structural anatomy, infection, effacement,
dilation; (4) detection of fetal heart sounds by Doppler device after
10 weeks.
 
Table 19–1. Common drugs that are teratogenic or fetotoxic.1
 
ACE inhibitors
Alcohol
A-II antagonists
Androgens
Antiepileptics (phenytoin,
valproic acid, carbamazepine)
Benzodiazepines
Carbarsone (amebicide)
Chloramphenicol (third
trimester)
Cyclophosphamide
Diazoxide
Diethylstilbestrol
Disulfiram
Ergotamine
Estrogens
Griseofulvin
Isotretinoin
Lithium
Methotrexate
Misoprostol
NSAIDs (third trimester)
Opioids (prolonged use)
Progestins
Radioiodine (antithyroid)
Reserpine
Ribavirin
Sulfonamides (third
trimester)
SSRIs
Tetracycline (third
trimester)
Thalidomide
Tobacco smoking
Trimethoprim (third
trimester)
Warfarin and other
coumarin anticoagulants
1Many other drugs are also contraindicated during pregnancy. Evaluate
any drug for its need versus its potential adverse effects. Further
information can be obtained from the manufacturer or from any of several
teratogenic registries around the country.
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; A-II antagonists, angiotensin II
receptor blocking agents; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;
SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
 
Table 19–2. Drugs and substances that require a careful
assessment of risk before they are prescribed for breast-feeding
women.
 
The above list is not all-inclusive. For additional information, see the below
references from which this information is adapted or the online drug and
lactation database, Lactmed, at http://lactmed.nlm.nih.gov
Data from Buhimschi CS et al. Medications in Pregnancy and Lactation:
part 1. Teratology. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Jan;113(1):166-88. Buhimschi CS
et al. Medications in pregnancy and lactation: Part 2. Drugs with minimal or
unknown human teratogenic effect. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Feb;113(2 Pt
1):417-32.)
Laboratory Tests
Urinalysis; culture of a clean-voided midstream urine sample;
random blood glucose; complete blood count with red cell indices;
serologic test for syphilis, rubella antibody titer; varicella immunity;
blood group; Rh type; antibody screening for anti-Rho(D), hepatitis
B surface antigen (HBsAg), and the HIV should be performed.
Cervical cultures are usually obtained for Chlamydia and possibly
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, along with a Papanicolaou smear of the
cervix. All black women should have sickle cell screening. Women
of African, Asian, or Mediterranean ancestry with anemia or low
mean corpuscular volume (MCV) values should have hemoglobin
electrophoresis performed to identify abnormal hemoglobins (Hb S,
C, F, α-thalassemia, β-thalassemia). Tuberculosis skin testing is
indicated for high-risk populations. Fetal aneuploidy screening is
available in the first and second trimester and should be offered to
all women, ideally before 20 weeks gestation. Noninvasive first
trimester screening for Down syndrome includes ultrasonographic
nuchal translucency and serum levels of PAPP-A (pregnancy-
associated plasma protein A) and the free β subunit of hCG. In the
second trimester, a “quad screen” blood test can be performed; it
measures serum alpha-fetoprotein (msAFP), hCG, unconjugated
estriol, and inhibin A. First and second trimester tests have similar
detection rates. When first and second trimester screening are
combined (integrated screening), the detection rates are even
higher. Women at increased risk for aneuploidy can then be offered
chorionic villus sampling or genetic amniocentesis, depending on
gestational age and availability. Blood screening for Tay-Sachs,
Canavan disease, and familial dysautonomia is offered to couples
who are of Eastern European Jewish (Ashkenazi) descent. Couples
of French-Canadian or Cajun ancestry should also be screened as
possible Tay-Sachs carriers. Screening for cystic fibrosis is offered
to all pregnant women. Hepatitis C antibody screening should be
offered to pregnant women who are at high risk for infection.
Pregnant women with high-risk professions and those who are
household contacts of a hepatitis B virus carrier or a hemodialysis
patient and are HBsAg-negative at prenatal screening are at high
risk for acquiring hepatitis B. They should be vaccinated during
pregnancy. All women who are pregnant during flu season should
receive vaccination for influenza regardless of gestational age.
 Advice to Patients
A. Prenatal Visits
Prenatal care should begin early and maintain a schedule of regular
prenatal visits: 0–28 weeks, every 4 weeks; 28–36 weeks, every 2
weeks; 36 weeks on, weekly.
B. Diet
The patient should be counseled to eat a balanced diet containing
the major food groups.
 
1. Prenatal vitamins with iron and folic acid should be
prescribed. Supplements that are not specified for
pregnant women should be avoided as they may contain
dangerous amounts of certain vitamins.
2. The average weight pregnant woman should be
expected to gain 20–40 lb. A pregnant woman should not
diet to lose weight during pregnancy.
3. Caffeine intake should be decreased to 0–1 cup of
coffee, tea, or caffeinated cola daily.
4. The patient should be advised to avoid eating raw or
rare meat as well as fish known to contain elevated levels
of mercury.
5. Patients should be encouraged to eat fresh fruits and
vegetables (washed before eating).
C. Medications
Only medications prescribed or authorized by the obstetric provider
should be taken.
D. Alcohol and Other Drugs
Patients should be encouraged to abstain from alcohol, tobacco,
and all recreational (“street”) drugs. No safe level of alcohol intake
has been established for pregnancy. Fetal effects are manifest in the
fetal alcohol syndrome, which includes growth restriction; facial,
skeletal, and cardiac abnormalities; and serious central nervous
system dysfunction. These effects are thought to result from direct
toxicity of ethanol as well as of its metabolites such as acetaldehyde.
Cigarette smoking results in fetal exposure to carbon monoxide
and nicotine, and this is thought to eventuate in a number of adverse
pregnancy outcomes. An increased risk of abruptio placentae,
placenta previa, and premature rupture of the membranes is
documented among women who smoke. Preterm delivery, low birth
weight, and ectopic pregnancy are also more likely among smokers.
Women who smoke should quit smoking or at least reduce the
number of cigarettes smoked per day to as few as possible.
Clinicians should ask all pregnant women about their smoking
history and offer smoking cessation counseling during pregnancy,
since women are more motivated to change at this time. Pregnant
women should also avoid exposure to environmental smoke
(“passive smoking”) and smokeless tobacco.
Sometimes compounding the above effects on pregnancy
outcome are the independent adverse effects of illicit drugs.
Cocaine use in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of
premature rupture of membranes, preterm delivery, placental
abruption, intrauterine growth restriction, neuro-behavioral deficits,
and sudden infant death syndrome. Similar adverse pregnancy
effects are associated with amphetamine use, perhaps reflecting the
vasoconstrictive potential of both amphetamines and cocaine.
Adverse effects associated with opioid use include intrauterine
growth restriction, prematurity, and fetal death.
E. Radiographs and Noxious Exposures
Radiographs should be avoided unless essential and approved by a
clinician. Abdominal shielding should be used whenever possible.
The patient should be told to inform her dentist and providers that
she is pregnant. Chemical or radiation hazards should be avoided as
should excessive heat in hot tubs or saunas. Patients should be told
to avoid handling cat feces or cat litter and to wear gloves when
gardening.
F. Rest and Activity
The patient should be encouraged to obtain adequate rest each day.
She should abstain from strenuous physical work or activities,
particularly when heavy lifting or weight bearing is required. Regular
exercise can be continued at a mild to moderate level; however
exhausting or hazardous exercises or new athletic training programs
should be avoided during pregnancy. Exercises that require a great
deal of balance should also be done with caution.
G. Birth Classes
The patient should be encouraged to enroll in a childbirth
preparation class with her partner well before her due date.
 Tests & Procedures
A. Each Visit
Weight, blood pressure, fundal height, and fetal heart rate are
measured, and a urine specimen is obtained and tested for protein
and glucose. Review any concerns the patient may have about
pregnancy, health, and nutrition.
B. 6–12 Weeks
Confirm uterine size and growth by pelvic examination. Document
fetal heart tones (audible at 10–12 weeks of gestation by Doppler).
First trimester screening and a discussion of choices of aneuploidy
screening should be discussed at this time (see Laboratory Tests,
above). Chorionic villus sampling is performed during this period
(11–13 weeks).
C. 16–20 Weeks
The “quad screen” and amniocentesis are performed as indicated
and requested by the patient during this time (see Laboratory Tests,
above). Fetal ultrasound examination to determine pregnancy dating
and evaluate fetal anatomy is also done. An earlier examination
provides the most accurate dating, and a later examination
demonstrates fetal anatomy in greatest detail. The best compromise
is at 18–20 weeks of gestation.
D. 20–24 Weeks
Instruct the patient about symptoms and signs of preterm labor and
rupture of membranes. Consider cervical length measurement by
ultrasound after 18 weeks with history of prior preterm delivery (>
2.5 cm is normal).
E. 24 Weeks to Delivery
Ultrasound examination is performed as indicated. Typically, fetal
size and growth are evaluated when fundal height is 3 cm less than
or more than expected for gestational age. In multiple pregnancies,
ultrasound should be performed every 4–6 weeks to evaluate for
discordant growth.
F. 24–28 Weeks
Screening for gestational diabetes is performed using a 50-g glucose
load (Glucola) and a 1-hour post-Glucola blood glucose
determination. Abnormal values (≥ 140 mg/dL) should be followed
up with a 3-hour glucose tolerance test (see Table 19–4).
G. 28 Weeks
If initial antibody screen for anti-Rho(D) is negative, repeat antibody
testing for Rh-negative patients is performed, but the result is not
required before Rho(D) immune globulin is administered (see
below).
H. 28–32 Weeks
Repeat the complete blood count to evaluate for anemia of
pregnancy. Screening for syphilis and possibly HIV is also
frequently performed at this time. Providers should familiarize
themselves with the laws in their state since testing requirements
vary.
I. 28 Weeks to Delivery
Determine fetal position and presentation. Question the patient at
each visit for symptoms or signs of preterm labor or rupture of
membranes. Assess maternal perception of fetal movement at each
visit. Antepartum fetal testing is performed as medically indicated.
J. 36 Weeks to Delivery
Repeat syphilis and HIV testing (depending on state laws), cervical
cultures for N gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis should
be performed in at-risk patients. Discuss with the patient the
indicators of onset of labor, admission to the hospital, management
of labor and delivery, and options for analgesia and anesthesia.
Weekly cervical examinations are not necessary unless indicated to
assess a specific clinical situation. Elective delivery (whether by
induction or cesarean section) prior to 39 weeks of gestation
requires confirmation of fetal lung maturity.
The CDC recommends universal prenatal culture-based
screening for group B streptococcal colonization in pregnancy. A
single standard culture of the distal vagina and anorectum is
collected at 35–37 weeks. No prophylaxis is needed if the
screening culture is negative. Patients whose cultures are positive
receive intrapartum penicillin prophylaxis during labor. Except when
group B streptococci are found in urine, asymptomatic colonization
is not to be treated before labor. Patients who have had a previous
infant with invasive group B streptococcal disease or who have
group B streptococcal bacteriuria during this pregnancy should
receive intrapartum prophylaxis regardless, so rectovaginal cultures
are not needed. Patients whose cultures at 35–37 weeks were not
done or whose results are not known should receive prophylaxis if
they have a risk factor for early-onset neonatal disease, including
intrapartum temperature ≥ 38°C, membrane rupture > 18 hours, or
delivery before 37 weeks gestation.
The routine recommended regimen for prophylaxis is penicillin G,
5 million units intravenously as a loading dose and then 2.5 million
units intravenously every 4 hours until delivery. In penicillin-allergic
patients not at high risk for anaphylaxis, 2 g of cefazolin can be
given intravenously as an initial dose and then 1 g intravenously
every 8 hours until delivery. In patients at high risk for anaphylaxis,
use vancomycin 1 g intravenously every 12 hours until delivery or,
after confirmed susceptibility testing of group B streptococcal
isolate, clindamycin 900 mg intravenously every 8 hours or
erythromycin 500 mg intravenously every 6 hours until delivery.
K. 41 Weeks
Examine the cervix to determine the probability of successful
induction of labor. Based on this, induction of labor is undertaken if
the cervix is favorable (generally, cervix ≥ 2 cm dilated ≥ 50%
effaced, vertex at −1 station, soft cervix, and midposition); if
unfavorable, antepartum fetal testing is begun. Induction is
performed at 42 weeks gestation regardless of the cervical
examination findings; some providers elect induction at 41 weeks
regardless of the cervical examination findings.
ACOG Committee on Genetics. ACOG Committee Opinion No.
442: Preconception and prenatal carrier screening for genetic
diseases in individuals of Eastern European Jewish descent. Obstet
Gynecol. 2009 Oct;114(4):950–53. [PMID: 19888064]
 
ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins. ACOG Practice Bulletin
No. 77: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Obstet
Gynecol. 2007 Jan;109(1):217–27. [PMID: 17197615]
 
Phelan ST. Components and timing of prenatal care. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am. 2008 Sep;35(3):339–53. [PMID:
18760223]
 
NUTRITION IN PREGNANCY
Nutrition in pregnancy can affect maternal health and infant size and
well-being. Pregnant women should have nutrition counseling early
in prenatal care and access to supplementary food programs if
necessary. Counseling should stress abstention from alcohol,
smoking, and recreational drugs. Caffeine and artificial sweeteners
should be used only in small amounts. “Empty calories” should be
avoided, and the diet should contain the following foods: protein
foods of animal and vegetable origin, milk and milk products,
whole-grain cereals and breads, and fruits and vegetables—
especially green leafy vegetables.
Weight gain in pregnancy should be 20–40 lb, which includes the
added weight of the fetus, placenta, and amniotic fluid and of
maternal reproductive tissues (fluid, blood, increased fat stores, and
increased lean body mass). Maternal fat stores are a caloric reserve
for pregnancy and lactation; weight restriction in pregnancy to avoid
developing such fat stores may affect the development of other fetal
and maternal tissues and is not advisable. Obese women can have
normal infants with less weight gain (15–20 lb) but should be
encouraged to eat high-quality foods. Normally, a pregnant woman
gains 2–5 lb in the first trimester and slightly < 1 lb/wk thereafter.
She needs approximately an extra 200–300 kcal/d (depending on
energy output) and 30 g/d of additional protein for a total protein
intake of about 75 g/d. Appropriate caloric intake in pregnancy
helps prevent the problems associated with low birth weight.
Rigid salt restriction is not necessary. While consumption of
highly salted snack foods and prepared foods is not desirable, 2–3
g/d of sodium is permissible. The increased calcium needs of
pregnancy (1200 mg/d) can be met with milk, milk products, green
vegetables, soybean products, corn tortillas, and calcium carbonate
supplements.
The increased need for iron and folic acid should be met with
foods as well as vitamin and mineral supplements. (See section on
anemia in pregnancy.) Megavitamins should not be taken in
pregnancy, as they may result in fetal malformation or disturbed
metabolism. However, a balanced prenatal supplement containing
30–60 mg of elemental iron, 0.5–0.8 mg of folate, and the
recommended daily allowances of various vitamins and minerals is
widely used in the United States and is probably beneficial to many
women with marginal diets. There is evidence that periconceptional
folic acid supplements can decrease the risk of neural tube defects
in the fetus. For this reason, the United States Public Health Service
recommends the consumption of 0.4 mg of folic acid per day for all
pregnant and reproductive age women. Women with a prior
pregnancy complicated by neural tube defect may require higher
supplemental doses as determined by their providers.
Lactovegetarians and ovolactovegetarians do well in pregnancy;
vegetarian women who eat neither eggs nor milk products should
have their diets assessed for adequate calories and protein and
should take oral vitamin B12 supplements during pregnancy and
lactation.
De-Regil LM et al. Effects and safety of periconceptional folate
supplementation for preventing birth defects. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2010 Oct 6; (10):CD007950. [PMID: 20927767]
 
Rasmussen KM et al. Recommendations for weight gain during
pregnancy in the context of the obesity epidemic. Obstet Gynecol.
2010 Nov;116(5):1191–5. [PMID: 20966705]
 
PREVENTION OF RHESUS ALLOIMMUNIZATION
The antibody anti-Rho(D) is responsible for most severe instances
of hemolytic disease of the newborn. About 15% of whites and
much lower proportions of blacks and Asians are Rho(D)–negative.
If an Rho(D)–negative woman carries an Rho(D)–positive fetus,
antibodies against Rho(D) may develop in the mother when fetal red
cells enter her circulation during small fetomaternal bleeding
episodes in the early third trimester or during delivery, abortion,
ectopic pregnancy, abruptio placentae, or other instances of
antepartum bleeding. This antibody, once produced, remains in the
woman's circulation and poses the threat of hemolytic disease for
subsequent Rh-positive fetuses.
Passive immunization against hemolytic disease of the newborn is
achieved with Rho(D) immune globulin, a purified concentrate of
antibodies against Rho(D) antigen. The Rho(D) immune globulin
(one vial of 300 mcg intramuscularly) is given to the mother within
72 hours after delivery (or spontaneous or induced abortion or
ectopic pregnancy). The antibodies in the immune globulin destroy
fetal Rh-positive cells so that the mother will not produce anti-
Rho(D). During her next Rh-positive gestation, erythroblastosis will
be prevented. An additional safety measure is the routine
administration of the immune globulin at the 28th week of
pregnancy. The passive antibody titer that results is too low to
significantly affect an Rh-positive fetus. The maternal clearance of
the globulin is slow enough that protection will continue for 12
weeks.
Hemolytic disease of varying degrees, from mild to serious,
continues to occur in association with Rh subgroups (C, c, or E) or
Kell, Kidd, and other factors. Therefore, the presence of atypical
antibodies should be checked in the third trimester of all
pregnancies.
Moise KJ Jr. Management of rhesus alloimmunization in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Jul;112(1):164-76. [PMID:
18591322]
 
LACTATION
Breastfeeding should be encouraged by education throughout
pregnancy and the puerperium. Mothers should be told the benefits
of breastfeeding, including infant immunity, emotional satisfaction,
mother-infant bonding, and economic savings. The period of
amenorrhea associated with frequent and consistent breastfeeding
provides some (although not completely reliable) birth control until
menstruation begins at 6–12 months postpartum or the intensity of
breastfeeding diminishes. If the mother must return to work, even a
brief period of nursing is beneficial. Transfer of immunoglobulins in
colostrum and breast milk protects the infant against many systemic
and enteric infections. Macrophages and lymphocytes transferred to
the infant from breast milk play an immunoprotective role. The
intestinal flora of breastfed infants inhibits the growth of pathogens.
Breastfed infants have fewer bacterial and viral infections, less
severe diarrhea, and fewer allergy problems than bottle-fed infants.
Furthermore, they are less apt to be obese as children and adults.
Frequent breastfeeding on an infant-demand schedule enhances
milk flow and successful breastfeeding. Mothers breastfeeding for
the first time need help and encouragement from providers, nurses,
and other nursing mothers. Milk supply can be increased by
increased suckling and increased rest.
Nursing mothers should have a fluid intake of over 2 L/d. The
United States RDA calls for 21 g of extra protein (over the 44 g/d
baseline for an adult woman) and 550 extra kcal/d in the first 6
months of nursing. Calcium intake should be 1200 mg/d.
Continuation of a prenatal vitamin and mineral supplement is wise.
Strict vegetarians who eschew both milk and eggs should always
take vitamin B12 supplements during pregnancy and lactation.
1. Effects of Drugs in a Nursing Mother
Drugs taken by a nursing mother may accumulate in milk and be
transmitted to the infant (Table 19–2). The amount of drug entering
the milk depends on the drug's lipid solubility, mechanism of
transport, and degree of ionization.
2. Suppression of Lactation
A. Mechanical Suppression
The simplest and safest method of suppressing lactation after it has
started is to gradually transfer the baby to a bottle or a cup over a
3-week period. Milk supply will decrease with decreased demand,
and minimal discomfort ensues. If nursing must be stopped abruptly,
the mother should avoid nipple stimulation, refrain from expressing
milk, and use a snug brassiere. Ice packs and analgesics can be
helpful. This same technique can be used in cases where
suppression is desired before nursing has begun. Engorgement will
gradually recede over a 2- to 3-day period.
B. Hormonal Suppression
Oral and long-acting injections of hormonal preparations were used
at one time to suppress lactation. Because of their questionable
efficacy and particularly because of associated side effects such as
thromboembolic episodes and hair growth, their use for this
purpose has been abandoned. Similarly, lactation suppression with
bromocriptine is to be avoided because of reports of severe
hypertension, seizures, strokes, and myocardial infarctions
associated with its use.
Britton C et al. Support for breastfeeding mothers. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24; (1):CD001141. [PMID:
17253455]
 
TRAVEL & IMMUNIZATIONS DURING PREGNANCY
During an otherwise normal low-risk pregnancy, travel can be
planned most safely up to the 32nd week. Commercial flying in
pressurized cabins does not pose a threat to the fetus. An aisle seat
will allow frequent walks. Adequate fluids should be taken during
the flight.
It is not advisable to travel to endemic areas of yellow fever in
Africa or Latin America; similarly, it is inadvisable to travel to areas
of Africa or Asia where chloroquine-resistant falciparum malaria is a
hazard, since complications of malaria are more common in
pregnancy.
Ideally, all immunizations should precede pregnancy. Live virus
products are contraindicated during pregnancy (measles, rubella,
yellow fever), including smallpox. Inactivated polio vaccine (IPV)
should be given subcutaneously instead of the oral live-attenuated
vaccine. 
Vaccines 
against 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia,
meningococcal meningitis, and hepatitis A can be used as indicated.
Annual influenza vaccination is indicated in all women who are
pregnant or will be pregnant during “flu season.” The CDC lists
pregnant women as a high-risk group.
Hepatitis A vaccine contains formalin-inactivated virus and can
be given in pregnancy when needed. Chloro quine can be used for
malaria prophylaxis in pregnancy, and proguanil is also safe. Pooled
immune globulin to prevent hepatitis A is safe and does not carry a
risk of HIV transmission.
Water should be purified by boiling, since iodine purification may
provide more iodine than is safe during pregnancy.
Prophylactic antibiotics or bismuth subsalicylate should not be
used during pregnancy to prevent diarrhea. Oral rehydration and
treatment of bacterial diarrhea with erythromycin or ampicillin if
necessary is preferred.
OBSTETRIC COMPLICATIONS
OF THE FIRST & SECOND
TRIMESTER
 
VOMITING OF PREGNANCY (Morning Sickness) &
HYPEREMESIS GRAVIDARUM (Pernicious Vomiting of
Pregnancy)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Morning or evening nausea and vomiting.
 Persistent vomiting severe enough to result in weight loss,
dehydration, starvation ketosis, hypochloremic alkalosis,
hypokalemia.
 May have transient elevation of liver enzymes.
 Appears related to high or rising serum hCG.
 More common with multiple gestation or hydatidiform mole.
 
 General Considerations
Nausea and vomiting begin soon after the first missed period and
cease by the fifth month of gestation. Up to three-fourths of women
complain of nausea and vomiting during early pregnancy, with the
vast majority noting nausea throughout the day. This problem exerts
no adverse effects on the pregnancy and does not presage other
complications.
Persistent, severe vomiting during pregnancy—hyperemesis
gravidarum—can be disabling and require hospitalization. Thyroid
dysfunction can be associated with hyperemesis gravidarum, so it is
advisable to determine thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and free
thyroxine (T4) values in these patients.
 Treatment
A. Mild Nausea and Vomiting of Pregnancy
In most instances, only reassurance and dietary advice are required.
Because of possible teratogenicity, drugs used during the first half of
pregnancy should be restricted to those of major importance to life
and health. Antiemetics, antihistamines, and antispasmodics are
generally unnecessary to treat nausea of pregnancy. Vitamin B6
(pyridoxine), 50–100 mg/d orally, is nontoxic and may be helpful in
some patients.
B. Hyperemesis Gravidarum
With more severe nausea and vomiting, it may become necessary to
hospitalize the patient. In this case, a private room with limited
activity is preferred. Give nothing by mouth for 48 hours, and
maintain hydration and electrolyte balance by giving appropriate
parenteral fluids and vitamin supplements as indicated. Antiemetics
such as promethazine (25 mg orally, rectally, or intravenously every
4–6 hours), metoclopr-amide (10 mg orally or intravenously every
6 hours), and ondansetron (4–8 mg orally or intravenously every 8
hours) should be started. Antiemetics will likely need to be given
intravenously initially. Rarely, total parenteral nutrition may become
necessary. As soon as possible, place the patient on a dry diet
consisting of six small feedings daily plus clear liquids 1 hour after
eating. Antiemetics may be continued orally as needed. After in-
patient stabilization, the patient can be maintained at home even if
she requires intravenous fluids in addition to her oral intake. There
are conflicting studies regarding the use of cortico steroids for the
control of hyperemesis gravidarum. Therefore, this treatment should
be withheld until more accepted treatments have been exhausted.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patient is unable to tolerate any food or water.
•    There is concern for other pathology (ie, hydatidiform
mole).
•    Patient requires hospitalization.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patient is unable to tolerate any food or water.
•    Condition precludes the patient from ingesting
necessary medications.
•    Weight loss.
•    Presence of a hydatidiform mole.
Goodwin TM. Hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am. 2008 Sep;35(3):401–17. [PMID: 18760227]
 
Niebyl JR. Clinical Practice. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 14;363(16):1544–50. [PMID: 20942670]
 
SPONTANEOUS ABORTION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Intrauterine pregnancy at < 20 weeks.
 Low or falling levels of hCG.
 Bleeding, midline cramping pain.
 Open cervical os.
 Complete or partial expulsion of products of conception.
 
 General Considerations
About three-fourths of spontaneous abortions occur before the 16th
week; of these, three-fourths occur before the eighth week. Almost
20% of all clinically recognized pregnancies terminate in
spontaneous abortion.
More than 60% of spontaneous abortions result from
chromosomal defects due to maternal or paternal factors; about
15% appear to be associated with maternal trauma, infections,
dietary deficiencies, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, the lupus
anticoagulant-anticardiolipin-antiphospholipid antibody syndrome,
or anatomic malformations. There is no reliable evidence that
abortion may be induced by psychic stimuli such as severe fright,
grief, anger, or anxiety. In about one-fourth of cases, the cause of
abortion cannot be determined. There is no evidence that video
display terminals or associated electromagnetic fields are related to
an increased risk of spontaneous abortion.
It is important to distinguish women with a history of incompetent
cervix from those with more typical early abortion.
Characteristically, incompetent cervix presents as “silent” cervical
dilation (ie, with minimal uterine contractions) in the second
trimester. Women with incompetent cervix often present with
significant cervical dilation (2 cm or more) and minimal symptoms.
When the cervix reaches 4 cm or more, active uterine contractions
or rupture of the membranes may occur secondary to the degree of
cervical dilation. This does not change the primary diagnosis.
Factors that predispose to incompetent cervix are a history of
incompetent cervix with a previous pregnancy, cervical conization
or surgery, cervical injury, diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure, and
anatomic abnormalities of the cervix. Prior to pregnancy or during
the first trimester, there are no methods for determining whether the
cervix will eventually be incompetent. After 14–16 weeks,
ultrasound may be used to evaluate the internal anatomy of the
lower uterine segment and cervix for the funneling and shortening
abnormalities consistent with cervical incompetence.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Threatened abortion—Bleeding or cramping occurs, but the
pregnancy continues. The cervix is not dilated.
2. Inevitable abortion—The cervix is dilated and the membranes
may be ruptured, but passage of the products of conception has not
yet occurred. Bleeding and cramping persist, and passage of the
products of conception is considered inevitable.
3. Complete abortion—Products of conception are completely
expelled. Pain ceases, but spotting may persist. Cervical os is
closed.
4. Incomplete abortion—The cervix is dilated. Some portion of
the products of conception (usually placental) remain in the uterus.
Only mild cramps are reported, but bleeding is persistent and often
excessive.
5. Missed abortion—The pregnancy has ceased to develop, but
the conceptus has not been expelled. Symptoms of pregnancy
disappear. There may be a brownish vaginal discharge but no free
bleeding. Pain does not develop. The cervix is semifirm and slightly
patulous; the uterus becomes smaller and irregularly softened; the
adnexa are normal.
B. Laboratory Findings
Pregnancy tests show low or falling levels of hCG. A complete
blood count should be obtained if bleeding is heavy. Determine Rh
type, and give Rho(D) immune globulin if Rh-negative. All tissue
recovered should be assessed by a pathologist and may be sent for
genetic analysis in selected cases.
C. Ultrasonographic Findings
The gestational sac can be identified at 5–6 weeks from the last
menstruation, a fetal pole at 6 weeks, and fetal cardiac activity at 6–
7 weeks by transvaginal ultrasound. Serial observations are often
required to evaluate changes in size of the embryo. A small,
irregular sac without a fetal pole with accurate dating is diagnostic of
an abnormal pregnancy.
 Differential Diagnosis
The bleeding that occurs in abortion of a uterine pregnancy must be
differentiated from the abnormal bleeding of an ectopic pregnancy
and anovular bleeding in a non-pregnant woman. The passage of
hydropic villi in the bloody discharge is diagnostic of hydatidiform
mole.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
1. Threatened abortion—Place the patient on bed rest for 24–48
hours followed by gradual resumption of usual activities, with
abstinence from coitus and douching. Hormonal treatment is
contraindicated. Antibiotics should be used only if there are signs of
infection.
2. Missed abortion—This calls for counseling regarding the fate of
the pregnancy and planning for its elective termination at a time
chosen by the patient and clinician. Insertion of laminaria to dilate
the cervix followed by aspiration is the method of choice for a
missed abortion. Prostaglandin vaginal tablets (misoprostol 800 mcg
per vagina, repeated 3 days later if products of conception are not
expelled) are an effective alternative.
B. Surgical Measures
1. Incomplete or inevitable abortion—Prompt removal of any
products of conception remaining within the uterus is required to
stop bleeding and prevent infection. Analgesia and a paracervical
block are useful, followed by uterine exploration with ovum forceps
or uterine aspiration. Regional anesthesia may be required.
2. Cerclage and restriction of activities—A cerclage is the
treatment of choice for incompetent cervix, but a viable intrauterine
pregnancy should be confirmed prior to placement of the cerclage.
A variety of suture materials including a 5-mm Mersilene band
can be used to create a purse-string type of stitch around the cervix,
using either the McDonald or Shirodkar method. Cerclage should
be undertaken with caution when there is advanced cervical dilation
or when the membranes are prolapsed into the vagina. Rupture of
the membranes and infection are specific contraindications to
cerclage. Cervical cultures for N gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia, and
group B streptococci should be obtained before elective placement
of a cerclage. N gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia should be treated
before placement.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patient with history of two second-trimester losses.
•    Vaginal bleeding in a pregnant patient that resembles
menstruation in a nonpregnant woman.
•    Patient with an open cervical os.
•    No signs of uterine growth in serial examinations of a
pregnant patient.
•    Leakage of amniotic fluid.
 When to Admit
 
•    Open cervical os.
•    Heavy vaginal bleeding.
•    Leakage of amniotic fluid.
Dempsey A et al. Medical management of early pregnancy failure:
how to treat and what to expect. Semin Reprod Med. 2008
Sep;26(5):401–10. [PMID: 18825608]
 
Deutchman M et al. First trimester bleeding. Am Fam Physician.
2009 Jun;79(11):985–94. [PMID: 19514696]
 
RECURRENT (Habitual) ABORTION
Recurrent abortion has been defined as the loss of three or more
previable (< 500 g) pregnancies in succession. Recurrent abortion
occurs in about 0.4–0.8% of all pregnancies. Abnormalities related
to recurrent abortion can be identified in approximately half of the
couples. If a woman has lost three previous pregnancies without
identifiable cause, she still has a 70–80% chance of carrying a fetus
to viability. If she has aborted four or five times, the likelihood of a
successful pregnancy is 65–70%.
Recurrent abortion is a clinical rather than pathologic diagnosis.
The clinical findings are similar to those observed in other types of
abortion (see above).
 Treatment
A. Preconception Therapy
Preconception therapy is aimed at detection of maternal or paternal
defects that may contribute to abortion. A thorough general and
gynecologic examination is essential. A random blood glucose test
and thyroid function studies (including thyroid antibodies) should be
done. Detection of lupus anticoagulant and other hemostatic
abnormalities (proteins S and C and antithrombin deficiency,
hyperhomocysteinemia, anticardiolipin antibody, factor V Leiden
mutations) and an antinuclear antibody test may be indicated.
Endometrial tissue may be examined in the postovulation stage of
the cycle to determine the adequacy of the response of the
endometrium to hormones. The competency of the cervix must be
determined and hysteroscopy or hysterography used to exclude
submucosal myomas and congenital anomalies. Chromosomal
(karyotype) analysis of both partners can be done to rule out
balanced translocations (found in 5% of infertile couples).
Many therapies have been tried to prevent recurrent pregnancy
loss from immunologic causes. Low-molecular-weight heparin
(LMWH), aspirin, intravenous immunoglobulin, and corticosteroids
have all been used but the definitive treatment has not yet been
determined. LMWH and low-dose aspirin may be considered for
women with antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy
loss.
Shetty S et al. Anti-phospholipid antibodies and other
immunological causes of recurrent fetal loss–a review of literature
of various therapeutic protocols. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2009
Jul;62(1):9–24. [PMID: 19527228]
 
B. Postconception Therapy
The patient should be provided early prenatal care and scheduled
frequent office visits. Bed rest is justified only for bleeding or pain.
Empiric sex steroid hormone therapy is contraindicated.
 Prognosis
The prognosis is excellent if the cause of abortion can be corrected
or treated.
Stephenson M et al. Evaluation and management of recurrent early
pregnancy loss. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2007 Mar;50(1): 132–45.
[PMID: 17304030]
 
ECTOPIC PREGNANCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Amenorrhea or irregular bleeding and spotting.
 Pelvic pain, usually adnexal.
 Adnexal mass by clinical examination or ultrasound.
 Failure of serum level of hCG to double every 48 hours.
 No intrauterine pregnancy on transvaginal ultrasound with serum
β > 2000 mU/mL.
 
 General Considerations
Ectopic implantation occurs in about one out of 150 live births.
About 98% of ectopic pregnancies are tubal. Other sites of ectopic
implantation are the peritoneum or abdominal viscera, the ovary,
and the cervix. Any condition that prevents or retards migration of
the fertilized ovum to the uterus can predispose to an ectopic
pregnancy, including a history of infertility, pelvic inflammatory
disease, ruptured appendix, and prior tubal surgery. Combined
intrauterine and extrauterine pregnancy (heterotopic) may occur
rarely. In the United States, undiagnosed or undetected ectopic
pregnancy is currently the most common cause of maternal death
during the first trimester.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Severe lower quadrant pain occurs in almost every case. It is
sudden in onset, stabbing, intermittent, and does not radiate.
Backache may be present during attacks. Shock occurs in about
10%, often after pelvic examination. At least two-thirds of patients
give a history of abnormal menstruation; many have been infertile.
Blood may leak from the tubal ampulla over a period of days,
and considerable blood may accumulate in the peritoneum. Slight
but persistent vaginal spotting is usually reported, and a pelvic mass
may be palpated. Abdominal distention and mild paralytic ileus are
often present.
B. Laboratory Findings
Blood studies may show anemia and slight leukocytosis.
Quantitative serum pregnancy tests will show levels generally lower
than expected for normal pregnancies of the same duration. If hCG
levels are followed over a few days, there may be a slow rise or a
plateau rather than the near doubling every 2 days associated with
normal early intrauterine pregnancy or the falling levels that occur
with spontaneous abortion. A progesterone level can also be
p
p g
measured to assess the viability of the pregnancy.
C. Imaging
Ultrasonography can reliably demonstrate a gestational sac 5–6
weeks from the last menstruation and a fetal pole at 6 weeks if
located in the uterus. An empty uterine cavity raises a strong
suspicion of extrauterine pregnancy, which can occasionally be
revealed by transvaginal ultrasound. Specified levels of serum hCG
have been reliably correlated with ultrasound findings of an
intrauterine pregnancy. For example, an hCG level of 6500 mU/mL
with an empty uterine cavity by transabdominal ultrasound is highly
suspicious for an ectopic pregnancy. Similarly, an hCG value of
2000 mU/mL or more can be indicative of an ectopic pregnancy if
no products of conception are detected within the uterine cavity by
transvaginal ultrasound. Serum hCG values can vary by laboratory.
D. Special Examinations
With the advent of high-resolution transvaginal ultra-sound,
culdocentesis is rarely used in evaluation of possible ectopic
pregnancy. Laparoscopy is the surgical procedure of choice both to
confirm an ectopic pregnancy and in most cases to permit removal
of the ectopic pregnancy without the need for exploratory
laparotomy.
 Differential Diagnosis
Clinical and laboratory findings suggestive or diagnostic of
pregnancy will distinguish ectopic pregnancy from many acute
abdominal illnesses such as acute appendicitis, acute pelvic
inflammatory disease, ruptured corpus luteum cyst or ovarian
follicle, and urinary calculi. Uterine enlargement with clinical findings
similar to those found in ectopic pregnancy is also characteristic of
an aborting uterine pregnancy or hydatidiform mole. Ectopic
pregnancy should be suspected when postabortal tissue examination
fails to reveal chorionic villi. Steps must be taken for immediate
diagnosis, including prompt microscopic tissue examination,
ultrasonography, and serial hCG titers every 48 hours.
 Treatment
Patients must be warned about the complications of an ectopic
pregnancy and monitored closely. In a stable patient, methotrexate
(50 mg/m2) intramuscularly—given as single or multiple doses—is
acceptable medical therapy for early ectopic pregnancy. Favorable
criteria are that the pregnancy should be < 3.5 cm in largest
dimension and unruptured, with no active bleeding and no fetal heart
tones.
When a patient with an ectopic pregnancy is unstable or when
surgical therapy is planned, the patient is hospitalized. Blood is
typed and cross-matched. Ideally, diagnosis and operative
treatment should precede frank rupture of the tube and intra-
abdominal hemorrhage. The use of methotrexate in an unstable
patient is absolutely contraindicated.
Surgical treatment is definitive. In most patients, diagnostic
laparoscopy is the initial surgical procedure performed. Depending
on the size of the ectopic pregnancy and whether or not it has
ruptured, salpingostomy with removal of the ectopic or a partial or
complete salpingectomy can usually be performed. Clinical
conditions permitting, patency of the contralateral tube can be
established by injection of indigo carmine into the uterine cavity and
flow through the contralateral tube confirmed visually by the
surgeon.
Iron therapy for anemia may be necessary during convalescence.
Rho(D) immune globulin (300 mcg) should be given to Rh-negative
patients.
 Prognosis
Repeat tubal pregnancy occurs in about 10% of cases. This should
not be regarded as a contraindication to future pregnancy, but the
patient requires careful observation and early ultrasound
confirmation of an intrauterine pregnancy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Severe abdominal pain.
•    Palpation of an adnexal mass on pelvic examination.
•    Abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding in a pregnant
patient.
 When to Admit
 
•    Presence of symptoms or signs of a ruptured ectopic
pregnancy.
Barnhart KT. Clinical practice. Ectopic pregnancy. N Engl J Med.
2009 Jul 23;361(4):379–87. [PMID: 19625718]
 
GESTATIONAL TROPHOBLASTIC DISEASE
(Hydatidiform Mole & Choriocarcinoma)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Hydatidiform Mole
 Amenorrhea.
 Irregular uterine bleeding.
 Serum hCG β > 40,000 mU/mL.
 Passage of grapelike clusters of enlarged edematous villi per
vagina.
 Ultrasound of uterus shows characteristic heterogeneous
echogenic image and no fetus or placenta.
 Cytogenetic composition is 46, XX (85%), completely of
paternal origin.
Choriocarcinoma
 Persistence of detectable hCG after mole evacuation.
 
 General Considerations
Gestational trophoblastic disease is a spectrum of disorders that
includes hydatidiform mole (partial and complete), invasive mole
(local extension into the uterus or vagina), and choriocarcinoma (a
malignant tumor often complicated by distant metastases).
Complete moles show no evidence of a fetus on ultrasonography.
The majority are 46, XX with all chromosomes of paternal origin.
Partial moles generally show evidence of an embryo or gestational
sac; are triploid, slower-growing, and less symptomatic; and often
present clinically as a missed abortion. Partial moles tend to follow a
benign course, while complete moles have a greater tendency to
become choriocarcinomas.
The highest rates of gestational trophoblastic disease occur in
Asians. In the United States, the frequency is 1:1500 pregnancies.
Risk factors include low socioeconomic status, a history of mole,
and age younger than 18 or older than 40. Approximately 10% of
women require further treatment after evacuation of the mole; 5%
develop choriocarcinoma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Excessive nausea and vomiting occur in one-quarter of patients with
hydatidiform moles. Uterine bleeding, beginning at 6–8 weeks, is
observed in virtually all instances. In some cases, the uterus is larger
than would be expected in a normal pregnancy of the same
duration. Bilaterally enlarged cystic ovaries are sometimes palpable.
They are the result of ovarian hyperstimulation due to excess of
hCG.
Preeclampsia-eclampsia may develop during the second trimester
of an untreated molar pregnancy, but this is unusual.
Choriocarcinoma may be manifested by continued or recurrent
uterine bleeding after evacuation of a mole or following delivery,
abortion, or ectopic pregnancy. The presence of an ulcerative
vaginal tumor, pelvic mass, or evidence of distant metastatic tumor
may be the presenting observation.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hydatidiform moles are generally characterized by high serum hCG
β-subunit values, which can range from high normal to the millions.
Levels are higher with complete moles than with partial moles.
Serum hCG values, if extremely high, can assist in making the
diagnosis, but they are more helpful in managing response to
treatment. Hematocrit, creatinine, blood type, liver function tests,
and thyroid function tests should also be measured. High hCG levels
can cause the release of thyroid hormone, and rarely, symptoms of
hyperthyroidism will be present. These patients may require β-
blockers until the mole has been evacuated.
C. Imaging
Ultrasound has virtually replaced all other means of preoperative
diagnosis of hydatidiform mole. Placental vesicles can be easily seen
on transvaginal ultrasound. A preoperative chest film is indicated to
rule out pulmonary metastases of the trophoblast.
Treatment
A. Specific (Surgical) Measures
The uterus should be emptied as soon as the diagnosis of
hydatidiform mole is established, preferably by suction curettage.
Ovarian cysts should not be resected nor ovaries removed;
spontaneous regression of theca lutein cysts will occur with
elimination of the mole. The products of conception removed from
the uterus should be sent to a pathologist for review. In patients
who have completed their childbearing, hysterectomy is an
acceptable alternative. Hysterectomy does not preclude the need
for follow up of hCG levels.
B. Follow-Up Measures
Weekly quantitative hCG level measurements are initially required.
Following successful surgical evacuation, moles show a progressive
decline in hCG. After three negative weekly tests (< 5 mU/mL), the
interval may be increased to monthly for an additional 6 months.
The purpose of this follow up is to identify persistent metastatic and
nonmetastatic disease, including choriocarcinoma, which is more
likely to occur if the initial hCG is high and the uterus is large. If
levels plateau or begin to rise, the patient should be evaluated by
repeat laboratory tests, chest film, and dilatation and curettage
(D&C) before the initiation of chemo-therapy. Effective
contraception (preferably birth control pills) should be prescribed to
avoid the hazard and confusion of elevated hCG from a new
pregnancy. The hCG levels should be negative for 6 months before
pregnancy is attempted again. Because the risk of recurrence of a
molar pregnancy is 1%, an ultrasound should be performed in the
first trimester of the pregnancy following a mole to ensure that the
pregnancy is normal. In addition, an hCG level should then be
checked 6 weeks postpartum (after the subsequent normal
pregnancy) to ensure there is no persistent trophoblastic tissue.
C. Antitumor Chemotherapy
If malignant tissue is discovered at surgery or during the follow-up
examination, chemotherapy is indicated. For low-risk patients with
a good prognosis, methotrexate is considered first-line therapy
followed by actinomycin (see Table 39–10). The side effects—
anorexia, nausea and vomiting, stomatitis, rash, diarrhea, and bone
marrow suppression—usually are reversible in about 3 weeks and
can be ameliorated by the administration of leucovorin (0.1 mg/kg)
intramuscularly. Repeated courses of methotrexate 2 weeks apart
generally are required to destroy the trophoblast and maintain a
zero chorionic gonadotropin titer, as indicated by β-hCG
determination. Patients with a poor prognosis should be referred to
a cancer center, where multiple-agent chemotherapy probably will
be given.
 Prognosis
Five year survival after courses of chemotherapy, even when
metastases have been demonstrated, can be expected in at least
85% of cases of choriocarcinoma.
 When to Refer
 
•    Uterine size exceeds that anticipated for gestational
age.
•    Vaginal bleeding similar to menstruation.
•    Pregnant patient with a history of a molar pregnancy.
 When to Admit
 
•    Confirmed molar pregnancy by ultrasound and
laboratory studies.
•    Heavy vaginal bleeding in a pregnant patient under
evaluation.
Berkowitz RS et al. Clinical practice. Molar pregnancy. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Apr 16;360(16):1639–45. [PMID: 19369669]
 
Horowitz NS et al. Management of gestational trophoblastic
neoplasia. Semin Oncol. 2009 Apr;36(2):181–9. [PMID:
19332252]
 
OBSTETRIC COMPLICATIONS
OF THE SECOND & THIRD
TRIMESTER
 
PREECLAMPSIA-ECLAMPSIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Preeclampsia
 Blood pressure of ≥ 140 mm Hg systolic or ≥ 90 mm Hg
diastolic after 20 weeks of gestation.
 Proteinuria of ≥ 0.3 g in 24 hours.
Severe Preeclampsia
 Blood pressure of ≥ 160 mm Hg systolic or ≥ 110 mm Hg
diastolic.
 Proteinuria ≥ 5 g in 24 hours or 4+ on dipstick.
 Thrombocytopenia.
 Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets (HELLP).
 Pulmonary edema.
 Fetal growth restriction.
Eclampsia
 Seizures in a patient with evidence of preeclampsia.
 
 General Considerations
Preeclampsia is defined as the presence of newly elevated blood
pressure and proteinuria during pregnancy. Eclampsia is diagnosed
when seizures develop in a patient with evidence of preeclampsia.
Historically, the presence of three elements was required for the
diagnosis of preeclampsia: hypertension, proteinuria, and edema.
Edema was difficult to objectively quantify and is no longer a
required element.
Preeclampsia-eclampsia can occur any time after 20 weeks of
gestation and up to 6 weeks postpartum. It is a disease unique to
pregnancy, with the only cure being delivery of the fetus and
placenta. Preeclampsia-eclampsia develops in approximately 7% of
pregnant women in the United States. Primiparas are most
frequently affected; however, the incidence of preeclampsia-
eclampsia is increased with multiple gestation pregnancies, chronic
hypertension, diabetes, kidney disease, collagen-vascular and
autoimmune disorders, and gestational trophoblastic disease. Five
percent of women with preeclampsia progress to eclampsia.
Uncontrolled eclampsia is a significant cause of maternal death.
The cause of preeclampsia-eclampsia is not known, but it is likely
a multifactorial, two-stage process. The first stage is thought to be a
disturbance in placental implantation involving the spiral arteries very
early in gestation. The abnormal placental perfusion that results
leads to the formation of noxious free radicals. The second stage is
characterized by excessive inflammation causing endothelial
damage, vasospasm, and finally clinical signs and symptoms. An
immunologic component to preeclampsia-eclampsia has been
proposed, citing the increased incidence in primigravidas. This entire
process is likely enhanced by environmental factors, genetic
predisposition, and preexisting maternal disease.
 Clinical Findings
Clinically, the severity of preeclampsia-eclampsia can be measured
with reference to the six major sites in which it exerts its effects: the
central nervous system, the kidneys, the liver, the hematologic and
vascular systems, and the fetal-placental unit. By evaluating each of
these areas for the presence of mild to severe preeclampsia, the
degree of involvement can be assessed, and an appropriate
management plan can be formulated that balances the severity of
disease and gestational age (Table 19–3).
A. Preeclampsia
1. Mild—Patients usually have few complaints, and the diastolic
blood pressure is < 110 mm Hg. Edema may be present. The
platelet count is over 100,000/mcL, antepartum fetal testing is
reassuring, central nervous system irritability is minimal, epigastric
pain is not present, and liver enzymes are not elevated.
2. Severe—Symptoms are more dramatic and persistent. Patients
may complain of headache and vision changes. The blood pressure
is often quite high, with readings at or above 160/110 mm Hg.
Thrombocytopenia (platelet counts < 100,000/mcL) may be
present and progress to disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Severe epigastric pain may be present from hepatic subcapsular
hemorrhage with significant stretch or rupture of the liver capsule.
HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets)
is a form of severe preeclampsia.
 
Table 19–3. indicators of mild versus severe preeclampsia-
eclampsia.
 
AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase; LFTs, liver function tests.
B. Eclampsia
The occurrence of seizures defines eclampsia. It is a manifestation
of severe central nervous system involvement. Other findings of
preeclampsia are observed.
 Differential Diagnosis
Preeclampsia-eclampsia can mimic and be confused with many
other diseases, including chronic hypertension, chronic kidney
disease, primary seizure disorders, gallbladder and pancreatic
disease, immune thrombocytopenia, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura, and hemolyticuremic syndrome. It must always be
considered a possibility in any pregnant woman beyond 20 weeks
of gestation. It is particularly difficult to diagnose when a preexisting
disease such as hypertension is present. Uric acid values can be
quite helpful in such situations, since hyperuricemia is uncommon in
pregnancy except with gout, kidney disease, or preeclampsia-
eclampsia.
 Treatment
The use of diuretics, dietary restriction or enhancement, sodium
restriction, aspirin, and vitamin-mineral supplements such as calcium
or vitamin C and E have not been confirmed to be useful in clinical
studies. The only cure is delivery of the fetus at a time as favorable
as possible for its survival.
A. Preeclampsia
Early recognition is the key to treatment. This requires careful
attention to the details of prenatal care—especially subtle changes in
blood pressure and weight. The objectives are to prolong
pregnancy if possible, to allow fetal lung maturity while preventing
progression to severe disease and eclampsia. The critical factors are
the gestational age of the fetus, fetal pulmonary maturity, and the
severity of maternal disease. Preeclampsia-eclampsia at term is
managed by delivery. Prior to term, severe preeclampsiaeclampsia
requires delivery with very few exceptions. Epigastric pain, severe
range blood pressures, thrombocytopenia, and visual disturbances
are strong indications for delivery of the fetus. Severe disease by
protein alone can be managed more conservatively.
For mild preeclampsia, bed rest is the cornerstone of therapy.
This increases central blood flow to the kidneys, heart, brain, liver,
and placenta and may stabilize or even improve the degree of
preeclampsia-eclampsia for a period of time.
Bed rest may be attempted at home or in the hospital. Prior to
making this decision, the clinician should evaluate the six sites of
involvement listed in Table 19–3 and make an assessment about the
severity of disease.
1. Home management—Home management with bed rest may be
attempted for patients with mild preeclampsia and a stable home
situation. This requires assistance at home, rapid access to the
hospital, a reliable patient, and the ability to obtain frequent blood
pressure readings. A home health nurse can often provide frequent
home visits and assessment.
2. Hospital care—Hospitalization is required for women with
severe preeclampsia or those with unreliable home situations.
Regular assessment of blood pressure, reflexes, urine protein, and
fetal heart tones and activity are required. A complete blood count,
platelet count, and electrolyte panel including liver enzymes should
be checked regularly, with frequency dependent on severity. A 24-
hour urine collection for creatinine clearance and total protein
should be obtained on admission and repeated as indicated.
Magnesium sulfate is not used until the diagnosis of severe
preeclampsia is made and delivery planned (see Eclampsia, below).
Fetal evaluation should be obtained as part of the workup. If the
patient is being admitted to the hospital, fetal testing should be
performed on the same day to assess fetal wellbeing. This may be
done by fetal heart rate testing with nonstress testing or by
biophysical profile. A regular schedule of fetal surveillance must then
be followed. Daily fetal kick counts can be recorded by the patient
herself. Consideration can be given to amniocentesis to evaluate
fetal lung maturity if hospitalization occurs at 30–37 weeks of
gestation. 
If 
immaturity 
is 
suspected, 
corticosteroids
(betamethasone 12 mg intramuscularly every 24 h for two doses, or
dexamethasone 6 mg intramuscularly every 12 h for four doses) can
be administered to the mother. Fetuses between 26 and 30 weeks
of gestation can be presumed to be immature, and corticosteroids
should be given.
The method of delivery is determined by the maternal and fetal
status. A vaginal delivery is preferred because it has less blood loss
than a cesarean section and requires less coagulation factors.
Cesarean section is reserved for the usual fetal indications.
B. Eclampsia
1. Emergency care—If the patient is convulsing, she is turned on
her side to prevent aspiration and to improve blood flow to the
placenta. Fluid or food is aspirated from the glottis or trachea. The
seizure may be stopped by giving an intravenous bolus of either
magnesium sulfate, 4–6 g, or lorazepam, 2–4 mg over 4 minutes or
until the seizure stops. Magnesium sulfate is the preferred agent, and
alternatives should only be used if magnesium sulfate is unavailable.
A continuous intravenous infusion of magnesium sulfate is then
started at a rate of 2–3 g/h unless the patient is known to have
significantly reduced kidney function. Magnesium blood levels are
then checked every 4–6 hours and the infusion rate adjusted to
maintain a therapeutic blood level (4–6 mEq/L). Urinary output is
checked hourly and the patient assessed for signs of possible
magnesium toxicity such as loss of deep tendon reflexes or decrease
in respiratory rate and depth, which can be reversed with calcium
gluconate, 1 g intravenously over 2 minutes.
2. General care—Magnesium sulfate should be given
intravenously, 4- to 6-g load over 15–20 minutes followed by 2–3
g/h maintenance, for seizure prophylaxis in patients with severe
preeclampsia. The occurrence of eclampsia necessitates delivery
once the patient is stabilized. It is important, however, that
assessment of the status of the patient and fetus take place first.
Continuous fetal monitoring must be performed and blood typed
and cross-matched quickly. A urinary catheter is inserted to monitor
urinary output, and blood is tested for complete blood count,
platelets, liver enzymes, uric acid, creatinine, and electrolytes. If
hypertension is present with systolic values of ≥ 160 mm Hg or
diastolic values ≥ 110 mm Hg, antihypertensive medications should
be administered to reduce the blood pressure to 140–150/90–100
mm Hg. Lower blood pressures than this may induce placental
insufficiency through reduced perfusion. Hydralazine given in 5- to
10-mg increments intravenously every 20 minutes is frequently used
to lower blood pressure. Labetalol, 10–20 mg intravenously, every
20 minutes as needed, can also be used.
3. Delivery—Delivery is mandated once eclampsia has occurred.
Vaginal delivery is preferred. The rapidity with which delivery must
be achieved depends on the fetal and maternal status following the
seizure and the availability of laboratory data on the patient.
Oxytocin, given intravenously and titrated to a dose that results in
adequate contractions, may be used to induce or augment labor.
Oxytocin should only be administered by a clinician specifically
trained in its use. Regional analgesia or general anesthesia is
acceptable. Cesarean section is used for the usual obstetric
indications.
4. Postpartum—Magnesium sulfate infusion (2–3 g/h) should be
continued until preeclampsia-eclampsia has begun to resolve
postpartum (which may take 1–7 days), but in any case for at least
24 hours. The most reliable indicator of this resolution is the onset
of diuresis with urinary output of over 100–200 mL/h. When this
occurs, magnesium sulfate can be discontinued. Late-onset
preeclampsiaeclampsia can occur during the postpartum period. It
is usually manifested by either hypertension or seizures. Treatment is
the same as prior to delivery—ie, with hydralazine and magnesium
sulfate.
 When to Refer
 
•    New onset of hypertension and proteinuria in a pregnant
patient > 20 weeks’ gestation.
•    New onset of seizure activity in a pregnant patient.
•    Symptoms of severe preeclampsia in a pregnant patient
with elevated blood pressure above baseline.
 When to Admit
 
•    Evidence of severe preeclampsia or eclampsia.
•    Evaluation for preeclampsia when severe disease is
suspected.
•    Evaluation for preeclampsia in a patient with an
unstable home environment.
Leeman L et al. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Am Fam
Physician. 2008 Jul 1;78(1):93–100. [PMID: 18649616]
 
Sibai BM. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: the United States
perspective. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Apr;20 (2):102–6.
[PMID: 18388806]
 
Steegers EA et al. Pre-eclampsia. Lancet. 2010 Aug
21;376(9741): 631–44. [PMID: 20598363]
 
ACUTE FATTY LIVER OF PREGNANCY
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy is a disorder limited to the gravid
state. It occurs in the third trimester of pregnancy and involves acute
hepatic failure. With improved recognition and immediate delivery,
the mortality rate is now 7–23%. The disorder is usually seen after
the 35th week of gestation and is more common in primigravidas
and those with twins. The incidence is about 1:14,000 deliveries.
The cause of acute fatty liver of pregnancy is not known.
However, as many as 20% of cases may be due to a homozygous
fetal deficiency of long-chain 3-hydroxyacylcoenzyme A
dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deficiency in a heterozygous mother.
 Clinical Findings
Pathologic findings are unique to the disorder, with fatty
engorgement of hepatocytes. Clinical onset is gradual, with flu-like
symptoms that progress to the development of abdominal pain,
jaundice, encephalopathy, disseminated intravascular coagulation,
and death. On examination, the patient shows signs of hepatic
failure.
Laboratory findings show marked elevation of alkaline
phosphatase 
but 
only 
moderate 
elevations 
of 
alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST).
Prothrombin time and bilirubin are also elevated. The white blood
cell count is elevated, and the platelet count is depressed.
Hypoglycemia may be extreme.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis is that of fulminant hepatitis. However,
liver aminotransferases for fulminant hepatitis are higher (> 1000
units/mL) than those for acute fatty liver of pregnancy (usually 500–
1000 units/mL). It is also important to review the appropriate
history and perform the appropriate tests for toxins that cause liver
failure. Preeclampsia may involve the liver but typically does not
cause jaundice. The elevations in liver function tests in patients with
preeclampsia usually do not reach the levels seen in patients with
acute fatty liver of pregnancy.
 Treatment
Diagnosis of acute fatty liver of pregnancy mandates immediate
delivery. Supportive care during labor includes administration of
glucose, platelets, and fresh frozen plasma as needed. Vaginal
delivery is preferred. Resolution of encephalopathy occurs over
days, and supportive care with a low-protein diet is needed.
Prognosis
Recurrence rates for this liver disorder are unclear but probably
increased in families with proven LCHAD deficiency. Most
authorities advise against subsequent pregnancy, but there have
been reported cases of successful outcomes in later pregnancies.
Hay JE. Liver disease in pregnancy. Hepatology. 2008 Mar;
47(3): 1067–76. [PMID: 18265410]
 
PRETERM LABOR
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Regular uterine contractions approximately 5 minutes apart.
 Cervical dilatation or effacement, or both.
 
 General Considerations
Preterm birth is defined as delivery prior to 37 weeks gestation, and
spontaneous preterm labor with or without premature rupture of the
fetal membranes is responsible for at least two-thirds or all preterm
births. Prematurity is the largest single contributor to infant mortality.
There are many risk factors for spontaneous preterm labor,
including a past history of spontaneous preterm delivery, premature
rupture of the membranes, multiple gestation, African American
race, intrauterine infections, müllerian anomalies (including those
caused by exposure to DES), bacterial vaginosis, and previous
cervical excisional surgery. In high-risk women (particularly those
with a prior spontaneous preterm birth), a short cervical length (<
25 mm) as measured by ultrasound has been associated with an
increased risk of recurrent preterm birth. Although somewhat
controversial, there is evidence to suggest that women with
shortened cervices may benefit from placement of a cervical
cerclage. Other strategies aimed at preventing recurrent preterm
birth have been largely disappointing. However, a prospective
randomized controlled study has suggested that in women with
singleton pregnancies and a history of pre-term delivery, weekly
injections of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone capote given from 16 to 36
weeks of gestation can reduce the rate of recurrent preterm birth.
 Clinical Findings
Cervical softening and remodeling likely precede symptoms of
uterine contractions in preterm labor. Symptoms such as pelvic
pressure, cramping, or vaginal discharge may be the first complaints
in high-risk patients who later develop preterm labor. Because these
complaints may be vague and irregular uterine contractions are
common, distinguishing which patients merit further evaluation can
be problematic. In some cases, this distinction can be facilitated by
the use of fetal fibronectin measurement in cervicovaginal
specimens. This test is most useful when it is negative (< 50 ng/mL),
since the negative predictive value for delivery within 7–14 days is
93–97%. A negative test, therefore, usually means the patient can
be reassured and discharged home.
 Treatment
Patients must be educated to identify symptoms associated with
preterm labor to avoid unnecessary delay in their evaluation. In
high-risk patients who become symptomatic, limited activity and
bed rest continues to be recommended despite limited evidence to
support such recommendations.
Numerous pharmacologic agents (eg, tocolytics) have been given
in an attempt to forestall preterm birth, although none are
completely effective. Magnesium sulfate is commonly used, and
there is evidence that it may also be protective against cerebral
palsy. Magnesium sulfate is given intravenously as a 4- to 6-g bolus
followed by a continuous infusion of 2–3 g/h. Magnesium levels
should be determined every 4–6 hours to monitor for evidence of
toxicity. Magnesium sulfate is entirely cleared by the kidney and
must, therefore, be used with caution in women with any degree of
kidney injury. After contractions have ceased for 12–24 hours,
magnesium can be stopped and the situation reassessed.
β-Adrenergic drugs such as terbutaline have also been used.
Terbutaline can be given as an intravenous infusion starting at 2.5
mcg/min or as a subcutaneous injection starting at 250 mcg given
every 30 minutes. Oral terbuta-line therapy following parenteral
treatment is often elected and consists of giving 2.5–5 mg every 4–6
hours. With terbutaline, a dose-related elevation of heart rate of
20–40 beats/min may occur. If maternal tachycardia is significant
(>120 beats/min) or if it is accompanied by chest pain or
palpitations, cessation of therapy should be considered. Pulmonary
edema is also a well-documented serious side effect and occurs
with increased frequency with concomitant administration of
corticosteroids, large volume intravenous fluid infusion, maternal
sepsis, or prolonged tocolysis. Unfortunately, these serious side
effects are idiosyncratic and not dose-related. Certain metabolic
derangements have also been associated with β-adrenergic drugs,
most commonly hyperglycemia and hypokalemia.
Nifedipine, 20 mg orally every 6 hours, and indo-methacin, 50
mg orally once then 25 mg orally every 6 hours up to 48 hours,
have also been used with limited success. Nifedipine should not be
given in conjunction with magnesium sulfate.
Before attempts are made to prevent preterm delivery with
tocolytic agents, the patient should be assessed for any conditions
that would prompt iatrogenic preterm delivery. Severe
preeclampsia, certain fetal anomalies, placental abruption, and intra
uterine infection are all examples of indications for preterm delivery.
In these cases, it would be inappropriate to delay delivery with
tocolytics.
In pregnancies between 24 and 34 weeks gestation where
preterm birth is anticipated, betamethasone, 12 mg intramuscularly
repeated once 24 hours later, or dexamethasone, 6 mg
intramuscularly repeated every 12 hours for four doses, is
administered to hasten fetal lung maturation. Repeat courses are not
recommended.
 When to Refer
 
•    Symptoms of increased pelvic pressure or cramping in
high-risk patients.
•    Regular uterine contractions.
•    Rupture of membranes.
•    Vaginal bleeding.
 When to Admit
 
•    Cervical dilation of ≥ 2 cm prior to 34 weeks gestation.
•    Contractions that cause cervical change.
•    Rupture of membranes.
Berghella V et al. Effectiveness of cerclage according to severity of
cervical length shortening: a meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol. 2010 Apr;35(4):468–73. [PMID: 20052661]
 
Iams JD et al. Care for women with prior preterm birth. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2010 Aug;203(2):89–100. [PMID: 20417491]
 
Rouse DJ et al; Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units Network. A randomized, controlled trial of
magnesium sulfate for the prevention of cerebral palsy. N Engl J
Med. 2008 Aug 28;359(9):895–905. [PMID: 18753646]
 
THIRD-TRIMESTER BLEEDING
Five to 10 percent of women have vaginal bleeding in late
pregnancy. The clinician must distinguish between placental causes
(placenta previa, placental abruption, vasa previa) and nonplacental
causes (labor, infection, disorders of the lower genital tract,
systemic disease). The approach to bleeding in late pregnancy
generally should be conservative and expectant unless fetal distress
or excessive maternal hemorrhage occurs.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
The patient should be hospitalized and placed on bed rest. Initially,
continuous fetal monitoring is indicated to assess for fetal distress. A
complete blood count (including platelets) should be obtained and
repeated serially if the bleeding continues. If the hemorrhage is
significant, the need for blood replacement should be anticipated
and two to four units of red cells typed and cross-matched.
Coagulation studies can be ordered as clinically indicated.
Ultrasound examination should be performed to determine placental
location. Digital pelvic examinations are done only after ultrasound
examination has ruled out placenta previa.
B. Placenta Previa
Placenta previa occurs when the placenta implants over the internal
cervical os. Its presence at term is an indication for cesarean
delivery. If the patient presents with bleeding at < 36 weeks
gestation, continued hospitalization and bed rest may be necessary,
especially during the initial 7–10 days. If the bleeding and
contractions completely resolve and the patient can easily return to
the hospital if symptoms recur, she may be a candidate for home
management. She must be well instructed and counseled regarding
the risks. In patients with persistent vaginal bleeding at < 36 weeks
gestation in whom delivery is being contemplated, amniocentesis
can be performed to test for fetal lung maturity. If the gestational
age is < 34 weeks, corticosteroid therapy is indicated if fetal lung
maturity is not present.
C. Placental Abruption
Placental abruption is the premature separation of the placenta from
its implantation site before delivery. Classic symptoms are vaginal
bleeding, uterine tenderness and frequent contractions, but the
clinical presentation is highly variable. Ultrasound may be helpful to
exclude placenta previa, but failure to identify a retroplacental clot
does not exclude abruption. In most cases, abruption is an
indication for immediate delivery because of the high risk of fetal
death. Hypertension is a known risk factor for abruption, and the
patient should be assessed with this in mind. Other risk factors
include multiparity, cocaine use, smoking, previous abruption, and
thrombophilias.
Sakornbut E et al. Late pregnancy bleeding. Am Fam Physician.
2007 Apr 15;75(8):1199–206. [PMID: 17477103]
 
OBSTETRIC COMPLICATIONS
OF THE PERIPARTUM PERIOD
 
PUERPERAL MASTITIS (See Also Chapter 17)
Postpartum mastitis occurs sporadically in nursing mothers, usually
with symptom onset after discharge from the hospital, or it may
occur in epidemic form in the hospital. Staphylococcus aureus is
usually the causative agent. Inflammation is generally unilateral, and
women nursing for the first time are more often affected. Rarely,
inflammatory carcinoma of the breast can be mistaken for puerperal
mastitis.
Mastitis frequently begins within 3 months after delivery and may
start with an engorged breast and a sore or fissured nipple. Cellulitis
is usually obvious in the affected area of breast with redness,
tenderness, and local warmth. Fever and chills are common
complaints as well. Treatment consists of antibiotics effective against
penicillin-resistant staphylococci (dicloxacillin 500 mg orally every 6
hours or a cephalosporin for 10–14 days) and regular emptying of
the breast by nursing or by using a mechanical suction device.
Although nursing of the infected breast is safe for the infant, local
inflammation of the nipple may complicate latching. Failure to
respond to usual antibiotics within 3 days may represent an
organizing abscess or infection with a resistant organism. When the
causative organism is methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA), the
risk for abscess formation is increased when compared with
infection caused by nonresistant staphylococcal species. If an
abscess is suspected, ultrasound of the breast can help confirm the
diagnosis. In these cases, surgical evacuation is usually required.
Stafford I et al. Community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus among patients with puerperal mastitis
requiring hospitalization. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Sep;112(3): 533–
7. [PMID: 18757649]
 
CHORIOAMNIONITIS & METRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever not attributable to another source.
 Uterine tenderness.
 Foul smelling vaginal discharge.
 Tachycardia in the mother, fetus, or both.
 
 General Considerations
Peripartum infection of the uterus is a common problem
encountered during labor and the puerperium. Uterine infection in
pregnancy is referred to as chorioamnionitis, since the infection
involves the chorion. Uterine infection after delivery is often called
endometritis or endomyometritis, but the term “metritis” is probably
most accurate to emphasize that the infection extends throughout the
uterine tissue. These infections are polymicrobial and are most
commonly attributed to urogenital pathogens. Risk factors include
cesarean delivery, prolonged labor, use of internal monitors,
multiple pelvic examinations, prolonged rupture of membranes, and
lower genital tract infections.
 Clinical Findings
Chorioamnionitis and metritis are diagnosed by the presence of
fever (≥ 38°C) in the absence of any other source and one or more
of the following signs: maternal tachycardia, fetal tachycardia, foul-
smelling lochia, and uterine tenderness. Cultures of the cervix are
not done because of the polymicrobial nature of the infection.
 Treatment
Treatment is with broad-spectrum antibiotics that will cover gram-
positive organisms and gram-negative organisms if still pregnant and
gram-negative organisms and anaerobes if postpartum. A common
regimen for chorioamnionitis is ampicillin, 2 g intravenously every 6
hours, and gentamicin, 2 mg/kg intravenous load then 1.5 mg/kg
intravenously every 8 hours. A common regimen for metritis is
gentamicin, 2 mg/kg intravenous load then 1.5 mg/kg intravenously
every 8 hours, and clindamycin, 900 mg intravenously every 8
hours. Antibiotics are stopped when the patient has been afebrile
for 24 hours. No oral antibiotics are subsequently needed. Patients
with metritis who do not respond in the first 24–48 hours may have
enterococcus and require additional gram-positive coverage (such
as ampicillin) to the regimen.
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
COMPLICATING PREGNANCY
 
ANEMIA
Normal pregnancy is characterized by an increase in maternal
plasma volume of about 50% and in increase in red cell volume of
about 25%. Because of these changes, the mean hemoglobin and
hematocrit values are lower than in the nonpregnant state. Anemia in
pregnancy is often defined as a hemoglobin measurement below 10
g/dL or hematocrit below 30%. Symptoms such as fatigue and
dyspnea that would otherwise suggest the presence of anemia in
non-pregnant women are normal in pregnant women; therefore,
periodic measurement of blood counts in pregnancy is essential so
that anemia can be identified and treated.
A. Iron Deficiency Anemia
The increased requirement for over the course of pregnancy is
appreciable in order to support fetal growth and expansion of
maternal blood volume. Dietary intake of iron is generally insufficient
to meet this demand, and it is recommended that all pregnant
women receive about 30 mg of elemental iron per day in the second
and third trimesters. If supplementation is inadequate, iron
deficiency anemia develops. The usual findings of hypochromic and
microcytic red cells may not initially be evident on the complete
blood count, but iron studies can confirm the diagnosis if necessary.
A serum iron level below 40 mcg/dL and transferrin saturation <
10% are consistent with iron deficiency anemia (see Chapter 13).
Treatment consists of supplements with 60–100 mg of elemental
iron and a diet containing iron-rich foods. Iron is best absorbed if
taken with a dietary source of vitamin C (raw fruits or lightly
cooked greens).
B. Folic Acid Deficiency Anemia
Megaloblastic anemia in pregnancy is almost always caused by folic
acid deficiency, since vitamin B12 deficiency is extremely uncommon
in the childbearing years. The daily requirement of folic acid
increases in pregnancy, and supplementation with 0.4 mg of folate is
recommended. Importantly, this dose taken during the
periconceptional period has also been shown to reduce the risk of
neural tube defects in the offspring. Multiple gestation, infections,
malabsorption, and use of anticonvulsant drugs such as phenytoin
can precipitate folic acid deficiency, and additional folate
supplementation should be considered in these settings. Lactating
women continue to have increased demand for folate, and the
diagnosis is sometimes made in the puerperium.
The diagnosis is made by finding macrocytic red cells and
hypersegmented neutrophils in a blood smear (see Chapter 13).
However, blood smears in pregnancy may be difficult to interpret,
since they frequently show iron deficiency changes as well. With
established folate deficiency, a supplemental dose of 1 mg/d and a
diet with increased folic acid is generally sufficient to correct the
anemia.
C. Sickle Cell Anemia
Women with sickle cell anemia are subject to serious complications
in pregnancy. The anemia becomes more severe, and acute pain
crises often occur more frequently. When compared with women
who do not have hemoglobinopathies, women with hemoglobin SS
are at increased risk for infections (especially pulmonary and urinary
tract), thromboembolic events, pregnancy-related hypertension,
transfusion, cesarean delivery, preterm birth, and fetal growth
restriction. There also continues to be an increased rate of maternal
mortality, despite an increased recognition of the high-risk nature of
these pregnancies. Intensive medical treatment may improve the
outcomes for both mother and fetus. Prophylactically transfusing
packed red cells to lower the level of hemoglobin S and elevate the
level of hemoglobin A is a controversial practice without clear
benefit. Management decisions should be made in conjunction with
g
j
a maternal fetal medicine specialist and a hematologist.
Genetic counseling should be offered to patients with sickle cell
disease or sickle trait (hemoglobin AS). If the father is a carrier of
the sickle cell gene (or his status is unknown), the parents may wish
to undergo prenatal diagnosis to determine whether the fetus is
affected.
Contraceptive counseling postpartum is important, although the
safest and most effective method in women with sickle cell disease
is unclear. Progestin-only compounds may be ideal because
progesterone has long been recognized to help prevent pain crises
in some women. Intrauterine devices carry a risk of infection and
combination oral contraceptives are a concern because of the
thrombogenic potential; neither of these forms of contraception have
been adequately studied in these patients.
Women with hemoglobin SC disease are also at increased risk
for complications, but the morbidity does not appear to be as great
as in women with SS disease. Women with either SC or SS disease
are managed similarly. Women with sickle cell trait alone usually
have an uncomplicated pregnancy course except for an increased
risk of urinary tract infection.
ACOG Committee on Obstetrics. ACOG Practice Bulletin No.
78: Hemoglobinopathies in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2007
Jan;109(1):229–37. [PMID: 17197616]
 
Villers MS et al. Morbidity associated with sickle cell disease in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Aug;199(2):125:e1–5.
[PMID: 18533123]
 
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
The antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is characterized by the
presence of specific autoantibodies in association with certain
clinical conditions, most notably arterial and venous thrombosis and
adverse pregnancy outcomes. Clinically, the diagnosis can be
suspected after any of the following outcomes: an episode of
thrombosis, three consecutive spontaneous abortions prior to 10
weeks’ gestation, one fetal loss after 10 weeks’ gestation, or a
preterm delivery at less than 34 weeks due to preeclampsia. In
addition to these clinical features, laboratory criteria include the
identification of the lupus anticoagulant or anticardiolipin antibodies,
or both. The lupus anticoagulant cannot be directly assayed, but it is
tested for in several different phospholipid-dependent clotting tests.
Anticardiolipin antibodies may be detected with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing. While the lupus
anticoagulant is reported as either positive or negative,
anticardiolipin antibodies are only considered clinically significant if
they are of the IgG or IgM subtypes and present in moderate to
high levels. Either antibody may cause false-positive serologic tests
for syphilis.
Treatment for APS in pregnancy generally involves administration
of a heparin compound and low-dose aspirin (81 mg). In women
with recurrent pregnancy loss and APS, it has been demonstrated
that unfractionated heparin and low-dose aspirin can reduce the risk
for spontaneous abortion. Outside of the first trimester, heparin is
generally continued through pregnancy and the early postpartum
period for thromboprophylaxis. LMWH is also commonly used for
this indication; however, it is not clear that LMWH has the same
effect on reducing the risk of recurrent abortion as unfractionated
heparin. Either prophylactic or therapeutic dosing strategies may be
appropriate depending on the patient's history and clinical risk
factors. Infusions of intravenous immunoglobulin have not proven
useful in these patients.
ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins-Obstetrics. ACOG
Practice Bulletin #68: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Obstet
Gynecol. 2005 Nov;106(5 Pt 1):1113–21. [PMID: 16260543]
 
Bates SM et al; American College of Chest Physicians. Venous
thromboembolism, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and
pregnancy: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based
Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008 Jun;133(6
suppl):844S–86S. [PMID: 18574280]
 
Ziakas PD et al. Heparin treatment in antiphospholipid syndrome
with recurrent pregnancy loss: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2010 Jun;115(6):1256–62. [PMID:
20502298]
 
THYROID DISEASE
Overt hypothyroidism in pregnancy has been associated with an
increase in complications such as preterm birth, preeclampsia,
placental abruption, and impaired neuropsychological development
in the offspring. The most common etiology is Hashimoto
(autoimmune) thyroiditis. Many of the symptoms of hypothyroidism
mimic those of normal pregnancy, so the diagnosis is generally made
by identifying an elevated TSH and a depressed free T4 level. Initial
treatment is empiric with levothyroxine started at 75-100 mcg/d.
Thyroid function tests can be repeated at 4–6 weeks and the dose
adjusted as necessary with the goal of normalizing the TSH level.
Subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as an increased TSH
and a normal thyroxine level. There is insufficient data at this time to
recommend screening for or treating subclinical hypothyroidism in
pregnancy.
Overt hyperthyroidism is also associated with increased risks
in pregnancy. Spontaneous abortion, preterm birth, preeclampsia,
and maternal heart failure occur with increased frequency with
untreated thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid storm, although rare, can be a life-
threatening complication. Management is initially medical, and the
thyroid inhibitor of choice is propylthiouracil, which acts to inhibit
production of T4 and blocks peripheral conversion of T4 to
triiodothyronine (T3). The initial dose of propylthiouracil is 100–150
mg orally three times a day, and the dose can be lowered as the
euthyroid state is approached. The therapeutic target is
normalization of the free T4 level, as the TSH levels generally stay
suppressed even with adequate treatment. A β-blocker can be used
for such symptoms as palpitations or tremors. Fetal hypothyroidism
or hyperthyroidism is uncommon but can occur with maternal
Graves disease, which is the most common cause of
hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. Radioiodine ablation is absolutely
contraindicated in pregnancy because it may destroy the fetal
thyroid as well.
Transient autoimmune thyroiditis can occur in the postpartum
period and is evident within the first year after delivery. The first
phase, occurring up to 4 months post-partum, is a hyperthyroid
state. Over the next few months, there is a transition to a
hypothyroid state, which may require treatment with levothyroxine.
Spontaneous resolution to a euthyroid state is the rule in most cases.
Casey BM et al. Thyroid disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol.
2006 Nov;108(5):1283–92. [PMID: 17077257]
 
Fitzpatrick DL et al. Diagnosis and management of thyroid disease
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2010
Jun;37(2):173–93. [PMID: 20685547]
 
DIABETES MELLITUS
Normal pregnancy can be characterized as a state of increased
insulin resistance which helps ensure a steady stream of glucose
delivery to the developing fetus. Thus, both mild fasting
hypoglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia are physiologic.
These metabolic changes are felt to be hormonally mediated with
likely contributions from human placental lactogen, estrogen, and
progesterone.
A. Gestational Diabetes
Gestational diabetes is abnormal glucose tolerance in pregnancy and
is generally believed to be an exaggeration of the pregnancy-
induced physiologic changes in carbohydrate metabolism.
Alternatively, pregnancy may unmask an underlying propensity for
glucose intolerance, which will be evident in the nonpregnant state at
some future time if not in the immediate postpartum period. Indeed,
50% of women with gestational diabetes are diagnosed with overt
diabetes at some point in their lifetime. During the pregnancy, the
principal concern in women identified to have gestational diabetes is
excessive fetal growth, which can result in increased maternal and
perinatal morbidity. Shoulder dystocia occurs more frequently in
infants of diabetic mothers because of fetal overgrowth and
increased fat deposition on the shoulders. Cesarean delivery and
preeclampsia are also significantly increased in women with
diabetes, both gestational and overt.
Although the diagnostic thresholds for glucose tolerance tests
vary somewhat by region, most practitioners elect to offer testing to
all pregnant women. A screening 50-g glucose load is administered
at 24–28 weeks’ gestation, and if this test is abnormal, the
diagnostic test is a 100-g oral glucose tolerance test (Table 19–4).
Women in whom gestational diabetes is diagnosed should undergo
nutrition counseling, and insulin should be given to those with
persistent fasting hyperglycemia. Insulin can be injected in a split
dose mix of NPH and regular, administered twice daily. Although
insulin has long been regarded as the standard of care in this
situation, the use of oral hypoglycemic agents (such as glyburide) in
selected patients appears safe based on the limited information
available. Capillary blood glucose monitoring is checked four times
per day, once fasting and three times after meals. Euglycemia is
considered to be 60–90 mg/dL while fasting and < 120 mg/dL 2
hours postprandially. Intensive therapy with dietary modifications or
insulin therapy, or both, has been demonstrated to decrease rates of
macrosomia, shoulder dystocia, and preeclampsia. Because of the
increased prevalence of overt diabetes in these women, they should
be evaluated 6–12 weeks postpartum by a 2-hour oral glucose
tolerance test (75-g glucose load).
 
Table 19–4. screening and diagnostic criteria for gestational
diabetes mellitus.
 
Screening for gestational diabetes mellitus
1. 50-g oral glucose load, administered between the 24th
and 28th weeks, without regard to time of day or time of
last meal. Universal blood glucose screening is indicated
for patients who are of Hispanic, African, Native American,
South or East Asian, Pacific Island, or indigenous
Australian ancestry. Other patients who have no known
diabetes in first-degree relatives, are under 25 years of
age, have normal weight before pregnancy, and have no
history of abnormal glucose metabolism or poor obstetric
outcome do not require routine screening.
2. Venous plasma glucose measure 1 hour later.
3. Value of 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) or above in venous
plasma indicates the need for a full diagnostic glucose
tolerance test.
Diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus
1. 100-g oral glucose load, administered in the morning
after overnight fast lasting at least 8 hours but not more
than 14 hours, and following at least 3 days of unrestricted
diet (> 150 g carbohydrate) and physical activity.
2. Venous plasma glucose is measured fasting and at 1,
2, and 3 hours. Subject should remain seated and should
not smoke throughout the test.
3. Two or more of the following venous plasma
concentrations must be equaled or exceeded for a
diagnosis of gestational diabetes: fasting, 95 mg/dL (5.3
mmol/L); 1 hour, 180 mg/dL (10 mmol/L); 2 hours, 155
mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L); 3 hours, 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L).
B. Overt Diabetes
Overt diabetes is diabetes mellitus that antedates the pregnancy. As
in gestational diabetes, fetal overgrowth from inadequately
controlled hyperglycemia remains a significant concern because of
the increased maternal and perinatal morbidity that accompany
macrosomia. Women with overt diabetes are subject to a number
of other complications as well. Rates of fetal loss, spontaneous
abortions, and third trimester stillbirths occur with increased
frequency in these women. There is also a twofold to threefold
increased risk for fetal malformations, as hyperglycemia during
organogenesis is teratogenic. The most common malformations in
offspring of diabetic women are cardiac, skeletal, and neural tube
defects. For the mother, the likelihood of infections and pregnancy-
related hypertension is increased.
Preconception counseling and evaluation in a diabetic woman is
ideal to maximize the pregnancy outcomes. This provides an
opportunity to optimize glycemic control and evaluate for evidence
of end-organ damage. The initial evaluation of diabetic women
should include a complete chemistry panel, HBA1c determination,
24-hour urine collection for total protein and creatinine clearance,
funduscopic examination, and an ECG. Hypertension is common
and should be addressed. Euglycemia should be established before
conception and maintained during pregnancy with daily home
glucose monitoring by the patient. There is an inverse relationship
between glycemic control and the occurrence of fetal
malformations, and women whose periconceptional glycosylated
hemoglobin levels are at or near normal levels have rates of
malformations that approach baseline. A well-planned dietary
program is a key component, with an intake of 1800–2200 kcal/d
divided into three meals and three snacks. Insulin is given
subcutaneously in a split-dose regimen as described above for
women with gestational diabetes. The use of continuous insulin
pump therapy has been found to be very useful during pregnancy in
women with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Throughout the pregnancy, diabetic women should be seen every
2–3 weeks and more frequently depending on the clinical condition.
Adjustments in the insulin regimen may be necessary as the
pregnancy progresses. A specialized ultrasound is often performed
around 20 weeks to detect fetal malformations. Signs and
symptoms of infections should be evaluated and promptly treated.
In the third trimester, fetal surveillance is indicated, and women with
diabetes should receive serial antenatal testing (usually in the form of
a nonstress test or biophysical profile). The timing of delivery is
dictated by the quality of diabetic control, the presence or absence
of medical complications, and fetal status. The goal is to reach 39
weeks (38 completed weeks) and then proceed with delivery.
Confirmation of lung maturity may be appropriate if preterm
delivery is contemplated.
Landon MB. Is there benefit to the treatment of mild gestational
diabetes mellitus? Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010 June;202(6): 649–
53. [PMID: 20510966]
 
Mathiesen ER et al. Insulin treatment in diabetic pregnancy.
Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2008 May–Jun;24(Suppl 2):S3–20.
[PMID: 18429332]
 
Nicholson W et al. Benefits and risks of oral diabetes agents
compared with insulin in women with gestational diabetes: a
systematic review. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Jan;113(1):193–205.
[PMID: 19104375]
 
CHRONIC HYPERTENSIVE DISEASE
Chronic hypertension is estimated to complicate approximately 3%
of pregnancies. To establish this diagnosis, hypertension should
antedate the pregnancy or be evident before 20 weeks’ gestation to
differentiate it from pregnancy-related hypertension. This distinction
can be problematic when the initial presentation is after 20 weeks,
but chronic hypertension is confirmed if the blood pressure remains
elevated beyond 12 weeks postpartum. Risk factors for chronic
hypertension include older maternal age, African American race,
and obesity. While essential hypertension is by far the most
common etiology, secondary causes should be sought when
clinically indicated.
Women with chronic hypertension are at increased risk for
adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes. Superimposed
preeclampsia develops in up to 25% of women with chronic
hypertension, and the risk appears to increase with greater degrees
of baseline hypertension. In these situations, there is a tendency for
preeclampsia to occur at an earlier gestational age, be more severe,
and be associated with fetal growth restriction. Women with chronic
hyper-tension are also at increased risk for placental abruption and
preterm birth.
Pregnant women with chronic hypertension require medication
only if the blood pressure is sustained at or above 150/100 mm Hg.
Treatment of hypertension has not been demonstrated to improve
pregnancy outcomes, but it is indicated in women with significant
hypertension for long-term maternal cardiovascular health. For
initiation of treatment, methyldopa has the longest record of safety
at a starting dosage of 250 mg orally two to three times daily.
Therapy with β-blockers or calcium channel blockers is also
acceptable (see Tables 11–7, 11–9). Care must be taken not to
excessively reduce the blood pressure, as this may decrease
uteroplacental perfusion. The goal is a modest reduction in blood
pressure and avoidance of severe hyper-tension (160/110 mm Hg).
If a woman with chronic hypertension is stable on a medical
regimen when she becomes pregnant, it is usually appropriate to
continue this therapy. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors are the exception; they are contraindicated in all trimesters
of pregnancy. In addition to causing fetal hypocalvaria and renal
failure with exposure in the second and third trimesters, it is now
recognized that ACE inhibitors are teratogenic in the first trimester.
Diuretics, although not typically initiated in pregnancy, may be
continued in patients who are taking them when they become
pregnant.
When there is sustained severe hypertension despite multiple
medications or significant end-organ damage from hypertensive
disease, pregnancy is not likely to be tolerated well. In these
situations, therapeutic abortion may be appropriate. If the
pregnancy is continued, the woman must be counseled that the
maternal and perinatal risks are appreciable, and complications such
as superimposed preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction should
be anticipated.
Jim B et al. Hypertension in pregnancy: a comprehensive update.
Cardiol Rev. 2010 Jul–Aug;18(4):178–89. [PMID: 20539101]
 
HEART DISEASE
Normal pregnancy physiology is characterized by cardiovascular
adaptations in the mother. Cardiac output increases markedly as a
result of both augmented stroke volume and an increase in the
resting heart rate, and the maternal blood volume expands by up to
50%. These changes may not be tolerated well in women with
functional or structural abnormalities of the heart. Thus, although
only a small number of pregnancies are complicated by cardiac
disease, these contribute disproportionately to overall rates of
maternal morbidity and mortality. Most heart disease seen in
women of childbearing age in the United States is caused by
congenital heart disease.
For practical purposes, the functional capacity of the heart is the
best single measurement of cardiopulmonary status (see box,
Functional Cardiac Assessment). Most pregnant women with
cardiac disease have class I or II functional disability, and good
outcomes are generally anticipated in this group. Women with more
severe disability (class III or IV) are rare in contemporary
obstetrics; however, the maternal mortality is markedly increased in
this setting and is usually the result of congestive heart failure.
Because of these risks, therapeutic abortion for maternal health
should be considered in women who are severely disabled from
cardiac disease. Specific conditions that have been associated with
a particularly high risk for maternal death include Eisenmenger
syndrome, primary pulmonary hypertension, Marfan syndrome with
aortic root dilatation, and severe aortic or mitral stenosis. In general,
these conditions should be considered contraindications to
pregnancy.
FUNCTIONAL CARDIAC ASSESSMENT
Class
I
Uncompromised: No limitation on physical activity.
Class
II
Slightly limited: Symptoms present with ordinary physical
activity but asymptomatic at rest.
Class
III
Markedly limited: Symptoms present with less than ordinary
activity but asymptomatic at rest.
Class
IV
Severely compromised: Inability to perform any activity
without developing symptoms, which may also develop at
rest.
 
Pregnant women with cardiac disease are best treated by a team
of practitioners with experience in caring for such patients.
Symptoms of volume overload should be evaluated and treated
promptly. Labor management may differ slightly depending on the
specific cardiac lesion, but cesarean section is generally reserved for
obstetric indications. The early postpartum period is a critical time
for fluid management. Patients who are predisposed to heart failure
should be monitored closely during the puerperium.
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is not recommended for a
vaginal or cesarean delivery if infection is not present. If infection is
present, such as chorioamnionitis, only women with cardiac
conditions associated with the highest risk of adverse outcome
should receive prophylaxis (see Table 33–4). Prophylaxis should be
given intravenously (see Table 33–6).
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Committee
on Obstetric Practice. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 421,
November 2008: Antibiotic prophylaxis for infective endocarditis.
Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Nov;112(5):1193–4. [PMID: 18978128]
 
Drenthen W et al; ZAHARA Investigators. Outcome of pregnancy
in women with congenital heart disease: a literature review. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2007 Jun 19;49(24):2303–11. [PMID: 17572244]
 
ASTHMA
Asthma is one of the most common medical conditions encountered
in pregnancy. Women with mild to moderate asthma can generally
expect excellent pregnancy outcomes, but severe or poorly
controlled asthma has been associated with adverse maternal and
perinatal outcomes. The effects of pregnancy on asthma are
unpredictable; some women experience an increase in
exacerbations while others experience a decrease or no change in
symptoms. Strategies for treatment are similar to that in nonpregnant
women. Patients should be educated about symptom management
and avoidance of asthma triggers. Baseline pulmonary function tests
can provide an objective assessment of lung function and may help
the patient with self-monitoring of her asthma severity using a peak
flow meter. Medications used commonly in the nonpregnant
population are acceptable in pregnancy, and none are absolutely
contraindicated. Inhaled β2-agonists are indicated for all asthma
patients, and inhaled corticosteroids are added for persistent
symptoms when a rescue inhaler alone is inadequate. Budesonide is
the preferred inhaled corticosteroid based on its documented safety
in pregnancy. The primary goals of management in pregnancy
include minimizing symptoms and avoiding hypoxic episodes to the
fetus.
Dombrowski MP et al; ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins-
Obstetrics. ACOG practice bulletin: Clinical management
guidelines for obstetrician-gynecologists number 90, February
2008: asthma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Feb;111 (2 Pt
1):457–64. [PMID: 18238988]
 
SEIZURE DISORDERS
Epilepsy is one of the most common serious neurologic disorders in
pregnant women. Many of the commonly used antiepileptic
medications are known human teratogens. Therefore, the principal
objectives in managing pregnancy in epileptic women are achieving
adequate control of seizures while minimizing exposure to
medications that can cause congenital malformations. Women
contemplating pregnancy who have not had a seizure for 5 years
should consider a prepregnancy trial of withdrawal from
antiepileptic therapy. For those who continue to require treatment,
therapy with one medication is preferred. Selecting a regimen
should be based on the type of seizure disorder and the risks
associated with each medication. Valproic acid should not be
considered first-line therapy because it has consistently been
associated with higher rates of malformations than most other
commonly used antiepileptics, and there are data to suggest that it is
also associated with impairments of cognitive development in the
offspring. Phenytoin and carbamazepine are older medications that
are still used commonly, and both have established patterns of
associated fetal malformations. Experience is increasing with the
newer antiepileptics. Lamotrigine appears to be safe with rates of
malformations 
similar 
to 
other 
anticonvulsants, 
although
pharmacokinetic changes in pregnancy may mandate dosing
adjustments. Levetiracetam is also being increasingly used, but
insufficient data are available to confirm the safety of this agent in
pregnancy. Supplemental folate (4 mg/d orally) administered
periconceptionally decreases congenital malformations in women
taking antiepileptic therapy.
Buhimschi CS et al. Medication in pregnancy and lactation: Part 1.
Teratology. Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Jan;113(1):166–88. [PMID:
19104374]
 
Harden CL et al. Practice parameter update: management issues
for women with epilepsy–focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based
review): teratogenesis and perinatal outcomes: report of the Quality
Standards Subcommittee and Therapeutics and Technology
Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology and American Epilepsy Society. Neurology. 2009 Jul
14;73(2):133–41. [PMID: 19398681]
 
Tomson T et al. Teratogenic effects of antiepileptic medications.
Neurol Clin. 2009 Nov;27(4):993–1002. [PMID: 19853219]
 
INFECTIOUS CONDITIONS
COMPLICATING PREGNANCY
 
URINARY TRACT INFECTION
The urinary tract is especially vulnerable to infections during
pregnancy because the altered secretions of steroid sex hormones
and the pressure exerted by the gravid uterus on the ureters and
bladder cause hypotonia and congestion and predispose to urinary
stasis. Labor and delivery and urinary retention postpartum also
may initiate or aggravate infection. Escherichia coli is the offending
organism in over two-thirds of cases.
From 2% to 8% of pregnant women have asymptomatic
bacteriuria, which some believe to be associated with an increased
risk of preterm birth. It is estimated that pyelonephritis will develop
in 20–40% of these women if untreated.
An evaluation for asymptomatic bacteriuria at the first prenatal
visit is recommended for all pregnant women. If a urine culture is
positive, treatment should be initiated. Nitrofurantoin (100 mg orally
twice daily), ampicillin (250 mg orally four times daily), and
cephalexin (250 mg orally four times daily) are acceptable
medications for 3–7 days. Sulfonamides should be avoided in the
third trimester because they may interfere with bilirubin binding and
thus impose a risk of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and kernicterus.
Fluoroquinolones are also contraindicated because of their potential
teratogenic effects on fetal cartilage and bone. Patients with
recurrent bacteriuria should receive suppressive medication (once
daily dosing of an appropriate antibiotic) for the remainder of the
pregnancy. Acute pyelonephritis requires hospitalization for intra
venous administration of antibiotics and crystalloids until the patient
is afebrile; this is followed by a full course of oral antibiotics.
Schnarr J et al. Asymptomatic bacteriuria and symptomatic urinary
tract infections in pregnancy. Eur J Clin Invest. 2008 Oct;
38(Suppl 2):50–7. [PMID: 18826482]
 
GROUP B STREPTOCOCCAL INFECTION
Group B streptococci frequently colonize the lower female genital
tract, with an asymptomatic carriage rate in pregnancy of 10–30%.
This rate depends on maternal age, gravidity, and geographic
variation. Vaginal carriage is asymptomatic and intermittent, with
spontaneous clearing in approximately 30% and recolonization in
about 10% of women. Adverse perinatal outcomes associated with
group B streptococcal colonization include urinary tract infection,
intrauterine infection, premature rupture of membranes, preterm
delivery, and postpartum metritis.
Women with postpartum metritis due to infection with group B
streptococci, especially after cesarean section, develop fever,
tachycardia, and abdominal pain, usually within 24 hours after
delivery. Approximately 35% of these women are bacteremic.
Group B streptococcal infection is a common cause of neonatal
sepsis. Transmission rates are high, yet the rate of neonatal sepsis is
surprisingly low at < 1:1000 live births. Unfortunately, the mortality
rate associated with early-onset disease can be as high as 20–30%
in premature infants. In contrast, it is approximately 2–3% in those
at term. Moreover, these infections can contribute markedly to
chronic morbidity, including mental retardation and neurologic
disabilities. Late-onset disease develops through contact with
hospital nursery personnel. Up to 45% of these health care workers
can carry the bacteria on their skin and transmit the infection to
newborns.
CDC recommendations for screening and prophylaxis for group
B streptococcal colonization are set forth in this chapter in the
section on Essentials of Prenatal Care: Tests and Procedures.
Verani JR et al; Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC). Prevention of perinatal group B
streptococcal disease—revised guidelines from CDC, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Nov 19;59(RR-10): 1–36. [PMID:
21088663]
 
VARICELLA
Commonly known as chickenpox, varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
infection has a fairly benign course when incurred during childhood
but may result in serious illness in adults, particularly during
pregnancy. Infection results in lifelong immunity. Approximately
95% of women born in the United States have VZV antibodies by
the time they reach reproductive age. The incidence of VZV
infection during pregnancy has been reported as up to 7:10,000.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period for this infection is 10–20 days. A primary
infection follows and is characterized by a flu-like syndrome with
malaise, fever, and development of a pruritic maculopapular rash on
the trunk which becomes vesicular and then crusts. Pregnant
women are prone to the development of VZV pneumonia, often a
fulminant infection sometimes requiring respiratory support. After
primary infection, the virus becomes latent, ascending to dorsal root
ganglia. Subsequent reactivation can occur as zoster, often under
circumstances of immunocompromise, although this is rare during
pregnancy.
Two types of fetal infection have been documented. The first is
congenital VZV syndrome, which typically occurs in 0.4–2% of
fetuses exposed to primary VZV infection during the first trimester.
Anomalies include limb and digit abnormalities, microphthalmos,
and microcephaly.
Infection during the second and third trimesters is less
threatening. Maternal IgG crosses the placenta, protecting the fetus.
The only infants at risk for severe infection are those born after
maternal viremia but before development of maternal protective
antibody. Maternal infection manifesting 5 days before or after
delivery is the time period believed to be most hazardous for
transmission to the fetus.
B. Laboratory Findings
Diagnosis is commonly made on clinical grounds. Laboratory
verification of recent infection is made most often by antibody
detection techniques, including ELISA, fluorescent antibody, and
hemagglutination inhibition. Serum obtained by cordocentesis may
be tested for VZV IgM to document fetal infection.
 Treatment
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG) has been shown to
prevent or modify the symptoms of infection in some women but is
no longer readily available. Treatment success depends on
identification of susceptible women at or just following exposure.
Women with a questionable or negative history of chickenpox
should be checked for antibody, since the overwhelming majority
will have been previously exposed. If the antibody is negative,
VZIG (625 units intramuscularly) should be given within 96 hours
after exposure. There are no known adverse effects of VZIG
administration during pregnancy, although the incubation period for
disease can be lengthened. Infants born within 5 days after onset of
maternal infection should also receive VZIG (125 units).
Infected pregnant women should be closely observed and
hospitalized at the earliest signs of pulmonary involvement.
Intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours) is
recommended in the treatment of VZV pneumonia.
Smith CK et al. Varicella in the fetus and newborn. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med. 2009 Aug;14(4):209–17. [PMID: 19097954]
 
TUBERCULOSIS
The diagnosis of tuberculosis in pregnancy is made by history
taking, physical examination, and skin testing, with special attention
to women in high-risk groups. Women at high risk include those
who are from endemic areas, those infected with HIV, drug users,
health care workers, and close contacts of people with tuberculosis.
Chest radio-graphs should not be obtained as a routine screening
measure in pregnancy but should be used only in patients with a skin
test conversion or with suggestive findings in the history and physical
examination. Abdominal shielding must be used if a chest
radiograph is obtained.
Decisions on treatment depend on whether the patient has active
disease or is at high risk for progression to active disease. Women
who are purified protein derivative (PPD)–positive but not at high
risk for disease progression can receive treatment postpartum,
which does not preclude breastfeeding. The concentration of
medication in breast milk is neither toxic nor adequate for treatment
of the newborn. Treatment is with isoniazid and ethambutol or
isoniazid and rifampin (see Chapters 9 and 33). Because isoniazid
therapy may result in vitamin B6 deficiency, a supplement of 50
mg/d of vitamin B6 should be given simultaneously. Isoniazid,
particularly in pregnant women, can cause hepatitis. Liver function
tests should be performed regularly in pregnant women who receive
treatment. 
Streptomycin, 
ethionamide, 
and 
most 
other
antituberculous drugs should be avoided in pregnancy. If adequately
treated, tuberculosis in pregnancy has an excellent prognosis.
HIV/AIDS DURING PREGNANCY
Heterosexual acquisition and injection drug use are the principal
identified modes of HIV infection in women. Asymptomatic
infection is associated with a normal pregnancy rate and no
increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. There is no
evidence that pregnancy causes AIDS progression.
Previously, two-thirds of HIV-positive neonates acquired their
infection close to, or during, the time of delivery. Routine HIV
screening in pregnancy, including the use of rapid HIV tests in
Labor and Delivery units, and the use of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) therapy has markedly reduced this transmission
risk. Zidovudine alone (500 mg/d orally) given to the mother
antenatally starting at 14 weeks of gestation and during labor (1
mg/kg/h intravenously) and then to the infant (2 mg/kg orally four
times daily) for the first 6 weeks of life reduces the transmission rate
from 25% to 8%. HAART reduced the risk even further, to
approximately 2%, and is the standard of care. In an HIV-positive
pregnant woman, a CD4 count, plasma RNA level, and resistance
testing (if virus is detectable) should be obtained at the first prenatal
visit. Prior or current anti-retroviral use should be reviewed. A
woman already taking and tolerating an acceptable HAART
regimen does not have to discontinue it in the first trimester. Patients
should also be tested for hepatitis C, toxoplasmosis, and
cytomegalovirus.
Women not receiving therapy should be offered HAART with
three drugs (commonly two nucleoside analogues and one protease
inhibitor, including zidovudine whenever possible) after counseling
regarding the potential impact of therapy on both mother and fetus.
HAART should be offered regardless of viral load and CD4 count,
and it should be started in the second trimester unless there is a
maternal indication to start earlier. The majority of drugs used to
treat HIV/AIDS have thus far proven to be safe in pregnancy with
an acceptable risk/benefit ratio. Efavirenz has been clearly linked
with anomalies (myelomeningocele) and should not be used in
pregnancy, specifically the first trimester.
The use of prophylactic elective cesarean section before the
onset of labor or rupture of the membranes to prevent vertical
transmission of HIV infection from mother to fetus has been shown
to further reduce the transmission rate. There is limited information
on the impact of elective cesarean section on transmission rates in
infants of mothers on HAART or with viral loads < 1000
copies/mL. However, with HAART therapy and undetectable viral
loads (< 50 copies/mL), the transmission risk has been estimated to
be 1% or less, and there may be no additional benefit of cesarean
delivery. Women with viral loads < 1000 copies/mL on HAART
can be offered a vaginal delivery. Amniotomy should not be
performed, and internal monitors, particularly the fetal scalp
electrode, should be avoided. HIV-infected women should be
advised not to breastfeed their infants.
The Public Health Task Force provides guidelines for the
management of HIV/AIDS in pregnancy that are regularly updated
and available at http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/. In addition, there is
the National Perinatal HIV Hotline, which provides free consultation
regarding perinatal HIV care (1-888-448-8765).
Anderson BL et al. Pregnancy and optimal care of HIV-infected
patients. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Feb 15;48(4):449–55. [PMID:
19133799]
 
Panel on Treatment of HIV-Infected Pregnant Women and
Prevention of Perinatal Transmission. Recommendations for use of
antiretroviral drugs in pregnant HIV-1 infected women for maternal
health and interventions to reduce perinatal HIV transmission in the
United States. 2010 May 24:1–117. Available at:
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PerinatalGL.pdf
 
MATERNAL HEPATITIS B & C CARRIER STATE
There are an estimated 200 million chronic carriers of hepatitis B
virus worldwide. Among these people, there is an increased
incidence of chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular
carcinoma. The frequency of the hepatitis B carrier state varies from
1% in the United States and Western Europe to 35% in parts of
Africa and Asia. All pregnant women should be screened for
HBsAg. Transmission of the virus to the baby after delivery is likely
if both surface antigen and e antigen are positive. Vertical
transmission can be blocked by the immediate postdelivery
administration to the newborn of 0.5 mL hepatitis B immunoglobulin
and hepatitis B vaccine intramuscularly. The vaccine dose is
repeated at 1 and 6 months of age. Successful, but limited,
experience has also been reported with lamivudine during the third
trimester to prevent vertical transmission of hepatitis B in mothers
with high HBV viral loads.
Hepatitis C virus infection is the most common chronic blood-
borne infection in the United States. Risk factors for transmission
include blood transfusion, injection drug use, employment in patient
care or clinical laboratory work, exposure to a sex partner or
household member who has had a history of hepatitis, exposure to
multiple sex partners, and low socioeconomic level. The average
rate of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection among infants born to
HCV-positive, HIV-negative women is 5–6%. However, the
average infection rate increases to 14% when mothers are
coinfected with HCV and HIV. The principal factor associated with
transmission is the presence of HCV RNA in the mother at the time
of birth.
Xu WM et al. Lamivudine in late pregnancy to prevent perinatal
transmission of hepatitis B virus infection: a multicentre,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Viral
Hepat. 2009 Feb;16(2):94–103. [PMID: 19175878]
 
HERPES GENITALIS
Infection of the lower genital tract by herpes simplex virus type 2
(HSV-2) (see also Chapter 6) is a common STD with potentially
serious consequences to pregnant women and their newborn
infants. Although up to 20% of women in an obstetric practice may
have antibodies to HSV-2, a history of the infection is unreliable
and the incidence of neonatal infection is low (8–60/100,000 live
births). Most infected neonates are born to women with no
symptoms, signs, or history of infection.
Women who have had primary herpes infection late in
pregnancy are at high risk for shedding virus at delivery. Some
authors suggest use of prophylactic acyclovir, 400 mg orally two to
three times daily, to decrease the likelihood of active lesions at the
time of labor and delivery.
Women with a history of recurrent genital herpes have a lower
neonatal attack rate than women infected during the pregnancy, but
they should still be monitored with clinical observation and culture of
any suspicious lesions. Since asymptomatic viral shedding is not
predictable by antepartum cultures, current recommendations do
not include routine cultures in individuals with a history of herpes
without active disease. However, when labor begins, vulvar and
cervical inspection should be performed. Cesarean section is
indicated at the time of labor if there are prodromal symptoms,
active genital lesions, or a positive cervical culture obtained within
the preceding week.
For treatment, see Chapter 32. The use of acyclovir in pregnancy
is acceptable, and prophylaxis starting at 36 weeks gestation has
been shown to decrease the number of cesarean sections
performed for active disease.
Anzivino E et al. Herpes simplex virus infection in pregnancy and in
neonate: status of art of epidemiology, diagnosis, therapy, and
prevention. Virol J. 2009 April 6;6:40. [PMID: 19348670]
 
Corey L et al. Maternal and neonatal herpes simplex virus
infections. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct 1;361(14):1376–85. [PMID:
19797284]
 
SYPHILIS, GONORRHEA, & CHLAMYDIA
TRACHOMATIS INFECTION (See also Chapters 33 and
34)
These STDs have significant consequences for mother and child.
Untreated syphilis in pregnancy can cause late abortion, stillbirth,
transplacental infection, and congenital syphilis. Gonorrhea can
produce large-joint arthritis by hematogenous spread as well as
ophthalmia neonatorum. Maternal chlamydial infections are largely
asymptomatic but are manifested in the newborn by inclusion
conjunctivitis and, at age 2–4 months, by pneumonia. The diagnosis
of each can be reliably made by appropriate laboratory tests. All
women should be tested for syphilis and Chlamydia as part of their
routine prenatal care. Repeat testing is dependent on risk factors,
prevalence, and state laws. Women at risk should be tested for
gonorrhea. The sexual partners of women with STDs should be
identified and treated also if possible; the local health department
can assist with this process.
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. [PMID:
21160459]
 
SURGICAL COMPLICATIONS
DURING PREGNANCY
 
Although purely elective surgery should be avoided during
pregnancy, women who undergo surgical procedures for an urgent
or emergent indication during pregnancy do not appear to be at
increased risk for adverse outcomes. Obstetric complications, when
they occur, are more likely to be associated with the underlying
maternal illness. Recommendations have held that the optimal time
for semi-elective surgery is the second trimester to avoid exposure
to anesthesia in the first trimester and the enlarged uterus in the
third. Importantly, however, there is no convincing evidence that
general anesthesia induces malformations or increases the risk for
abortion.
CHOLELITHIASIS, CHOLECYSTITIS, &
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCY
Cholelithiasis is common in pregnancy as physiologic changes such
as incomplete gallbladder emptying predispose to gallstone
formation. The diagnosis is usually suspected based on classic
symptoms of right upper quadrant pain, usually after meals, and is
confirmed with right upper quadrant ultrasound. Symptomatic
cholelithiasis without cholecystitis is usually managed conservatively,
but recurrent symptoms are common. Cholecystitis results from
obstruction of the cystic duct and often is accompanied by bacterial
infection. Medical management with antibiotics is reasonable in
selected cases, but definitive treatment with cholecystectomy will
help prevent complications such as gallbladder perforation and
pancreatitis. Cholecystectomy has successfully been performed in
all trimesters of pregnancy and should not be withheld based on the
stage of pregnancy if clinically indicated. Laparoscopy is preferred
in the first half of pregnancy but becomes technically difficult in the
last trimester due to the enlarged uterus and cephalad displacement
of abdominal contents.
Obstruction of the common duct can lead to cholangitis requiring
surgical removal of gallstones and establishment of biliary drainage.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and
endoscopic retrograde sphincterotomy can be performed safely in
pregnant women if precautions are taken to minimize exposure to
radiation. There does, however, appear to be a slightly higher rate
of postprocedure pancreatitis in pregnant women who undergo
ERCP.
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is characterized by
incomplete clearance of bile acids in genetically susceptible women.
The main symptom of generalized pruritus usually occurs in the third
trimester. Hepatic transaminase levels are modestly elevated, and
mild bilirubin elevations may even result in clinical jaundice.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (8–10 mg/kg/d) is the treatment of choice
and results in decreased pruritus in most women. Cholestyramine
has also been used, but it does not appear to be as effective and
impairs absorption of fat soluble vitamins. Vitamin K
supplementation is therefore required to help prevent hemorrhagic
disease in the fetus. Symptoms ultimately resolve after delivery but
may recur in subsequent pregnancies. Early reports suggested that
women with cholestasis were at increased risk for stillbirth, but
more recent publications have failed to confirm this risk. Although it
is not clear if increased fetal surveillance improves outcomes,
antenatal testing in these women is reasonable given the ambiguity of
the data available.
Tang SJ et al. Safety and utility of ERCP during pregnancy.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2009 Mar;69(3 Pt 1):453–61. [PMID:
19136111]
 
APPENDICITIS
Appendicitis occurs in about 1 of 1500 pregnancies. The diagnosis
is often difficult to make clinically since the appendix is displaced
cephalad from McBurney point. Furthermore, nausea, vomiting, and
mild leukocytosis occur in normal pregnancy, so with or without
these findings, any complaint of right-sided pain should raise
suspicion. CT scanning can help confirm the diagnosis when clinical
findings are equivocal, and proper shielding can minimize radiation
exposure to the fetus. Unfortunately, the diagnosis of appendicitis is
not made until the appendix has ruptured in at least 20% of
obstetric patients. Peritonitis in these cases can lead to preterm
labor or abortion. With early diagnosis and appendectomy, the
prognosis is good for mother and baby.
Parangi S et al. Surgical gastrointestinal disorders during
pregnancy. Am J Surg. 2007 Feb;193(2):223–32. [PMID:
17236852]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE BREAST
Carcinoma of the breast (see also Chapter 17) is one of the most
commonly diagnosed cancers in pregnancy. Although the effects of
pregnancy on breast cancer progression are unclear, it has been
consistently reported that breast cancers diagnosed during
pregnancy are more likely to have associated nodal involvement
when compared with those diagnosed in nonpregnant women. This
observation underscores the importance of expeditious evaluation of
any breast mass in a pregnant woman. Although breast enlargement
and glandular hyperplasia during pregnancy and the puerperium may
limit the radiographic evaluation, both ultrasonography and
mammography are useful for characterizing a mass. Ultimately,
however, biopsy is required for any suspicious lesion. If breast
biopsy confirms the diagnosis of cancer, surgery should not be
withheld based on the stage of the pregnancy. If chemotherapy is
indicated and the pregnancy is early, termination can be considered.
If the pregnancy is more advanced, it may be appropriate to
administer chemotherapeutic agents during the pregnancy to avoid a
delay in treatment. Each case should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team with experience in treating such patients.
Beadle BM et al. The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer
outcomes in women ≤ 35 years. Cancer. 2009 Mar 15;115(6):
1174–84. [PMID: 19204903]
 
OVARIAN TUMORS
The management of an adnexal mass in pregnancy depends on the
gestational age at which it is diagnosed and the likelihood that
complications will develop. In early pregnancy, the corpus luteum is
frequently observed using transvaginal ultrasound and appears as a
simple cyst. The corpus luteum provides progesterone support of
the pregnancy until the placenta assumes this role in the latter part of
the first trimester. Although uncommon, corpus luteum cysts may
enlarge and undergo hemorrhage or torsion and become
symptomatic. If resection is required prior to 10 weeks gestation,
supplementation with progesterone should be given through the 10th
week.
The management of asymptomatic adnexal masses identified in
early pregnancy depends on the size and sonographic appearance
of the mass. In general, masses that are small (< 5 cm), cystic, and
simple require no follow-up. Larger masses or those with complex
features are usually followed with repeat ultrasound in the early
second trimester. Those that persist may require surgical resection,
particularly if they are large (> 10 cm) or have features that are
suspicious for malignancy, such as thick internal septations or
papillary excrescences. Larger masses, even when benign, increase
the risk for ovarian torsion, which can result in adnexal necrosis and
peritonitis. Elective removal in this situation is recommended. If
surgery is undertaken to remove an adnexal mass, the second
trimester is the optimal time. If there is suspicion for ovarian cancer,
preoperative consultation with a practitioner experienced in treating
gynecologic malignancies is appropriate. The optimal management
of persistent masses of intermediate size (5–10 cm) that are
believed to be benign is unclear and decisions should be made on
an individual basis.
Glanc P et al. Adnexal masses in the pregnant patient: a diagnostic
and management challenge. Ultrasound Q. 2008 Dec;24(4): 225–
40. [PMID: 19060689]
 
 
 
Musculoskeletal &
Immunologic Disorders
David B. Hellmann, MD, MACP
John B. Imboden Jr., MD
 Diagnosis & Evaluation
A. Examination of the Patient
In the patient with arthritis, the two clinical clues most helpful for
diagnosis are the joint pattern and the presence or absence of
extra-articular manifestations. The joint pattern is defined by the
answers to three questions: (1) Is inflammation present? (2) How
many joints are involved? and (3) What joints are affected? Joint
inflammation manifests as redness, warmth, swelling, and morning
stiffness of at least 30 minutes’ duration. Both the number of
affected joints and the specific sites of involvement affect the
differential diagnosis (Table 20–1). Some diseases—gout, for
example—are characteristically monarticular, whereas other
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, are usually polyarticular. The
location of joint involvement can also be distinctive. Only two
diseases frequently cause prominent involvement of the distal
interphalangeal (DIP) joint: osteoarthritis and psoriatic arthritis.
Extra-articular manifestations such as fever (eg, gout, Still disease,
endocarditis), rash (eg, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriatic
arthritis, Still disease), nodules (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, gout), or
neuropathy (eg, polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis [formerly Wegener granulomatosis]) narrow the
differential diagnosis further.
B. Arthrocentesis and Examination of Joint Fluid
If the diagnosis is uncertain, synovial fluid should be examined
whenever possible (Table 20–2). Most large joints are easily
aspirated, and contraindications to arthrocentesis are few. The
aspirating needle should never be passed through an overlying
cellulitis or psoriatic plaque because of the risk of introducing
infection. For patients who are receiving long-term anticoagulation
therapy with warfarin, joints can be aspirated with a small-gauge
needle (eg, 22F) if the international normalized ratio (INR) is < 3.0.
1. Types of studies
A. GROSS EXAMINATION—Clarity is an approximate guide to the
degree of inflammation. Noninflammatory fluid is transparent, mild
inflammation produces translucent fluid, and purulent effusions are
opaque. Bleeding disorders, trauma, and traumatic taps are the
most common causes of bloody effusions.
B. CELL COUNT—The synovial fluid white cell count discriminates
between noninflammatory 
(< 
2000 
white 
cells/mcL),
inflammatory (2000–75,000 white cells/mcL), and purulent (>
100,000 white cells/mcL) joint effusions. Synovial fluid glucose and
protein levels add little information and should not be ordered.
C. MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION—Compensated polarized light
microscopy identifies and distinguishes monosodium urate (gout,
negatively birefringent) and calcium pyrophosphate (pseudogout,
positive birefringent) crystals. Gram stain has specificity but limited
sensitivity (50%) for septic arthritis.
D. CULTURE—Bacterial cultures as well as special studies for
gonococci, tubercle bacilli, or fungi are ordered as appropriate.
2. Interpretation—Synovial fluid analysis is diagnostic in infectious
or microcrystalline arthritis. Although the severity of inflammation in
synovial fluid can overlap among various conditions, the synovial
fluid white cell count is a helpful guide to diagnosis (Table 20–3).
DEGENERATIVE & CRYSTAL-
INDUCED ARTHRITIS
 
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE (Osteoarthritis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A degenerative disorder with minimal articular inflammation.
 No systemic symptoms.
 Pain relieved by rest; morning stiffness brief.
 Radiographic findings: narrowed joint space, osteophytes,
increased density of subchondral bone, bony cysts.
 
 
Table 20–1. Diagnostic value of the joint pattern.
 
 General Considerations
Osteoarthritis, the most common form of joint disease, is chiefly a
disease of aging. Ninety percent of all people have radiographic
features of osteoarthritis in weight-bearing joints by age 40.
Symptomatic disease also increases with age.
This arthropathy is characterized by degeneration of cartilage and
by hypertrophy of bone at the articular margins. Inflammation is
usually minimal. Hereditary and mechanical factors may be involved
in the pathogenesis.
Obesity is a risk factor for osteoarthritis of the knee and
probably of the hip. Recreational running does not increase the
incidence of osteoarthritis, but participation in competitive contact
sports does. Jobs requiring frequent bending and carrying increase
the risk of knee osteoarthritis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Degenerative joint disease is divided into two types: (1) primary,
which most commonly affects some or all of the following: the DIP
and the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints of the fingers, the
carpometacarpal joint of the thumb, the hip, the knee, the
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint of the big toe, and the cervical
and lumbar spine; and (2) secondary, which may occur in any joint
as a sequela to articular injury resulting from either intra-articular
(including rheumatoid arthritis) or extra-articular causes. The injury
may be acute, as in a fracture; or chronic, as that due to
occupational overuse of a joint, metabolic disease (eg,
hyperparathyroidism, hemochromatosis, ochronosis), or neurologic
disorders (syringomyelia; see below).
The onset is insidious. Initially, there is articular stiffness, seldom
lasting more than 15 minutes; this develops later into pain on motion
of the affected joint and is made worse by activity or weight bearing
and relieved by rest. Flexion contracture or varus deformity of the
knee is not unusual, and bony enlargements of the DIP (Heberden
nodes) and PIP (Bouchard nodes) are occasionally prominent
(Figure 20–1). There is no ankylosis, but limitation of motion of the
affected joint or joints is common. Crepitus may often be felt over
the knee. Joint effusion and other articular signs of inflammation are
mild. There are no systemic manifestations.
B. Laboratory Findings
Osteoarthritis does not cause elevation of the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) or other laboratory signs of inflammation.
Synovial fluid is noninflammatory.
 
Table 20–2. Examination of joint fluid.
 
1 Gout, rheumatoid arthritis, and other inflammatory conditions
occasionally have synovial fluid WBC counts > 75,000/mcL but rarely >
100,000/mcL.
2 Most purulent effusions are due to septic arthritis. Septic arthritis,
however, can present with group II synovial fluid, particularly if infection is
caused by organisms of low virulence (eg, Neisseria gonorrhoeae) or if
antibiotic therapy has been started.
WBC, white blood cell count.
 
Table 20–3. Differential diagnosis by joint fluid groups.
 
1 May be hemorrhagic.
2 Noninflammatory or inflammatory group.
Reproduced, with permission, from Rodnan GP (editor). Primer on the
rheumatic diseases, 7th ed. JAMA. 1973;224(Suppl):662.
C. Imaging
Radiographs may reveal narrowing of the joint space; osteophyte
formation and lipping of marginal bone; and thickened, dense
subchondral bone. Bone cysts may also be present.
 Differential Diagnosis
Because articular inflammation is minimal and systemic
manifestations are absent, degenerative joint disease should seldom
be confused with other arthritides. The distribution of joint
involvement in the hands also helps distinguish osteoarthritis from
rheumatoid arthritis. Osteoarthritis chiefly affects the DIP and PIP
joints and spares the wrist and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints;
rheumatoid arthritis involves the wrists and MCP joints and spares
the DIP joints. Furthermore, the joint enlargement is bony-hard and
cool in osteoarthritis but spongy and warm in rheumatoid arthritis.
Skeletal symptoms due to degenerative changes in joints—
especially in the spine—may cause coexistent metastatic neoplasia,
osteoporosis, multiple myeloma, or other bone disease to be
overlooked.
 
Figure 20–1. osteoarthritis with bony enlargement of the distal
interphalangeal (DIP) joints (Heberden nodes) and proximal
interphalangeal (PIP) joints (Bouchard nodes). (Courtesy of
Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Prevention
Weight reduction reduces the risk of developing symptomatic knee
osteoarthritis. Maintaining normal vitamin D levels may reduce the
occurrence and progression of osteoarthritis, in addition to being
important for bone health.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
For patients with mild to moderate osteoarthritis of weight-bearing
joints, moderate physical activity (eg, a supervised walking
program, hydrotherapy classes, or Tai Chi classes) may result in
clinical improvement of functional status without aggravating the
joint pain. Weight loss can also improve the symptoms.
B. Analgesic and Anti-inflammatory Drugs
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (see Table 5–3)
are more effective (and more toxic) than acetaminophen for
osteoarthritis of the knee or hip. Their superiority is most convincing
in persons with severe disease. Patients with mild disease should
start with acetaminophen (2.6–4 g/d). NSAIDs should be
considered for patients who do not respond to acetaminophen.
(See discussion of NSAID toxicity in the section on treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis.) High doses of NSAIDs, as used in the
inflammatory arthritides, are unnecessary. A topical NSAID—
diclofenac gel 1% is approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for treatment of osteoarthritis; the
recommended dose is 4 g applied to the affected joint four times
daily. Topical diclofenac appears more effective than placebo for
knee and hand osteoarthritis. Rates of systemic side effects are
lower with topical than with oral diclofenac. Few studies have
compared the efficacy of oral and topical NSAIDs. Chondroitin
sulfate and glucosamine, alone or in combination, are no better than
placebo in reducing pain in patients with knee or hip osteoarthritis.
For many patients, it is possible eventually to reduce the dosage
or limit use of drugs to periods of exacerbation. For patients with
knee osteoarthritis and effusion, intra-articular injection of
triamcinolone (20–40 mg) may obviate the need for analgesics or
NSAIDs. Corticosteroid injections up to four times a year appear
to be safe. Intra-articular injections of sodium hyaluronate reduce
symptoms moderately in some patients. Capsaicin cream 0.025–
0.075% applied three or four times a day can also reduce knee pain
without NSAIDs.
C. Surgical Measures
Total hip and knee replacements provide excellent symptomatic and
functional improvement when involvement of that joint severely
restricts walking or causes pain at rest, particularly at night.
Arthroscopic surgery for knee osteoarthritis is ineffective.
 Prognosis
Marked disability is less common in patients with osteoarthritis than
in those with rheumatoid arthritis, but symptoms may be quite
severe and limit activity considerably (especially with involvement of
the hips, knees, and cervical spine).
 When to Refer
 
•    Refer patients to an orthopedic surgeon when
recalcitrant symptoms or functional impairment, or both,
warrant consideration of joint replacement surgery of the
hip or knee.
Altman R et al. Topical therapy for osteoarthritis: clinical and
pharmacologic perspectives. Postgrad Med. 2009 Mar; 121(2):
139–47. [PMID: 19332972]
 
Kirkley A et al. A randomized trial of arthroscopic surgery for
osteoarthritis of the knee. N Engl J Med. 2008 Sep 11;359(11):
1097–107. [PMID: 18784099]
 
Scanzello CR et al. The post-NSAID era: what to use now for the
pharmacologic treatment of pain and inflammation in osteoarthritis.
Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2008 Jan;10(1):49–56. [PMID: 18457612]
 
Wandel S et al. Effects of glucosamine, chondroitin, or placebo in
patients with osteoarthritis of hip or knee: network meta-analysis.
BMJ. 2010 Sep 16;341:c4675. [PMID: 20847017]
 
CRYSTAL DEPOSITION ARTHRITIS
1. Gouty Arthritis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute onset, usually monarticular, often involving the first MTP
joint.
 Polyarticular involvement more common in patients with long-
standing disease.
 Identification of urate crystals in joint fluid or tophi is diagnostic.
 Dramatic therapeutic response to NSAIDs.
 With chronicity, urate deposits in subcutaneous tissue, bone,
cartilage, joints, and other tissues.
 
 General Considerations
Gout is a metabolic disease of a heterogeneous nature, often
familial, associated with abnormal amounts of urates in the body and
characterized early by a recurring acute arthritis, usually
monarticular, and later by chronic deforming arthritis. The
associated hyperuricemia is due to overproduction or
underexcretion of uric acid—sometimes both. The disease is
especially common in Pacific islanders, eg, Filipinos and Samoans.
Primary gout has a heritable component, and genome-wide surveys
have linked risk of gout to several genes whose products regulate
urate handling by the kidney. Secondary gout, which may have a
heritable component, is related to acquired causes of hyperuricemia,
eg, medication use (especially diuretics, low-dose aspirin,
cyclosporine, and niacin), myeloproliferative disorders, multiple
myeloma, 
hemoglobinopathies, 
chronic 
kidney 
disease,
hypothyroidism, psoriasis, sarcoidosis, and lead poisoning (Table
20–4). Alcohol ingestion promotes hyperuricemia by increasing
urate production and decreasing the renal excretion of uric acid.
Finally, hospitalized patients frequently suffer attacks of gout
because of changes in diet, fluid intake, or medications that lead
either to rapid reductions or increases in the serum urate level.
About 90% of patients with primary gout are men, usually over
30 years of age. In women, the onset is typically postmenopausal.
The characteristic lesion is the tophus, a nodular deposit of
monosodium urate monohydrate crystals with an associated foreign
body reaction. Tophi are found in cartilage, subcutaneous and
periarticular tissues, tendon, bone, the kidneys, and elsewhere.
Urates have been demonstrated in the synovial tissues (and fluid)
during acute arthritis; indeed, the acute inflammation of gout is
believed to be activated by the phagocytosis by polymorphonuclear
cells of urate crystals with the ensuing release from the neutrophils
of chemotactic and other substances capable of mediating
inflammation. The precise relationship of hyperuricemia to gouty
arthritis is still obscure, since chronic hyperuricemia is found in
people who never develop gout or uric acid stones. Rapid
fluctuations in serum urate levels, either increasing or decreasing, are
important factors in precipitating acute gout. The mechanism of the
late, chronic stage of gouty arthritis is better understood. This is
characterized pathologically by tophaceous invasion of the articular
and periarticular tissues, with structural derangement and secondary
degeneration (osteoarthritis).
 
Table 20–4. origin of hyperuricemia.
 
Primary hyperuricemia
A. Increased production of purine
     1. Idiopathic
     2. Specific enzyme defects (eg, Lesch-Nyhan
syndrome, glycogen storage diseases)
B. Decreased renal clearance of uric acid (idiopathic)
Secondary hyperuricemia
A. Increased catabolism and turnover of purine
     1. Myeloproliferative disorders
     2. Lymphoproliferative disorders
     3. Carcinoma and sarcoma (disseminated)
     4. Chronic hemolytic anemias
     5. Cytotoxic drugs
     6. Psoriasis
B. Decreased renal clearance of uric acid
     1. Intrinsic kidney disease
     2. Functional impairment of tubular transport
         a. Drug-induced (eg, thiazides, low-dose aspirin)
         b. Hyperlacticacidemia (eg, lactic acidosis,
alcoholism)
         c. Hyperketoacidemia (eg, diabetic ketoacidosis,
starvation)
         d. Diabetes insipidus (vasopressin-resistant)
         e. Bartter syndrome
 
Modified, with permission, from Rodnan GP. Gout and other crystalline
forms of arthritis. Postgrad Med. 1975 Oct;58(5):6–14.
Uric acid kidney stones are present in 5–10% of patients with
gouty arthritis. Hyperuricemia correlates highly with the likelihood of
developing stones, with the risk of stone formation reaching 50% in
patients with a serum urate level > 13 mg/dL. Chronic urate
nephropathy is caused by the deposition of monosodium urate
crystals in the renal medulla and pyramids. Although progressive
chronic kidney disease occurs in a substantial percentage of patients
with chronic gout, the role of hyperuricemia in causing this outcome
is controversial, because many patients with gout have numerous
confounding risk factors for chronic kidney disease (eg,
hypertension, alcohol use, lead exposure, and other risk factors for
vascular disease).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Acute gouty arthritis is sudden in onset and frequently nocturnal. It
may develop without apparent precipitating cause or may follow
rapid increases or decreases in serum urate levels. Common
precipitants are alcohol excess (particularly beer), changes in
medications that affect urate metabolism, and, in the hospitalized
patient, fasting before medical procedures. The MTP joint of the
great toe is the most susceptible joint (“podagra”), although others,
especially those of the feet, ankles, and knees, are commonly
affected. Gouty attacks may develop in periarticular soft tissues
such as the arch of the foot. Hips and shoulders are rarely affected.
More than one joint may occasionally be affected during the same
attack; in such cases, the distribution of the arthritis is usually
asymmetric. As the attack progresses, the pain becomes intense.
The involved joints are swollen and exquisitely tender and the
overlying skin tense, warm, and dusky red. Fever is common and
may reach 39°C. Local desquamation and pruritus during recovery
from the acute arthritis are characteristic of gout but are not always
present. Tophi may be found in the external ears, feet, olecranon
and prepatellar bursae, and hands (Figure 20–2). They usually
develop years after the initial attack of gout.
Asymptomatic periods of months or years commonly follow the
initial acute attack. After years of recurrent severe monarthritis
attacks of the lower extremities and untreated hyperuricemia, gout
can evolve into a chronic, deforming polyarthritis of upper and
lower extremities that mimics rheumatoid arthritis.
 
Figure 20–2. Acute gouty arthritis superimposed on tophaceous
gout. (Courtesy of the Western Journal of Medicine and JM
Geiderman, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith
MA, Mayeaux EJ, Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
The serum uric acid is elevated (> 7.5 mg/dL) in 95% of patients
who have serial measurements during the course of an attack.
However, a single uric acid determination is normal in up to 25% of
cases, so it does not exclude gout, especially in patients taking
urate-lowering drugs. During an acute attack, the peripheral blood
white cell count is frequently elevated. Identification of sodium urate
crystals in joint fluid or material aspirated from a tophus establishes
the diagnosis. The crystals, which may be extracellular or found
within neutrophils, are needle-like and negatively birefringent when
examined by polarized light microscopy.
C. Imaging
Early in the disease, radiographs show no changes. Later, punched-
out erosions with an overhanging rim of cortical bone (“rat bite”)
develop. When these are adjacent to a soft tissue tophus, they are
diagnostic of gout.
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute gout is often confused with cellulitis. Bacteriologic studies
usually exclude acute pyogenic arthritis. Pseudogout is distinguished
by the identification of calcium pyrophosphate crystals (positive
birefringence) in the joint fluid, usually normal serum uric acid, and
the radiographic appearance of chondrocalcinosis.
Chronic tophaceous arthritis may resemble chronic rheumatoid
arthritis; gout is suggested by an earlier history of monarthritis and is
established by the demonstration of urate crystals in a suspected
tophus. Likewise, hips and shoulders are generally spared in
tophaceous gout. Biopsy may be necessary to distinguish tophi from
rheumatoid nodules. A radiographic appearance similar to that of
gout may be found in rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, multiple
myeloma, hyperparathyroidism, or Hand-Schüller-Christian disease.
Chronic lead intoxication may result in attacks of gouty arthritis
(saturnine gout).
 Treatment
A. Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia
Asymptomatic hyperuricemia should not be treated; uric acid–
lowering drugs need not be instituted until arthritis, renal calculi, or
tophi become apparent.
B. Acute Attack
Arthritis is treated first and hyperuricemia weeks or months later, if
at all. Sudden reduction of serum uric acid often precipitates further
episodes of gouty arthritis.
1. NSAIDs—These drugs (see Table 5–3) are the treatment of
choice for acute gout. Traditionally, indomethacin has been the most
frequently used agent, but all of the other newer NSAIDs are
probably equally effective. Indomethacin is initiated at a dosage of
25–50 mg orally every 8 hours and continued until the symptoms
have resolved (usually 5–10 days). Active peptic ulcer disease,
impaired kidney function, and a history of allergic reaction to
NSAIDs are contraindications. For patients at high risk for upper
gastrointestinal bleeding, celecoxib (200 mg twice a day on day 1
then 100 mg twice daily until resolution), a cyclooxygenase type 2
(COX-2) inhibitor, may be an appropriate first choice for
management of an acute gout attack. Long-term use of COX-2
inhibitors is not advised because of the association with increased
risk of cardiovascular events, which has led to the removal of some
drugs (eg, rofecoxib and valdecoxib) from the US market.
2. Colchicine—Neither oral nor intravenous colchicine should be
used for the treatment of acute gout flares. A patient who is taking
prophylactic doses of colchicine may continue it through the flare.
The use of oral colchicine during the intercritical period to prevent
gout attacks is discussed below.
3. Corticosteroids—Corticosteroids 
often 
give 
dramatic
symptomatic relief in acute episodes of gout and will control most
attacks. They are most useful in patients with contraindications to
the use of NSAIDs. Corticosteroids may be given intravenously
(eg, methylprednisolone, 40 mg/d tapered over 7 days) or orally
(eg, prednisone, 40–60 mg/d tapered over 7 days). If the patient's
gout is monarticular, intra-articular administration (eg, triamcinolone,
10–40 mg depending on the size of the joint) is very effective.
Because gouty and septic arthritis can coexist, albeit rarely, joint
aspiration and Gram stain with culture of synovial fluid should be
performed when intra-articular corticosteroids are given.
4. Anakinra—Uncontrolled studies suggest that this inter-leukin-1
receptor antagonist has efficacy for the management of acute gout.
C. Management between Attacks
Treatment during symptom-free periods is intended to minimize
urate deposition in tissues, which causes chronic tophaceous
arthritis, and to reduce the frequency and severity of recurrences.
Patients with a single episode of gout who are willing to lose weight
and stop drinking alcohol are at low risk for another attack and
unlikely to benefit from long-term medical therapy. In contrast,
older individuals with mild chronic kidney disease who require
diuretic use and have a history of multiple attacks of gout are more
likely to benefit from pharmacologic treatment. In general, the higher
the uric acid level and the more frequent the attacks, the more likely
that long-term medical therapy will be beneficial.
1. Diet—Potentially reversible causes of hyperuricemia are a high-
purine diet, obesity, alcohol consumption, and use of certain
medications (see below). Beer consumption appears to confer a
higher risk of gout than does whiskey or wine. Higher levels of meat
and seafood consumption are associated with increased risks of
gout, whereas a higher level of dairy products consumption is
associated with a decreased risk. Although dietary purines usually
contribute only 1 mg/dL to the serum uric acid level, moderation in
eating foods with high purine content is advisable (Table 20–5). A
high liquid intake and, more importantly, a daily urinary output of 2
L or more will aid urate excretion and minimize urate precipitation in
the urinary tract.
 
Table 20–5. the purine content of foods.1
 
Low-purine foods
     Refined cereals and cereal products, cornflakes, white
bread, pasta, flour, arrowroot, sago, tapioca, cakes
     Milk, milk products, and eggs
     Sugar, sweets, and gelatin
     Butter, polyunsaturated margarine, and all other fats
     Fruit, nuts, and peanut butter
     Lettuce, tomatoes, and green vegetables (except those
listed below)
     Cream soups made with low-purine vegetables but
without meat or meat stock
     Water, fruit juice, cordials, and carbonated drinks
High-purine foods
     All meats, including organ meats, and seafood
     Meat extracts and gravies
     Yeast and yeast extracts, beer, and other alcoholic
beverages
     Beans, peas, lentils, oatmeal, spinach, asparagus,
cauliflower, and mushrooms
1The purine content of a food reflects its nucleoprotein content and
turnover. Foods containing many nuclei (eg, liver) have many purines, as
do rapidly growing foods such as asparagus. The consumption of large
amounts of a food containing a small concentration of purines may provide
a greater purine load than consumption of a small amount of a food
containing a large concentration of purines.
Reproduced, with permission, from Emmerson BT. The management of
gout. N Engl J Med. 1996 Feb 15;334(7):445–51.
2. Avoidance of hyperuricemic medications—Thiazide and loop
diuretics inhibit renal excretion of uric acid and should be avoided in
patients with gout. Similarly, low doses of aspirin aggravate
hyperuricemia, as does niacin.
3. Colchicine—There are two indications for daily colchicine
administration. First, colchicine can be used to prevent future
attacks. For the person who has mild hyperuricemia and occasional
attacks of gouty arthritis, long-term colchicine prophylaxis may be
all that is needed. Second, colchicine can also be used when
uricosuric drugs or allopurinol (see below) are started, to suppress
attacks precipitated by abrupt changes in the serum uric acid level.
For either indication, the usual dose is 0.6 mg either once or twice a
day. Colchicine is renally cleared. Patients who have coexisting
moderate chronic kidney disease should take colchicine only once a
day or once every other day in order to avoid the peripheral
neuromyopathy and other complications of colchicine toxicity.
4. Reduction of serum uric acid—Indications for a urate lowering
intervention include frequent acute arthritis not controlled by
colchicine prophylaxis, tophaceous deposits, or kidney damage.
Hyperuricemia with infrequent attacks of arthritis may not require
treatment. If instituted, the goal of medical treatment is to maintain
the serum uric acid at or below 5 mg/dL, which allows urate
crystals to solubilize.
Two classes of agents may be used to lower the serum uric acid
—the uricosuric drugs and allopurinol (neither is of value in the
treatment of acute gout). The choice of one or the other depends on
the result of a 24-hour urine uric acid determination. A value under
800 mg/d indicates undersecretion of uric acid, which is amenable
to uricosuric agents if kidney function is preserved or to allopurinol
if kidney function is limited. Patients with > 800 mg of uric acid in a
24-hour urine collection are overproducers and require allopurinol.
A. URICOSURIC DRUGS—Uricosuric drugs, which block the tubular
reabsorption of filtered urate thereby reducing the metabolic urate
pool, prevent the formation of new tophi and reduce the size of
those already present. When administered concomitantly with
colchicine, they may lessen the frequency of recurrences of acute
gout. The indication for uricosuric treatment is the increasing
frequency or severity of acute attacks. Uricosuric agents are
ineffective in patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of <
60 mL/min.
The following uricosuric drugs may be used: (1) Probenecid, 0.5
g orally daily initially, with gradual increase to 1–2 g daily; or (2)
sulfinpyrazone, 50–100 mg orally twice daily initially, with gradual
increase to 200–400 mg twice daily. Hypersensitivity to either with
fever and rash occurs in 5% of cases; gastrointestinal complaints are
observed in 10%. Probenecid also inhibits the excretion of
penicillin, indomethacin, dapsone, and acetazolamide.
Precautions with uricosuric drugs include maintaining a daily
urinary output of 2000 mL or more in order to minimize the
precipitation of uric acid in the urinary tract. This can be further
prevented by giving alkalinizing agents (eg, potassium citrate, 30–80
mEq/d orally) to maintain a urine pH of > 6.0. Uricosuric drugs
should not be used in patients with a history of uric acid
nephrolithiasis. Aspirin in moderate doses antagonizes the action of
uricosuric agents, but low doses (325 mg or less per day) do not;
doses of aspirin > 3 g daily are themselves uricosuric.
B. XANTHINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS—The xanthine oxidase
inhibitors promptly lower plasma urate and urinary uric acid
concentrations and facilitate tophus mobilization. Inhibitors of
xanthine oxidase are of special value in uric acid overproducers; in
tophaceous gout; in patients unresponsive to the uricosuric regimen;
and in gouty patients with uric acid renal calculi. Asymptomatic
hyperuricemia should not be treated. Two xanthine oxidase
inhibitors are available for treating chronic gout: allopurinol and
febuxostat. One or the other should be chosen; allopurinol and
febuxostat are not to be used together. The most frequent adverse
effect with either medication is the precipitation of an acute gouty
attack; thus, patients generally should be receiving prophylactic
doses of colchicine and should not be experiencing an acute flare
when xanthine oxidase inhibitors are initiated. Hypersensitivity to
allopurinol occurs in 2% of cases and can be life-threatening. The
most common sign of hypersensitivity is a pruritic rash that may
progress to toxic epidermal necrolysis, particularly if allopurinol is
continued; vasculitis and hepatitis are other manifestations. Patients
should be instructed to stop allopurinol immediately if a rash
develops. Febuxostat apparently does not cause the hypersensitivity
reactions seen with allopurinol and can be given without dose
adjustment to patients with mild to moderate renal disease.
However, 2–3% of patients taking febuxostat may develop
abnormal liver function tests. In addition, one clinical study showed
that febuxostat was associated with a slightly higher rate of fatal and
non-fatal cardiovascular events than allopurinol (0.97 vs 0.58 per
100 patient-years).
The initial daily dose of allopurinol is 300 mg/d orally for most
patients who have normal kidney function; the dose of allopurinol
should be increased in 100-mg increments to achieve the desired
serum uric acid level of ≤ 5.0 mg/dL. Successful treatment usually
requires a dose of 300–400 mg of allopurinol daily. The maximum
daily dose is 800 mg. Allopurinol can be used in chronic kidney
disease, but the dose must be reduced to decrease the chance of
side effects. For patients with renal impairment, the initial dose
should be 50–100 mg daily.
Allopurinol interacts with other drugs. The combined use of
allopurinol and ampicillin causes a drug rash in 20% of patients.
Allopurinol can increase the half-life of probenecid, while
probenecid increases the excretion of allopurinol. Thus, a patient
taking both drugs may need to use slightly higher than usual doses of
allopurinol and lower doses of probenecid. The initial dose of
febuxostat is 40 mg/d orally. If the target serum uric acid is not
reached within 2 weeks, then the dose of febuxostat can be
increased to its maximum of 80 mg/d.
D. Chronic Tophaceous Arthritis
With rigorous medical compliance, allopurinol or febuxostat shrinks
tophi and in time can lead to their disappearance. Resorption of
extensive tophi requires maintaining a serum uric acid below 5
mg/dL. Surgical excision of large tophi offers mechanical
improvement in selected deformities.
E. Gout in the Transplant Patient
Hyperuricemia and gout commonly develop in many transplant
patients because they have decreased kidney function and require
drugs that inhibit uric acid excretion (especially cyclosporine and
diuretics). Treating acute gout in these patients is challenging:
NSAIDs are usually contraindicated because of underlying chronic
kidney disease; intravenous colchicine should not be used because
of its narrow therapeutic index (particularly in kidney dysfunction);
and corticosteroids are already being used. Often the best approach
for monarticular gout—after excluding infection—is injecting
corticosteroids into the joint (see above). For polyarticular gout,
increasing the dose of systemic corticosteroid may be the only
alternative. Since transplant patients often have multiple attacks of
gout, long-term relief requires lowering the serum uric acid with
allopurinol or febuxostat. (Kidney dysfunction seen in many
transplant patients makes uricosuric agents ineffective.) Both
allopurinol and febuxostat inhibit the metabolism of azathioprine and
should be avoided in patients who must take azathioprine.
 Prognosis
Without treatment, the acute attack may last from a few days to
several weeks. The intervals between acute attacks vary up to
years, but the asymptomatic periods often become shorter if the
disease progresses. Chronic gouty arthritis occurs after repeated
attacks of acute gout, but only after inadequate treatment. The
younger the patient at the onset of disease, the greater the tendency
to a progressive course. Destructive arthropathy is rarely seen in
patients whose first attack is after age 50.
Patients with gout are anecdotally thought to have an increased
incidence of hypertension, kidney disease (eg, nephrosclerosis,
interstitial 
nephritis, 
pyelonephritis), 
diabetes 
mellitus,
hypertriglyceridemia, and atherosclerosis.
Burns CM et al. Gout therapeutics: new drugs for an old disease.
Lancet. 2011 Jan 8;377(9760):165–77. [PMID: 20719377]
 
Janssens HJ et al. Use of oral prednisolone or naproxen for the
treatment of gout arthritis: a double-blind, randomised equivalence
trial. Lancet. 2008 May 31;371(9627):1854–60. [PMID:
18514729]
 
Schumacher HR Jr et al. Effects of febuxostat versus allopurinol
and placebo in reducing serum urate in subjects with hyper-
uricemia and gout: a 28-week, phase III, randomized, double-
blind, parallel-group trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Nov 15;59(11):
1540–8. [PMID: 18975369]
 
2. Chondrocalcinosis & Pseudogout
Chondrocalcinosis is the presence of calcium-containing salts in
articular cartilage. Diagnosed radiologically, it may be familial and is
commonly associated with a wide variety of metabolic disorders
(eg, hemochromatosis, hyperparathyroidism, ochronosis, diabetes
mellitus, hypothyroidism, Wilson disease, and gout). Pseudogout
(also called calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate [CPPD] deposition
disease) is most often seen in persons age 60 or older, is
characterized by acute, recurrent and rarely chronic arthritis
involving large joints (most commonly the knees and the wrists) and
is almost always accompanied by chondrocalcinosis of the affected
joints. Other joints frequently affected are the MCPs, hips,
shoulders, elbows, and ankles. Involvement of the DIP and PIP
joints is no more common in CPPD deposition disease than in other
age-matched controls. Pseudogout, like gout, frequently develops
24–48 hours after major surgery. Identification of calcium
pyrophosphate crystals in joint aspirates is diagnostic of
pseudogout. With light microscopy, the rhomboid-shaped crystals
differ from the needle-shaped gout crystals. A red compensator is
used for positive identification, since pseudogout crystals are blue
when parallel and yellow when perpendicular to the axis of the
compensator. Urate crystals give the opposite pattern. X-ray
examination shows not only calcification (usually symmetric) of
cartilaginous structures but also signs of degenerative joint disease
(osteoarthritis). Unlike gout, pseudogout is usually associated with
normal serum urate levels.
NSAIDs (salicylates, indomethacin, naproxen, and other drugs)
are helpful in the treatment of acute episodes. Patients at increased
risk for upper gastrointestinal bleeding may use a COX-2 inhibitor
to treat acute attacks of pseudogout. Long-term use of COX-2
inhibitors is not advised because of the association with increased
risk of cardiovascular events. Colchicine, 0.6 mg orally twice daily,
is more effective for prophylaxis than for acute attacks. Aspiration
of the inflamed joint and intra-articular injection of triamcinolone,
10–40 mg, depending on the size of the joint, are also of value in
resistant cases.
Announ N et al. Treating difficult crystal pyrophosphate dihydrate
deposition disease. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2008 Jul;10(3): 228–34.
[PMID: 18638432]
 
Richette P et al. An update on the epidemiology of calcium
pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease. Rheumatology
(Oxford). 2009 Jul;48(7):711–5. [PMID: 19398486]
 
PAIN SYNDROMES
 
NECK PAIN
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most chronic neck pain is caused by degenerative joint disease
and responds to conservative approaches.
 Whiplash is the most common type of traumatic injury to the
neck.
 Serious erosive disease of the atlantoaxial joint (C1–2) may lead
to neurologic complications in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
and ankylosing spondylitis.
 
General Considerations
At any point in time, about 15% of adults are experiencing neck
pain, which develops more commonly in women than in men. The
prevalence of neck pain peaks at age 50. A large group of articular
and extra-articular disorders are characterized by pain that may
involve simultaneously the neck, shoulder girdle, and upper
extremity. Diagnostic differentiation may be difficult. Some
represent primary disorders of the cervicobrachial region; others are
local manifestations of systemic disease. It is frequently not possible
to make a specific diagnosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Neck pain may be limited to the posterior region or, depending on
the level of the symptomatic joint, may radiate segmentally to the
occiput, anterior chest, shoulder girdle, arm, forearm, and hand. It
may be intensified by active or passive neck motions. The general
distribution of pain and paresthesias corresponds roughly to the
involved dermatome in the upper extremity. Radiating pain in the
upper extremity is often intensified by hyperextension of the neck
and deviation of the head to the involved side. Limitation of cervical
movements is the most common objective finding. Neurologic signs
depend on the extent of compression of nerve roots or the spinal
cord. Compression of the spinal cord may cause paraparesis or
paraplegia.
B. Imaging
The radiographic findings depend on the cause of the pain; many
plain radiographs are completely normal in patients who have
suffered an acute cervical strain. Loss of cervical lordosis is often
seen but is nonspecific. In osteoarthritis, comparative reduction in
height of the involved disk space is a frequent finding. The most
common late radiographic finding is osteophyte formation anteriorly,
adjacent to the disk; other chronic abnormalities occur around the
apophysial joint clefts, chiefly in the lower cervical spine.
Use of advanced imaging techniques is indicated in the patient
who has severe pain of unknown cause that fails to respond to
conservative therapy or in the patient who has evidence of
myelopathy. MRI is more sensitive than CT in detecting disk
disease, extradural compression, and intramedullary cord disease.
CT is preferable for demonstration of fractures.
 Differential Diagnosis & Treatment
The causes of neck pain include acute and chronic cervical strain or
sprains, herniated nucleus pulposus, osteoarthritis, ankylosing
spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, osteomyelitis,
neoplasms, polymyalgia rheumatica, compression fractures, pain
referred from visceral structures (eg, angina), and functional
disorders.
A. Nonspecific Neck Pain
In the absence of trauma or evidence of infection, malignancy,
neurologic findings, or systemic inflammation, the patient can be
treated conservatively. Conservative therapy can include rest,
analgesics, or physical therapy.
B. Acute Cervical Musculotendinous Strain
Cervical strain is generally caused by mechanical postural disorders,
overexertion, or injury (eg, whiplash). Acute episodes are
associated with pain, decreased cervical spine motion, and
paraspinal muscle spasm, resulting in stiffness of the neck and loss
of motion. Muscle trigger points can often be localized. After
whiplash injury, patients often experience not only neck pain but
also shoulder girdle discomfort and headache. Management
includes administration of analgesics. Soft cervical collars are
commonly recommended, but evidence suggests they may delay
recovery. Acupuncture, manipulation, or physical therapy can help
some patients, but the precise role of these treatments is not well
established. Corticosteroid injection into cervical facet joints is
ineffective. Gradual return to full activity is encouraged.
C. Herniated Nucleus Pulposus
Rupture or prolapse of the nucleus pulposus of the cervical disks
into the spinal canal causes pain radiating at a C6–7 level. When
intra-abdominal pressure is increased by coughing, sneezing, or
other movements, symptoms are aggravated, and cervical muscle
spasm may occur. Neurologic abnormalities include decreased
reflexes of the deep tendons of the biceps and triceps and
decreased sensation and muscle atrophy or weakness in the
forearm or hand. Cervical traction, bed rest, and other conservative
measures are usually successful. Radicular symptoms usually
respond to conservative therapy, including NSAIDs, activity
modification, intermittent cervical traction, and neck immobilization.
Cervical epidural corticosteroid injections may help those who fail
conservative therapy. Surgery is indicated for unremitting pain and
progressive weakness despite a full trial of conservative therapy and
if a surgically correctable abnormality is identified by MRI or CT
myelography. Surgical decompression achieves excellent results in
70–80% of such patients.
D. Arthritic Disorders
Cervical spondylosis (degenerative arthritis) is a collective term
describing degenerative changes that occur in the apophysial joints
and intervertebral disk joints, with or without neurologic signs.
Osteoarthritis of the articular facets is characterized by progressive
thinning of the cartilage, subchondral osteoporosis, and osteophytic
proliferation around the joint margins. Degeneration of cervical
disks and joints may occur in adolescents but is more common after
age 40. Degeneration is progressive and is marked by gradual
narrowing of the disk space, as demonstrated by radiography.
Osteocartilaginous proliferation occurs around the margin of the
vertebral body and gives rise to osteophytic ridges that may
encroach upon the intervertebral foramina and spinal canal, causing
compression of the neurovascular contents.
Osteoarthritis of the cervical spine is often asymptomatic but may
cause diffuse neck pain. A minority of patients with neck pain also
suffer from radicular pain or myelopathy. Myelopathy develops
insidiously and is manifested by sensory dysfunction and clumsy
hands. Some patients also complain of unsteady walking, urinary
frequency and urgency, or electrical shock sensations with neck
flexion or extension (Lhermitte sign). Weakness, sensory loss, and
spasticity with exaggerated reflexes develop below the level of
spinal cord compression. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple
sclerosis, syringomyelia, spinal cord tumors, and tropical spastic
paresis from HTLV-1 infection can mimic myelopathy from cervical
arthritis. The mainstay of conservative therapy is immobilizing the
cervical spine with a collar. With moderate to severe neurologic
symptoms, surgical treatment is indicated.
Atlantoaxial subluxation may occur in patients with either
rheumatoid arthritis or ankylosing spondylitis. Inflammation of the
synovial structures resulting from erosion and laxity of the transverse
ligament can lead to neurologic signs of spinal cord compression.
Treatment may vary from use of a cervical collar or more rigid
bracing to operative treatment, depending on the degree of
subluxation and neurologic progression. Surgical treatment for
stabilization of the cervical spine is a last resort.
E. Other Disorders
Osteomyelitis and neoplasms are discussed below. Osteoporosis is
discussed in Chapter 26.
Haines T et al; Cervical Overview Group (COG). A Cochrane
review of patient education for neck pain. Spine J. 2009 Oct;
9(10):859–71. [PMID: 19596214]
 
THORACIC OUTLET SYNDROMES
Thoracic outlet syndromes result from compression of the
neurovascular structures supplying the upper extremity. Symptoms
and signs arise from intermittent or continuous pressure on elements
of the brachial plexus (> 90% of cases) or the subclavian or axillary
vessels (veins or arteries) by a variety of anatomic structures of the
shoulder girdle region. The neurovascular bundle can be
compressed between the anterior or middle scalene muscles and a
normal first thoracic rib or a cervical rib. Most commonly thoracic
outlet syndromes are caused by scarred scalene neck muscle
secondary to neck trauma or sagging of the shoulder girdle resulting
from aging, obesity, or pendulous breasts. Faulty posture,
occupation, or thoracic muscle hypertrophy from physical activity
(eg, weight-lifting, baseball pitching) may be other predisposing
factors.
Thoracic outlet syndromes present in most patients with some
combination of four symptoms involving the upper extremity, namely
pain, numbness, weakness, and swelling. The predominant
symptoms depend on whether the compression chiefly affects neural
or vascular structures. The onset of symptoms is usually gradual but
can be sudden. Some patients spontaneously notice aggravation of
symptoms with specific positioning of the arm. Pain radiates from
the point of compression to the base of the neck, the axilla, the
shoulder girdle region, arm, forearm, and hand. Paresthesias are
common and distributed to the volar aspect of the fourth and fifth
digits. Sensory symptoms may be aggravated at night or by
prolonged use of the extremities. Weakness and muscle atrophy are
the principal motor abnormalities. Vascular symptoms consist of
arterial ischemia characterized by pallor of the fingers on elevation
of the extremity, sensitivity to cold, and, rarely, gangrene of the
digits or venous obstruction marked by edema, cyanosis, and
engorgement.
The symptoms of thoracic outlet syndromes can be provoked
within 60 seconds over 90% of the time by having a patient elevate
the arms in a “stick-em-up” position (ie, abducted 90 degrees in
external rotation). Reflexes are usually not altered. Obliteration of
the radial pulse with certain maneuvers of the arm or neck, once
considered a highly sensitive sign of thoracic outlet obstruction,
does not occur in most cases.
Chest radiography will identify patients with cervical rib (although
most patients with cervical ribs are asymptomatic). MRI with the
arms held in different positions is useful in identifying sites of
impaired blood flow. Intra-arterial or venous obstruction is
confirmed by angiography. Determination of conduction velocities
of the ulnar and other peripheral nerves of the upper extremity may
help localize the site of their compression.
Thoracic outlet syndrome must be differentiated from
osteoarthritis of the cervical spine, tumors of the superior pulmonary
sulcus, cervical spinal cord, or nerve roots, and periarthritis of the
shoulder.
Treatment is directed toward relief of compression of the
neurovascular bundle. Greater than 95% of patients can be treated
successfully with conservative therapy consisting of physical therapy
and avoiding postures or activities that compress the neurovascular
bundle. Some women will benefit from a support bra. Operative
treatment, required by < 5% of patients, is more likely to relieve the
neurologic rather than the vascular component that causes
symptoms.
Brooke BS et al. Contemporary management of thoracic outlet
syndrome. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2010 Nov;25(6):535–40. [PMID:
20838336]
 
LOW BACK PAIN
Up to 80% of the population experience low back pain at some
time. The differential diagnosis is broad and includes muscular
strain, primary spine disease (eg, disk herniation, degenerative
arthritis), systemic diseases (eg, metastatic cancer), and regional
diseases (eg, aortic aneurysm). A precise diagnosis cannot be made
in the majority of cases. Even when anatomic defects—such as
vertebral osteophytes or a narrowed disk space—are present,
causality cannot be assumed since such defects are common in
asymptomatic patients. Most patients with acute onset of low back
pain will improve in 1–4 weeks and need no evaluation beyond the
initial history and physical examination. The diagnostic challenge is
to identify those patients who require more extensive or urgent
evaluation. In practice, this means identifying those patients with
pain caused by (1) infection, (2) cancer, (3) inflammatory back
disease such as ankylosing spondylitis, or (4) pain referred from
abdominal or pelvic processes, such as an expanding aortic
aneurysm. Significant or progressive neurologic deficits also require
identification. If there is no evidence of these problems,
conservative therapy is called for.
1. Clinical Approach to Diagnosis
 
General 
History 
& 
Physical
Examination
Low back pain is a final common pathway of many processes; the
pain of vertebral osteomyelitis, for example, is not very different in
quality and intensity from that due to back strain of the weekend
gardener. Historical factors of importance include smoking, weight
loss, age over 50, and cancer, all of which are risk factors for
vertebral body metastasis. Osteomyelitis most frequently occurs in
adults with a history of recurrent urinary tract infections and is
especially common in diabetics and injection drug users. A history
of a cardiac murmur should raise concern about endocarditis, since
back pain is not an uncommon manifestation. A background of
renal calculi might indicate another cause of referred back pain.
 History of Back Pain
Certain qualities of a patient's pain can indicate a specific diagnosis.
Low back pain radiating down the buttock and below the knee
suggests a herniated disk causing nerve root irritation. Other
conditions—including sacroiliitis, facet joint degenerative arthritis,
spinal stenosis, or irritation of the sciatic nerve from a wallet—also
cause this pattern.
The diagnosis of disk herniation is further suggested by physical
examination (see below) and confirmed by imaging techniques. Disk
herniation can be asymptomatic, so its presence does not invariably
link it to the symptom.
Low back pain at night, unrelieved by rest or the supine position,
suggests the possibility of malignancy, either vertebral body
metastasis (chiefly from prostate, breast, lung, multiple myeloma, or
lymphoma) or a cauda equina tumor. Similar pain can also be
caused by compression fractures (from osteoporosis or myeloma).
Symptoms of large or rapidly evolving neurologic deficits identify
patients who need urgent evaluation for possible cauda equina
tumor, epidural abscess or, rarely, massive disk herniation. When a
herniated disk impinges a nerve root, pain is the most prominent
symptom; numbness and weakness are less common and, when
present, are of the magnitude consistent with compression of a
single nerve root. Symptoms of bilateral leg weakness (from
multiple lumbar nerve root compressions) or of saddle area
anesthesia, bowel or bladder incontinence, or impotence (indicating
multiple sacral nerve root compressions) indicate a cauda equina
process.
Low back pain that worsens with rest and improves with activity
is characteristic of ankylosing spondylitis or other seronegative
spondyloarthropathies, especially when the onset is insidious and
begins before age 40. Most degenerative back diseases produce
precisely the opposite pattern, with rest alleviating and activity
aggravating the pain. Low back pain causing the patient to writhe
occurs in renal colic but can also indicate a leaking aneurysm. The
pain associated with pseudoclaudication from lumbar spinal stenosis
is discussed below.
 Physical Examination of the Back
Several physical findings should be sought because they help
identify those few patients who need more than conservative
management.
Neurologic examination of the lower extremities will detect the
small deficits produced by disk disease and the large deficits
complicating such problems as cauda equina tumors. A positive
straight leg raising test indicates nerve root irritation. The examiner
performs the test on the supine patient by passively raising the
patient's ipsilateral leg. The test is positive if radicular pain is
produced with the leg raised 60 degrees or less. It has a specificity
of 40% but is 95% sensitive in patients with herniation at the L4–5
or L5–S1 level (the sites of 95% of disk herniations). It can be
falsely negative, especially in patients with herniation above the L4–
5 level. The crossed straight leg sign is positive when raising the
contralateral leg reproduces the sciatica. It has a sensitivity of 25%
but is 90% specific for disk herniation.
Detailed examination of the sacral and lumbar nerve roots,
especially L5 and S1, is essential for detecting neurologic deficits
associated with back pain. Disk herniation produces deficits
predictable for the site involved (Table 20–6). Deficits of multiple
nerve roots suggest a cauda equina tumor or an epidural abscess,
both requiring urgent evaluation and treatment.
Measurement of spinal motion in the patient with acute pain is
rarely of diagnostic utility and usually simply confirms that pain limits
motion. An exception is the decreased range of motion in multiple
regions of the spine (cervical, thoracic, and lumbar) in a diffuse
spinal disease such as ankylosing spondylitis. By the time the patient
has such limits, however, the diagnosis is usually straightforward.
If back pain is not severe and does not itself limit motion, the
modified Schober test of lumbar motion is helpful in early diagnosis
of ankylosing spondylitis. To perform this test, two marks are made
with the patient upright: one 10 cm above the sacral dimples and
another 5 cm below. The patient then bends forward as far as
possible, and the distance between the points is measured.
Normally, the distance increases from 15 cm to at least 20 cm.
Anything less indicates reduced lumbar motion.
Palpation of the spine usually does not yield diagnostic
information. Point tenderness over a vertebral body is reported to
suggest osteomyelitis, but this association is uncommon. A step-off
noted between the spinous process of adjacent vertebral bodies
may indicate spondylolisthesis, but the sensitivity of this finding is
extremely low. Tenderness of the soft tissues overlying the greater
trochanter of the hip is a manifestation of trochanteric bursitis.
 
Table 20–6. Neurologic testing of lumbosacral nerve disorders.
 
 
Inspection of the spine is not often of value in identifying serious
causes of low back pain. The classic posture of ankylosing
spondylitis is a late finding. Scoliosis of mild degree is not
associated with an increased risk of clinical back disease.
Cutaneous neurofibromas can identify the rare patient with nerve
root encasement.
Examination of the hips should be part of the complete
examination. While hip arthritis usually produces pain chiefly in the
groin area, some patients have buttock or low back symptoms.
 Further Examination
If the history and physical examination do not suggest the presence
of infection, cancer, inflammatory back disease, major neurologic
deficits, or pain referred from abdominal or pelvic disease, further
evaluation can be deferred while conservative therapy is tried. The
great majority of patients will improve with conservative care over
1–4 weeks.
Regular radiographs of the lumbosacral spine give 20 times the
radiation dose of a chest radiograph and provide limited, albeit
important, information. Oblique films double the radiation dose and
are not routinely needed. Radiographs can provide evidence of
vertebral body osteomyelitis, cancer, fractures, or ankylosing
spondylitis. Degenerative changes in the lumbar spine are ubiquitous
in patients over 40 and do not prove clinical disease. Plain
radiographs have very low sensitivity or specificity for disk disease.
Thus, plain radio-graphs are warranted promptly for patients
suspected of having infection, cancer, or fractures; selected other
patients who do not improve after 2–4 weeks of conservative
therapy are also candidates. The Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality guidelines for obtaining lumbar radiographs are
summarized in Table 20–7.
 
Table 20–7. AHRQ criteria for lumbar radiographs in patients with
acute low back pain.
 
Possible fracture
     Major trauma
     Minor trauma in patients > 50 years
     Long-term corticosteroid use
     Osteoporosis
     > 70 years
Possible tumor or infection
     > 50 years
     < 20 years
     History of cancer
     Constitutional symptoms
     Recent bacterial infection
     Injection drug use
     Immunosuppression
     Supine pain
     Nocturnal pain
AHRQ, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Reproduced, with
permission, from Suarez-Almazor et al. JAMA. 1997;277:1782–6.
MRI provides exquisite anatomic detail but is reserved for
patients who are considering surgery or have evidence of a systemic
disease. For example, MRI is needed urgently for any patient in
whom an epidural mass or cauda equina tumor is suspected but not
for a patient believed to have a routine disk herniation, since most
will improve over 4–6 weeks of conservative therapy. Noncontrast
CT does not image cauda equina tumors or other intradural lesions,
and if used instead of MRI it must include intrathecal contrast.
Radionuclide bone scanning has limited usefulness. It is most
useful for early detection of vertebral body osteomyelitis or
osteoblastic metastases. The bone scan is normal in multiple
myeloma because lytic lesions do not take up isotope.
2. Management
While any management plan must be individualized, key elements of
most conservative treatments for back pain include analgesia and
education. Analgesia can usually be provided with NSAIDs (see
Table 5–3), but severe pain may require opioids (see Table 5–4).
Rarely does the need for opioids extend beyond 1–2 weeks.
Diazepam, cyclobenzaprine, carisoprodol, and methocarbamol
have been prescribed as muscle relaxants, though their sedative
effects may limit their use. They should be reserved for patients who
do not respond to NSAIDs and usually are needed only for 1–2
weeks, which reduces the chance of dependence. Their use should
be avoided in older patients, who are at risk for falling. All patients
should be taught how to protect the back in daily activities—ie, not
to lift heavy objects, to use the legs rather than the back when
lifting, to use a chair with arm rests, and to rise from bed by first
rolling to one side and then using the arms to push to an upright
position. Back manipulation for benign, mechanical low back pain
appears safe and as effective as therapies provided by clinicians.
Rest and back exercises, once thought to be cornerstones of
conservative therapy, are now known to be ineffective for acute
back pain. Advice to rest in bed is less effective than advice to
remain active. No bed rest with continuation of ordinary activities as
tolerated is superior to 2 days of bed rest, 7 days of bed rest, and
back mobilizing exercises. Similarly, for acute back pain, exercise
therapy is not effective. The value of corsets or traction is dubious.
Epidural corticosteroid injections can provide short-term relief of
sciatica but do not improve functional status or reduce the need for
surgery. In double-blind studies, repeated injections have been no
more effective than a single injection. For chronic low back pain,
yoga is as effective as a back exercise program and more effective
than a self-care book. Corticosteroid injections into facet joints are
ineffective for chronic low back pain.
Surgical consultation is needed urgently for any patient with a
major or evolving neurologic deficit. Randomized controlled trials
have shown that for sciatica caused by disk herniation, conservative
treatment and surgery achieve similar 1-year outcomes; however,
pain relief and perceived recovery were obtained more quickly with
surgery. Surgery tends to ameliorate leg pain more quickly and fully
than back pain.
Complaints without objective findings suggest a psychological
role in symptom formation. Treatment includes reassurance and
nonopioid analgesics.
When to Refer
 
•    Suspected malignancy.
•    Inflammatory low back pain.
 When to Admit
 
•    Neurologic signs indicative of cauda equina syndrome.
•    Vertebral osteomyelitis.
Chou R et al. Will this patient develop persistent disabling low
back pain? JAMA. 2010 Apr 7;303(13):1295–302. [PMID:
20371789]
 
Hildreth CJ et al. JAMA patient page. Sciatica. JAMA. 2009 Jul
8;302(2):216. [PMID: 19584353]
 
Peul WC et al. Surgery versus prolonged conservative treatment
for sciatica. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 31;356(22):2245–56.
[PMID: 17538084]
 
Weinstein JN et al. Surgical compared with nonoperative treatment
for lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis: four-year results in the
Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT) randomized and
observational cohorts. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009
Jun;91(6):1295–304. [PMID: 19487505]
 
LUMBAR SPINAL STENOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most patients are older than 60 years.
 Presenting symptom is often back pain radiating to the buttocks
and thighs.
 Pain often interferes with walking, worsens with lumbar
extension, and improves with lumbar flexion.
 Back and leg pain often associated with numbness and
paresthesias.
 Preservation of pedal pulses helps exclude vascular claudication.
 Diagnosis best confirmed by MRI.
 
 General Considerations
Lumbar spinal stenosis, defined as narrowing of the spinal canal
with compression of the nerve roots, may be congenital or (more
commonly) acquired. It most frequently results from enlarging
osteophytes at the facet joints, hypertrophy of the ligamentum
flavum, and protrusion or bulging of intervertebral disks. Lumbar
spinal stenosis may produce symptoms by directly compressing
nerve roots or by compressing nutrient arterioles that supply the
nerve roots.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with lumbar spinal stenosis are over 60 years old and
complain of either leg pain or trouble walking. The pain may
originate in the low back but will extend below the buttock into the
thigh in nearly 90% of patients. In approximately 50% of patients,
the pain will extend below the knee. The pain is often a combination
of aching and numbness, which characteristically worsens with
walking. The pain can also be brought on by prolonged standing.
Not infrequently the symptoms are bilateral. Many patients are
more troubled by poor balance, unsteadiness of gait, or leg
weakness that develops as they walk. Some describe these
neuroclaudication symptoms as developing “spaghetti legs” or
“walking like a drunk sailor.” Because the lumbar spinal canal
volume increases with back flexion and decreases with extension,
some patients observe that they have fewer symptoms walking
uphill than down. The back and lower extremity examination in
patients with lumbar spinal stenosis is often unimpressive. Less than
10% have a positive straight leg raise sign, 25% have diminished
deep tendon reflexes, and 60% have slight proximal weakness.
Walking with the patient may reveal unsteadiness, although usually
the patient's perception of gait disturbance is greater than that of an
observer.
B. Imaging
The diagnosis of spinal stenosis in a patient with symptoms is best
confirmed by MRI.
 Differential Diagnosis
The onset of symptoms with standing, the location of the maximal
discomfort to the thighs, and the preservation of pedal pulses help
distinguish the “pseudoclaudication” of spinal stenosis from true
claudication caused by vascular insufficiency. Distinguishing spinal
stenosis from disk herniation can be challenging since both
conditions can produce pain radiating down the back of the leg.
Features that favor spinal stenosis are the gradual onset of
symptoms, the marked exacerbation with walking, and the
amelioration of symptoms with sitting or lumbar flexion. Complaints
of bilateral aching in the buttocks associated with stiffness may
make some practitioners consider the diagnosis of polymyalgia
rheumatica. However, patients with lumbar spinal stenosis do not
have the shoulder or neck symptoms characteristic of polymyalgia
rheumatica.
 Treatment
Weight loss and exercises aimed at reducing lumbar lordosis, which
aggravates symptoms of spinal stenosis, can help. Lumbar epidural
corticosteroid injections provide some immediate relief for about
50% of patients and more sustained relief for approximately 25%.
When disabling symptoms persist, surgery will reduce pain and
improve function substantially in approximately 75% of patients at 1
and 2 years; only about 25% of patients treated conservatively will
experience a similar improvement.
Genevay S et al. Lumbar spinal stenosis. Best Pract Res Clin
Rheumatol. 2010 Apr;24(2):253–65. [PMID: 20227646]
 
Weinstein JN et al. Surgical compared with nonoperative treatment
for lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis: four-year results in the
Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT) randomized and
observational cohorts. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009
Jun;91(6):1295–304. [PMID: 19487505]
 
FIBROMYALGIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most frequent in women aged 20–50.
 Chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain syndrome with multiple
tender points.
 Fatigue, headaches, numbness common.
 Objective signs of inflammation absent; laboratory studies
normal.
 
 General Considerations
Fibromyalgia is one of the most common rheumatic syndromes in
ambulatory general medicine affecting 3–10% of the general
population. It shares many features with the chronic fatigue
syndrome, namely, an increased frequency among women aged 20–
50, absence of objective findings, and absence of diagnostic
laboratory test results. While many of the clinical features of the two
conditions overlap, musculoskeletal pain predominates in
fibromyalgia whereas lassitude dominates the chronic fatigue
syndrome.
The cause is unknown, but aberrant perception of painful stimuli,
sleep disorders, depression, and viral infections have all been
proposed. Fibromyalgia can be a rare complication of
hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis or, in men, sleep apnea.
 Clinical Findings
The patient complains of chronic aching pain and stiffness,
frequently involving the entire body but with prominence of pain
around the neck, shoulders, low back, and hips. Fatigue, sleep
disorders, subjective numbness, chronic headaches, and irritable
bowel symptoms are common. Even minor exertion aggravates pain
and increases fatigue. Physical examination is normal except for
“trigger points” of pain produced by palpation of various areas such
as the trapezius, the medial fat pad of the knee, and the lateral
epicondyle of the elbow.
 Differential Diagnosis
Fibromyalgia is a diagnosis of exclusion. A detailed history and
repeated physical examination can obviate the need for extensive
laboratory testing. Rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) present with objective physical findings or
abnormalities on routine testing. Thyroid function tests are useful,
since hypothyroidism can produce a secondary fibromyalgia
syndrome. Polymyositis produces weakness rather than pain. The
diagnosis of fibromyalgia probably should be made hesitantly in a
patient over age 50 and should never be invoked to explain fever,
weight loss, or any other objective signs. Polymyalgia rheumatica
produces shoulder and pelvic girdle pain, is associated with anemia
and an elevated ESR, and occurs after age 50. Hypophosphatemic
states, such as oncogenic osteomalacia, should also be included in
the differential diagnosis of musculoskeletal pain unassociated with
physical findings. In contrast to fibromyalgia, oncogenic
osteomalacia usually produces pain in only a few areas and is
associated with a low serum phosphate level.
 Treatment
A multidisciplinary approach is most effective. Patient education is
essential. Patients can be comforted that they have a diagnosable
syndrome treatable by specific though imperfect therapies and that
the course is not progressive. Cognitive behavioral therapy,
including programs that emphasize mindfulness meditation is often
helpful. There is modest efficacy of amitriptyline, fluoxetine,
duloxetine, 
milnacipran, 
chlorpromazine, 
cyclobenzaprine,
pregabalin, or gabapentin. Amitriptyline is initiated at a dosage of 10
mg orally at bedtime and gradually increased to 40–50 mg
depending on efficacy and toxicity. Less than 50% of the patients
experience a sustained improvement. Exercise programs are also
beneficial. NSAIDs are generally ineffective. Tramadol and
acetaminophen combinations have ameliorated symptoms modestly
in short-term trials. Opioids and corticosteroids are ineffective and
should not be used to treat fibromyalgia. Acupuncture is also
ineffective.
 Prognosis
All patients have chronic symptoms. With treatment, however,
many do eventually resume increased activities. Progressive or
objective findings do not develop.
Arnold LM et al. Flexible dosed duloxetine in the treatment of
fibromyalgia: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
J Rheumatol. 2010 Dec;37(12):2578–86. [PMID: 20843911]
 
Häuser W et al. Efficacy of multicomponent treatment in
fibromyalgia syndrome: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
clinical trials. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Feb 15;61(2):216–24.
[PMID: 19177530]
 
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Begins as pain, burning, and tingling in the distribution of the
median nerve.
 Symptoms initially most bothersome at night.
 Weakness or atrophy, especially of the thenar eminence, appears
later.
 Common in occupations that require repetitive wrist motion and
in pregnancy, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis.
 
 General Considerations
An entrapment neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome is a painful
disorder caused by compression of the median nerve between the
carpal ligament and other structures within the carpal tunnel. The
contents of the tunnel can be compressed by synovitis of the tendon
sheaths or carpal joints, recent or malhealed fractures, tumors, and
occasionally congenital anomalies. Even though no anatomic lesion
is apparent, flattening or even circumferential constriction of the
median nerve may be observed during operative section of the
ligament. The disorder may occur in pregnancy, is seen in
individuals with a history of repetitive use of the hands, and may
follow injuries of the wrists. There is a familial type of carpal tunnel
syndrome in which no etiologic factor can be identified.
Carpal tunnel syndrome can also be a feature of many systemic
diseases: rheumatoid arthritis and other rheumatic disorders
(inflammatory tenosynovitis); myxedema, localized amyloidosis in
chronic kidney disease, sarcoidosis, and leukemia (tissue
infiltration); acromegaly; and hyperparathyroidism.
 Clinical Findings
The initial symptoms are pain, burning, and tingling in the distribution
of the median nerve (the palmar surfaces of the thumb, the index
and long fingers, and the radial half of the ring finger). Aching pain
may radiate proximally into the forearm and occasionally proximally
to the shoulder and over the neck and chest. Pain is exacerbated by
manual activity, particularly by extremes of volar flexion or
dorsiflexion of the wrist. It is most bothersome at night. Impairment
of sensation in the median nerve distribution may or may not be
demonstrable. Subtle disparity between the affected and opposite
sides can be shown by testing for two-point discrimination or by
requiring the patient to identify different textures of cloth by rubbing
them between the tips of the thumb and the index finger. Tinel or
Phalen sign may be positive. (Tinel sign is tingling or shock-like pain
elicited by tapping the volar surface of the wrist; Phalen sign is pain
or paresthesia in the distribution of the median nerve when the
patient flexes both wrists to 90 degrees for 60 seconds.) The carpal
compression test, in which numbness and tingling are induced by the
direct application of pressure over the carpal tunnel, may be more
sensitive and specific than the Tinel and Phalen tests. Muscle
weakness or atrophy, especially of the thenar eminence, appears
later than sensory disturbances. Specific examinations include
electromyography and determinations of segmental sensory and
motor conduction delay. Sensory conduction delay is evident before
motor delay.
 Differential Diagnosis
This syndrome should be differentiated from other cervicobrachial
pain syndromes, from compression syndromes of the median nerve
in the forearm or arm, and from mononeuritis multiplex. When left-
sided, it may be confused with angina pectoris.
 Treatment
Treatment is directed toward relief of pressure on the median nerve.
When a causative lesion is discovered, it is treated appropriately.
Otherwise, patients in whom carpal tunnel syndrome is suspected
should modify their hand activities and have the affected wrist
splinted for 2–6 weeks. NSAIDs can also be added. Patients
should be referred to a specialist for injection of corticosteroid into
the carpal tunnel or for operation when they do not improve or
when thenar muscle atrophy or weakness develops. Muscle
strength returns gradually, but complete recovery cannot be
expected when atrophy is pronounced.
 When to Refer
 
•    Refer to a hand surgeon if symptoms persist despite the
use of wrist splints.
•    Refer to a hand surgeon if weakness or thenar atrophy
develops.
Huisstede BM et al. Carpal tunnel syndrome. Part I: effectiveness
of nonsurgical treatments—a systematic review. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil. 2010 Jul;91(7):981–1004. [PMID: 20599038]
 
Huisstede BM et al. Carpal tunnel syndrome. Part II: effectiveness
of surgical treatments—a systematic review. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil. 2010 Jul;91(7):1005–24. [PMID: 20599039]
 
DUPUYTREN CONTRACTURE
This relatively common disorder is characterized by hyperplasia of
the palmar fascia and related structures, with nodule formation and
contracture of the palmar fascia. The cause is unknown, but the
condition has a genetic predisposition and occurs primarily in white
men over 50 years of age. The incidence is higher among alcoholic
patients and those with chronic systemic disorders (especially
cirrhosis). It is also associated with systemic fibrosing syndrome,
which includes Peyronie disease, mediastinal and retroperitoneal
fibrosis, and Riedel struma. The onset may be acute, but slowly
progressive chronic disease is more common.
Dupuytren contracture manifests itself by nodular or cord-like
thickening of one or both hands, with the fourth and fifth fingers
most commonly affected. The patient may complain of tightness of
the involved digits, with inability to satisfactorily extend the fingers,
and on occasion there is tenderness. The resulting cosmetic
problems may be unappealing, but in general the contracture is well
tolerated since it exaggerates the normal position of function of the
hand. Fasciitis involving other areas of the body may lead to plantar
fibromatosis (10% of patients) or Peyronie disease (1–2%).
If the palmar nodule is growing rapidly, injections of
triamcinolone or collagenase into the nodule may be of benefit.
Surgical intervention is indicated in patients with significant flexion
contractures, depending on the location, but recurrence is not
uncommon.
Hurst LC et al; CORD I Study Group. Injectable collagenase
clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren's contracture. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Sep 3;361(10):968–79. [PMID: 19726771]
 
COMPLEX REGIONAL PAIN SYNDROME
Complex regional pain syndrome (formerly called reflex sympathetic
dystrophy) is a rare disorder of the extremities characterized by
autonomic and vasomotor instability. The cardinal symptoms and
signs are pain localized to an arm or leg, swelling of the involved
extremity, disturbances of color and temperature in the affected
limb, dystrophic changes in the overlying skin and nails, and limited
range of motion. Strikingly, the findings are not limited to the
distribution of a single peripheral nerve. Most cases are preceded
by direct physical trauma, often of relatively minor nature, to the soft
tissues, bone, or nerve. Early mobilization after injury or surgery
reduces the likelihood of developing the syndrome. Vitamin C, 500
mg/d orally, is effective in reducing the risk of complex regional pain
syndrome following wrist fracture. Any extremity can be involved,
but the syndrome most commonly occurs in the hand and is
associated with ipsilateral restriction of shoulder motion (shoulder-
hand syndrome). The syndrome proceeds through phases: pain,
swelling, and skin color and temperature changes develop early
and, if untreated, lead to atrophy and dystrophy. The swelling in
complex regional pain syndrome is diffuse (“catcher's mitt hand”)
and not restricted to joints. Pain is often burning in quality, intense,
and often greatly worsened by minimal stimuli such as light touch.
The shoulder-hand variant of this disorder sometimes complicates
myocardial infarction or injuries to the neck or shoulder. Complex
regional pain syndrome may occur after a knee injury or after
arthroscopic knee surgery. There are no systemic symptoms. In the
early phases of the syndrome, bone scans are sensitive, showing
diffuse increased uptake in the affected extremity. Radiographs
eventually reveal severe generalized osteopenia. In the
posttraumatic variant, this is known as Sudeck atrophy. Symptoms
and findings are bilateral in some. This syndrome should be
differentiated from other cervicobrachial pain syndromes,
rheumatoid arthritis, thoracic outlet obstruction, and scleroderma,
among others.
Early treatment offers the best prognosis for recovery. For mild
cases, NSAIDs (eg, naproxen 250–500 mg twice daily orally) can
be effective. For more severe cases associated with edema,
prednisone, 30–60 mg/d orally for 2 weeks and then tapered over
2 weeks, can be effective. Pain management is important and
facilitates physical therapy, which plays a critical role in efforts to
restore function. Some patients will also benefit from antidepressant
agents (eg, nortriptyline initiated at a dosage of 10 mg orally at
bedtime and gradually increased to 40–75 mg at bedtime) or from
anticonvulsants (eg, gabapentin 300 mg three times daily orally).
Bisphosphonates, calcitonin, regional nerve blocks and dorsal-
column stimulation have also been demonstrated to be helpful.
Patients who have restricted shoulder motion may benefit from the
treatment described for scapulohumeral periarthritis. The prognosis
partly depends on the stage in which the lesions are encountered
and the extent and severity of associated organic disease.
Bruehl S. An update on the pathophysiology of complex regional
pain syndrome. Anesthesiology. 2010 Sep;113(3):713–25.
[PMID: 20693883]
 
s
BURSITIS
Inflammation of bursae—the synovium-like cellular membranes
overlying bony prominences—may be secondary to trauma,
infection, or arthritic conditions such as gout, rheumatoid arthritis, or
osteoarthritis. The most common locations are the subdeltoid,
olecranon (Figure 20-3), ischial, trochanteric, semimembranous-
gastrocnemius (Baker cyst), and prepatellar bursae.
 
Figure 20–3. Aseptic olecranon bursitis secondary to repetitive
trauma. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
There are several ways to distinguish bursitis from arthritis.
Bursitis is more likely than arthritis to cause focal tenderness and
swelling and less likely to affect range of motion of the adjacent
joint. Olecranon bursitis, for example, causes an oval (or, if chronic,
bulbous) swelling at the tip of the elbow and does not affect elbow
motion, whereas an elbow joint inflammation produces more diffuse
swelling and reduces range of motion. Similarly, a patient with
prepatellar bursitis has a small focus of swelling over the kneecap
but no distention of the knee joint itself and preserved knee motion.
A patient with trochanteric bursitis will have tenderness over the
greater trochanter and normal internal rotation of the hip; a patient
with hip arthritis usually will have reduced internal rotation. Bursitis
caused by trauma responds to local heat, rest, NSAIDs, and local
corticosteroid injections.
Bursitis can result from infection. The two most common sites are
the olecranon and prepatellar bursae. Acute swelling and redness at
either of these two sites calls for aspiration to rule out infection. The
absence of fever does not exclude infection; one-third of those with
septic olecranon bursitis are afebrile. A bursal fluid white blood cell
count of > 1000/mcL indicates inflammation from infection,
rheumatoid arthritis, or gout. In septic bursitis, the white cell count
averages over 50,000/mcL. Most cases are caused by
Staphylococcus aureus; the Gram stain is positive in two-thirds.
Treatment involves antibiotics and aspiration for tense effusions.
Chronic, stable olecranon bursa swelling usually does not require
aspiration. Aspiration of the olecranon bursa runs the risk of
creating a chronic drainage site, which can be reduced by using a
“zig-zag” approach with a small needle (25-gauge if possible) and
pulling the skin over the bursa before introducing it. Applying a
pressure bandage may also help prevent chronic drainage. Surgical
removal of the bursa is indicated only for cases in which repeated
infections occur. Repetitive minor trauma to the olecranon bursa
should be eliminated by avoiding resting the elbow on a hard
surface or by wearing an elbow pad.
A bursa can also become symptomatic when it ruptures. This is
particularly true for Baker cyst, whose rupture can cause calf pain
and swelling that mimic thrombophlebitis. Ruptured Baker cysts are
imaged easily by sonography or MRI. In most cases, imaging is
unnecessary because the cyst and an associated knee effusion are
detectable on physical examination. It may be important to exclude
a deep venous thrombosis, which can be mimicked by a ruptured
Baker cyst. Treatment of a ruptured cyst includes rest, leg elevation,
and injection of triamcinolone, 20–40 mg into the knee anteriorly
(the knee compartment communicates with the cyst). Rarely, Baker
cyst can compress vascular structures and cause leg edema and true
thrombophlebitis.
Rowand M et al. Clinical inquiries. How should you treat
trochanteric bursitis? J Fam Pract. 2009 Sep;58(9):494–500.
[PMID: 19744419]
 
SPORTS MEDICINE INJURIES
Musculoskeletal problems commonly occur as a result of both
serious athletic pursuits and activities of daily living. For most such
disorders, the diagnosis is made easily. Physical therapy is an
increasingly important adjunct to the management of these
disorders.
1. Overuse Syndromes of the Knee
Runners—particularly those who overtrain or do not attain the
proper level of conditioning before starting a running program—may
develop a variety of painful overuse syndromes of the knee. Most
of these conditions are forms of tendinitis or bursitis that can be
diagnosed on examination. The most common conditions include
anserine bursitis, the iliotibial band syndrome, and popliteal and
patellar tendinitis.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms resulting from all of these conditions worsen as the
patient continues to run and often require cessation of the activity.
Anserine bursitis results in pain medial and inferior to the knee joint
over the medial tibia. The iliotibial band syndrome and popliteal
tenosynovitis may be difficult to differentiate, because the popliteus
tendon inserts into the lateral femoral condyle underneath the
iliotibial band. Both conditions result in pain on the lateral side of the
knee. Patellar tendinitis, a cause of anterior knee discomfort,
typically occurs at the tendon's insertion into the patella rather than
at its more inferior insertion.
All of these diagnoses are confirmed by palpation at the relevant
sites around the knee. None is associated with joint effusions or
other signs of synovitis.
 Treatment
Rest and abstention from the associated physical activities for a
period of days to weeks are essential. Once pain has subsided, a
program of gentle stretching (particularly prior to resuming exercise)
may prevent recurrence. Corticosteroid injections with lidocaine
may be useful when intense discomfort is present, but caution must
be used when injecting corticosteroids into the region of a tendon to
avoid rupture.
Brushøj C et al. Prevention of overuse injuries by a concurrent
exercise program in subjects exposed to an increase in training
load: a randomized controlled trial of 1020 army recruits. Am J
Sports Med. 2008 Apr;36(4):663–70. [PMID: 18337359]
 
2. Plantar Fasciitis
The most common cause of foot pain in outpatient medicine is
plantar fasciitis, which results from constant strain on the plantar
fascia at its insertion into the medial tubercle of the calcaneus.
Although certain inflammatory disorders such as the seronegative
spondyloarthropathies predispose patients to enthesopathies, the
majority of cases occur in patients with no associated disease. Most
occur as the result of excessive standing and improper footwear.
 Clinical Findings
Patients with plantar fasciitis report severe pain on the bottoms of
their feet in the morning—the first steps out of bed in particular—
but the pain subsides after a few minutes of ambulation.
The diagnosis may be confirmed by palpation over the plantar
fascia's insertion on the medial heel. Radiographs have no role in the
diagnosis of this condition—heel spurs frequently exist in patients
without plantar fasciitis, and most symptomatic patients do not have
heel spurs.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of restriction of prolonged standing for days and
the use of arch supports. Arch supports give relief by requiring the
arches to bear more of the patient's weight, thus unloading the
plantar enthesis. NSAIDs may provide some relief. In severe cases,
a corticosteroid with lidocaine injection (small volume—no more
than a total of 1.5 mL) directly into the most tender area on the sole
of the foot is helpful. Rare patients require release of the plantar
fascia from its attachment site at the os calcis.
Healey K et al. Plantar fasciitis: current diagnostic modalities and
treatments. Clin Podiatr Med Surg. 2010 Jul;27(3):369–80.
[PMID: 20691370]
 
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
 
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually insidious onset with morning stiffness and pain in affected
joints.
 Symmetric polyarthritis with predilection for small joints of the
hands and feet; deformities common with progressive disease.
 Radiographic findings: juxta-articular osteoporosis, joint erosions,
and joint space narrowing.
 Rheumatoid factor and antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides
(anti-CCP) are present in 70–80%.
 Extra-articular manifestations: subcutaneous nodules, interstitial
lung disease, pleural effusion, pericarditis, splenomegaly with
leukopenia, and vasculitis.
 
 General Considerations
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic systemic inflammatory disease
whose major manifestation is synovitis of multiple joints. It has a
prevalence of 1% and is more common in women than men
(female:male ratio of 3:1). Rheumatoid arthritis can begin at any age,
but the peak onset is in the fourth or fifth decade for women and the
sixth to eighth decades for men. The cause is not known.
Susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis is genetically determined with
multiple genes contributing. Inheritance of class II HLA molecules
with a distinctive five-amino-acid sequence known as the “shared
epitope” is the best characterized genetic risk factor. Untreated,
rheumatoid arthritis causes joint destruction with consequent
disability and shortens life expectancy. Early, aggressive treatment is
the standard of care.
The pathologic findings in the joint include chronic synovitis with
formation of a pannus, which erodes cartilage, bone, ligaments, and
tendons. In the acute phase, effusion and other manifestations of
inflammation are common. In the late stage, organization may result
in fibrous ankylosis; true bony ankylosis is rare.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Joint symptoms—The clinical manifestations of rheumatoid
disease are highly variable, but joint symptoms usually predominate.
Although acute presentations may occur, the onset of articular signs
of inflammation is usually insidious, with prodromal symptoms of
vague periarticular pain or stiffness. Symmetric swelling of multiple
joints with tenderness and pain is characteristic. Monarticular
disease is occasionally seen initially. Stiffness persisting for > 30
minutes (and usually many hours) is prominent in the morning.
Stiffness may recur after daytime inactivity and be much more
severe after strenuous activity. Although any diarthrodial joint may
be affected, PIP joints of the fingers, MCP joints (Figure 20–4),
wrists, knees, ankles, and MTP joints are most often involved.
Synovial cysts and rupture of tendons may occur. Entrapment
syndromes are not unusual—particularly of the median nerve at the
carpal tunnel of the wrist. Rheumatoid arthritis can affect the neck
but spares the other components of the spine and does not involve
the sacroiliac joints. In advanced disease, atlantoaxial (C1–C2)
subluxation can lead to myelopathy.
 
Figure 20–4. Rheumatoid arthritis with ulnar deviation at the
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints. (Courtesy of Richard P.
Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA,
Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
2. Rheumatoid nodules—Twenty percent of patients have
subcutaneous rheumatoid nodules, most commonly situated over
bony prominences but also observed in the bursae and tendon
sheaths (Figure 20–5). Nodules are occasionally seen in the lungs,
the sclerae, and other tissues. Nodules correlate with the presence
of rheumatoid factor in serum (“seropositivity”), as do most other
extra-articular manifestations.
3. Ocular symptoms—Dryness of the eyes, mouth, and other
mucous membranes is found especially in advanced disease (see
Sjögren syndrome). Other ocular manifestations include episcleritis,
scleritis, and scleromalacia due to scleral nodules.
4. Other symptoms—Interstitial lung disease is not uncommon
(estimates of prevalence vary widely according to method of
detection) and manifests clinically as cough and progressive
dyspnea. Pericarditis and pleural disease, when present, are usually
silent clinically. Patients with active joint disease often have palmar
erythema. Occasionally, a small vessel vasculitis develops and
manifests as tiny hemorrhagic infarcts in the nail folds or finger
pulps. Although necrotizing arteritis is well reported, it is rare. A
small subset of patients with rheumatoid arthritis have Felty
syndrome, the occurrence of splenomegaly and neutropenia, usually
in the setting of severe, destructive arthritis. Felty syndrome must be
distinguished from the large granular lymphocyte syndrome, with
which it shares many features.
 
Figure 20–5. Rheumatoid nodules over the extensor surface of
the forearm. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
Aortitis is a rare late complication that can result in aortic
regurgitation or rupture and is usually associated with evidence of
rheumatoid vasculitis elsewhere in the body.
B. Laboratory Findings
Anti-CCP antibodies and rheumatoid factor, an IgM antibody
directed against the Fc fragment of IgG, are present in 70–80% of
patients with established rheumatoid arthritis but have sensitivities of
only 50% in early disease. Anti-CCP antibodies are the most
specific blood test for rheumatoid arthritis (specificity ~95%).
Rheumatoid factor can occur in other autoimmune disease and in
chronic infections, including hepatitis C, syphilis, subacute bacterial
endocarditis, and tuberculosis. The prevalence of rheumatoid factor
positivity also rises with age in healthy individuals. Approximately
20% of rheumatoid patients have antinuclear antibodies.
The ESR and levels of C-reactive protein are typically elevated in
proportion to disease activity. A moderate hypochromic normocytic
anemia is common. The white cell count is normal or slightly
elevated, but leukopenia may occur, often in the presence of
splenomegaly (eg, Felty syndrome). The platelet count is often
elevated, roughly in proportion to the severity of overall joint
inflammation. Initial joint fluid examination confirms the inflammatory
nature of the arthritis. (See Table 20–2.) Arthrocentesis is needed
to diagnose superimposed septic arthritis, which is a common
complication of rheumatoid arthritis and should be considered
whenever a patient with rheumatoid arthritis has one joint inflamed
out of proportion to the rest.
C. Imaging
Of all the laboratory tests, radiographic changes are the most
specific for rheumatoid arthritis. Radiographs obtained during the
first 6 months of symptoms, however, are usually normal. The
earliest changes occur in the wrists or feet and consist of soft tissue
swelling and juxta-articular demineralization. Later, diagnostic
changes of uniform joint space narrowing and erosions develop.
The erosions are often first evident at the ulnar styloid and at the
juxtaarticular margin, where the bony surface is not protected by
cartilage. Diagnostic changes also occur in the cervical spine, with
C1–2 subluxation, but these changes usually take many years to
develop. Although both MRI and ultrasonography are more
sensitive than radiographs in detecting bony and soft tissue changes
in rheumatoid arthritis, their value in early diagnosis relative to that
of plain radio-graphs has not been established.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differentiation of rheumatoid arthritis from other joint conditions
and immune-mediated disorders can be difficult. In 2010, the
American College of Rheumatology updated their classification
criteria for rheumatoid arthritis. In contrast to rheumatoid arthritis,
osteoarthritis spares the wrist and the MCP joints. Osteoarthritis is
not associated with constitutional manifestations, and the joint pain
is characteristically relieved by rest, unlike the morning stiffness of
rheumatoid arthritis. Signs of articular inflammation, prominent in
rheumatoid arthritis, are usually minimal in degenerative joint
disease. CPPD deposition disease can cause a degenerative
arthropathy of the MCPs and wrists; radiographs are usually
diagnostic. Although gouty arthritis is almost always intermittent and
monarticular in the early years, it may evolve with time into a
chronic polyarticular process that mimics rheumatoid arthritis. Gouty
tophi can resemble rheumatoid nodules both in typical location and
appearance. The early history of intermittent monarthritis and the
presence of synovial urate crystals are distinctive features of gout.
Spondyloarthropathies, particularly earlier in their course, can be a
source of diagnostic uncertainty; predilection for lower extremities
and involvement of the spine and sacroiliac joints point to the
correct diagnosis. Chronic Lyme arthritis typically involves only one
joint, most commonly the knee, and is associated with positive
serologic tests (see Chapter 34). Human parvovirus B19 infection in
adults can mimic early rheumatoid arthritis. However, arthralgias are
more prominent than arthritis, fever is common, IgM antibodies to
parvovirus B19 are present, and the arthritis usually resolves within
weeks. Infection with hepatitis C can cause a chronic nonerosive
polyarthritis associated with rheumatoid factor; tests for anti-CCP
antibodies are negative.
Malar rash, photosensitivity, discoid skin lesions, alopecia, high
titer antibodies to double-stranded DNA, glomerulonephritis, and
central nervous system abnormalities point to the diagnosis of SLE.
Polymyalgia rheumatica occasionally causes polyarthralgias in
patients over age 50, but these patients remain rheumatoid factor–
negative and have chiefly proximal muscle pain and stiffness,
centered on the shoulder and hip girdles. Rheumatic fever is
characterized by the migratory nature of the arthritis, an elevated
antistreptolysin titer, and a more dramatic and prompt response to
aspirin; carditis and erythema marginatum may occur in adults, but
chorea and subcutaneous nodules virtually never do. Finally, a
variety of cancers produce paraneoplastic syndromes, including
polyarthritis. One form is hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy
most often produced by lung and gastrointestinal carcinomas,
characterized by a rheumatoid-like arthritis associated with
clubbing, periosteal new bone formation, and a negative rheumatoid
factor. Diffuse swelling of the hands with palmar fasciitis occurs in a
variety of cancers, especially ovarian carcinoma.
 Treatment
The primary objectives in treating rheumatoid arthritis are reduction
of inflammation and pain, preservation of function, and prevention of
deformity. Success requires early, effective pharmacologic
intervention. Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
should be started as soon as the diagnosis of rheumatoid disease is
certain and then adjusted with the aim of suppressing disease
activity. The American College of Rheumatology recommends using
standardized assessments, such as the Disease Activity Score 28
Joints (DAS28), to gauge therapeutic responses, with the target of
mild disease activity or remission by these measures. In advanced
disease, surgical intervention may help improve function of damaged
joints and to relieve pain.
A. Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
NSAIDs provide some symptomatic relief in rheumatoid arthritis
but do not prevent erosions or alter disease progression. They are
not appropriate for monotherapy and should only be used in
conjunction with DMARDs. A large number of NSAIDs are
available; all appear equivalent in terms of efficacy (see Table 5–3).
Celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, is FDA-approved for
the treatment of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. Compared
with traditional NSAIDs, COX-2 inhibitors are as effective for
treating rheumatoid arthritis but less likely in some circumstances to
cause upper gastrointestinal tract adverse events (eg, obstruction,
perforation, hemorrhage, or ulceration). Long-term use of COX-2
inhibitors, particularly in the absence of concomitant aspirin use, has
been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events,
leading to the removal of some COX-2 inhibitors from the US
market and intense scrutiny of all drugs in that class.
1. Gastrointestinal side effects—For traditional NSAIDs that
inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2, gastrointestinal side effects, such
as gastric ulceration, perforation, and gastrointestinal hemorrhage,
are the most common serious side effects. The overall rate of
bleeding with NSAID use in the general population is low (1:6000
users or less) but is increased by long-term use, higher NSAID
dose, concomitant corticosteroids or anticoagulants, the presence of
rheumatoid arthritis, history of peptic ulcer disease or alcoholism,
and age over 70. Twenty-five percent of all hospitalizations and
deaths from peptic ulcer disease result from traditional NSAID
therapy. Each year, 1:1000 patients with rheumatoid arthritis will
require hospitalization for NSAID-related gastrointestinal bleeding
or perforation. Although all traditional NSAIDs can cause massive
gastrointestinal bleeding, the risk may be higher with indomethacin
and piroxicam, probably because these drugs preferentially inhibit
COX-1 in the stomach.
One approach to reducing the gastrointestinal toxicity of
traditional NSAIDs is to add a proton pump inhibitor (eg,
omeprazole 20 mg orally daily). Sucralfate, antacids, and H2-
blockers (such as ranitidine) either do not work or do not work as
well as proton pump inhibitors. The expense of proton pump
inhibitors and misoprostol dictates that their use should be reserved
for patients with risk factors for NSAID-induced gastrointestinal
toxicity (noted above). Patients who have recently recovered from
an NSAID-induced bleeding gastric ulcer appear to be at high risk
for rebleeding (about 5% in 6 months) when an NSAID is
reintroduced, even if prophylactic measures such as proton pump
inhibitors are used. NSAIDs can also affect the lower intestinal
tract, causing perforation or aggravating inflammatory bowel
disease.
Acute liver injury from NSAIDs is rare, occurring in about 1 of
every 25,000 patients using these agents. Having rheumatoid
arthritis or taking sulindac may increase the risk.
2. Renal side effects—All of the NSAIDs, including aspirin and
the COX-2 inhibitors, can produce renal toxicity, including
interstitial nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, prerenal azotemia, and
aggravation of hypertension. Hyperkalemia due to hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism may also be seen rarely. The risk of renal
toxicity is low but is increased by age over 60, a history of kidney
disease, congestive heart failure, ascites, and diuretic use. COX-2
inhibitors appear to cause as much nephrotoxicity as traditional
NSAIDs.
3. Platelet effects—All NSAIDs except the nonacetylated
salicylates and the COX-2 inhibitors interfere with platelet function
and prolong bleeding time. For all older NSAIDs except aspirin, the
effect on bleeding time resolves as the drug is cleared. Aspirin
irreversibly inhibits platelet function, so the bleeding time effect
resolves only as new platelets are made. Concomitant
administration of a traditional NSAID can interfere with the ability
of aspirin to acetylate platelets and thus may interfere with the
cardioprotective effects of low-dose aspirin. COX-2 inhibitors,
which differ from other NSAIDs in not inhibiting platelet function,
do not increase the risk of bleeding with surgical procedures as
most NSAIDs do. Unfortunately, this failure to inhibit platelets is
now known to lead to increased risks of myocardial infarction and
stroke, particularly when the medications are used in high doses for
prolonged periods of time. Patients requiring low-dose aspirin who
are not compliant have a greater risk of developing a thrombotic
event while taking a COX-2 inhibitor than while taking a traditional
NSAID. Whether combination therapy with low-dose aspirin and a
COX-2 inhibitor maintains the gastrointestinal advantage of
selective COX-2 inhibitors is not yet known.
Although groups of patients with rheumatoid arthritis respond
similarly to NSAIDs, individuals may respond differently—an
NSAID that works for one patient may not work for another. Thus,
if the first NSAID chosen is not effective after 2–3 weeks of use,
another should be tried.
B. Corticosteroids
Low-dose corticosteroids (eg, oral prednisone 5–10 mg daily)
produce a prompt anti-inflammatory effect in rheumatoid arthritis
and slow the rate of articular erosion. However, their multiple side
effects limit their long-term use.
Low-dose corticosteroids often are used as a “bridge” to reduce
disease activity until the slower acting DMARDs take effect or as
adjunctive therapy for active disease that persists despite treatment
with DMARDs. No more than 10 mg of prednisone or equivalent
per day is appropriate for articular disease. Many patients do
reasonably well on 5–7.5 mg daily. (The use of 1 mg tablets, to
facilitate doses of < 5 mg/d, is encouraged.) Higher doses are used
to manage serious extra-articular manifestations (eg, pericarditis,
necrotizing scleritis). When the corticosteroids are to be
discontinued, they should be tapered gradually on a planned
schedule appropriate to the duration of treatment. All patients
receiving long-term corticosteroid therapy should take measures to
prevent osteoporosis.
Intra-articular corticosteroids may be helpful if one or two joints
are the chief source of difficulty. Intra-articular triamcinolone, 10–
40 mg depending on the size of the joint to be injected, may be
given for symptomatic relief but not more than four times a year.
C. Synthetic DMARDs
1. Methotrexate—Methotrexate is usually the initial synthetic
DMARD of choice for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. It is
generally well tolerated and often produces a beneficial effect in 2–6
weeks. The usual initial dose is 7.5 mg of methotrexate orally once
weekly. If the patient has tolerated methotrexate but has not
responded in 1 month, the dose can be increased to 15 mg orally
once per week. The maximal dose is usually 20–25 mg/wk. The
most frequent side effects are gastric irritation and stomatitis.
Cytopenia, most commonly leukopenia or thrombocytopenia but
rarely pancytopenia, due to bone marrow suppression is another
important potential problem. The risk of developing pancytopenia is
much higher in patients with elevation of the serum creatinine (≥ 2
mg/dL). Hepatotoxicity with fibrosis and cirrhosis is an important
toxic effect that correlates with cumulative dose and is uncommon
with appropriate monitoring of liver function tests. Methotrexate is
contraindicated in a patient with any form of chronic hepatitis.
Heavy alcohol use increases the hepatotoxicity, so patients should
be advised to drink alcohol in extreme moderation, if at all.
Diabetes, obesity, and kidney disease also increase the risk of
hepatotoxicity. Liver function tests should be monitored at least
every 12 weeks, along with a complete blood count. The dose of
methotrexate should be reduced if aminotransferase levels are
elevated, and the drug should be discontinued if abnormalities
persist despite dosage reduction. Gastric irritation, stomatitis,
cytopenias, and hepatotoxicity are reduced by prescribing either
daily folate (1 mg orally) or weekly leucovorin calcium (2.5–5 mg
taken orally 24 hours after the dose of methotrexate).
Hypersensitivity to methotrexate can cause an acute or subacute
interstitial pneumonitis that can be life-threatening but which usually
responds to cessation of the drug and institution of corticosteroids.
Because methotrexate is teratogenic, women of child-bearing age as
well as men must use effective contraception while taking the
medication. Methotrexate is associated with an increased risk of B
cell lymphomas, some of which resolve following the discontinuation
of the medication. The combination of methotrexate and other folate
antagonists, such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, should be used
cautiously, since pancytopenia can result. Probenecid should also
be avoided since it increases methotrexate drug levels and toxicity.
2. Sulfasalazine—This drug is a second-line agent for rheumatoid
arthritis. It is usually introduced at a dosage of 0.5 g orally twice
daily and then increased each week by 0.5 g until the patient
improves or the daily dose reaches 3 g. Side effects, particularly
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, occur in 10–25% and are
serious in 2–5%. Sulfasalazine also causes hemolysis in patients with
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, so a
G6PD level should be checked before initiating sulfasalazine.
Patients with aspirin sensitivity should not be given sulfasalazine.
Patients taking sulfasalazine should have complete blood counts
monitored every 2–4 weeks for the first 3 months, then every 3
months.
3. Leflunomide—Leflunomide, a pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor, is
also FDA-approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and is
administered as a single oral daily dose of 20 mg. The most frequent
side effects are diarrhea, rash, reversible alopecia, and
hepatotoxicity. Some patients experience dramatic unexplained
weight loss. The drug is carcinogenic, teratogenic, and has a half-life
of 2 weeks. Thus, it is contraindicated in premenopausal women or
in men who wish to father children.
4. Antimalarials—Hydroxychloroquine sulfate is the anti-malarial
agent most often used against rheumatoid arthritis. Monotherapy
with hydroxychloroquine should be reserved for patients with mild
disease because only a small percentage will respond and in some
of those cases only after 3–6 months of therapy.
Hydroxychloroquine is often used in combination with other
conventional DMARDs, particularly methotrexate and sulfasalazine.
The advantage of hydroxychloroquine is its comparatively low
toxicity, especially at a dosage of 200–400 mg/d orally (not to
exceed 6.5 mg/kg/d). The most important reaction, pigmentary
retinitis causing visual loss, is rare at this dose. Ophthalmologic
examinations every 12 months are required when this drug is used
for long-term therapy. Other reactions include neuropathies and
myopathies of both skeletal and cardiac muscle, which usually
improve when the drug is withdrawn.
5. Minocycline—Minocycline is more effective than placebo for
rheumatoid arthritis. It is reserved for early, mild cases, since its
efficacy is modest, and it works better during the first year of
rheumatoid arthritis. The mechanism of action is not clear, but
tetracyclines do have anti-inflammatory properties, including the
ability to inhibit destructive enzymes such as collagenase. The
dosage of minocycline is 200 mg orally daily. Adverse effects are
uncommon except for dizziness, which occurs in about 10%.
D. Biologic DMARDs
1. Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors—Inhibitors of tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)—a pro-inflammatory cytokine—are fulfilling the aim
of targeted therapy for rheumatoid arthritis. These medications are
frequently added to the treatment of patients who have not
responded adequately to methotrexate and are increasingly used as
initial therapy in combination with methotrexate for patients with
poor prognostic factors.
Five inhibitors are in use: etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab,
golimumab, and certolizumab pegol. Etanercept, a soluble
recombinant TNF receptor:Fc fusion protein, is usually administered
at a dosage of 50 mg subcutaneously once per week. Infliximab, a
chimeric monoclonal antibody, is administered at a dosage of 3–10
mg/kg intravenously; infusions are repeated after 2, 6, 10, and 14
weeks and then are administered every 8 weeks. Adalimumab, a
human monoclonal antibody that binds to TNF, is given at a dosage
of 40 mg subcutaneously every other week. The dose for
golimumab, a human anti-TNF monoclonal antibody, is 50 mg
subcutaneously once monthly. Certolizumab pegol is a PEGylated
monoclonal antibody TNF inhibitor; the dose is 200–400 mg
subcutaneously every 2 to 4 weeks. Each drug produces substantial
improvement in more than 60% of patients. Each is usually very well
tolerated. Minor irritation at injection sites is the most common side
effect of etanercept and adalimumab. Rarely, nonrecurrent
leukopenia develops in patients. TNF plays a physiologic role in
combating many types of infection; TNF inhibitors have been
associated with a several-fold increased risk of serious bacterial
infections and a striking increase in granulomatous infections,
particularly reactivation of tuberculosis. Screening for latent
tuberculosis (see Chapter 9) is mandatory before the initiation of
TNF blockers. It is prudent to suspend TNF blockers when a fever
or other manifestations of a clinically important infection develops in
a patient. Demyelinating neurologic complications that resemble
multiple sclerosis have been reported rarely in patients taking
etanercept, but the true magnitude of this risk—likely quite small—
has not been determined with precision. While there are conflicting
data with respect to increased risk of malignancy, in 2009, the FDA
issued a safety alert about case reports of malignancies, including
leukemias, in patients treated with TNF inhibitors. Contrary to
expectation, TNF inhibitors were not effective in the treatment of
congestive heart failure. The use of infliximab, in fact, was
associated with increased morbidity in a congestive heart failure
trial. Consequently, TNF inhibitors should be used with extreme
caution in patients with congestive heart failure. Infliximab can rarely
cause anaphylaxis and induce anti-DNA antibodies (but rarely
clinically evident SLE). A final concern about TNF inhibitors is the
expense, which is more than $10,000 per year.
2. Abatacept—Abatacept, a recombinant protein made by fusing a
fragment of the Fc domain of human IgG with the extracellular
domain of a T cell inhibitory receptor (CTLA4), blocks T-cell
costimulation. It is approved by the FDA for use in rheumatoid
arthritis and produces clinically meaningful responses in
approximately 50% of individuals whose disease is active despite
the combination of methotrexate and a TNF inhibitor.
3. Rituximab—Rituximab is a humanized mouse monoclonal
antibody that depletes B cells. It is approved by the FDA to be
used in combination with methotrexate for patients whose disease
has been refractory to treatment with a TNF inhibitor.
4. Tocilizumab—Tocilizumab is a monoclonal antibody that blocks
the receptor for IL-6, an inflammatory cytokine involved in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. It also is approved by the FDA
to be used in combination with methotrexate for patients whose
disease has been refractory to treatment with a TNF inhibitor.
E. DMARD Combinations
As a general rule, DMARDs have greater efficacy when
administered in combination than when used individually. Currently,
the most commonly used combination is that of methotrexate with
one of the TNF inhibitors, which clearly is superior to methotrexate
alone. The urge to use combination therapies with TNF inhibitors as
the initial treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, however, has been
tempered by concerns about their safety and cost. The American
College of Rheumatology has published detailed recommendations
on the initiation of DMARD combinations.
 Course & Prognosis
After months or years, deformities may occur; the most common
are ulnar deviation of the fingers, boutonnière deformity
(hyperextension of the DIP joint with flexion of the PIP joint),
“swan-neck” deformity (flexion of the DIP joint with extension of
the PIP joint), valgus deformity of the knee, and volar subluxation of
the MTP joints. The excess mortality associated with rheumatoid
arthritis is largely due to cardiovascular disease that is unexplained
by traditional risk factors and that appears to be a result of
deleterious effects of chronic systemic inflammation on the vascular
system.
When to Refer
Early referral to a rheumatologist is essential for appropriate
diagnosis and the timely introduction of effective pharmacologic and
nonpharmacologic (physical and occupational) therapy.
Aletaha D et al. 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria: an
American College of Rheumatology/European League Against
Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis Rheum. 2010
Sep;62(9):2569–81. [PMID: 20872595]
 
Saag KG et al. American College of Rheumatology 2008
recommendations for the use of nonbiologic and biologic disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis
Rheum. 2008 Jun 15;59(6):762–84. [PMID: 18512708]
 
van Vollenhoven RF et al. Addition of infliximab compared with
addition of sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine to methotrexate in
patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (Swefot trial): 1-year results
of a randomised trial. Lancet. 2009 Aug 8;374(9688):459–66.
[PMID: 19665644]
 
ADULT STILL DISEASE
Still disease is a systemic form of juvenile chronic arthritis in which
high spiking fevers are much more prominent, especially at the
outset, than arthritis. This syndrome also occurs in adults. Most
adults are in their 20s or 30s; onset after age 60 is rare. The fever is
dramatic, often with daily spikes to 40°C, associated with sweats
and chills, and then plunging to normal or several degrees below
normal in the absence of antipyretics. Many patients initially
complain of sore throat. An evanescent salmon-colored nonpruritic
rash, chiefly on the chest and abdomen, is a characteristic feature.
The rash can easily be missed since it often appears only with the
fever spike. Many patients also have lymphadenopathy and
pericardial effusions. Joint symptoms are mild or absent in the
beginning, but a destructive arthritis, especially of the wrists, may
develop months later. Anemia and leukocytosis, with white blood
counts sometimes exceeding 40,000/mcL, are the rule. Ferritin
levels are exceptionally high (> 3000 mg/mL) in more than 70% of
cases of adult Still disease—for reasons that are not clear. A low
percentage (< 20%) of serum ferritin that is glycosylated may be
even more specific for adult Still disease. Although there must be
exclusion of other causes of fever, the diagnosis of adult Still disease
is strongly suggested by the fever pattern, sore throat, and the
classic rash. About half of the patients respond to high-dose aspirin
(eg, 1 g three times orally daily) or other NSAIDs, and half require
prednisone, sometimes in doses > 60 mg/d orally. TNF inhibitors
may be helpful for some patients with refractory adult Still disease,
but most patients treated with these agents achieve only partial
remissions. More complete and dramatic responses have been
achieved with the IL-1 receptor antagonist anakinra.
Bagnari V et al. Adult-onset Still's disease. Rheumatol Int. 2010
May;30(7):855–62. [PMID: 20020138]
 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Occurs mainly in young women.
 Rash over areas exposed to sunlight.
 Joint symptoms in 90% of patients. Multiple system involvement.
 Anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia.
 Glomerulonephritis, central nervous system disease, and
complications of antiphospholipid antibodies are major sources
of disease morbidity.
 Serologic findings: antinuclear antibodies (100%), anti–double-
stranded DNA antibodies (approximately two-thirds), and low
serum complement levels (particularly during disease flares).
 
 General Considerations
SLE is an inflammatory autoimmune disorder characterized by
autoantibodies to nuclear antigens. It can affect multiple organ
systems. Many of its clinical manifestations are secondary to the
trapping of antigen-antibody complexes in capillaries of visceral
structures or to autoantibody-mediated destruction of host cells (eg,
thrombocytopenia). The clinical course is marked by spontaneous
remission and relapses. The severity may vary from a mild episodic
disorder to a rapidly fulminant, life-threatening illness.
The incidence of SLE is influenced by many factors, including
gender, race, and genetic inheritance. About 85% of patients are
women. Sex hormones appear to play some role; most cases
develop after menarche and before menopause. Among older
individuals, the gender distribution is more equal. Race is also a
factor, as SLE occurs in 1:1000 white women but in 1:250 black
women. Familial occurrence of SLE has been repeatedly
documented, and the disorder is concordant in 25–70% of identical
twins. If a mother has SLE, her daughters’ risks of developing the
disease are 1:40 and her sons’ risks are 1:250. Aggregation of
serologic abnormalities (positive antinuclear antibody) is seen in
asymptomatic family members, and the prevalence of other
rheumatic diseases is increased among close relatives of patients.
The importance of specific genes in SLE is emphasized by the high
frequency of certain HLA haplotypes, especially DR2 and DR3,
and null complement alleles.
Before making a diagnosis of SLE, it is imperative to ascertain
that the condition has not been induced by a drug (Table 20–8).
Procainamide, hydralazine, and isoniazid are the best-studied drugs.
While antinuclear antibody tests and other serologic findings
become positive in many persons receiving these agents, clinical
manifestations occur in only a few.
Four features of drug-induced lupus separate it from SLE: (1)
the sex ratio is nearly equal; (2) nephritis and central nervous system
features are not ordinarily present; (3) hypocomplementemia and
antibodies to double-stranded DNA are absent; and (4) the clinical
features and most laboratory abnormalities usually revert toward
normal when the offending drug is withdrawn.
 
Table 20–8. Drugs associated with lupus erythematosus.
 
Definite association
     Chlorpromazine
     Hydralazine
     Isoniazid
     Methyldopa
Minocycline
rocainamide
Quinidine
Possible association
     β-Blockers
     Captopril
     Carbamazepine
     Cimetidine
     Ethosuximide
     Levodopa
     Lithium
     Methimazole
Nitrofurantoin
Penicillamine
Phenytoin
Propylthiouracil
Sulfasalazine
Sulfonamides
Trimethadione
Unlikely association
     Allopurinol
     Chlorthalidone
     Gold salts
     Griseofulvin
     Methysergide
     Oral contraceptives
Penicillin
Phenylbutazone
Reserpine
Streptomycin
Tetracyclines
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Hess EV et al. Drug-
related lupus. Bull Rheum Dis. 1991;40(4):1–8.
The diagnosis of SLE should be suspected in patients having a
multisystem disease with a positive test for anti-nuclear antibodies.
Differential diagnosis includes rheumatoid arthritis, systemic
vasculitis, scleroderma, inflammatory myopathies, viral hepatitis,
sarcoidosis, acute drug reactions, and drug-induced lupus.
The diagnosis of SLE can be made with reasonable probability if
4 of the 11 criteria set forth in Table 20–9 are met. These criteria,
developed as guidelines for the inclusion of patients in research
studies, do not supplant clinical judgment in the diagnosis of SLE.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The systemic features include fever, anorexia, malaise, and weight
loss. Most patients have skin lesions at some time; the characteristic
“butterfly” (malar) rash affects less than half of patients. Other
cutaneous manifestations are discoid lupus, typical fingertip lesions,
periungual erythema, nail fold infarcts, and splinter hemorrhages.
Alopecia is common. Mucous membrane lesions tend to occur
during periods of exacerbation. Raynaud phenomenon, present in
about 20% of patients, often antedates other features of the disease.
Joint symptoms, with or without active synovitis, occur in over
90% of patients and are often the earliest manifestation. The arthritis
can lead to reversible swanneck deformities, but erosive changes
are almost never noted on radiographs. Subcutaneous nodules are
rare.
 
Table 20–9. Criteria for the classification of SLE. (A patient is
classified as having SLE if any 4 or more of 11 criteria are met.)
 
1. Malar rash
2. Discoid rash
3. Photosensitivity
4. Oral ulcers
5. Arthritis
6. Serositis
7. Kidney disease
a. > 0.5 g/d proteinuria, or
b. ≥3+ dipstick proteinuria, or
c. Cellular casts
8. Neurologic disease
a. Seizures, or
b. Psychosis (without other cause)
9. Hematologic disorders
a. Hemolytic anemia, or
b. Leukopenia (< 4000/mcL), or
c. Lymphopenia (< 1500/mcL), or
d. Thrombocytopenia (< 100,000/mcL)
10. Immunologic abnormalities
a. Positive LE cell preparation, or
b. Antibody to native DNA, or
c. Antibody to Sm, or
d. False-positive serologic test for syphilis
11. Positive ANA
ANA, antinuclear antibody; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus. Modified
and reproduced, with permission, from Tan EM et al. The 1982 revised
criteria for the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis
Rheum. 1982 Nov;25(11):1271–7.
Ocular manifestations include conjunctivitis, photo-phobia,
transient or permanent monocular blindness, and blurring of vision.
Cotton-wool spots on the retina (cytoid bodies) represent
degeneration of nerve fibers due to occlusion of retinal blood
vessels.
Pleurisy, pleural effusion, bronchopneumonia, and pneumonitis
are frequent. Restrictive lung disease can develop. Alveolar
hemorrhage is rare but life-threatening.
The pericardium is affected in the majority of patients. Cardiac
failure may result from myocarditis and hypertension. Cardiac
arrhythmias are common. Atypical verrucous endocarditis of
Libman-Sacks is usually clinically silent but occasionally can
produce acute or chronic valvular incompetence—most commonly
mitral regurgitation.
Mesenteric vasculitis occasionally occurs in SLE and may closely
resemble polyarteritis nodosa, including the presence of aneurysms
in medium-sized blood vessels. Abdominal pain (particularly
postprandial), ileus, peritonitis, and perforation may result.
Neurologic complications of SLE include psychosis, cognitive
impairment, seizures, peripheral and cranial neuropathies, transverse
myelitis, and strokes. Severe depression and psychosis are
sometimes exacerbated by the administration of large doses of
corticosteroids.
Several forms of glomerulonephritis may occur, including
mesangial, focal proliferative, diffuse proliferative, and membranous
(see Chapter 22). Some patients may also have interstitial nephritis.
With appropriate therapy, the survival rate even for patients with
serious chronic kidney disease (proliferative glomerulonephritis) is
favorable, albeit a substantial portion of patients with severe lupus
nephritis still eventually require renal replacement therapy.
B. Laboratory Findings
(Tables 20–10 and 20–11.) SLE is characterized by the production
of many different autoantibodies. Antinuclear antibody tests based
on immunofluorescence assays are sensitive but not specific for SLE
—ie, they are positive in virtually all patients with lupus but are
positive also in many patients with nonlupus conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune thyroid disease, scleroderma, and
Sjögren syndrome. False-negative results can occur with tests for
antinuclear antibodies based on enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays (ELISA). Therefore, SLE should not be excluded on the
basis of a negative ELISA for antinuclear antibodies. Antibodies to
double-stranded DNA and to Sm are specific for SLE but not
sensitive, since they are present in only 60% and 30% of patients,
respectively. Depressed serum complement—a finding suggestive of
disease activity—often returns toward normal in remission. Anti-
double-stranded DNA antibody levels also correlate with disease
activity in some patients; anti-Sm levels do not.
Three types of antiphospholipid antibodies occur (Table 20–11).
The first causes the biologic false-positive tests for syphilis; the
second is the lupus anticoagulant, which despite its name is a risk
factor for venous and arterial thrombosis and for miscarriage. The
lupus anticoagulant often causes prolongation of the activated partial
thromboplastin time, and its presence is confirmed by an abnormal
Russell viper venom time (RVVT) that corrects with the addition of
phospholipid but not normal plasma. Anticardiolipin antibodies are
the third type of antiphospholipid antibodies. In many cases, the
“antiphospholipid antibody” appears to be directed at a serum
cofactor (β2-glycoprotein-I) rather than at phospholipid itself.
Abnormality of urinary sediment is almost always found in
association with renal lesions. Showers of red blood cells, with or
without casts, and proteinuria (varying from mild to nephrotic range)
are frequent during exacerbation of the disease.
 
Table 20–10. frequency (%) of autoantibodies in rheumatic
diseases.1
 
1 Frequency for generalized, active disease.
ANA, antinuclear antibodies; Anti-Sm, anti-Smith antibody; anti-SCL-70,
anti-scleroderma antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody;
CREST, calcinosis cutis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal motility
disorder, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia.
 
Table 20–11. frequency (%) of laboratory abnormalities in
systemic lupus erythematosus.
 
Anemia
60%
Leukopenia
45%
Thrombocytopenia
30%
Biologic false-positive tests for syphilis
25%
Antiphospholipid antibodies
     Lupus anticoagulant
7%
     Anti-cardiolipin antibody
25%
     Direct Coombs-positive
30%
Proteinuria
30%
Hematuria
30%
Hypocomplementemia
60%
ANA
95–100%
Antinative DNA
50%
Anti-Sm
20%
ANA, antinuclear antibody; Anti-Sm, anti-Smith antibody.
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Hochberg MC et al.
Systemic lupus erythematosus: a review of clinicolaboratory features and
immunologic matches in 150 patients with emphasis on demographic
subsets. Medicine (Baltimore). 1985 Sep;64(5): 285–95.
Treatment
Patient education and emotional support are especially important for
patients with lupus. Since the various manifestations of SLE affect
prognosis differently and since SLE activity often waxes and wanes,
drug therapy—both the choice of agents and the intensity of their
use—must be tailored to match disease severity. Patients with
photosensitivity should be cautioned against sun exposure and
should apply a protective lotion to the skin while out of doors. Skin
lesions often respond to the local administration of corticosteroids.
Minor joint symptoms can usually be alleviated by rest and
NSAIDs.
Antimalarials (hydroxychloroquine) may be helpful in treating
lupus rashes or joint symptoms and appear to reduce the incidence
of severe disease flares. The dose of hydroxychloroquine is 200 or
400 mg/d orally and should not exceed 6.5 mg/kg/d; annual
monitoring for retinal changes is recommended. Drug-induced
neuropathy and myopathy may be erroneously ascribed to the
underlying disease. The androgenic corticosteroid danazol may be
effective therapy for thrombocytopenia not responsive to
corticosteroids. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has a therapeutic
role comparable to that of the antimalarial agents in the treatment of
SLE, but its side effects (particularly acne) are troubling to some
patients.
Corticosteroids are required for the control of certain
complications. (Systemic corticosteroids are not usually given for
minor arthritis, skin rash, leukopenia, or the anemia associated with
chronic disease.) Glomerulonephritis, hemolytic anemia, pericarditis
or myocarditis, alveolar hemorrhage, central nervous system
involvement, and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura all require
corticosteroid treatment and often other interventions as well. Forty
to 60 mg of oral prednisone is often needed initially; however, the
lowest dose of corticosteroid that controls the condition should be
used. Central nervous system lupus may require higher doses of
corticosteroids than are usually given; however, corticosteroid
psychosis may mimic lupus cerebritis, in which case reduced doses
are 
appropriate. 
Immunosuppressive 
agents 
such 
as
cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine are
used in cases resistant to corticosteroids. Treatment of severe lupus
nephritis includes an induction phase and a maintenance phase.
Cyclophosphamide, which improves renal survival but not patient
survival, has been for many years the standard treatment for both
phases of lupus nephritis. Mycophenolate mofetil appears to be an
effective alternative treatment for many patients with lupus nephritis.
Very close follow-up is needed to watch for potential side effects
when immunosuppressants are given; these agents should be
administered by clinicians experienced in their use. When
cyclophosphamide is required, gonadotropin- releasing hormone
analogs can be given to protect a woman against the risk of
premature ovarian failure. For patients with the antiphospholipid
syndrome—the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies and
compatible clinical events—anticoagulation is the treatment of
choice (see Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome, below).
Moderate intensive anticoagulation with warfarin to achieve an INR
of 2.0–3.0 is as effective as more intensive regimens. Pregnant
patients with recurrent fetal loss associated with antiphospholipid
antibodies should be treated with low-molecular-weight heparin
plus aspirin.
 Course & Prognosis
Ten-year survival rates exceeding 85% are routine. In most
patients, the illness pursues a relapsing and remitting course.
Prednisone, often needed in doses of 40 mg/d orally or more during
severe flares, can usually be tapered to low doses (5–10 mg/d)
when the disease is inactive. However, there are some in whom the
disease pursues a virulent course, leading to serious impairment of
vital structures such as lung, heart, brain, or kidneys, and the
disease may lead to death. With improved control of lupus activity
and with increasing use of corticosteroids and immunosuppressive
drugs, the mortality and morbidity patterns in lupus have changed.
Mortality in SLE shows a bimodal pattern. In the early years after
diagnosis, infections—especially with opportunistic organisms—are
the leading cause of death, followed by active SLE, chiefly due to
kidney or central nervous system disease. In later years, accelerated
atherosclerosis, linked to chronic inflammation, becomes a major
cause of death. Indeed, the incidence of myocardial infarction is five
times higher in persons with SLE than in the general population.
Therefore, it is especially important for SLE patients to avoid
smoking and to minimize other conventional risk factors for
atherosclerosis (eg, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, obesity,
and inactivity). Patients with SLE should receive influenza
vaccination every year and pneumococcal vaccination every 5
years. Since some reports indicate that SLE patients have a higher
risk of developing malignancy, preventive cancer screening
recommendations should be followed assiduously. With more
patients living longer, it has become evident that avascular necrosis
of bone, affecting most commonly the hips and knees, is responsible
for substantial morbidity. Nonetheless, the outlook for most patients
with SLE has become increasingly favorable.
 When to Refer
 
•    Appropriate diagnosis and management of SLE
requires the active participation of a rheumatologist.
•    The severity of organ involvement dictates referral to
other 
subspecialists, 
such 
as 
nephrologists 
and
pulmonologists.
 When to Admit
 
•    Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, pulmonary
hemorrhage, transverse myelitis, and other severe organ-
threatening manifestations of lupus usually require in-
patient assessment and management.
•    Severe infections, particularly in the setting of
immunosuppressant therapy, should prompt admission.
Haque S et al. Risk factors for clinical coronary heart disease in
systemic lupus erythematosus: the lupus and atherosclerosis
evaluation of risk (LASER) study. J Rheumatol. 2010 Feb;
37(2):322–9. [PMID: 19955047]
 
Merrill JT et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab in moderately-to-
severely active systemic lupus erythematosus: the randomized,
double-blind, phase II/III systemic lupus erythematosus evaluation
of rituximab trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Jan; 62(1):222–33.
[PMID: 20039413]
 
Petri M et al. High-dose cyclophosphamide versus monthly
intravenous cyclophosphamide for systemic lupus erythematosus: a
prospective randomized trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2010
May;62(5):1487–93. [PMID: 20131296]
 
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID ANTIBODY SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hypercoagulability, with recurrent thromboses in either the
venous or arterial circulation.
 Thrombocytopenia is common.
 Pregnancy complications, specifically pregnancy losses after the
first trimester.
 Lifelong anticoagulation with warfarin is recommended currently
for patients with serious complications of this syndrome because
recurrent events are common.
 
 General Considerations
A primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLAS) is
diagnosed in patients who have recurrent venous or arterial
occlusions, recurrent fetal loss, or thrombocytopenia in the presence
of antiphospholipid antibodies but not other features of SLE. In <
1% of patients with antiphospholipid antibodies, a potentially
devastating syndrome known as the “catastrophic antiphospholipid
syndrome” occurs, leading to diffuse thromboses, thrombotic
microangiopathy, and multiorgan system failure.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients are often asymptomatic until suffering a thrombotic
complication of this syndrome. Thrombotic events may occur in
either the arterial or venous circulations. Thus, deep venous
thromboses, pulmonary emboli, cerebrovascular accidents are
typical clinical events among patients with the APLAS. Budd-Chiari
syndrome, cerebral sinus vein thrombosis, myocardial or digital
infarctions, and other thrombotic events also occur. A variety of
other symptoms and signs are often attributed to the APLAS,
including mental status changes, livedo reticularis, skin ulcers,
microangiopathic nephropathy, and cardiac valvular dysfunction—
typically mitral regurgitation that may mimic Libman-Sacks
endocarditis. Livedo reticularis is strongly associated with the subset
of patients with APLAS in whom arterial ischemic events develop.
B. Laboratory Findings
As noted in the discussion of SLE, three types of antiphospholipid
antibody are believed to contribute to this syndrome: (1) anti-
cardiolipin antibodies; (2) a “lupus anticoagulant” that prolongs
certain coagulation tests (see below); and (3) an antibody
associated with a biologic false-positive test for syphilis. Anti-
cardiolipin antibodies are typically measured with enzyme
immunoassays for either IgG or IgM. In general, IgG anti-
cardiolipin antibodies are believed to be more pathologic than IgM.
A clue to the presence of a lupus anticoagulant, which may occur in
individuals who do not have SLE, may be detected by a
prolongation of the partial thromboplastin time (which,
paradoxically, is associated with a thrombotic tendency rather than
a bleeding risk). A finding more sensitive for a lupus anticoagulant,
however, is prolongation of the coagulation assay known as the
Russell viper venom time (RVVT). In the presence of a lupus
anticoagulant, the RVVT is prolonged and does not correct with
mixing studies but does with the addition of excess phospholipid.
With the last type of antiphospholipid antibody, the patient has a
positive rapid plasma reagin (RPR), but negative specific anti-
treponemal assays.
 Differential Diagnosis
The exclusion of other autoimmune disorders, particularly those in
the SLE spectrum, is essential because such disorders may be
associated with additional complications requiring alternative
treatments. Other genetic or acquired conditions associated with
hypercoagulability such as protein C, protein S, factor V Leiden,
and antithrombin deficiency should be excluded. Catastrophic
APLAS has a broad differential, including sepsis, pulmonary-renal
syndromes, 
systemic 
vasculitis, 
disseminated 
intravascular
coagulation, and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
 Treatment
Present recommendations for anticoagulation are to treat patients
with warfarin to maintain an INR of 2.0–3.0. Patients who have
recurrent thrombotic events on this level of anticoagulation may
require higher INRs (> 3.0), but the bleeding risk increases
substantially with this degree of anticoagulation. Guidelines indicate
that patients with APLAS should be treated with anticoagulation for
life. Because of the teratogenic effects of warfarin, subcutaneous
heparin and low dose aspirin (81 mg) is the usual approach to
prevent pregnancy complications in women with APLAS. In
patients with catastrophic APLAS, a three-pronged approach is
taken in the acute setting: intravenous heparin, high doses of
corticosteroids, and either intravenous immune globulin or
plasmapheresis.
Cervera R. Update on the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of
the catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rep.
2010 Feb;12(1):70–6. [PMID: 20425537]
 
Ruiz-Irastorza G et al. Antiphospholipid syndrome. Lancet. 2010
Oct 30;376(9751):1498–509. [PMID: 20822807]
 
Ziakas PD et al. Heparin treatment in antiphospholipid syndrome
with recurrent pregnancy loss: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2010 Jun;115(6):1256–62. [PMID:
20502298]
 
RAYNAUD PHENOMENON
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Paroxysmal bilateral digital pallor and cyanosis followed by
rubor.
 Precipitated by cold or emotional stress; relieved by warmth.
 Primarily affects young women.
 Primary form benign; secondary form can cause digital ulceration
or gangrene.
 
 General Considerations
Raynaud phenomenon (RP) is a syndrome of paroxysmal digital
ischemia, most commonly caused by an exaggerated response of
digital arterioles to cold or emotional stress. The initial phase of RP,
mediated by excessive vasoconstriction, consists of well-
demarcated digital pallor or cyanosis; the subsequent (recovery)
phase of RP, caused by vasodilation, leads to intense hyperemia
and rubor. Although RP chiefly affects fingers, it can also affect toes
and other acral areas such as the nose and ears. RP is classified as
primary (idiopathic or Raynaud disease) or secondary. Nearly one-
third of the population reports being “sensitive to the cold” but does
not experience the paroxysms of digital pallor, cyanosis, and
erythema characteristic of RP. Primary RP occurs in 2–6% of
adults, is especially common in young women, and poses more of a
nuisance than a threat to good health. In contrast, secondary RP is
less common, is chiefly associated with rheumatic diseases
(especially scleroderma), and is frequently severe enough to cause
digital ulceration or gangrene.
 Clinical Findings
In early attacks of RP, only one or two fingertips may be affected;
as it progresses, all fingers down to the distal palm may be involved.
The thumbs are rarely affected. During recovery there may be
intense rubor, throbbing, paresthesia, pain, and slight swelling.
Attacks usually terminate spontaneously or upon returning to a
warm room or putting the extremity in warm water. The patient is
usually asymptomatic between attacks. Sensory changes that often
accompany vasomotor manifestations include numbness, stiffness,
diminished sensation, and aching pain.
Primary RP appears first between ages 15 and 30, almost always
in women. It tends to be mildly progressive and, unlike secondary
RP (which may be unilateral and may involve only one or two
fingers), symmetric involvement of the fingers of both hands is the
rule. Spasm becomes more frequent and prolonged. Unlike
secondary RP, primary RP does not cause digital pitting, ulceration,
or gangrene.
Nailfold capillary abnormalities are among the earliest clues that a
person has secondary rather than primary RP. The nailfold capillary
pattern can be visualized by placing a drop of grade B immersion oil
at the patient's cuticle and then viewing the area with an
ophthalmoscope set to 20–40 diopters. Dilation or dropout of the
capillary loops indicates the patient has a secondary form of RP,
most commonly scleroderma (Table 20–12). While highly specific
for secondary RP, nailfold capillary changes have a low sensitivity.
Digital pitting or ulceration or other abnormal physical findings (eg,
skin tightening, loss of extremity pulse, rash, swollen joints) can also
provide evidence of secondary RP.
 
Table 20–12. Causes of secondary Raynaud phenomenon.
 
Rheumatic diseases
     Scleroderma
     Systemic lupus erythematosus
     Dermatomyositis/polymyositis
     Sjögren syndrome
     Vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa, Takayasu disease,
Buerger disease)
Neurovascular compression and occupational
     Carpal tunnel syndrome
     Thoracic outlet obstruction
     Vibration injury
Medications
     Serotonin agonists (sumatriptan)
     Sympathomimetic drugs (decongestants)
     Chemotherapy (bleomycin, vinblastine)
     Ergotamine
     Caffeine
     Nicotine
Hematologic disorders
     Cryoglobulinemia
     Polycythemia vera
     Paraproteinemia
     Cold agglutinins
Endocrine disorders
     Hypothyroidism
     Pheochromocytoma
Miscellaneous
     Atherosclerosis
     Embolic disease
     Migraine
Primary RP must be differentiated from the numerous causes of
secondary RP (Table 20–12). The history and examination may
suggest the diagnosis of systemic sclerosis (including its CREST
variant), SLE, and mixed connective tissue disease; RP is
occasionally the first manifestation of these disorders. The diagnosis
of many of these rheumatic diseases can be confirmed with specific
serologic tests (see Table 20–10).
RP may occur in patients with the thoracic outlet syndromes. In
these disorders, involvement is generally unilateral, and symptoms
referable to brachial plexus compression tend to dominate the
clinical picture. Carpal tunnel syndrome should also be considered,
and nerve conduction tests are appropriate in selected cases.
A particularly severe form of RP occurs in up to one-third of
patients receiving bleomycin and vincristine in combination, often for
testicular cancer. Treatment is unsuccessful, and the problem
persists even with discontinuation of the drugs.
Differential Diagnosis
The differentiation from Buerger disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
is usually not difficult, since thromboangiitis obliterans is generally a
disease of men, particularly smokers; peripheral pulses are often
diminished or absent; and, when RP occurs in association with
thromboangiitis obliterans, it is usually in only one or two digits.
In acrocyanosis, cyanosis of the hands is permanent and diffuse;
the sharp and paroxysmal line of demarcation with pallor does not
occur with acrocyanosis. Frostbite may lead to chronic RP. Ergot
poisoning, particularly due to prolonged or excessive use of
ergotamine, must also be considered but is unusual.
RP may be mimicked by type I cryoglobulinemia, in which a
monoclonal antibody cryoprecipitates in the cooler distal circulation.
Type I cryoglobulinemia is usually associated with multiple myeloma
or with lymphoproliferative disorders.
Erythromelalgia can mimic the rubor phase of RP; exacerbation
by heat and relief with cold readily distinguish erythromelalgia from
RP.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Patients should wear gloves or mittens whenever outside in
temperatures that precipitate attacks. Keeping the body warm is
also a cornerstone of initial therapy. Wearing warm shirts, coats,
and hats will help prevent the exaggerated vasospasm that causes
RP and that is not prevented by warming only the hands. The hands
should be protected from injury at all times; wounds heal slowly,
and infections are consequently hard to control. Softening and
lubricating lotion to control the fissured dry skin should be applied
to the hands frequently. Smoking should be stopped and
sympathomimetic drugs (eg, decongestants, diet pills, and
amphetamines) should be avoided. For most patients with primary
RP, general measures alone are sufficient to control symptoms.
Medical or surgical therapy should be considered in patients who
have severe symptoms or are experiencing tissue injury from digital
ischemia.
B. Medications
Calcium channel blockers are first-line therapy for RP. Calcium
channel blockers produce a modest benefit and are more effective
in primary RP than secondary RP. Slow release nifedipine (30–180
mg/d orally), amlodipine (5–20 mg/d orally), felodipine, or
nisoldipine are popular and more effective than verapamil and
diltiazem. Other medications that are sometimes effective in treating
RP include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, sympatholytic
agents (eg, prazosin), topical nitrates, phosphodiesterase inhibitors
(eg, sildenafil, tadalafil, and vardenafil), selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (fluoxetine), endothelin-receptor inhibitors (ie, bosentan),
statins, parenteral prostaglandins (prostaglandin E1), and oral
prostaglandins (misoprostol).
C. Surgical Measures
Sympathectomy may be indicated when attacks have become
frequent and severe, when they interfere with work and well being,
and particularly when trophic changes have developed and medical
measures have failed. Cervical sympathectomy is modestly effective
for primary but not secondary RP. Digital sympathectomy may
improve secondary RP.
 Prognosis
Primary RP is benign and largely a nuisance for affected individuals
who are exposed to cold winters or excessive air conditioning. The
prognosis of secondary RP depends on the severity of the
underlying disease. Unfortunately, severe pain from ulceration and
gangrene are not rare with scleroderma, especially the CREST
variant.
 When to Refer
 
•    Appropriate management of patients with secondary
RP often requires consultation with a rheumatologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with severe digital ischemia as evidenced by
demarcation should be admitted for intensive therapy.
Chatterjee S. Management of Raynaud's phenomenon in the
patient with connective tissue disease. Curr Treat Options
Cardiovasc Med. 2010 Apr;12(2):185–204. [PMID: 20842555]
 
Shenoy PD et al. Efficacy of tadalafil in secondary Raynaud's
phenomenon resistant to vasodilator therapy: a double blind
randomized cross-over trial. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2010
Dec;49(12):2420–8. [PMID: 20837499]
 
SCLERODERMA (Systemic Sclerosis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Limited disease (80% of patients): thickening of skin confined to
the face, neck, and distal extremities.
 Diffuse disease (20%): widespread thickening of skin, including
truncal involvement, with areas of increased pigmentation and
depigmentation.
 Raynaud phenomenon and antinuclear antibodies are present in
virtually all patients.
 Systemic features of gastroesophageal reflux, hypomotility of
gastrointestinal tract, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension,
and renal involvement.
 
 General Considerations
Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis) is a rare chronic disorder
characterized by diffuse fibrosis of the skin and internal organs.
Symptoms usually appear in the third to fifth decades, and women
are affected two to three times as frequently as men.
Two forms of scleroderma are generally recognized: limited
(80% of patients) and diffuse (20%). In limited scleroderma, which
is also known as the CREST syndrome (representing calcinosis
cutis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal motility disorder,
sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia), the hardening of the skin
(scleroderma) is limited to the face and hands. In contrast, in diffuse
scleroderma, the skin changes also involve the trunk and proximal
extremities. Tendon friction rubs over the forearms and shins occur
uniquely (but not universally) in diffuse scleroderma. In general,
patients with limited scleroderma have better outcomes than those
with diffuse disease, largely because kidney disease or interstitial
lung disease rarely develops in patients with limited disease. Cardiac
disease is also more characteristic of diffuse scleroderma. Patients
with limited disease, however, are more susceptible to digital
ischemia, leading to finger loss, and to life-threatening pulmonary
hypertension. Small and large bowel hypomotility, which may occur
in either form of scleroderma, can cause constipation alternating
with diarrhea, malabsorption due to bacterial overgrowth,
pseudoobstruction, and severe bowel distension with rupture.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Raynaud phenomenon is usually the initial manifestation and can
precede other signs and symptoms by years in cases of limited
scleroderma. Polyarthralgia, weight loss, and malaise are common
early features of diffuse scleroderma but are infrequent in limited
scleroderma. Cutaneous disease usually, but not always, develops
before visceral involvement and can manifest initially as nonpitting
subcutaneous edema associated with pruritus. With time the skin
becomes thickened and hidebound, with loss of normal folds.
Telangiectasia, pigmentation, and depigmentation are characteristic.
Ulceration about the fingertips and subcutaneous calcification are
seen. Dysphagia and symptoms of reflux due to esophageal
dysfunction are common and result from abnormalities in motility
and later from fibrosis. Fibrosis and atrophy of the gastrointestinal
tract cause hypomotility. Large-mouthed diverticuli occur in the
jejunum, ileum, and colon. Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis and
pulmonary vascular disease are reflected in restrictive lung
physiology and low diffusing capacities. Cardiac abnormalities
include pericarditis, heart block, myocardial fibrosis, and right heart
failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension. Scleroderma renal
crisis, resulting from intimal proliferation of smaller renal arteries and
usually associated with hypertension, is a marker for a poor
outcome even though many cases can be treated effectively with
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.
B. Laboratory Findings
Mild anemia is often present. In scleroderma renal crisis, the
peripheral blood smear shows findings consistent with a
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (due to mechanical damage to
red cells from diseased small vessels). Elevation of the ESR is
unusual. Proteinuria and cylindruria appear in association with renal
involvement. Antinuclear antibody tests are nearly always positive,
frequently in high titers (Table 20–10). The scleroderma antibody
(antiSCL-70), directed against topoisomerase III, is found in one-
third of patients with diffuse systemic sclerosis and in 20% of those
with CREST syndrome. Although present in only a small number of
patients with diffuse scleroderma, anti-SCL-70 antibodies may
portend a poor prognosis, with a high likelihood of serious internal
organ involvement (eg, interstitial lung disease). Anticentromere
antibodies are seen in 50% of those with CREST syndrome and in
1% of individuals with diffuse scleroderma (Table 20–10).
Anticentromere antibodies are highly specific for limited
scleroderma, but they also occur occasionally in overlap
syndromes. Anti-RNA polymerase III antibodies develop in 10–
20% of scleroderma patients overall and correlate with the
development of diffuse skin disease and renal hypertensive crisis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Early in its course, scleroderma can cause diagnostic confusion with
other causes of Raynaud phenomenon, particularly SLE, mixed
connective tissue disease, and the inflammatory myopathies.
Scleroderma can be mistaken for other disorders characterized by
skin hardening. Eosinophilic fasciitis is a rare disorder presenting
with skin changes that resemble diffuse scleroderma. The
inflammatory abnormalities, however, are limited to the fascia rather
than the dermis and epidermis. Moreover, patients with eosinophilic
fasciitis are distinguished from those with scleroderma by the
presence of peripheral blood eosinophilia, the absence of Raynaud
phenomenon, the good response to prednisone, and an association
(in some cases) with paraproteinemias. Diffuse skin thickening and
visceral involvement are features of scleromyxedema; the presence
of a paraprotein, the absence of Raynaud phenomenon, and distinct
skin histology point to scleromyxedema. Diabetic cheiropathy
typically develops in long-standing, poorly controlled diabetes and
can mimic sclerodactyly. Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy
produces thickening and hardening of the skin of the trunk and
extremities in patients with chronic kidney disease; exposure to
gadolinium may play a pathogenic role. Morphea and linear
scleroderma 
cause 
sclerodermatous 
changes 
limited 
to
circumscribed areas of the skin and usually have excellent
outcomes.
 Treatment
Treatment of scleroderma is symptomatic and supportive and
focuses on the organ systems involved. There is no effective therapy
for the underlying disease process. However, interventions for
management of specific organ manifestations of this disease have
improved substantially. Severe Raynaud syndrome may respond to
calcium channel blockers, eg, long-acting nifedipine, 30–120 mg/d
orally, or to losartan, 50 mg/d orally, or to sildenafil 50 mg orally
twice daily. Patients with esophageal disease should take
medications in liquid or crushed form. Esophageal reflux can be
reduced and the risk of scarring diminished by avoidance of late-
night meals and by the use of proton pump inhibitors (eg,
omeprazole, 20–40 mg/d orally), which achieve near-complete
inhibition of gastric acid production and are remarkably effective for
refractory esophagitis. Patients with delayed gastric emptying
maintain their weight better if they eat small, frequent meals and
remain upright for at least 2 hours after eating. Long-term octreotide
(0.1 mg subcutaneously twice daily), a somatostatin analog, helps
some patients with bacterial overgrowth and pseudoobstruction.
Malabsorption due to bacterial over-growth also responds to
antibiotics, eg, tetracycline, 500 mg four times orally daily, often
prescribed cyclically. The hypertensive crises associated with
systemic sclerosis renal crisis must be treated early and aggressively
(in the hospital) with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, eg,
captopril, initiated at 25 mg orally every 6 hours and titrated up as
needed to a maximum of 100 mg every 6 hours. Apart from the
patient with myositis, prednisone has little or no role in the treatment
of scleroderma; high doses (> 15 mg daily) have been associated
with scleroderma renal crisis. Cyclophosphamide improves dyspnea
and pulmonary function tests modestly in patients with severe
interstitial lung disease; this highly toxic drug should only be
administered by physicians familiar with its use. Bosentan, an
endothelin receptor antagonist, improves exercise capacity and
cardiopulmonary hemodynamics in patients with pulmonary
hypertension and helps prevent digital ulceration. Sildenafil or
prostaglandins (delivered by continuous intravenous infusion or
intermittent inhalation) may also be useful in treating pulmonary
hypertension. At an experimental level, immunoablative therapy with
or without stem cell rescue has achieved promising results for some
patients with severe, rapidly progressive diffuse scleroderma.
The 9-year survival rate in scleroderma averages approximately
40%. The prognosis tends to be worse in those with diffuse
scleroderma, in blacks, in males, and in older patients. Lung disease
—in the form of pulmonary fibrosis or pulmonary arterial
hypertension—is now the number one cause of mortality. Death
from advanced heart failure or chronic kidney disease is also
common. Those persons in whom severe internal organ involvement
does not develop in the first 3 years have a substantially better
prognosis, with 72% surviving at least 9 years. Breast and lung
cancer may be more common in patients with scleroderma.
 When to Refer
 
•    Appropriate management of scleroderma requires
frequent consultations with a rheumatologist.
•    Severity of organ involvement dictates referral to other
subspecialists, 
such 
as 
pulmonologists 
or
gastroenterologists.
Hudson M et al; Canadian Scleroderma Research Group. Health-
related quality of life in systemic sclerosis: a systematic review.
Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug 15;61(8):1112–20. [PMID:
19644906]
 
Khanna D et al. Evidence-based management of rapidly
progressing systemic sclerosis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol.
2010 Jun;24(3):387–400. [PMID: 20534372]
 
Kowal-Bielecka O et al. EULAR recommendations for the
treatment of systemic sclerosis: a report from the EULAR
Scleroderma Trials and Research group (EUSTAR). Ann Rheum
Dis. 2009 May;68(5):620–8. [PMID: 19147617]
 
Tashkin DP et al; Scleroderma Lung Study Research Group.
Cyclophosphamide versus placebo in scleroderma lung disease. N
Engl J Med. 2006 Jun 22;354(25):2655–66. [PMID: 16790698]
 
Tyndall AJ et al. Causes and risk factors for death in systemic
sclerosis: a study from the EULAR Scleroderma Trials and
Research (EUSTAR) database. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010
Oct;69(10): 1809–15. [PMID: 20551155]
 
IDIOPATHIC INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES
(Polymyositis & Dermatomyositis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bilateral proximal muscle weakness.
 Characteristic cutaneous manifestations in dermatomyositis
(gottron papules, heliotrope rash).
 Diagnostic tests: elevated creatine kinase, muscle biopsy,
electromyography, MRI.
 Increased risk of malignancy, particularly in dermatomyositis.
 Inclusion body myositis can mimic polymyositis but is less
responsive to treatment.
 
 General Considerations
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are systemic disorders of
unknown cause whose principal manifestation is muscle weakness.
Although their clinical presentations (aside from the presence of
certain skin findings in dermatomyositis, some of which are
pathognomonic) and treatments are similar, the two diseases are
pathologically quite distinct. They affect persons of any age group,
but the peak incidence is in the fifth and sixth decades of life.
Women are affected twice as commonly as men, and the diseases
(particularly polymyositis) also occur more often among blacks than
whites. There is an increased risk of malignancy in adult patients
with dermatomyositis. Indeed, up to one patient in four with
dermatomyositis has an occult malignancy. Malignancies may be
evident at the time of presentation with the muscle disease but may
not be detected until months afterward in some cases. Rare patients
with dermatomyositis have skin disease without overt muscle
involvement, a condition termed “dermatomyositis sine myositis.”
Myositis may also be associated with other connective tissue
diseases, especially scleroderma, lupus, mixed connective tissue
disease, and Sjögren syndrome.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Polymyositis may begin abruptly, but the usual presentation is one
of gradual and progressive muscle weakness. The weakness chiefly
involves proximal muscle groups of the upper and lower extremities
as well as the neck. Leg weakness (eg, difficulty in rising from a
chair or climbing stairs) typically precedes arm symptoms. In
contrast to myasthenia gravis, polymyositis and dermatomyositis do
not cause facial or ocular muscle weakness. Pain and tenderness of
affected muscles occur in one-fourth of cases, but these are rarely
the chief complaints. About one-fourth of patients have dysphagia.
In contrast to scleroderma, which affects the smooth muscle of the
lower esophagus and can cause a “sticking” sensation below the
sternum, polymyositis or dermatomyositis involves the striated
muscles of the upper pharynx and can make initiation of swallowing
difficult. Muscle atrophy and contractures occur as late
complications of advanced disease. Clinically significant myocarditis
is uncommon even though there is often creatine kinase-MB
elevation. Patients who are bed-bound from myositis should be
screened for respiratory muscle weakness that can be severe
enough to cause CO2 retention and can progress to require
mechanical ventilation.
The characteristic rash of dermatomyositis is dusky red and
may appear in a malar distribution mimicking the classic rash of
SLE. Facial erythema beyond the malar distribution is also
characteristic of dermatomyositis. Erythema also occurs over other
areas of the face, neck, shoulders, and upper chest and back
(“shawl sign”). Periorbital edema and a purplish (heliotrope)
suffusion over the eyelids are typical signs (Figure 20–6).
Coloration of the heliotrope and other rashes of dermatomyositis
can be affected by skin tone. In blacks, the rashes may appear
more hyperpigmented than erythematous or violaceous. Periungual
erythema, dilations of nailbed capillaries, and scaly patches over the
dorsum of PIP and MCP joints (Gottron sign) are highly suggestive.
Scalp involvement by dermatomyositis may mimic psoriasis.
Infrequently, the cutaneous findings of this disease precede the
muscle inflammation by weeks or months. Diagnosing polymyositis
in patients over age 70 years can be difficult because weakness may
be overlooked or attributed erroneously to idiopathic frailty.
Polymyositis can remain undiagnosed or will be misdiagnosed as
hepatitis because of elevations in alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels. A subset of patients
with 
polymyositis 
and 
dermatomyositis 
develop 
the
“antisynthetase syndrome,” a group of findings including
inflammatory arthritis, fever, Raynaud phenomenon, “mechanic's
hands” (hyperkeratosis along the radial and palmar aspects of the
fingers) interstitial lung disease, and often severe muscle disease
associated with certain autoantibodies (eg, anti-Jo1 antibodies).
 
Figure 20–6. Heliotrope (violaceous) rash around the eyes in a
patient with dermatomyositis. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine,
MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux
EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family
Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Measurement of serum levels of muscle enzymes, especially creatine
kinase and aldolase, is most useful in diagnosis and in assessment of
disease activity. Anemia is uncommon. The ESR and C-reactive
protein are often normal and are not reliable indicators of disease
activity. Rheumatoid factor is found in a minority of patients.
Antinuclear antibodies are present in many patients, especially those
who have an associated connective tissue disease (Table 20–10). A
number of autoantibodies are seen exclusively in patients with
myositis and are associated with distinctive clinical features. The
most common myositis-specific antibody, anti-Jo-1 antibody, is
seen in the subset of patients who have associated interstitial lung
disease (Table 20–10). The other myositis-specific autoantibodies
are anti-Mi-2, associated with dermatomyositis; anti-SRP (anti-
signal recognition particle), associated with rapidly progressive,
severe polymyositis, and dysphagia; anti-155/140, strongly
associated with dermatomyositis with malignancy (malignancy in
71% with versus 11% without this antibody); and anti-200/100-kd
antibodies define a subgroup of patients with necrotizing myopathy
associated with prior statin use. In the absence of the anti-
synthetase syndrome, chest radiographs are usually normal.
Electromyographic abnormalities consisting of polyphasic potentials,
fibrillations, and high-frequency action potentials are helpful in
establishing the diagnosis. None of the studies are specific. MRI can
detect early and patchy muscle involvement, can guide biopsies, and
may prove to be more useful than electromyography. The
malignancies most commonly associated with dermatomyositis in
descending order of frequency are ovarian, lung, pancreatic,
stomach, colorectal, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The search for
an occult malignancy should begin with a history and physical
examination, supplemented with a complete blood count,
comprehensive biochemical panel, serum protein electrophoresis,
and urinalysis, and should include age- and risk-appropriate cancer
screening tests. Given the especially strong association of ovarian
carcinoma and dermatomyositis, pelvic ultrasonography, CT
scanning, and CA-125 levels may be useful in women. No matter
how extensive the initial screening, some malignancies will not
become evident for months after the initial presentation.
C. Muscle Biopsy
Biopsy of clinically involved muscle is the only specific diagnostic
test. The pathology findings in polymyositis and dermatomyositis are
distinct. Although both include lymphoid inflammatory infiltrates, the
findings in dermatomyositis are localized to perivascular regions and
there is evidence of humoral and complement-mediated destruction
of micro-vasculature associated with the muscle. In addition to its
vascular orientation, the inflammatory infiltrate in dermatomyositis
centers on the interfascicular septa and is located around, rather
than in, muscle fascicles. A pathologic hallmark of dermatomyositis
is perifascicular atrophy. In contrast, the pathology of polymyositis
characteristically includes endomysial infiltration of the inflammatory
infiltrate. Owing to the sometimes patchy distribution of pathologic
abnormalities, however, false-negative biopsies sometimes occur in
both disorders.
 Differential Diagnosis
Muscle inflammation may occur as a component of SLE,
scleroderma, Sjögren syndrome, and overlap syndromes. In those
cases, associated findings usually permit the precise diagnosis of the
primary condition.
Inclusion body myositis, because of its tendency to mimic
polymyositis, is a common cause of “treatment- resistant
polymyositis.” In contrast to the epidemiologic features of
polymyositis, however, the typical inclusion body myositis patient is
white, male, and over the age of 50. The onset of inclusion body
myositis is even more insidious than that of polymyositis or
dermatomyositis (eg, occurring over years rather than months), and
asymmetric distal motor weakness is common in inclusion body
myositis. Creatine kinase levels in inclusion body myositis are often
minimally elevated and are normal in 25%. Muscle biopsy shows
characteristic intracellular vacuoles by light microscopy and either
tubular or filamentous inclusions in the nucleus or cytoplasm by
electron microscopy. Inclusion body myositis is less likely to
respond to therapy.
Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism may both be associated
with proximal muscle weakness. Hypothyroidism is associated also
with elevations of creatine kinase. Patients with polymyalgia
rheumatica are over the age of 50 and—in contrast to patients with
polymyositis—have pain but no objective weakness; creatine kinase
levels are normal. Disorders of the peripheral and central nervous
systems (eg, chronic inflammatory polyneuropathy, multiple
sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, Eaton-Lambert disease, and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) can produce weakness but are
distinguished by characteristic symptoms and neurologic signs and
often by distinctive electromyographic abnormalities. A number of
systemic vasculitides (polyarteritis nodosa, microscopic polyangiitis,
the Churg-Strauss syndrome, granulomatosis with polyangiitis
[formerly Wegener granulomatosis], and mixed cryoglobulinemia)
can produce profound weakness through vasculitic neuropathy. The
muscle weakness associated with these disorders, however, is
typically distal and asymmetric, at least in the early stages.
Many drugs, including corticosteroids, alcohol, clofibrate,
penicillamine, tryptophan, and hydroxychloroquine, can produce
proximal muscle weakness. Chronic use of colchicine at doses as
low as 0.6 mg twice a day in patients with moderate chronic kidney
disease can produce a mixed neuropathy-myopathy that mimics
polymyositis. The weakness and muscle enzyme elevation reverse
with cessation of the drug. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors can
cause myopathy and rhabdomyolysis. Statin use has also been
associated with development of an autoimmune-mediated myositis,
which can sometimes persist even after the statin has been
discontinued. Although only about 0.1% of patients taking a statin
drug alone develop myopathy, concomitant administration of other
drugs (especially gemfibrozil, cyclosporine, niacin, macrolide
antibiotics, azole antifungals, and protease inhibitors) increases the
risk. Polymyositis can occur as a complication of HIV or HTLV-I
infection and with zidovudine therapy as well.
 Treatment
Most patients respond to corticosteroids. Often a daily dose of 40–
60 mg or more of oral prednisone is required initially. The dose is
then adjusted downward while monitoring muscle strength and
serum levels of muscle enzymes. Long-term use of corticosteroids is
often needed, and the disease may recur or reemerge when they are
withdrawn. Patients with an associated neoplasm have a poor
prognosis, although remission may follow treatment of the tumor;
corticosteroids may or may not be effective in these patients. In
patients resistant or intolerant to corticosteroids, therapy with
methotrexate or azathioprine may be helpful. Intravenous immune
globulin is effective for dermatomyositis resistant to prednisone.
Mycophenolate mofetil (1–1.5 g orally twice daily) may be useful as
a steroid-sparing agent. Rituximab has achieved encouraging results
in some patients with inflammatory myositis unresponsive to
prednisone. Since the rash of dermatomyositis is often
photosensitive, 
patients 
should 
limit 
sun 
exposure.
Hydroxychloroquine (200–400 mg/d orally not to exceed 6.5
mg/kg) can also help ameliorate the skin disease.
 When to Refer
 
•    Appropriate management of myositis usually requires
frequent consultations with a rheumatologist or neurologist.
•    Severe lung disease may require consultation with a
pulmonologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Signs of rhabdomyolysis.
•    Respiratory insufficiency with hypoxia or carbon dioxide
retention.
Christopher-Stine L et al. A novel autoantibody recognizing 200-
kd and 100-kd proteins is associated with an immune-mediated
necrotizing myopathy. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Sep; 62(9):2757–66.
[PMID: 20496415]
 
Hengstman GJ et al. Treatment of the inflammatory myopathies:
update and practical recommendations. Expert Opin
Pharmacother. 2009 May;10(7):1183–90. [PMID: 19405792]
 
Madan V et al. Defining cancer risk in dermatomyositis. Part I.
Clin Exp Dermatol. 2009 Jun;34(4):451–5. [PMID: 19522981]
 
Madan V et al. Defining cancer risk in dermatomyositis. Part II.
Assessing diagnostic usefulness of myositis serology. Clin Exp
Dermatol. 2009 Jul;34(5):561–5. [PMID: 19508476]
 
Mammen AL. Dermatomyositis and polymyositis: Clinical
presentation, autoantibodies, and pathogenesis. Ann N Y Acad
Sci. 2010 Jan;1184:134–53. [PMID: 20146695]
 
MIXED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE & OVERLAP
SYNDROMES
Many patients with symptoms and signs compatible with a
connective tissue disease have features consistent with more than
one type of rheumatic disease. Special attention has been drawn to
antinuclear antibody–positive patients who have overlapping
features of SLE, scleroderma, and inflammatory myopathy together
with autoantibodies to ribonuclear protein (RNP). Some consider
these patients to have a distinct entity (“mixed connective tissue
disease”), and others view this as a subset of SLE characterized by
a higher prevalence of Raynaud phenomenon, polyarthritis, myositis,
and pulmonary hypertension and a lower incidence of renal
involvement. Other patients have features of more than one
connective tissue disease (eg, rheumatoid arthritis and SLE, SLE
and scleroderma) in the absence of anti-RNP antibodies and are
referred to as having an “overlap syndrome.” Treatments are guided
more by the distribution and severity of patients’ organ system
involvement than by therapies specific to these overlap syndromes.
Tsai YY et al. Fifteen-year experience of pediatric-onset mixed
connective tissue disease. Clin Rheumatol. 2010 Jan;29(1): 53–8.
[PMID: 19756834]
 
SJÖGREN SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Women are 90% of patients; the average age is 50 years.
 Dryness of eyes and dry mouth (sicca components) are the most
common features; they occur alone or in association with
rheumatoid arthritis or other connective tissue disease.
 Rheumatoid factor and other autoantibodies common.
 Increased incidence of lymphoma.
 
 General Considerations
Sjögren syndrome is a systemic autoimmune disorder whose clinical
presentation is usually dominated by dryness of the eyes and mouth
due to immune-mediated dysfunction of the lacrimal and salivary
glands. The disorder is predominantly seen in women, with a ratio
of 9:1; most cases develop between the ages of 40 and 60 years.
Sjögren syndrome can occur in isolation (“primary” Sjögren
syndrome) or in association with another rheumatic disease. Sjögren
syndrome is most frequently associated with rheumatoid arthritis but
also occurs with SLE, primary biliary cirrhosis, scleroderma,
polymyositis, Hashimoto thyroiditis, polyarteritis, and interstitial
pulmonary fibrosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca results from inadequate tear production
caused by lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration of the lacrimal
glands. Ocular symptoms are usually mild. Burning, itching, and the
sensation of having a foreign body or a grain of sand in the eye
occur commonly. For some patients, the initial manifestation is the
inability to tolerate wearing contact lenses. Many patients with more
severe ocular dryness notice ropy secretions across their eyes,
especially in the morning. Photophobia may signal corneal ulceration
resulting from severe dryness. For most patients, symptoms of
dryness of the mouth (xerostomia) dominate those of dry eyes.
Patients frequently complain of a “cotton mouth” sensation and
difficulty swallowing foods, especially dry foods like crackers,
unless they are washed down with liquids. The persistent oral
dryness causes most patients to carry water bottles or other liquid
dispensers from which they sip constantly. A few patients have such
severe xerostomia that they have difficulty speaking. Persistent
xerostomia results often in rampant dental caries; caries at the gum
line strongly suggest Sjögren syndrome. Some patients are most
troubled by loss of taste and smell. Parotid enlargement, which may
be chronic or relapsing, develops in one-third of patients.
Desiccation may involve the nose, throat, larynx, bronchi, vagina,
and skin.
Systemic manifestations include dysphagia, vasculitis, pleuritis,
obstructive lung disease (in the absence of smoking),
neuropsychiatric 
dysfunction 
(most 
commonly 
peripheral
neuropathies), and pancreatitis; they may be related to the
associated diseases noted above. Renal tubular acidosis (type I,
distal) occurs in 20% of patients. Chronic interstitial nephritis, which
may result in impaired kidney function, may be seen. A glomerular
lesion is rarely observed but may occur secondary to associated
cryoglobulinemia.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings include mild anemia, leukopenia, and
eosinophilia. Polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, rheumatoid
factor positivity (70%), and antinuclear antibodies (95%) are all
common findings. Antibodies against the cytoplasmic antigens SS-A
and SS-B (also called Ro and La, respectively) are often present in
primary Sjögren syndrome and tend to correlate with the presence
of extra glandular manifestations (Table 20–10). Thyroid-associated
autoimmunity is a common finding among patients with Sjögren
syndrome.
Useful ocular diagnostic tests include the Schirmer test, which
measures the quantity of tears secreted. Lip biopsy, a simple
procedure, reveals characteristic lymphoid foci in accessory salivary
glands. Biopsy of the parotid gland should be reserved for patients
with atypical presentations such as unilateral gland enlargement that
suggest a neoplastic process.
 Differential Diagnosis
Isolated complaints of dry mouth are most commonly due to
medication side effects. Chronic hepatic C can cause sicca
symptoms. Minor salivary gland biopsies reveal lymphocytic
infiltrates but not to the extent of Sjögren syndrome, and tests for
anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B are negative. Diffuse infiltration of CD8 T
cells producing parotid gland enlargement can develop in HIV-
infected individuals. Involvement of the lacrimal or salivary glands,
or both in sarcoidosis can mimic Sjögren syndrome; biopsies reveal
noncaseating granulomas. Rarely, amyloid deposits in the lacrimal
and salivary glands produce sicca symptoms. IgG4-related systemic
disease (characterized by high serum IgG4 levels and infiltration of
tissues with IgG4+ plasma cells) can result in lacrimal and salivary
gland enlargement that mimics Sjögren syndrome.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Treatment of sicca symptoms is symptomatic and supportive.
Artificial tears applied frequently will relieve ocular symptoms and
avert further desiccation. Topical ocular 0.05% cyclosporine also
improves ocular symptoms and signs of dryness. The mouth should
be kept well lubricated. Sipping water frequently or using sugar-free
gums and hard candies usually relieves dry mouth symptoms.
Pilocarpine (5 mg orally four times daily) and the acetylcholine
derivative cevimeline (30 mg orally three times daily) may improve
xerostomia symptoms. Atropinic drugs and decongestants decrease
salivary secretions and should be avoided. A program of oral
hygiene, including fluoride treatment, is essential in order to preserve
dentition. If there is an associated rheumatic disease, its systemic
treatment is not altered by the presence of Sjögren syndrome.
Although Sjögren syndrome may compromise patients’ quality of
life significantly, the disease is usually consistent with a normal life
span. Poor prognoses are influenced mainly by the presence of
systemic features associated with underlying disorders, the
development in some patients of lymphocytic vasculitis, the
occurrence of a painful peripheral neuropathy, and the complication
(in a minority of patients) of lymphoma. Severe systemic
inflammatory manifestations are treated with prednisone or various
immunosuppressive medications. The patients (3–10% of the total
Sjögren population) at greatest risk for developing lymphoma are
those with severe exocrine dysfunction, marked parotid gland
enlargement, splenomegaly, vasculitis, peripheral neuropathy,
anemia, and mixed monoclonal cryoglobulinemia.
 When to Refer
 
•    Presence of systemic symptoms or signs.
•    Symptoms or signs of ocular dryness not responsive to
artificial tears.
 When to Admit
Presence of severe systemic signs such as vasculitis unresponsive to
outpatient management.
Chai J et al. Neurological manifestations of primary Sjögren's
syndrome. Curr Opin Neurol. 2010 Oct;23(5):509–13. [PMID:
20689426]
 
Meijer JM et al. Effectiveness rituximab treatment in primary
Sjögren's syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):960–8. [PMID:
20131246]
 
Ramos-Casals M et al. Treatment of primary Sjögren syndrome: a
systematic review. JAMA. 2010 Jul 28;304(4):452–60. [PMID:
20664046]
 
RHABDOMYOLYSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Associated with crush injuries to muscle, pro-longed immobility,
drug toxicities, hypothermia, and other causes.
 Massive acute elevations of muscle enzymes that peak quickly
and usually resolve within days once the inciting injury has been
identified and removed.
 
 General Considerations
Defined strictly, rhabdomyolysis is necrosis of skeletal muscle and
may be encountered in a wide variety of clinical settings, alone or in
concert with other disorders of muscle. When the term
“rhabdomyolysis” is used without being otherwise defined,
healthcare providers ordinarily think of the syndrome of crush injury
to muscle, associated with myoglobinuria, acute kidney injury,
markedly elevated creatine kinase levels and, frequently, multiorgan
failure as a consequence of other complications of the trauma.
Acute kidney injury in myoglobinuria is caused by tubular injury
resulting from excessive quantities of filtered myoglobin (See Acute
Tubular Necrosis in Chapter 22). This complication is nearly always
associated with hypovolemia. Experimental models of severe
rhabdomyolysis in which blood volume and pressure are maintained
ordinarily are not associated with acute tubular necrosis. From a
practical point of view, however, many patients who suffer crush
injuries are indeed volume-contracted, and oliguric renal failure is
encountered routinely.
In addition to crush injuries, prolonged immobility, particularly
after drug overdose or intoxication and commonly associated with
exposure hypothermia, may be associated with rhabdomyolysis.
Often there is little evidence for muscle injury on external
examination of these patients—and specifically, neither myalgia nor
myopathy presents. The clue to muscle necrosis in such individuals
may be a urinary dipstick testing positive for “blood” (actually
myoglobin) in the absence of red cells in the sediment. This positive
finding is due to myoglobinuria, which results in a false-positive
reading for hemoglobin. Such an abnormality is investigated by
serum creatine kinase determination, and the finding of marked
elevation of the creatine kinase level. Other studies elevated in
rhabdomyolysis include ALT and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)—
and once again, these studies may be obtained for other reasons,
such 
as 
suspected 
liver 
disease 
or 
hemolysis. When
disproportionately elevated, it is prudent to establish that they are
not of muscle origin by confirming them with creatine kinase
determination.
A number of other causes of rhabdomyolysis are encountered.
Statins are common offenders (see above). The presence of
compromised kidney and liver function, diabetes, and
hypothyroidism as well as concomitant use of other medications all
increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis in patients taking statins. The
cytochrome P450 liver enzymes metabolize all statins except for
pravastatin and rosuvastatin. Drugs that block the action of
cytochrome P450 include protease inhibitors, erythromycin,
itraconazole, clarithromycin, diltiazem, and verapamil. Use of these
drugs concomitantly with the statins (but not pravastatin or
rosuvastatin) can increase the risk of development of
rhabdomyolysis. The likelihood of rhabdomyolysis can also be
increased when statins are used with niacin and fibric acids
(gemfibrozil, clofibrate, and fenofibrate).
Both acute alcohol intoxication and even intramuscular injections
may cause some elevation of creatine kinase.
 Treatment
Vigorous fluid resuscitation (4–6 L/d, with careful monitoring for
fluid overload), mannitol (100 mg/d), and urine alkalinization are
suggested early in the course, but definitive evidence for the efficacy
of these measures is lacking. On occasion, oliguric tubular necrosis
may be converted to a nonoliguric variety, and—though the
prognosis for recovery of kidney function and mortality is the same
—many clinicians believe it is easier to care for nonoliguric disease
because hyperkalemia and pulmonary edema are less important
concerns. Myopathic complications of statins usually resolve within
several weeks of discontinuing the drug.
Bosch X et al. Rhabdomyolysis and acute kidney injury. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Jul 2;361(1):62–72. [PMID: 19571284]
 
Cervellin G et al. Rhabdomyolysis: historical background, clinical,
diagnostic and therapeutic features. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2010
Jun;48(6):749–56. [PMID: 20298139]
 
VASCULITIS SYNDROMES
 
“Vasculitis” is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by
inflammation within the walls of affected blood vessels. The major
forms of primary systemic vasculitis are listed in Table 20–13. The
first consideration in classifying cases of vasculitis is the size of the
major vessels involved: large, medium, or small. The presence of the
clinical signs and symptoms shown in Table 20–14 help distinguish
among these three groups. After determining the size of the major
vessels involved, other issues that contribute to the classification
include the following:
 
11/17/2011
•    Does the process involve arteries, veins, or both?
•    What are the patient's demographic characteristics
(age, gender, ethnicity, smoking status)?
•    Which organs are involved?
•    Is there evidence of immune complex deposition?
•    Is there granulomatous inflammation on tissue biopsy?
•    Are antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)
present?
 
Table 20–13. Classification scheme of primary vasculitides
according to size of predominant blood vessels involved.
 
Predominantly large-vessel vasculitides
     Takayasu arteritis
     Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis)
     Behçet disease1
Predominantly medium-vessel vasculitides
     Polyarteritis nodosa
     Buerger disease
     Primary angiitis of the central nervous system
Predominantly small-vessel vasculitides
     Immune-complex mediated
        Cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis (“hypersensitivity
vasculitis”)
        Henoch-Schönlein purpura
        Essential cryoglobulinemia2
     “ANCA-associated” disorders3
        Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener
granulomatosis)2
        Microscopic polyangiitis2
        Churg-Strauss syndrome2
1May involve small, medium, and large-sized blood vessels.
2Frequent overlap of small and medium-sized blood vessel involvement.
3Not all forms of these disorders are always associated with ANCA. ANCA,
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies.
In addition to the disorders considered to be primary
vasculitides, there are also multiple forms of vasculitis that are
associated with other known underlying conditions. These
“secondary” forms of vasculitis occur in the setting of chronic
infections (eg, hepatitis B or C, subacute bacterial endocarditis),
connective tissue disorders, inflammatory bowel disease,
malignancies, and reactions to medications. Only the major primary
forms of vasculitis are discussed here.
 
Table 20–14. typical clinical manifestations of large-, medium-, and
small-vessel involvement by vasculitis.
 
Langford CA. Vasculitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Feb;125
(2 Suppl 2):S216–25. [PMID: 19932919]
 
POLYMYALGIA RHEUMATICA & GIANT CELL
ARTERITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Age over 50 years.
 Giant cell (temporal) arteritis is characterized by headache, jaw
claudication, polymyalgia rheumatica, visual abnormalities, and a
markedly elevated ESR.
 The hallmark of polymyalgia rheumatica is pain and stiffness in
shoulders and hips lasting for several weeks without other
explanation.
 
 General Considerations
Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell arteritis probably represent a
spectrum of one disease: Both affect the same population (patients
over the age of 50), show preference for the same HLA
haplotypes, and show similar patterns of cytokines in blood and
arteries. Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell arteritis also
frequently coexist. The important differences between the two
conditions are that polymyalgia rheumatica alone does not cause
blindness and responds to low-dose (10–20 mg/d orally)
prednisone therapy, whereas giant cell arteritis can cause blindness
and large artery complications and requires high-dose (40–60
mg/d) prednisone.
 Clinical Findings
A. Polymyalgia Rheumatica
Polymyalgia rheumatica is a clinical diagnosis based on pain and
stiffness of the shoulder and pelvic girdle areas, frequently in
association with fever, malaise, and weight loss. In approximately
two-thirds of cases, polymyalgia occurs in the absence of giant cell
arteritis. Because of the stiffness and pain in the shoulders, hips, and
lower back, patients have trouble combing their hair, putting on a
coat, or rising from a chair. In contrast to polymyositis and
polyarteritis nodosa, polymyalgia rheumatica does not cause
muscular weakness either through primary muscle inflammation or
secondary to nerve infarction. A few patients have joint swelling,
particularly of the knees, wrists, and sternoclavicular joints.
B. Giant Cell Arteritis
Giant cell arteritis is a systemic panarteritis affecting medium-sized
and large vessels in patients over the age of 50. The incidence of
this disease increases with each decade of life. The mean age at
onset is approximately 79 years. Giant cell arteritis is also called
temporal arteritis because that artery is frequently involved, as are
other extracranial branches of the carotid artery. About 50% of
patients with giant cell arteritis also have polymyalgia rheumatica.
The classic symptoms suggesting that a patient has arteritis are
headache, scalp tenderness, visual symptoms (particularly
amaurosis fugax or diplopia), jaw claudication, or throat pain. Of
these symptoms, jaw claudication has the highest positive predictive
value. The temporal artery is usually normal on physical examination
but may be nodular, enlarged, tender, or pulseless. Blindness usually
results from the syndrome of anterior ischemic optic neuropathy,
caused by occlusive arteritis of the posteriorciliary branch of the
ophthalmic artery. The ischemic optic neuropathy of giant cell
arteritis may produce no funduscopic findings for the first 24–48
hours after the onset of blindness.
Asymmetry of pulses in the arms, a murmur of aortic
regurgitation, or bruits heard near the clavicle resulting from
subclavian artery stenoses identify patients in whom giant cell
arteritis has affected the aorta or its major branches. Clinically
evident large vessel involvement—characterized chiefly by
aneurysm of the thoracic aorta or stenosis of the subclavian,
vertebral, carotid, and basilar arteries—occurs in approximately
25% of patients with giant cell arteritis, sometimes years after the
diagnosis. Subclinical large artery disease is the rule: positron
emission tomography scans reveal inflammation in the aorta and its
major branches in nearly 85% of untreated patients. Forty percent
of patients with giant cell arteritis have non-classic symptoms at
presentation, chiefly respiratory tract problems (most frequently dry
cough), mononeuritis multiplex (most frequently with painful
paralysis of a shoulder), or fever of unknown origin. Giant cell
arteritis accounts for 15% of all cases of fever of unknown origin in
patients over the age of 65. The fever can be as high as 40°C and is
frequently associated with rigors and sweats. In contrast to patients
with infection, patients with giant cell arteritis and fever usually have
normal white blood cell counts (before prednisone is started). Thus,
in an older patient with fever of unknown origin, marked elevations
of acute phase reactants, and a normal white blood count, giant cell
arteritis must be considered even in the absence of specific features
such as headache or jaw claudication. In some cases, instead of
having the well-known symptom of jaw claudication, patients
complain of vague pain affecting other locations, including the
tongue, nose, or ears. Indeed, unexplained head or neck pain in an
older patient may signal the presence of giant cell arteritis.
C. Laboratory Findings
1. Polymyalgia rheumatica—Anemia and elevated acute phase
reactants (often markedly elevated ESRs, for example) are present
in the most cases, but cases of polymyalgia rheumatica occurring
with normal acute phase reactants are well documented.
2. Giant cell arteritis—Nearly 90% of patients with giant cell
arteritis have ESRs > 50 mm/h. The ESR in this disorder is often >
100 mm/h, but cases in which the ESR is low or even normal do
occur. In one series, 5% of patients with biopsy-proven giant cell
arteritis had ESRs < 40 mm/h. Although the C-reactive protein is
slightly more sensitive, patients with biopsy-proven giant cell arteritis
with normal C-reactive proteins have also been described. Most
patients also have a mild normochromic, normocytic anemia and
thrombocytosis. The alkaline phosphatase (liver source) is elevated
in 20% of patients with giant cell arteritis.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of malaise, anemia, and striking acute
phase reactant elevations includes rheumatic diseases (such as
rheumatoid arthritis, other systemic vasculitides, multiple myeloma,
and other malignant disorders) and chronic infections (such as
bacterial endocarditis and osteomyelitis).
 Treatment
A. Polymyalgia Rheumatica
Patients with isolated polymyalgia rheumatica (ie, those not having
“above the neck” symptoms of headache, jaw claudication, scalp
tenderness, or visual symptoms) are treated with prednisone, 10–20
mg/d orally. If the patient does not experience a dramatic
improvement within 72 hours, the diagnosis should be revisited.
Usually after 2–4 weeks of treatment, slow tapering of the
prednisone can be attempted. Most patients require some dose of
prednisone for a minimum of approximately 1 year; 6 months is too
short in most cases. Disease flares are common (50% or more) as
prednisone is tapered. The addition of weekly methotrexate may
increase the chance of successfully tapering prednisone in some
patients.
B. Giant Cell Arteritis
The urgency of early diagnosis and treatment in giant cell arteritis
relates to the prevention of blindness. Once blindness develops, it is
usually permanent. Therefore, when a patient has symptoms and
findings suggestive of temporal arteritis, therapy with prednisone (60
mg/d orally) should be initiated immediately and a temporal artery
biopsy performed promptly. For patients who seek medical
attention for visual loss, intravenous pulse methylprednisolone (eg, 1
g daily for 3 days) has been advocated; unfortunately, few patients
recover vision no matter what the initial treatment. One study—too
small and too preliminary to change the standard therapy
recommendations mentioned above—suggested that initiating
treatment with intravenous pulse methylprednisolone may increase
the chance that a patient with giant cell arteritis will achieve
remission and be able to taper off of prednisone. Retrospective
studies suggest that low-dose aspirin (~81 mg/d orally) may reduce
the chance of visual loss or stroke in patients with giant cell arteritis
and should be added to prednisone in the initial treatment. Although
it is prudent to obtain a temporal artery biopsy as soon as possible
after instituting treatment, diagnostic findings of giant cell arteritis
may still be present 2 weeks (or even considerably longer) after
starting corticosteroids. Typically, a positive biopsy shows
inflammatory infiltrate in the media and adventitia with lymphocytes,
histiocytes, plasma cells, and giant cells. An adequate biopsy
specimen is essential (at least 2 cm in length is ideal), because the
disease may be segmental. Unilateral temporal artery biopsies are
positive in approximately 80–85% of patients, but bilateral biopsies
add incrementally to the yield (10–15% in some studies, less in
others). Ultrasonography can detect abnormalities in inflamed
temporal arteries, but it has not displaced temporal artery biopsy as
the gold standard for diagnosis in most cases because results are
highly operator dependent. Temporal artery biopsy is abnormal in
only 50% of patients with large artery disease (eg, arm claudication
and unequal upper extremity blood pressures). In these patients,
magnetic resonance angiography or CT angiography will establish
the diagnosis by demonstrating long stretches of narrowing of the
subclavian and axillary arteries. Prednisone should be continued in a
dosage of 60 mg/d orally for about 1 month before tapering. When
only the symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica are present, temporal
artery biopsy is not necessary.
After 1 month of high-dose prednisone, almost all patients will
have a normal ESR. When tapering and adjusting the dosage of
prednisone, the ESR (or C-reactive protein) is a useful but not
absolute guide to disease activity. A common error is treating the
ESR rather than the patient. The ESR often rises slightly as the
prednisone is tapered, even as the disease remains quiescent.
Because elderly individuals often have baseline ESRs that are above
the normal range, mild ESR elevations should not be an occasion
for renewed treatment with prednisone in patients who are
asymptomatic. Unfortunately, no highly effective prednisone-sparing
therapy has been identified. Methotrexate was modestly effective in
one double-blind, placebo-controlled treatment trial but ineffective
in another. Anti-TNF therapies do not work in giant cell arteritis.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms occur 17 times more frequently in
patients with giant cell arteritis than in normal individuals and can
result in aortic regurgitation, dissection, or rupture. The aneurysms
can develop at any time but typically occur 7 years after the
diagnosis of giant cell arteritis is made.
Gonzalez-Gay MA et al. Medical management of polymyalgia
rheumatica. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010 May;11(7):1077–
87. [PMID: 20367535]
Kale N et al. Diagnosis and management of giant cell arteritis: a
review. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2010 Nov;21(6):417–22. [PMID:
20811283]
 
Salvarani C et al. Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant-cell arteritis.
Lancet. 2008 Jul 19;372(9634):234–45. [PMID: 18640460]
 
POLYARTERITIS NODOSA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Medium-sized arteries are always affected; smaller arterioles are
sometimes involved; lung is spared but kidney often affected,
causing renin-mediated hypertension.
 Clinical findings depend on the arteries involved.
 Common features include fever, abdominal pain, livedo
reticularis, mononeuritis multiplex, anemia, and elevated acute
phase reactants (ESR or C-reactive protein or both).
 Associated with hepatitis B (10% of cases).
 
General Considerations
Polyarteritis nodosa, described in 1866, is acknowledged widely as
the first form of vasculitis reported in the medical literature. For
many years, all forms of inflammatory vascular disease were termed
“polyarteritis nodosa.” In recent decades, numerous subtypes of
vasculitis have been recognized, greatly narrowing the spectrum of
vasculitis called polyarteritis nodosa. Currently, the term is reserved
for necrotizing arteritis of mediumsized vessels that has a
predilection for involving the skin, peripheral nerves, mesenteric
vessels (including renal arteries), heart, and brain, but polyarteritis
nodosa can actually involve almost any organ. Polyarteritis nodosa
is relatively rare, with a prevalence of about 30 per 1 million people.
Approximately 10% of cases of polyarteritis nodosa are caused by
hepatitis B. Most cases of hepatitis B–associated disease occur
within 6 months of hepatitis B infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical onset is usually insidious, with fever, malaise, weight
loss, and other symptoms developing over weeks to months. Pain in
the extremities is often a prominent early feature caused by
arthralgia, myalgia (particularly affecting the calves), or neuropathy.
The combination of mononeuritis multiplex (with the most common
finding being foot-drop) and features of a systemic illness is one of
the earliest specific clues to the presence of an underlying vasculitis.
Polyarteritis nodosa is among the forms of vasculitis most commonly
associated with vasculitic neuropathy.
In polyarteritis nodosa, the typical skin findings—livedo
reticularis, subcutaneous nodules, and skin ulcers—reflect the
involvement of deeper, medium-sized blood vessels. Digital
gangrene is not an unusual occurrence. The most common
cutaneous presentation is lower extremity ulcerations, usually
occurring near the malleoli. Involvement of the renal arteries leads to
a renin- mediated hypertension (much less characteristic of
vasculitides involving smaller blood vessels). For unclear reasons,
classic polyarteritis nodosa seldom (if ever) involves the lung, with
the occasional exception of the bronchial arteries.
Abdominal 
pain—particularly 
diffuse 
periumbilical 
pain
precipitated by eating—is common but often difficult to attribute to
mesenteric vasculitis in the early stages. Nausea and vomiting are
common symptoms. Infarction compromises the function of major
viscera and may lead to acalculous cholecystitis or appendicitis.
Some patients present dramatically with an acute abdomen caused
by mesenteric vasculitis and gut perforation or with hypotension
resulting from rupture of a microaneurysm in the liver, kidney, or
bowel.
Subclinical cardiac involvement is common in polyarteritis
nodosa, and overt cardiac dysfunction occasionally occurs (eg,
myocardial infarction secondary to coronary vasculitis, or
myocarditis).
B. Laboratory Findings
Most patients with polyarteritis nodosa have a slight anemia, and
leukocytosis is common. Acute phase reactants are often (but not
always) strikingly elevated. A major challenge in making the
diagnosis of polyarteritis nodosa, however, is the absence of a
disease-specific serologic test (eg, an autoantibody). Patients with
classic polyarteritis nodosa are ANCA-negative and may have low
titers of rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibodies, both of which
are nonspecific findings. In patients with polyarteritis nodosa,
appropriate serologic tests for active hepatitis B infection must be
performed.
C. Biopsy and Angiography
The diagnosis of polyarteritis nodosa requires confirmation with
either a tissue biopsy or an angiogram. Biopsies of symptomatic
sites such as skin (from the edge of an ulcer or the center of a
nodule), nerve, or muscle have sensitivities of approximately 70%.
The least invasive tests should usually be obtained first, but biopsy
of an involved organ is essential. If performed by experienced
clinicians, tissue biopsies normally have high benefit-risk ratios
because of the importance of establishing the diagnosis. Patients in
whom polyarteritis nodosa is suspected—eg, on the basis of
mesenteric ischemia or new-onset hypertension occurring in the
setting of a systemic illness—may be diagnosed by the angiographic
finding of aneurysmal dilations in the renal, mesenteric, or hepatic
arteries. Angiography must be performed cautiously in patients with
baseline renal dysfunction.
 Treatment
For polyarteritis nodosa, corticosteroids in high doses (up to 60 mg
of oral prednisone daily) may control fever and constitutional
symptoms and heal vascular lesions. Pulse methylprednisolone (eg,
1 g intravenously daily for 3 days) may be necessary for patients
who are critically ill at presentation. Immunosuppressive agents,
especially cyclophosphamide, lower the risk of disease-related
death and morbidity among patients who have severe disease. For
patients with polyarteritis nodosa associated with hepatitis B, the
preferred treatment regimen is a short course of prednisone
accompanied by antiviral therapy and plasma-pheresis (three times
a week for up to 6 weeks).
 Prognosis
Without treatment, the 5-year survival rate in these disorders is
poor—on the order of 10%. With appropriate therapy, remissions
are possible in many cases and the 5-year survival rate has
improved to 60–90%. Poor prognostic factors are chronic kidney
disease with serum creatinine > 1.6 mg/dL, proteinuria > 1 g/d,
gastrointestinal ischemia, central nervous system disease, and
cardiac involvement. In the absence of any of these five factors, 5-
year survival is nearly 90%. Survival at 5 years drops to 75% with
one poor prognostic factor present and to about 50% with two or
more factors. Substantial morbidity and even death may result from
adverse 
effects of cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids.
Consequently, these therapies require careful monitoring and expert
management. In contrast to many other forms of systemic vasculitis,
disease relapses in polyarteritis following the successful induction of
remission are the exception rather than the rule, occurring in only
about 20% of cases.
Morgan AJ et al. Cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa: a comprehensive
review. Int J Dermatol. 2010 Jul;49(7):750–6. [PMID:
20618492]
 
Pagnoux C et al. Clinical features and outcomes in 348 patients
with polyarteritis nodosa: a systematic retrospective study of
patients diagnosed between 1963 and 2005 and entered into the
French Vasculitis Study Group Database. Arthritis Rheum. 2010
Feb;62(2):616–26. [PMID: 20112401]
 
Ribi C et al. Treatment of polyarteritis nodosa and microscopic
polyangiitis without poor-prognosis factors: a prospective
randomized study of one hundred twenty-four patients. Arthritis
Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):1186–97. [PMID: 20131268]
 
GRANULOMATOSIS WITH POLYANGIITIS (Formerly
Wegener Granulomatosis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Classic triad of upper and lower respiratory tract disease and
glomerulonephritis.
 Suspect if mild respiratory symptoms (eg, nasal congestion,
sinusitis) are refractory to usual treatment.
 Pathology defined by the triad of small vessel vasculitis,
granulomatous inflammation, and necrosis.
 ANCAs, usually directed against proteinase-3 (less commonly
against myeloperoxidase present in severe, active disease) (90%
of patients).
 Kidney disease often rapidly progressive without treatment.
 
 General Considerations
Granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(formerly 
Wegener
granulomatosis), which has an estimated incidence of approximately
12 cases per million individuals per year, is the prototype of
diseases associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA). (Other “ANCA-associated vasculitides” include
microscopic polyangiitis and the Churg-Strauss syndrome.)
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis)
is characterized in its full expression by vasculitis of small arteries,
arterioles, and capillaries, necrotizing granulomatous lesions of both
upper and lower respiratory tract, glomerulonephritis, and other
organ manifestations. Without treatment, generalized disease is
invariably fatal, with most patients surviving < 1 year after diagnosis.
It occurs most commonly in the fourth and fifth decades of life and
affects men and women with equal frequency.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The disorder usually develops over 4–12 months. Upper
respiratory tract symptoms develop in 90% of patients and lower
respiratory tract symptoms develop in 60% of patients; some
patients may have both upper and lower respiratory tract
symptoms. Upper respiratory tract symptoms can include nasal
congestion, sinusitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, inflammation of the
gums, or stridor due to subglottic stenosis. Since many of these
symptoms are common, the underlying disease is not often
suspected until the patient develops systemic symptoms or the
original problem is refractory to treatment. The lungs are affected
initially in 40% and eventually in 80%, with symptoms including
cough, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. Other early symptoms can include
a migratory oligoarthritis with a predilection for large joints; a variety
of symptoms related to ocular disease (unilateral proptosis from
orbital pseudo-tumor; red eye from scleritis (Figure 20–7),
episcleritis, anterior uveitis, or peripheral ulcerative keratitis);
purpura or other skin lesions; and dysesthesia due to neuropathy.
Renal involvement, which develops in three-fourths of the cases,
may be subclinical until kidney disease is advanced. Fever, malaise,
and weight loss are common.
Physical examination can be remarkable for congestion, crusting,
ulceration, bleeding, and even perforation of the nasal septum.
Destruction of the nasal cartilage with “saddle nose” deformity
occurs late. Otitis media, proptosis, scleritis, episcleritis, and
conjunctivitis are other common findings. Newly acquired
hypertension, a frequent feature of poly arteritis nodosa, is rare in
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis).
Venous thrombotic events (eg, deep venous thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism) are a common occurrence in granulomatosis
with polyangiitis, at least in part because of the tendency of the
disease to involve veins as well as arteries. Although limited forms
of granulomatosis with polyangiitis have been described in which the
kidney is spared initially, kidney disease will develop in the majority
of untreated patients.
 
Figure 20–7. scleritis in a patient with granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis). (Courtesy of
Everett Allen, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith
MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Serum tests and urinalysis—Most patients have slight anemia,
mild leukocytosis, and elevated acute phase reactants. If there is
renal involvement, the urinary sediment invariably contains red cells,
with or without white cells, and often has red cell casts.
Serum tests for ANCA help in the diagnosis of granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis) and related
forms of vasculitis (Table 20–10). Several different types of ANCA
are recognized, but the two subtypes relevant to systemic vasculitis
are those directed against proteinase-3 (PR3) and myeloperoxidase
(MPO). Antibodies to these two antigens are termed “PR3-
ANCA” and “MPO-ANCA,” respectively. The cytoplasmic
pattern of immunofluorescence (C-ANCA) caused by PR3-ANCA
has a high specificity (> 90%) for either granulomatosis with
polyangiitis or a closely related disease, microscopic polyangiitis
(or, less commonly, the Churg-Strauss syndrome). In the setting of
active disease, particularly cases in which the disease is severe and
generalized to multiple organ systems, the sensitivity of PR3-ANCA
is > 95%. A substantial percentage of patients with “limited”
granulomatosis with polyangiitis—disease that does not pose an
immediate threat to life and is often confined to the respiratory tract
—are ANCA-negative. Although ANCA testing may be very
helpful when used properly, it does not eliminate the need in most
cases for confirmation of the diagnosis by tissue biopsy.
Furthermore, ANCA levels correlate erratically with disease
activity, and changes in titer should not dictate changes in therapy in
the absence of supporting clinical data. The perinuclear (P-ANCA)
pattern, caused by MPO-ANCA, is more likely to occur in
microscopic polyangiitis or Churg-Strauss but may also be found in
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Approximately 10–25% of patients
with classic granulomatosis with polyangiitis have MPO-ANCA. All
positive immunofluorescence assays for ANCA should be
confirmed by enzyme immunoassays for the specific autoantibodies
directed against PR3 or MPO.
2. Histologic findings—Histologic features of granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis) include vasculitis,
granulomatous inflammation, geographic necrosis, and acute and
chronic inflammation. The full range of pathologic changes is usually
evident only on thoracoscopic lung biopsy. Granulomas, observed
only rarely in renal biopsy specimens, are found much more
commonly on lung biopsy specimens. Nasal biopsies often do not
show vasculitis but may show chronic inflammation and other
changes which, interpreted by an experienced pathologist, can serve
as convincing evidence of the diagnosis. Renal biopsy discloses a
segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis with multiple crescents; this
is characteristic but not diagnostic. Pathologists characterize the
renal lesion of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (and other forms of
“ANCA-associated 
vasculitis”) 
as 
a 
pauci-immune
glomerulonephritis because of the relative absence (compared with
immune complex–mediated disorders) of immunoreactants—IgG,
IgM, IgA, and complement proteins—within glomeruli.
C. Imaging
Chest CT is more sensitive than chest radiography; lesions include
infiltrates, nodules, masses, and cavities. Often the radiographs
prompt concern about lung cancer. Hilar adenopathy is unusual in
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis);
if present, sarcoidosis, tumor, or infection is more likely. Other
common radio-graphic abnormalities include extensive sinusitis and
even bony sinus erosions.
 Differential Diagnosis
In most patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly
Wegener granulomatosis), refractory sinusitis or otitis media is
initially suspected. When upper respiratory tract inflammation
persists and is accompanied by additional systemic inflammatory
signs (eg, red eye from scleritis, joint pain and swelling), the
diagnosis of granulomatosis with polyangiitis should be considered.
Rheumatoid arthritis will wrongly be suspected in a substantial
minority of patients who chiefly complain of joint pain. Arriving at
the correct diagnosis is aided by awareness that rheumatoid arthritis
typically involves small joints of the hand, whereas Wegener
granulomatosis favors large joints, such as the hip, knee, elbow, and
shoulder. Lung cancer may be the first diagnostic consideration for
some middle-aged patients in whom cough, hemoptysis, and lung
masses are presenting symptoms and signs; typically, evidence of
glomerulonephritis, a positive ANCA or, ultimately, the lung biopsy
findings will point to the proper diagnosis. Wegener granulomatosis
shares with SLE, Goodpasture syndrome, and microscopic
polyangiitis the ability to cause an acute pulmonary-renal syndrome.
Approximately 10–25% of patients with classic granulomatosis with
polyangiitis have MPO-ANCA. Owing to involvement of the same
types of blood vessels, similar patterns of organ involvement, and
the possibility of failing to identify granulomatous pathology on tissue
biopsies because of sampling error, granulomatosis with polyangiitis
is often difficult to differentiate from microscopic polyangiitis. The
crucial distinctions between the two disorders are the tendencies for
granulomatosis with polyangiitis to involve the upper respiratory
tract (including the ears) and to cause granulomatous inflammation.
 Treatment
Early treatment is crucial in preventing the devastating end-organ
complications of this disease, and often in preserving life. While
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis)
may involve the sinuses or lung for months, once proteinuria or
hematuria develops, progression to advanced chronic kidney
disease can be rapid (over several weeks). Remissions of at least a
temporary nature have been induced in more than 90% of patients
treated with prednisone (1 mg/kg daily) and cyclophosphamide (2
mg/kg/d orally with adjustments required for renal insufficiency and
age > 70 years old). Cyclophosphamide is best given daily by
mouth; intermittent high-dose intravenous cyclophosph-amide is less
effective. Unfortunately, the traditional therapy of oral
cyclophosphamide continued for 12 months after the patient
achieves remission has resulted in severe toxicity, including a 2.4
times increased risk of all malignancies, a 33-fold increase in
bladder cancer, and a 60% chance of ovarian failure. Moreover,
disease relapses occur in a substantial proportion of those patients
who achieve remission. Still, for patients with severe granulomatosis
with polyangiitis, cyclophosphamide and prednisone remain the
standard of care for remission induction. Consequently, the current
approach to remission induction in severe cases is to use
cyclophosphamide for 3–6 months, followed by a switch to a
regimen more likely to be tolerated well. In patients with remission
induced by 3–6 months of cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids,
azathioprine (up to 2 mg/kg/d orally) has been shown to be as
effective as cyclophosphamide in maintaining disease remissions (at
least for up to 12–15 months). Before the institution of azathioprine,
patients should be tested (through a commercially available blood
test) for deficiencies in the level of thiopurine methyltransferase, an
enzyme essential to the metabolism of azathioprine. Another current
option for remission maintenance is methotrexate, 20–25 mg/wk
(administered either orally or intramuscularly). Because of its
superior side-effect profile, methotrexate is viewed as an
appropriate substitute for cyclophosphamide for initial treatment in
patients who do not have significant renal dysfunction (of any cause)
or immediately life-threatening disease. Treatment with TNF
inhibitors, particularly etanercept, is not effective. Rituximab, a B-
cell-depleting monoclonal antibody, has been shown to be as
effective as cyclophosphamide for patients who have never been
treated and may be more effective than cyclophosphamide for
treating relapses. However, rituximab's high cost, its undefined long-
term health effects, and its association with opportunistic infections
(including progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy [PML])
indicate that defining rituximab's precise role in treating ANCA-
associated vasculitis requires additional study.
Carruthers D et al. Evidence-based management of ANCA
vasculitis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2009 Jun;23(3):367–
78. [PMID: 19508944]
 
Hiemstra TF et al; European Vasculitis Study Group (EUVAS).
Mycophenolate mofetil vs azathioprine for remission maintenance
in antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010 Dec 1; 304(21):2381–
8. [PMID: 21060104]
 
Stone JH et al. Rituximab versus cyclophosphamide for ANCA-
associated vasculitis. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 15;363(3):221–32.
[PMID: 20647199]
 
MICROSCOPIC POLYANGIITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Necrotizing vasculitis of small- and medium-sized arteries and
veins.
 Most common cause of pulmonary-renal syndrome; pulmonary
alveolar hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis.
 Associated with ANCA in 75% of cases, usually anti-
myeloperoxidase antibodies (MPO-ANCA) that cause a P-
ANCA pattern on immunofluorescence testing. ANCA directed
against proteinase-3 (PR3-ANCA) can also be observed.
 
 General Considerations
Microscopic polyangiitis is a pauci-immune nongranulomatous
necrotizing vasculitis that (1) affects small blood vessels (capillaries,
venules, or arterioles), (2) often causes glomerulonephritis and
pulmonary capillaritis, and (3) is often associated with ANCA on
immunofluorescence testing (directed against MPO, a constituent of
neutrophil granules). Because microscopic polyangiitis may involve
medium-sized as well as small blood vessels and because it tends to
affect capillaries within the lungs and kidneys, its spectrum overlaps
those of both polyarteritis nodosa and granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis).
In rare instances, medications, particularly propylthiouracil,
hydralazine, 
allopurinol, 
penicillamine, 
minocycline, 
and
sulfasalazine, induce a systemic vasculitis associated with high titers
of MPO-ANCA and features of microscopic polyangiitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A wide variety of findings suggesting vasculitis of small blood
vessels may develop in microscopic polyangiitis. These include
“palpable” (or “raised”) purpura and other signs of cutaneous
vasculitis (ulcers, splinter hemorrhages, vesiculobullous lesions).
Microscopic polyangiitis is the most common cause of
pulmonary-renal syndromes, being several times more common than
Goodpasture (antiglomerular basement membrane) disease.
Interstitial lung fibrosis that mimics usual interstitial pneumonitis is the
presenting condition. Pulmonary hemorrhage may occur. The
pathologic findings in the lung are typically those of capillaritis.
Vasculitic neuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex) is also common in
microscopic polyangiitis.
B. Laboratory Findings
As noted, three-fourths of patients with microscopic polyangiitis are
ANCA-positive. Elevated acute phase reactants are also typical of
active disease. Microscopic hematuria, proteinuria, and red blood
cell casts in the urine may occur. The renal lesion is a segmental,
necrotizing glomerulonephritis, often with localized intravascular
coagulation and the observation of intraglomerular thrombi upon
renal biopsy.
 Differential Diagnosis
Distinguishing this disease from granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(formerly Wegener granulomatosis) may be challenging in some
cases. Microscopic polyangiitis is not associated with the chronic
destructive upper respiratory tract disease often found in
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Moreover, as noted, a critical
difference between the two diseases is the absence of
granulomatous inflammation in microscopic polyangiitis. Because
their treatments may differ, microscopic polyangiitis must also be
differentiated from polyarteritis nodosa.
 Treatment
In microscopic polyangiitis, patients are likely to require prednisone
and cyclophosphamide because of the urgency in treating
pulmonary hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis. Cyclophosphamide
may be administered either in an oral daily regimen or via
intermittent (usually monthly) intra venous pulses. Whenever
cyclophosphamide is used, Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis with
either single-strength oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or
dapsone 100 mg/d is essential. Following the induction of remission,
azathioprine is a reasonable choice to replace cyclophosphamide. In
cases of drug-induced MPO-ANCA- associated vasculitis, the
offending medication should be discontinued; significant organ
involvement (eg, pulmonary hemorrhage, glomerulonephritis)
requires immunosuppressive therapy. Rituximab has been shown to
be as effective as cyclophosphamide in treating ANCA-associated
vasculitis.
 Prognosis
The key to effecting good outcomes is early diagnosis. Compared
with patients who have granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener
granulomatosis), those who have microscopic polyangiitis are more
likely to have significant fibrosis on renal biopsy because of later
diagnosis. The likelihood of disease recurrence following remission
in microscopic polyangiitis is about 33%.
Chung SA et al. Microscopic polyangiitis. Rheum Dis Clin North
Am. 2010 Aug;36(3):545–58. [PMID: 20688249]
 
Jayne D. Review article: Progress of treatment in ANCA-
associated vasculitis. Nephrology (Carlton). 2009 Feb;14(1): 42–
8. [PMID: 19335843]
 
Silva F et al. Mycophenolate mofetil for induction and maintenance
of remission in microscopic polyangiitis with mild to moderate renal
involvement–a prospective, open-label pilot trial. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2010 Mar;5(3):445–53. [PMID: 20093349]
 
CRYOGLOBULINEMIA
Cryoglobulinemia can be associated with an immune-complex
mediated, small-vessel vasculitis. Chronic infection with hepatitis C
is the most common underlying condition; cryoglobulinemic
vasculitis also can occur in the setting of other chronic infections,
such as subacute bacterial endocarditis and osteomyelitis, and with
connective tissues diseases, especially Sjögren syndrome. The
cryoglobulins associated with vasculitis are cold-precipitable
immune complexes consisting of rheumatoid factor and IgG
(rheumatoid factor is an autoantibody to the constant region of
IgG). The rheumatoid factor component can be monoclonal (type II
cryoglobulins) or polyclonal (type III cryoglobulins). (Type I
cryoglobulins are cryoprecipitable monoclonal proteins that lack
rheumatoid factor activity; these cause cold-induced hyperviscosity
syndromes, 
not 
vasculitis, 
and 
are 
associated 
with
lymphoproliferative disease.)
 Clinical Findings
Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis typically manifests as recurrent palpable
purpura 
and 
peripheral 
neuropathy. 
A 
proliferative
glomerulonephritis can develop and can manifest as rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis. Abnormal liver function tests,
abdominal pain, and pulmonary disease may also occur. The
diagnosis is based on a compatible clinical picture and a positive
serum test for cryoglobulins. The presence of a disproportionately
low C4 level can be a diagnostic clue to the presence of
cryoglobulinemia.
 Treatment
Asymptomatic cryoglobulinemia is common in hepatitis C–infected
individuals and does not in itself warrant treatment. The optimal
approach to treatment of hepatitis C–associated cryoglobulinemic
vasculitis is viral suppression with pegylated forms of interferon-α
and ribavirin. Because immunosuppressive agents may facilitate viral
replication, 
corticosteroids, 
cyclophosphamide, 
and 
other
interventions (including plasmapheresis) should be reserved for
organ-threatening complications. B cell depletion using rituximab
appears to be a promising avenue of therapy.
Iannuzzella F et al. Management of hepatitis C virus-related mixed
cryoglobulinemia. Am J Med. 2010 May;123(5):400–8. [PMID:
20399313]
 
Saadoun D et al. Rituximab plus Peg-interferon-alpha/ribavirin
compared with Peg-interferon-alpha/ribavirin in hepatitis C-related
mixed cryoglobulinemia. Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3): 326–34.
[PMID: 20439619]
 
HENOCH-SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, the most common systemic vasculitis in
children, occurs in adults as well. Typical features are palpable
purpura (Figure 20–8), abdominal pain, arthritis, and hematuria.
Pathologic features include leukocytoclastic vasculitis with IgA
deposition. The cause is not known.
The purpuric skin lesions are typically located on the lower
extremities but may also be seen on the hands, arms, trunk, and
buttocks. Joint symptoms are present in the majority of patients, the
knees and ankles being most commonly involved. Abdominal pain
secondary to vasculitis of the intestinal tract is often associated with
gastrointestinal bleeding. Hematuria signals the presence of a renal
lesion that is usually reversible, although it occasionally may
progress to chronic kidney disease. Children tend to have more
frequent and more serious gastrointestinal vasculitis, whereas adults
more often suffer from chronic kidney disease. Biopsy of the kidney
reveals segmental glomerulonephritis with crescents and mesangial
deposition of IgA.
 
Figure 20–8. Palpable purpura in a woman with leukocytoclastic
vasculitis. (Courtesy of Eric Kraus, MD; used, with permission,
from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger
J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
Chronic courses with persistent or intermittent skin disease are
more likely to occur in adults than in children. The value of
corticosteroids has been controversial. In children or adults,
prednisone (1 mg/kg/d orally) may benefit those with severe
extrarenal manifestations and with evidence of kidney disease. The
incremental efficacy of steroid-sparing drugs such as azathioprine
and mycophenolate mofetil—often used in the setting of kidney
disease—is not known.
Chartapisak W et al. Interventions for preventing and treating
kidney disease in Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP). Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8; (3):CD005128. [PMID:
19588365]
 
McCarthy HJ et al. Clinical practice: diagnosis and management of
Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Eur J Pediatr. 2010 Jun;169(6): 643–
50. [PMID: 20012647]
 
Pillebout E et al; CESAR Study Group. Addition of cyclophosph-
amide to steroids provides no benefit compared with steroids
alone in treating adult patients with severe Henoch Schönlein
Purpura. Kidney Int. 2010 Sep;78(5):495–502. [PMID:
20505654]
 
RELAPSING POLYCHONDRITIS
This disease is characterized by inflammatory destructive lesions of
cartilaginous structures, principally the ears, nose, trachea, and
larynx. Nearly 40% of cases are associated with another disease,
especially either other immunologic disorders (such as SLE,
rheumatoid arthritis, or Hashimoto thyroiditis) or cancers (such as
multiple 
myeloma) 
or 
hematologic 
disorders 
(such 
as
myelodysplastic syndrome). The disease, which is usually episodic,
affects males and females equally. The cartilage is painful, swollen,
and tender during an attack and subsequently becomes atrophic,
resulting in permanent deformity. Biopsy of the involved cartilage
shows 
inflammation 
and 
chondrolysis. 
Noncartilaginous
manifestations of the disease include fever, episcleritis, uveitis,
deafness, aortic insufficiency, and rarely glomerulonephritis. In 85%
of patients, a migratory, asymmetric, and seronegative arthropathy
occurs, affecting both large and small joints and the costochondral
junctions. Diagnosing this uncommon disease is especially difficult
since the signs of cartilage inflammation (such as red ears or nasal
pain) may be more subtle than the fever, arthritis, rash, or other
systemic manifestations.
Prednisone, 0.5–1 mg/kg/d orally, is often effective. Dapsone
(100–200 mg/d orally) or methotrexate (7.5–20 mg orally per
week) may also have efficacy, sparing the need for long-term high-
dose corticosteroid treatment. Involvement of the tracheobronchial
tree, leading to tracheomalacia, may lead to difficult management
issues.
Lahmer T et al. Relapsing polychondritis: An autoimmune disease
with many faces. Autoimmun Rev. 2010 Jun;9(8):540–6. [PMID:
20215048]
 
Leroux G et al. Treatment of relapsing polychondritis with
rituximab: a retrospective study of nine patients. Arthritis Rheum.
2009 May 15;61(5):577–82. [PMID: 19405005]
 
BEHÇET SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most commonly occurs among persons of Asian, turkish, or
Middle Eastern background, but may affect persons of any
demographic profile.
 Recurrent, painful aphthous ulcers of the mouth and genitals.
 Erythema nodosum–like lesions; a follicular rash; and the
pathergy phenomenon (formation of a sterile pustule at the site of
a needle stick).
 Either anterior or posterior uveitis. Posterior uveitis may be
asymptomatic until significant damage to the retina has occurred.
 Variety of neurologic lesions that can mimic multiple sclerosis,
particularly through involvement of the white matter of the
brainstem.
 
General Considerations
Named after the Turkish dermatologist who first described it, this
disease is of unknown cause. Essentially all of its protean
manifestations, however, are believed to result from vasculitis that
may involve all types of blood vessels: small, medium, and large, on
both the arterial and venous side of the circulation.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The hallmark of Behçet disease is painful aphthous ulceration in the
mouth (see Figure 8–7). These lesions, which usually occur multiply,
may be found on the tongue, gums, and inner surfaces of the oral
cavity. Genital lesions, similar in appearance, are also common but
do not occur in all patients. Other cutaneous lesions of Behçet
disease include tender, erythematous, papular lesions that resemble
erythema nodosum. (On biopsy, however, many of these lesions are
shown to be secondary to vasculitis rather than septal panniculitis.)
These erythema nodosum–like lesions have a tendency to ulcerate,
a major difference between the lesions of Behçet disease and the
erythema nodosum seen in cases of sarcoidosis and inflammatory
bowel disease. An erythematous follicular rash that occurs
frequently on the upper extremities may be a subtle feature of the
disease. The pathergy phenomenon is frequently underappreciated
(unless the patient is asked); in this phenomenon, sterile pustules
develop at sites where needles have been inserted into the skin (eg,
for phlebotomy) in some patients.
A nonerosive arthritis occurs in about two-thirds of patients,
most commonly affecting the knees and ankles. Eye involvement
may be one of the most devastating complications of Behçet
disease. Posterior uveitis, in essence a retinal venulitis, may lead to
the insidious destruction of large areas of the retina before the
patient becomes aware of visual problems. Anterior uveitis,
associated with photo-phobia and a red eye, is intensely
symptomatic. This complication may lead to a hypopyon, the
accumulation of pus in the anterior chamber. If not treated properly
with mydriatic agents to dilate the pupil and corticosteroid eye-
drops to diminish inflammation, the anterior uveitis may lead to
synechial formation between the iris and lens, resulting in permanent
pupillary distortion.
Central nervous system involvement is another cause of major
potential morbidity. The central nervous system lesions that may
mimic multiple sclerosis radiologically often result in serious
disability or death. Findings include sterile meningitis (recurrent
meningeal headaches associated with a lymphocytic pleocytosis),
cranial nerve palsies, seizures, encephalitis, mental disturbances, and
spinal cord lesions. Finally, patients have a hypercoagulable
tendency that may lead to complicated venous thrombotic events,
particularly multiple deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary emboli,
cerebral sinus thrombosis, and other problems associated with
clotting.
The clinical course may be chronic but is often characterized by
remissions and exacerbations.
B. Laboratory Findings
There are no pathognomonic laboratory features of Behçet disease.
Although acute phase reactants are often elevated, there is no
autoantibody or other assay that is distinctive. No markers of
hypercoagulability specific to Behçet have been identified.
 Treatment
Corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/d of oral prednisone) are a mainstay of
therapy for severe disease manifestations. Azathioprine (2 mg/kg/d
orally) 
may 
be 
an 
effective 
steroid-sparing 
agent.
Cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/d orally) or chlorambucil (0.1–0.2
mg/kg/d orally) is indicated for severe ocular and central nervous
system complications of Behçet disease. Both colchicine (0.6 mg
once to three times daily orally) and thalidomide (100 mg/d orally)
help ameliorate the mucocutaneous findings. TNF inhibition and
interferon alfa-2a demonstrates some promise as a therapeutic
approach, but large studies are lacking to date.
Ideguchi H et al. Neurological manifestations of Behçet's disease in
Japan: a study of 54 patients. J Neurol. 2010 Jun;257(6): 1012–
20. [PMID: 20127350]
 
PRIMARY ANGIITIS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM
Primary angiitis of the central nervous system is a syndrome with
several possible causes that produces small and medium-sized
vasculitis limited to the brain and spinal cord. Biopsy-proved cases
have predominated in men who have a history of weeks to months
of headaches, encephalopathy, and multifocal strokes. Systemic
signs and symptoms are absent, and routine laboratory tests are
usually normal. MRI of the brain is almost always abnormal, and the
spinal fluid often reveals a mild lymphocytosis and a modest
increase in protein level. Angiograms classically reveal a “string of
beads” pattern produced by alternating segments of arterial
narrowing and dilation. However, neither the MRI nor the
angiogram appearance is specific for vasculitis. Indeed, in one
study, none of the patients who had biopsy-proved central nervous
system vasculitis had an angiogram showing “the string of beads,”
and none of the patients with the classic angiographic findings had a
positive brain biopsy for vasculitis. Many conditions, including
vasospasm, can produce the same angiographic pattern as
vasculitis. Definitive diagnosis requires a compatible clinical picture;
exclusion of infection, neoplasm, or metabolic disorder or drug
exposure (eg, cocaine) that can mimic primary angiitis of the central
nervous system; and a positive brain biopsy. In contrast to biopsy-
proved cases, patients with angiographically defined central nervous
system vasculopathy are chiefly women who have had an abrupt
onset of headaches and stroke (often in the absence of
encephalopathy) with normal spinal fluid findings. Many patients
who fit this clinical profile may have reversible cerebral
vasoconstriction rather than true vasculitis. Such cases may best be
treated with calcium channel blockers (such as nimodipine or
verapamil) and possibly short course of corticosteroids. Biopsy-
proved cases usually improve with prednisone therapy and often
require cyclophosphamide. In recent years, cases of central nervous
system vasculitis associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy have
been reported. These cases often respond well to corticosteroids,
albeit the long-term natural history remains poorly defined.
Birnbaum J et al. Primary angiitis of the central nervous system.
Arch Neurol. 2009 Jun;66(6):704–9. [PMID: 19506130]
 
LIVEDO RETICULARIS
Livedo reticularis produces a mottled, purplish discoloration of the
skin with reticulated cyanotic areas surrounding paler central cores.
This distinctive “fishnet” pattern is caused by spasm or obstruction
of perpendicular arterioles, combined with pooling of blood in
surrounding venous plexuses. Livedo reticularis can be idiopathic or
a manifestation of a serious underlying condition.
Idiopathic livedo reticularis is a benign condition that worsens
with cold exposure, improves with warming, and primarily affects
the extremities. Apart from cosmetic concerns, it is usually
asymptomatic. The presence of systemic symptoms or the
development of cutaneous ulcerations points to the presence of an
underlying disease.
Secondary livedo reticularis occurs in association with a variety
of diseases that cause vascular obstruction or inflammation. Of
particular importance is the link with antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome. Livedo reticularis is the presenting manifestation of 25%
of patients with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and is strongly
associated with the subgroup that has arterial thromboses, including
those 
with 
Sneddon 
syndrome 
(livedo 
reticularis 
and
cerebrovascular events). Other underlying causes of livedo
reticularis include the vasculitides (particularly polyarteritis nodosa),
cholesterol emboli syndrome, thrombocythemia, cryoglobulinemia,
cold agglutinin disease, primary hyperoxaluria (due to vascular
deposits of calcium oxalate), and disseminated intravascular
coagulation.
Frances C. Dermatological manifestations of Hughes’
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Lupus. 2010
Aug;19(9):1071–7. [PMID: 20693200]
 
SERONEGATIVE
SPONDYLOARTHROPATHIES
 
The seronegative spondyloarthropathies are ankylosing spondylitis,
psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis (formerly called Reiter
syndrome), the arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease,
and undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy. These disorders are
noted for male predominance, onset usually before age 40,
inflammatory arthritis of the spine or the large peripheral joints (or
both), enthesopathy (inflammation of where ligaments, tendons, and
joint capsule insert into bone), uveitis in a significant minority, the
absence of autoantibodies in the serum, and a striking association
with HLA-B27. Present in only 8% of normal whites and 4% of
normal blacks, HLA-B27 is positive in 90% of patients with
ankylosing spondylitis and 75% with reactive arthritis. HLA-B27
also occurs in 50% of the psoriatic and inflammatory bowel disease
patients who have sacroiliitis. Patients with only peripheral arthritis
in these latter two syndromes do not show an increase in HLA-
B27.
ANKYLOSING SPONDYLITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic low backache in young adults, generally worst in the
morning.
 Progressive limitation of back motion and of chest expansion.
 Transient (50%) or persistent (25%) peripheral arthritis.
 Anterior uveitis in 20–25%.
 Diagnostic radiographic changes in sacroiliac joints.
 Negative serologic tests for rheumatoid factor.
 HlA-B27 testing is most helpful when there is an indeterminate
probability of disease.
 
 General Considerations
Ankylosing spondylitis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the
joints of the axial skeleton, manifested clinically by pain and
progressive stiffening of the spine. The age at onset is usually in the
late teens or early 20s. The incidence is greater in males than in
females, and symptoms are more prominent in men, with ascending
involvement of the spine more likely to occur.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is usually gradual, with intermittent bouts of back pain
that may radiate into the buttocks. The back pain is worse in the
morning and usually associated with stiffness that lasts hours. The
pain and stiffness improve with activity, in contrast to back pain due
to mechanical causes and degenerative disease, which improves
with rest and worsens with activity. As the disease advances,
symptoms progress in a cephalad direction, and back motion
becomes limited, with the normal lumbar curve flattened and the
thoracic curvature exaggerated. Chest expansion is often limited as
a consequence of costovertebral joint involvement. In advanced
cases, the entire spine becomes fused, allowing no motion in any
direction. Transient acute arthritis of the peripheral joints occurs in
about 50% of cases, and permanent changes in the peripheral joints
—most commonly the hips, shoulders, and knees—are seen in
about 25%. Enthesopathy, a hallmark of the spondyloarthropathies,
can manifest as swelling of the Achilles tendon at its insertion,
plantar fasciitis (producing heel pain), or “sausage” swelling of a
finger or toe (less common in anky-losing spondylitis than in
psoriatic arthritis).
Anterior uveitis is associated in as many as 25% of cases and
may be a presenting feature. Spondylitic heart disease,
characterized chiefly by atrioventricular conduction defects and
aortic insufficiency, occurs in 3–5% of patients with long-standing
severe disease. Pulmonary fibrosis of the upper lobes, with
progression to cavitation and bronchiectasis mimicking tuberculosis,
may rarely occur, characteristically long after the onset of skeletal
symptoms. Radicular symptoms due to cauda equina fibrosis may
develop years after onset of the disease. Constitutional symptoms
similar to those of rheumatoid arthritis are absent in most patients.
B. Laboratory Findings
The ESR is elevated in 85% of cases, but serologic tests for
rheumatoid factor are characteristically negative. Anemia may be
present but is often mild. HLA-B27 is found in 90% of white
patients and 50% of black patients with ankylosing spondylitis.
Because this antigen occurs in 8% of the healthy white population
(and 2% of healthy blacks), it is not a specific diagnostic test.
C. Imaging
The earliest radiographic changes are usually in the sacroiliac joints.
In the first 2 years of the disease process, the sacroiliac changes
may be detectable only by MRI. Later, erosion and sclerosis of
these joints are evident on plain radiographs; the sacroiliitis of
ankylosing spondylitis is bilateral and symmetric. Inflammation
where the annulus fibrosus attaches to the vertebral bodies initially
causes sclerosis (“the shiny corner sign”) and then characteristic
squaring of the vertebral bodies. The term “bamboo spine”
describes the late radiographic appearance of the spinal column in
which the vertebral bodies are fused by vertically oriented, bridging
syndesmophytes formed by the ossification of the annulus fibrosus
and calcification of the anterior and lateral spinal ligaments. Fusion
of the posterior facet joints of the spine is also common.
Additional radiographic findings include periosteal new bone
formation on the iliac crest, ischial tuberosities and calcanei, and
alterations of the pubic symphysis and sternomanubrial joint similar
to those of the sacroiliacs. Radiologic changes in peripheral joints,
when present, tend to be asymmetric and lack the demineralization
and erosions seen in rheumatoid arthritis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Low back pain due to mechanical causes, disk disease, and
degenerative arthritis is very common. Onset of back pain prior to
age 30 and an “inflammatory” quality of the back pain (ie, morning
stiffness and pain that improve with activity) should raise the
possibility of ankylosing spondylitis. In contrast to ankylosing
spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis predominantly affects multiple,
small, peripheral joints of the hands and feet. Rheumatoid arthritis
spares the sacroiliac joints and only affects the cervical component
of the spine. Bilateral sacroiliitis indistinguishable from ankylosing
spondylitis is seen with the spondylitis associated with inflammatory
bowel disease. Sacroiliitis associated with reactive arthritis and
psoriasis, on the other hand, is often asymmetric or even unilateral.
Osteitis condensans ilii (sclerosis on the iliac side of the sacroiliac
joint) is an asymptomatic, postpartum radiographic finding that is
occasionally mistaken for sacroiliitis. Diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis (DISH) causes exuberant osteophytes of the spine that
occasionally are difficult to distinguish from the syndesmophytes of
ankylosing spondylitis. The osteophytes of DISH are thicker and
more anterior than the syndesmophytes of ankylosing spondylitis,
and the sacroiliac joints are normal in DISH.
 Treatment
A. Basic Program
As with any chronic inflammatory arthritis, patient education and
physical therapy are cornerstones of treatment of ankylosing
spondylitis. The importance of performing postural and breathing
exercises and avoiding smoking should be stressed.
B. Drug Therapy
NSAIDs remain first-line treatment of ankylosing spondylitis and
may slow radiographic progression of spinal disease. Because
individual patients differ in their response to particular NSAIDs,
empiric trials of several different NSAIDs are warranted if the
response to any given NSAID is not satisfactory. TNF inhibitors
have established efficacy for NSAID-resistant axial disease;
responses are often substantial and durable. Etanercept (50 mg
subcutaneously once a week), adalimumab (40 mg subcutaneously
every other week), or infliximab (5 mg/kg every other month by IV
infusion) is reasonable for patients whose symptoms are refractory
to NSAIDs. Sulfasalazine (1000 mg orally twice daily) is sometimes
useful for peripheral arthritis but lacks effectiveness for spinal and
sacroiliac joint disease. Corticosteroids have minimal impact on the
arthritis—particularly the spondylitis—of ankylosing spondylitis and
can worsen osteopenia.
 Prognosis
Almost all patients have persistent symptoms over decades; rare
individuals experience long-term remissions. The severity of disease
varies greatly, with about 10% of patients having work disability
after 10 years. Developing hip disease within the first 2 years of
disease onset presages a worse prognosis. The availability of TNF
inhibitors has improved the outlook dramatically for many patients
with ankylosing spondylitis. Many patients who do not respond to
NSAIDs will experience less pain, show less radiographic
progression, and will be less likely to become disabled with TNF
inhibitor therapy.
Barkham N et al. Double-blind placebo-controlled trial of
etanercept in the prevention of work disability in ankylosing
spondylitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Nov;69(11):1926–8. [PMID:
20511615]
 
Braun J et al. Treatment of ankylosing spondylitis and other
spondyloarthritides. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2009 Jul;21(4): 324–
34. [PMID: 19461519]
 
Song IH et al. Different response to rituximab in tumor necrosis
factor blockernaive patients with active ankylosing spondylitis and
in patients in whom tumor necrosis factor blockers have failed: a
twenty-four-week clinical trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2010
May;62(5):1290–7. [PMID: 20461780]
 
PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Psoriasis precedes onset of arthritis in 80% of cases.
 Arthritis usually asymmetric, with “sausage” appearance of fingers
and toes but a polyarthritis that resembles rheumatoid arthritis
also occurs.
 Sacroiliac joint involvement common; ankylosis of the sacroiliac
joints may occur.
 Radiographic findings: osteolysis; pencil-in-cup deformity; relative
lack of osteoporosis; bony ankylosis; asymmetric sacroiliitis and
atypical syndesmophytes.
 
 General Considerations
Although psoriasis usually precedes the onset of arthritis, arthritis
precedes (by up to 2 years) or occurs simultaneously with the skin
disease in approximately 20% of cases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The patterns or subsets of psoriatic arthritis include the following:
 
1. A symmetric polyarthritis that resembles rheumatoid
arthritis. Usually, fewer joints are involved than in
rheumatoid arthritis.
2. An oligoarticular form that may lead to considerable
destruction of the affected joints.
3. A pattern of disease in which the DIP joints are primarily
affected. Early, this may be monarticular, and often the joint
involvement is asymmetric. Pitting of the nails and
onycholysis frequently accompany DIP involvement.
4. A severe deforming arthritis (arthritis mutilans) in which
osteolysis is marked.
5. A spondylitic form in which sacroiliitis and spinal
involvement predominate; 50% of these patients are HLA-
B27-positive.
Arthritis is at least five times more common in patients with
severe skin disease than in those with only mild skin findings.
Occasionally, however, patients may have a single patch of
psoriasis (typically hidden in the scalp, gluteal cleft, or umbilicus)
and are unaware of its connection to the arthritis. Thus, a detailed
search for cutaneous lesions is essential in patients with arthritis of
new onset. Also, the psoriatic lesions may have cleared when
arthritis appears—in such cases, the history is most useful in
diagnosing previously unexplained cases of mono- or oligoarthritis.
Nail pitting is sometimes a clue. “Sausage” swelling of one or more
digits is a common manifestation of enthesopathy in psoriatic
arthritis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory studies show an elevation of the ESR, but rheumatoid
factor is not present. Uric acid levels may be high, reflecting the
active turnover of skin affected by psoriasis. There is a correlation
between the extent of psoriatic involvement and the level of uric
acid, but gout is no more common than in patients without psoriasis.
Desquamation of the skin may also reduce iron stores.
C. Imaging
Radiographic findings are most helpful in distinguishing the disease
from other forms of arthritis. There are marginal erosions of bone
and irregular destruction of joint and bone, which, in the phalanx,
may give the appearance of a sharpened pencil. Fluffy periosteal
new bone may be marked, especially at the insertion of muscles and
ligaments into bone. Such changes will also be seen along the shafts
of metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges. Psoriatic spondylitis
causes asymmetric sacroiliitis and syndesmophytes, which are
coarser than those seen in ankylosing spondylitis.
 Treatment
NSAIDs are usually sufficient for mild cases. Methotrexate (7.5–20
mg orally once a week) is generally considered the drug of choice
for patients who have not responded to NSAIDs; methotrexate can
improve both the cutaneous and arthritic manifestations. For cases
with disease that is refractory to methotrexate, the addition of TNF
inhibitors (at doses similar to the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis)
is usually effective for both arthritis and psoriatic skin disease.
Corticosteroids are less effective in psoriatic arthritis than in other
forms of inflammatory arthritis and may precipitate pustular psoriasis
during tapers. Antimalarials may also exacerbate psoriasis.
Successful treatment directed at the skin lesions alone (eg, by
PUVA therapy) occasionally is accompanied by an improvement in
peripheral articular symptoms.
Ceponis A et al. Use of methotrexate in patients with psoriatic
arthritis. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2010 Sep–Oct;28(5 Suppl
61):S132–7. [PMID: 21044447]
 
Gladman DD et al. Risk factors for radiographic progression in
psoriatic arthritis: subanalysis of the randomized controlled trial
ADEPT. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(3):R113. [PMID:
20537151]
 
Mease PJ. Psoriatic arthritis assessment and treatment update.
Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2009 Jul;21(4):348–55. [PMID:
19461518]
 
REACTIVE ARTHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fifty to eighty percent of patients are HlA-B27-positive.
 Oligoarthritis, conjunctivitis, urethritis, and mouth ulcers most
common features.
 Usually follows dysentery or a sexually transmitted infection.
 
General Considerations
Reactive arthritis (formerly called Reiter syndrome) is precipitated
by antecedent gastrointestinal and genitourinary infections and
manifests as an asymmetric sterile oligoarthritis, typically of the
lower extremities. It is frequently associated with enthesitis. Extra-
articular manifestations are common and include urethritis,
conjunctivitis, uveitis, and mucocutaneous lesions. Reactive arthritis
occurs most commonly in young men and is associated with HLA-
B27 in 80% of white patients and 50–60% of blacks.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most cases of reactive arthritis develop within 1–4 weeks after
either a gastrointestinal infection (with Shigella, Salmonella,
Yersinia, Campylobacter) or a sexually transmitted infection (with
Chlamydia trachomatis or perhaps Ureaplasma urealyticum).
Whether the inciting infection is sexually transmitted or dysenteric
does not affect the subsequent manifestations but does influence the
gender ratio: The ratio is 1:1 after enteric infections but 9:1 with
male predominance after sexually transmitted infections. Synovial
fluid from affected joints is culture-negative. A clinically
indistinguishable syndrome can occur without an apparent
antecedent infection, suggesting that subclinical infection can
precipitate reactive arthritis or that there are other, as yet
unrecognized, triggers.
The arthritis is most commonly asymmetric and frequently
involves the large weight-bearing joints (chiefly the knee and ankle);
sacroiliitis or ankylosing spondylitis is observed in at least 20% of
patients, especially after frequent recurrences. Systemic symptoms
including fever and weight loss are common at the onset of disease.
The mucocutaneous lesions may include balanitis (Figure 20–9),
stomatitis, and keratoderma blennorrhagicum (Figure 20–10),
indistinguishable from pustular psoriasis. Involvement of the
fingernails in reactive arthritis also mimics psoriatic changes. Carditis
and aortic regurgitation may occur. While most signs of the disease
disappear within days or weeks, the arthritis may persist for several
months or become chronic. Recurrences involving any combination
of the clinical manifestations are common and are sometimes
followed by permanent sequelae, especially in the joints (eg,
articular destruction).
B. Imaging
Radiographic signs of permanent or progressive joint disease may
be seen in the sacroiliac as well as the peripheral joints.
 Differential Diagnosis
Gonococcal arthritis can initially mimic reactive arthritis, but the
marked improvement after 24–48 hours of antibiotic administration
and the culture results distinguish the two disorders. Rheumatoid
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and psoriatic arthritis must also be
considered. By causing similar oral, ocular, and joint lesions, Behçet
disease may also mimic reactive arthritis. The oral lesions of reactive
arthritis, however, are typically painless, in contrast to those of
Behçet disease.
The association of reactive arthritis and HIV has been debated,
but evidence now indicates that it is equally common in sexually
active men regardless of HIV status.
 
Figure 20–9. Circinate balanitis due to reactive arthritis (Reiter
syndrome). (Courtesy of Susan Lindsley, Dr. M. F. Rein, Public
Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
 Treatment
NSAIDs have been the mainstay of therapy. Antibiotics given at the
time of a nongonococcal sexually transmitted infection reduce the
chance that the individual will develop this disorder. For chronic
reactive arthritis associated with chlamydial infection, combination
antibiotics taken for 6 months is more effective than placebo.
Patients who do not respond to NSAIDs may respond to
sulfasalazine, 1000 mg orally twice daily, or to methotrexate, 7.5–
20 mg orally per week. There are very limited data on the efficacy
of the anti-TNF agents, which are effective in the other
spondyloarthropathies.
Carter JD et al. Combination antibiotics as a treatment for chronic
Chlamydia-induced reactive arthritis: a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, prospective trial. Arthritis Rheum. 2010
May;62(5):1298–307. [PMID: 20155838]
 
 
Figure 20–10. Keratoderma blennorrhagica of the soles due to
reactive arthritis (Reiter syndrome). (Courtesy of Susan Lindsley,
Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
ARTHRITIS & INFLAMMATORY INTESTINAL
DISEASES
One-fifth of patients with inflammatory bowel disease have arthritis,
which complicates Crohn disease somewhat more frequently than it
does ulcerative colitis. In both diseases, two distinct forms of
arthritis occur. The first is peripheral arthritis—usually a
nondeforming asymmetric oligoarthritis of large joints—in which the
activity of the joint disease parallels that of the bowel disease. The
arthritis usually begins months to years after the bowel disease, but
occasionally the joint symptoms develop earlier and may be
prominent enough to cause the patient to overlook intestinal
symptoms. The second form of arthritis is a spondylitis that is
indistinguishable by symptoms or radiographs from ankylosing
spondylitis and follows a course independent of the bowel disease.
About 50% of these patients are HLA-B27-positive.
Controlling the intestinal inflammation usually eliminates the
peripheral arthritis. The spondylitis often requires NSAIDs, which
need to be used cautiously since these agents may activate the
bowel disease in a few patients. Range-of-motion exercises as
prescribed for ankylosing spondylitis can be helpful.
About two-thirds of patients with Whipple disease experience
arthralgia or arthritis, most often an episodic, large-joint
polyarthritis. The arthritis usually precedes the gastrointestinal
manifestations by years. In fact, the arthritis resolves as the diarrhea
develops. Thus, Whipple disease should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of unexplained episodic arthritis.
Salvarani C et al. Clinical features and epidemiology of
spondyloarthritides associated with inflammatory bowel disease.
World J Gastroenterol. 2009 May 28;15(20):2449–55. [PMID:
19468993]
 
INFECTIOUS ARTHRITIS*
 
NONGONOCOCCAL ACUTE BACTERIAL (Septic)
ARTHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute onset of inflammatory monoarticular arthritis, most often in
large weight-bearing joints and wrists.
 Previous joint damage or injection drug use common risk factors.
 Infection with causative organisms commonly found elsewhere in
body.
 Joint effusions are usually large, with white blood counts
commonly > 50,000/mcl.
 
 General Considerations
Nongonococcal acute bacterial arthritis is often a disease that
occurs when there is an underlying abnormality. The key risk factors
are bacteremia (eg, injection drug use, endocarditis, infection at
other sites), damaged or prosthetic joints (eg, rheumatoid arthritis),
compromised immunity (eg, diabetes, advanced chronic kidney
disease, alcoholism, cirrhosis, and immunosuppressive therapy), and
loss of skin integrity (eg, cutaneous ulcer or psoriasis).
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause of
nongonococcal septic arthritis, accounting for about 50% of all
cases. Methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA) and group B
streptococcus have become increasing frequent and important
causes of septic arthritis. Gram-negative septic arthritis causes
about 10% of cases and is especially common in injection drug
users and in immunocompromised persons. Escherichia coli and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa are the most common gram-negative
isolates in adults. Pathologic changes include varying degrees of
acute inflammation, with synovitis, effusion, abscess formation in
synovial or subchondral tissues, and, if treatment is not adequate,
articular destruction.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is usually acute, with pain, swelling, and heat of the
affected joint worsening over hours. The knee is most frequently
involved; other commonly affected sites are the hip, wrist, shoulder,
and ankle. Unusual sites, such as the sternoclavicular or sacroiliac
joint, can be involved in injection drug users. Chills and fever are
common but are absent in up to 20% of patients. Infection of the
hip usually does not produce apparent swelling but results in groin
pain greatly aggravated by walking. More than one joint is involved
in 15% of cases of septic arthritis; risk factors for multiple joint
involvement include rheumatoid arthritis, associated endocarditis,
and infection with group B streptococci.
B. Laboratory Findings
Synovial fluid analysis is critical for diagnosis. The leukocyte count
of the synovial fluid usually exceeds 50,000/mcL and often is >
100,000/mcL, with 90% or more polymorphonuclear cells (Table
20–2). Gram stain of the synovial fluid is positive in 75% of
staphylococcal infections and in 50% of gram-negative infections.
Synovial fluid cultures are positive in 70–90% of cases;
administration of antibiotics prior to arthrocentesis reduces the
likelihood of a positive culture result. Blood cultures are positive in
approximately 50% of patients.
C. Imaging
Imaging tests generally add little to the diagnosis of septic arthritis.
Indeed, other than demonstrating joint effusion, radiographs are
usually normal early in the disease; evidence of demineralization may
develop within days of onset. MRI and CT are more sensitive in
detecting fluid in joints that are not accessible to physical
examination (eg, the hip). Bony erosions and narrowing of the joint
space followed by osteomyelitis and periostitis may be seen within 2
weeks.
*Lyme disease is discussed in Chapter 34.
 
Differential Diagnosis
Gout and pseudogout can cause acute, very inflammatory
monoarticular arthritis and high-grade fever; the failure to find
crystals on synovial fluid analysis excludes these diagnoses. A well-
recognized but uncommon initial presentation of rheumatoid arthritis
is an acute inflammatory monoarthritis (“pseudoseptic”). Acute
rheumatic fever commonly involves many joints; Still disease may
mimic septic arthritis, but laboratory evidence of infection is absent.
Pyogenic arthritis may be superimposed on other types of joint
disease, notably rheumatoid arthritis. Indeed, septic arthritis must be
excluded (by joint fluid examination) in any patient with rheumatoid
arthritis who has a joint strikingly more inflamed than the other
joints.
 Prevention
There is no evidence that patients with prosthethic joints undergoing
procedures should receive antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent joint
infection. However, the topic remains controversial. The American
Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons advocates prescribing antibiotic
prophylaxis for any patient with a prosthetic joint replacement
undergoing a procedure that can cause bacteremia.
 Treatment
The effective treatment of septic arthritis requires appropriate
antibiotic therapy together with drainage of the infected joint.
Hospitalization is always necessary. If the likely causative organism
cannot be determined clinically or from the synovial fluid Gram
stain, treatment should be started with broad-spectrum antibiotic
coverage effective against staphylococci, streptococci, and gram-
negative organisms. The recommendation for initial treatment is to
give a third-generation cephalosporin: ceftriaxone, 1 g intravenously
daily (or every 12 hours if concomitant meningitis or endocarditis is
suspected); or cefotaxime, 1 g intravenously every 8 hours; or
ceftizoxime, 1 g intravenously every 8 hours. Vancomycin (1 g
intravenously every 12 hours, adjusted for age, weight, and renal
function) should be used whenever MRSA is reasonably likely.
Antibiotic therapy should be adjusted when culture results become
available; the duration of antibiotic therapy is usually 6 weeks.
Early orthopedic consultation is essential. Effective drainage is
usually achieved through early arthroscopic lavage and debridement
together with drain placement. Open surgical drainage should be
performed when conservative treatment fails, when there is
concomitant osteomyelitis requiring debridement, or when the
involved joint (eg, hip, shoulder, sacroiliac joint) cannot be drained
by more conservative means. Immobilization with a splint and
elevation are used at the onset of treatment. Early active motion
exercises within the limits of tolerance will hasten recovery.
 Prognosis
The outcome of septic arthritis depends largely on the antecedent
health of the patient, the causative organism (eg, S aureus bacterial
arthritis is associated with a poor functional outcome in about 40%
of cases), and the promptness of treatment. Five to 10 percent of
patients with an infected joint die of respiratory complications of
sepsis. The mortality rate is 30% for patients with polyarticular
sepsis. Bony ankylosis and articular destruction commonly also
occur if treatment is delayed or inadequate.
García-Lechuz J et al. Treatment recommendations and strategies
for the management of bone and joint infections. Expert Opin
Pharmacother. 2009 Jan;10(1):35–55. [PMID: 19236181]
 
Mathews CJ et al. Bacterial septic arthritis in adults. Lancet. 2010
Mar 6;375(9717):846–55. [PMID: 20206778]
 
GONOCOCCAL ARTHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Prodromal migratory polyarthralgias.
 Tenosynovitis most common sign.
 Purulent monarthritis in 50%.
 Characteristic skin lesions.
 Most common in young women during menses or pregnancy.
 Symptoms of urethritis frequently absent.
 Dramatic response to antibiotics.
 
 General Considerations
In contrast to nongonococcal bacterial arthritis, gonococcal arthritis
usually occurs in otherwise healthy individuals. Host factors,
however, influence the expression of the disease: gonococcal
arthritis is two to three times more common in women than in men,
is especially common during menses and pregnancy, and is rare
after age 40. Gonococcal arthritis is also common in men who have
sex with men, whose high incidence of asymptomatic gonococcal
pharyngitis and proctitis predisposes them to disseminated
gonococcal infection. Recurrent disseminated gonococcal infection
should prompt testing of the patient's CH50 level to evaluate for a
congenital deficiency of a terminal complement component (C5,
C6, C7, or C8).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
One to 4 days of migratory polyarthralgias involving the wrist, knee,
ankle, or elbow are common at the outset. Thereafter, two patterns
emerge. The first pattern is characterized by tenosynovitis that most
often affects wrists, fingers, ankles, or toes and is seen in 60% of
patients. The second pattern is purulent monarthritis that most
frequently involves the knee, wrist, ankle, or elbow and is seen in
40% of patients. Less than half of patients have fever, and less than
one-fourth have any genitourinary symptoms. Most patients will
have asymptomatic but highly characteristic skin lesions that usually
consist of two to ten small necrotic pustules distributed over the
extremities, especially the palms and soles.
B. Laboratory Findings
The peripheral blood leukocyte count averages about 10,000
cells/mcL and is elevated in less than one-third of patients. The
synovial fluid white blood cell count usually ranges from 30,000 to
60,000 cells/mcL. The synovial fluid Gram stain is positive in one-
fourth of cases and culture in less than half. Positive blood cultures
are uncommon. Urethral, throat, cervical, and rectal cultures should
be done in all patients, since they are often positive in the absence
of local symptoms. Urinary nucleic acid amplification tests have
excellent sensitivity and specificity for the detection of Neisseria
gonorrhoeae in genitourinary sites.
C. Imaging
Radiographs are usually normal or show only soft tissue swelling.
 Differential Diagnosis
Reactive arthritis can produce acute monarthritis in a young person
but is distinguished by negative cultures, sacroiliitis, and failure to
respond to antibiotics. Lyme disease involving the knee is less
acute, does not show positive cultures, and may be preceded by
known tick exposure and characteristic rash. The synovial fluid
analysis will exclude gout, pseudogout, and nongonococcal bacterial
arthritis. Rheumatic fever and sarcoidosis can produce migratory
tenosynovitis but have other distinguishing features. Infective
endocarditis with septic arthritis can mimic disseminated gonococcal
infection. Meningococcemia occasionally presents with a clinical
picture that resembles disseminated gonococcal infection; blood
cultures establish the correct diagnosis.
 Treatment
In most cases, patients in whom gonococcal arthritis is suspected
should be admitted to the hospital to confirm the diagnosis, to
exclude endocarditis, and to start treatment. While outpatient
treatment has been recommended in the past, the rapid rise in
gonococci resistant to penicillin makes initial inpatient treatment
advisable. Approximately 4–5% of all gonococcal isolates produce
a β-lactamase that confers penicillin resistance. An additional 15–
20% of gonococcal species have chromosomal mutations that result
in relative resistance to penicillin. The recommendation for initial
treatment is to give a third-generation cephalosporin: ceftriaxone, 1
g intravenously daily (or every 12 hours if concomitant meningitis or
endocarditis is suspected); or cefotaxime, 1 g intravenously every 8
hours; or ceftizoxime, 1 g intravenously every 8 hours.
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics are not recommended for the initial
treatment of gonococcal infections in the United States because of
drug resistance, but they can be used if culture results show
antibiotic sensitivity. Once improvement from parenteral antibiotics
has been achieved for 24–48 hours, patients can be switched to
cefixime, 400 mg orally twice daily, or cefpodoxime, 400 mg orally
twice daily, to complete a 7- to 10-day course.
 Prognosis
Generally, gonococcal arthritis responds dramatically in 24–48
hours after initiation of antibiotics, and drainage of the infected
joint(s) is required infrequently. Complete recovery is the rule.
García-De La Torre I et al. Gonococcal and nongonococcal
arthritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2009 Feb;35(1):63–73.
[PMID: 19480997]
 
RHEUMATIC MANIFESTATIONS OF HIV INFECTION
Infection with HIV has been associated with various rheumatic
disorders, most commonly arthralgias and arthritis. HIV painful
articular syndrome causes severe arthralgias in an oligoarticular,
asymmetric pattern that resolve within 24 hours; the joint
examination is normal. HIV-associated arthritis is an asymmetric
oligoarticular process with objective findings of arthritis and a self-
limited course that ranges from weeks to months. Psoriatic arthritis
and reactive arthritis occur in HIV-infected individuals and can be
severe; it remains uncertain whether the incidence of these disorders
is 
increased 
in 
HIV-infected 
populations. 
These
spondyloarthropathies can respond to NSAIDs, though many cases
are unresponsive. In the era of highly active antiretroviral therapies,
immunosuppressive medications can be used if necessary in HIV
patients, though with reluctance and great caution. Muscle
weakness associated with an elevated creatine kinase can be due to
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor-associated myopathy or
HIV-associated myopathy; the clinical presentations of each
resemble idiopathic polymyositis but the muscle biopsies show
minimal inflammation. Less commonly, an inflammatory myositis
indistinguishable from idiopathic polymyositis occurs.
Nguyen BY et al. Rheumatic manifestations associated with HIV in
the highly active antiretroviral therapy era. Curr Opin Rheumatol.
2009 Jul;21(4):404–10. [PMID: 19444116]
 
Patel N et al. HIV infection and rheumatic diseases: the changing
spectrum of clinical enigma. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2009
Feb;35(1):139–61. [PMID: 19481002]
 
VIRAL ARTHRITIS
Arthralgias occur frequently in the course of acute infections with
many viruses, but frank arthritis is uncommon. A notable exception
is acute parvovirus B19 infection, which leads to acute polyarthritis
in 50–60% of adult cases (infected children develop the febrile
exanthem known as “slapped cheek fever”). The arthritis can mimic
rheumatoid arthritis but is almost always self-limited and resolves
within several weeks. The diagnosis is established by the presence
of IgM antibodies specific for parvovirus B19. Self-limited
polyarthritis is also common in acute hepatitis B infection and
typically occurs before the onset of jaundice. Urticaria or other
types of skin rash may be present. Indeed, the clinical picture
resembles that of serum sickness (see Atopic Disease below).
Serum transaminase levels are elevated, and tests for hepatitis B
surface antigen are positive. Serum complement levels are often low
during active arthritis and become normal after remission of arthritis.
The incidence of hepatitis B–associated polyarthritis has fallen
substantially with the introduction of hepatitis B vaccination.
Effective vaccination programs in the United States have eliminated
acute rubella infections, formerly a common cause of virally induced
polyarthritis. Changes in the rubella vaccine (an attenuated live
vaccine) have greatly reduced the incidence of rubella vaccine–
induced polyarthritis as well.
Chronic infection with hepatitis C is associated with chronic
polyarthralgia in up to 20% of cases and with chronic polyarthritis in
3–5%. Both can mimic rheumatoid arthritis, and the presence of
rheumatoid factor in most hepatitis C–infected individuals leads to
further diagnostic confusion. Indeed, hepatitis C–associated arthritis
is frequently misdiagnosed as rheumatoid arthritis. Distinguishing
hepatitis C–associated arthritis/arthralgias from the co-occurrence
of hepatitis C and rheumatoid arthritis can be difficult. Rheumatoid
arthritis always causes objective arthritis (not just arthralgias) and
can be erosive (hepatitis C–associated arthritis is nonerosive). The
presence of anti-CCP antibodies points to the diagnosis of
rheumatoid arthritis.
Becker J et al. Update on rheumatic manifestations of infectious
diseases. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Jan;22(1):72–7. [PMID:
19910794]
 
Palazzi C et al. Hepatitis C virus-related arthritis. Autoimmun Rev.
2008 Oct;8(1):48–51. [PMID: 18707027]
 
INFECTIONS OF BONES
 
ACUTE PYOGENIC OSTEOMYELITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever and chills associated with pain and tenderness of involved
bone.
 Diagnosis usually requires culture of bone biopsy.
 ESR often extremely high (eg, > 100 mm/h).
 Radiographs early in the course are typically negative.
 
 General Considerations
Osteomyelitis is a serious infection that is often difficult to diagnose
and treat. Infection of bone occurs as a consequence of (1)
hematogenous dissemination of bacteria, (2) invasion from a
contiguous focus of infection, and (3) skin breakdown in the setting
of vascular insufficiency.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Hematogenous osteomyelitis—Osteomyelitis resulting from
bacteremia is a disease associated with sickle cell disease, injection
drug users, diabetes mellitus, or the elderly. Patients with this form
of osteomyelitis often present with sudden onset of high fever, chills,
and pain and tenderness of the involved bone. The site of
osteomyelitis and the causative organism depend on the host.
Among patients with hemoglobinopathies such as sickle cell anemia,
osteomyelitis is caused most often by salmonellae; S aureus is the
second most common cause. Osteomyelitis in injection drug users
develops most commonly in the spine. Although in this setting S
aureus is most common, gram-negative infections, especially P
aeruginosa and Serratia species, are also frequent pathogens.
Rapid progression to epidural abscess causing fever, pain, and
sensory and motor loss is not uncommon. In older patients with
hematogenous osteomyelitis, the most common sites are the
thoracic and lumbar vertebral bodies. Risk factors for these patients
include diabetes, intravenous catheters, and indwelling urinary
catheters. These patients often have more subtle presentations, with
low-grade fever and gradually increasing bone pain.
2. Osteomyelitis from a contiguous focus of infection
—Prosthetic joint replacement, decubitus ulcer, neurosurgery, and
trauma most frequently cause soft tissue infections that can spread
to bone. S aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis are the most
common organisms. Localized signs of inflammation are usually
evident, but high fever and other signs of toxicity are usually absent.
Septic arthritis and cellulitis can also spread to con tiguous bone.
3. Osteomyelitis associated with vascular insufficiency
—Patients with diabetes and vascular insufficiency are susceptible
to developing a very challenging form of osteomyelitis. The foot and
ankle are the most commonly affected sites. Infection originates
from an ulcer or other break in the skin that is usually still present
when the patient presents but may appear disarmingly unimpressive.
Bone pain is often absent or muted by the associated neuropathy.
Fever is also commonly absent. Two of the best bedside clues that
the patient has osteomyelitis are the ability to easily advance a sterile
probe through a skin ulcer to bone and an ulcer area > 2 cm2.
B. Imaging and Laboratory Findings
The plain film is the most readily available imaging procedure to
establish the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, but it can be falsely negative
early. Early radiographic findings may include soft tissue swelling,
loss of tissue planes, and periarticular demineralization of bone.
About 2 weeks after onset of symptoms, erosion of bone and
alteration of cancellous bone appear, followed by periostitis.
MRI, CT, and nuclear medicine bone scanning are more sensitive
than conventional radiography. MRI is the most sensitive and is
particularly helpful in demonstrating the extent of soft tissue
involvement. Radionuclide bone scanning is most valuable when
osteomyelitis is suspected but no site is obvious. Nuclear medicine
studies may also detect multifocal sites of infection. Ultrasound is
useful in diagnosing the presence of effusions within joints and extra-
articular soft tissue fluid collections but not in detecting bone
infections.
Identifying the offending organism is a crucial step in selection of
antibiotic therapy. Bone biopsy for culture is required except in
those with hematogenous osteomyelitis, who have positive blood
cultures. Cultures from overlying ulcers, wounds, or fistulas are
unreliable.
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis should be distinguished from
suppurative arthritis, rheumatic fever, and cellulitis. More subacute
forms must be differentiated from tuberculosis or mycotic infections
of bone and Ewing sarcoma or, in the case of vertebral
osteomyelitis, from metastatic tumor. When osteomyelitis involves
the vertebrae, it commonly traverses the disk—a finding not
observed in tumor.
 Complications
Inadequate treatment of bone infections results in chronicity of
infection, and this possibility is increased by delaying diagnosis and
treatment. Extension to adjacent bone or joints may complicate
acute osteomyelitis. Recurrence of bone infections often results in
anemia, a markedly elevated ESR, weight loss, weakness and,
rarely, amyloidosis or nephrotic syndrome. Pseudoepitheliomatous
hyperplasia, squamous cell carcinoma, or fibrosarcoma may
occasionally arise in persistently infected tissues.
 Treatment
Most patients require both debridement of necrotic bone and
prolonged administration of antibiotics. Patients with vertebral body
osteomyelitis and epidural abscess may require urgent neurosurgical
decompression. Depending on the site and extent of debridement,
surgical procedures to stabilize, fill in, cover, or revascularize may
be needed. Oral therapy with quinolones (eg, ciprofloxacin, 750 mg
twice daily) for 6–8 weeks has been shown to be as effective as
standard parenteral anti biotic therapy for chronic osteomyelitis with
susceptible organisms. When treating osteomyelitis caused by S
aureus, quinolones are usually combined with rifampin, 300 mg
orally twice daily.
 Prognosis
If sterility of the lesion is achieved within 2–4 days, a good result
can be expected in most cases if there is no compromise of the
patient's immune system. However, progression of the disease to a
chronic form may occur. It is especially common in the lower
extremities and in patients in whom circulation is impaired (eg,
diabetics).
Conterno LO et al. Antibiotics for treating chronic osteomyelitis in
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8; (3):CD004439.
[PMID: 19588358]
 
Zimmerli W. Clinical practice. Vertebral osteomyelitis. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Mar 18;362(11):1022–9. [PMID: 20237348]
 
MYCOTIC INFECTIONS OF BONES & JOINTS
Fungal infections of the skeletal system are usually secondary to a
primary infection in another organ, frequently the lungs (see Chapter
36). Although skeletal lesions have a predilection for the cancellous
portions of long bones and vertebral bodies, the predominant lesion
—a granuloma with varying degrees of necrosis and abscess
formation—does not produce a characteristic clinical picture.
Differentiation from other chronic focal infections depends on
culture studies of synovial fluid or tissue obtained from the local
lesion. Serologic tests provide presumptive support of the diagnosis.
1. Candidiasis
Candidal osteomyelitis most commonly develops in debilitated,
malnourished patients undergoing prolonged hospitalization for
cancer, neutropenia, trauma, complicated abdominal surgical
procedures, or injection drug use. Infected intravenous catheters
frequently serve as a hematogenous source. Prosthetic joints can
also be infected by Candida.
For susceptible Candida species, fluconazole, 200 mg orally
twice daily, is probably as effective as amphotericin B (see Chapter
36).
Richardson M et al. Changing epidemiology of systemic fungal
infections. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2008 May;14(Suppl 4):5–24.
[PMID: 18430126]
 
2. Coccidioidomycosis
Coccidioidomycosis of bones and joints is usually secondary to
primary pulmonary infection. Arthralgia with periarticular swelling,
especially in the knees and ankles, occurring as a nonspecific
manifestation of systemic coccidioidomycosis, should be
distinguished from actual bone or joint infection. Osseous lesions
commonly occur in cancellous bone of the vertebrae or near the
ends of long bones at tendinous insertions. These lesions are initially
osteolytic and thus may mimic metastatic tumor or myeloma.
The precise diagnosis depends on recovery of Coccidioides
immitis from the lesion or histologic examination of tissue obtained
by open biopsy. Rising titers of complement-fixing antibodies also
provide evidence of the disseminated nature of the disease.
Oral azole antifungal agents (fluconazole 200–400 mg daily, or
itraconazole 200 mg twice daily) are the treatment of choice for
bone and joint coccidioidomycosis. Chronic infection is rarely cured
with antifungal agents and may require operative excision of infected
bone and soft tissue; amputation may be the only solution for
stubbornly progressive infections. Immobilization of joints by plaster
casts and avoidance of weight bearing provide benefit.
Synovectomy, joint debridement, and arthrodesis are reserved for
more advanced joint infections.
Ampel NM. Coccidioidomycosis: a review of recent advances.
Clin Chest Med. 2009 Jun;30(2):241–51. [PMID: 19375631]
 
Blair JE. State-of-the-art treatment of coccidioidomycosis skeletal
infections. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Sep;1111:422–33. [PMID:
17395727]
 
3. Histoplasmosis
Focal skeletal or joint involvement in histoplasmosis is rare and
generally represents dissemination from a primary focus in the lungs.
Skeletal lesions may be single or multiple and are not characteristic.
Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis. Clin Chest Med. 2009 Jun;30(2):
217–25. [PMID: 19375629]
 
Knox KS et al. Histoplasmosis. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2010
May;7(3):169–72. [PMID: 20463244]
 
TUBERCULOSIS OF BONES & JOINTS
SPINAL TUBERCULOSIS (Pott Disease)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Seen primarily in immigrants from developing countries or
immunocompromised patients.
 Back pain and gibbus deformity.
 Radiographic evidence of vertebral involvement.
 Evidence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in aspirates or
biopsies of spinal lesions.
 
 General Considerations
In the developing world, children primarily bear the burden of
musculoskeletal tuberculosis. In the United States, however,
musculoskeletal infection is more often seen in adult immigrants from
countries where tuberculosis is prevalent, or it develops in the
setting of immunosuppression (eg, HIV infection, therapy with TNF
inhibitors). Spinal tuberculosis (Pott disease) accounts for about
50% of musculoskeletal infection due to M tuberculosis (see
Chapter 9). Seeding of the vertebrae may occur through
hematogenous spread from the respiratory tract at the time of
primary infection, with clinical disease developing years later as a
consequence of reactivation. The thoracic and lumbar vertebrae are
the most common sites of spinal involvement; vertebral infection is
associated with paravertebral cold abscesses in 75% of cases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients complain of back pain, often present for months and
sometimes associated with radicular pain and lower extremity
weakness. Constitutional symptoms are usually absent, and < 20%
have active pulmonary disease. Destruction of the anterior aspect of
the vertebral body can produce the characteristic gibbus deformity.
B. Laboratory Findings
Most patients have a positive reaction to purified protein derivative
(PPD). Cultures of paravertebral abscesses and biopsies of
vertebral lesions are positive in up to 70–90%. Biopsies reveal
characteristic caseating granulomas in most cases. Isolation of M
tuberculosis from an extraspinal site is sufficient to establish the
diagnosis in the proper clinical setting.
C. Imaging
Radiographs can reveal lytic and sclerotic lesions and bony
destruction of vertebrae but are normal early in the disease course.
CT scanning can demonstrate paraspinal soft tissue extensions of
the infection; MRI is the imaging technique of choice to detect
compression of the spinal cord or cauda equina.
 Differential Diagnosis
Spinal tuberculosis must be differentiated from subacute and chronic
spinal infections due to pyogenic organisms, Brucella, and fungi as
well as from malignancy.
 Complications
Paraplegia due to compression of the spinal cord or cauda equina is
the most serious complication of spinal tuberculosis.
 Treatment
Antimicrobial therapy should be administered for 6–9 months,
usually in the form of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and
ethambutol for 2 months followed by isoniazid and rifampin for an
additional 4–7 months (see also Chapter 9). Medical management
alone is often sufficient. Surgical intervention, however, may be
indicated when there is neurologic compromise or severe spinal
instability.
Jain AK. Tuberculosis of the spine: a fresh look at an old disease.
J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2010 Jul;92(7):905–13. [PMID: 20595106]
 
Luzzati R et al. Diagnosis, management and outcome of clinically-
suspected spinal infection. J Infect. 2009 Apr;58(4):259–65.
[PMID: 19268368]
 
TUBERCULOUS ARTHRITIS
Infection of peripheral joints by M tuberculosis usually presents as
a monoarticular arthritis lasting for weeks to months (or longer), but
less often, it can have an acute presentation that mimics septic
arthritis. Any joint can be involved; the hip and knee are most
commonly affected. Constitutional symptoms and fever are present
in only a small number of cases. Tuberculosis also can cause a
chronic tenosynovitis of the hand and wrist. Joint destruction occurs
far more slowly than in septic arthritis due to pyogenic organisms.
Synovial fluid is inflammatory but not to the degree seen in pyogenic
infections, with synovial white cell counts in the range of 10,000–
20,000 cells/mcL. Smears of synovial fluid are positive for acid-fast
bacilli in a minority of cases; synovial fluid cultures, however, are
positive in 80% of cases. Because culture results may take weeks,
the diagnostic procedure of choice usually is synovial biopsy, which
yields characteristic pathologic findings and positive cultures in >
90%. Antimicrobial therapy is the mainstay of treatment. Rarely, a
reactive, sterile polyarthritis associated with erythema nodosum
(Poncet disease) develops in patients with active pulmonary
tuberculosis.
Shu CC et al. Mycobacterial arthritis of large joints. Ann Rheum
Dis. 2009 Sep; (9):1504–5. [PMID: 19674984]
 
ARTHRITIS IN SARCOIDOSIS
The frequency of arthritis among patients with sarcoidosis is
variously reported between 10% and 35%. It is usually acute in
onset, but articular symptoms may appear insidiously and often
antedate other manifestations of the disease. Knees and ankles are
most commonly involved, but any joint may be affected. Distribution
of joint involvement is usually polyarticular and symmetric. The
arthritis is commonly self-limited, resolving after several weeks or
months and rarely resulting in chronic arthritis, joint destruction, or
significant deformity. Sarcoid arthropathy is often associated with
erythema nodosum, but the diagnosis is contingent on the
demonstration of other extra-articular manifestations of sarcoidosis
and, notably, biopsy evidence of noncaseating granulomas. In
chronic arthritis, radiographs show typical changes in the bones of
the extremities with intact cortex and cystic changes.
Treatment of arthritis in sarcoidosis is usually symptomatic and
supportive. Colchicine may be of value. A short course of
corticosteroids may be effective in patients with severe and
progressive joint disease.
Sweiss NJ et al. Rheumatologic manifestations of sarcoidosis.
Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Aug;31(4):463-73. [PMID:
20665396]
 
OTHER RHEUMATIC
DISORDERS
 
RHEUMATIC MANIFESTATIONS OF CANCER
Rheumatologic syndromes may be the presenting manifestations for
a variety of cancers (see Table 39–13). Dermatomyositis in adults,
for example, is often associated with cancer. Hypertrophic
pulmonary osteoarthropathy is characterized by the triad of
polyarthritis, new onset of clubbing, and periosteal new bone
formation. It is associated with both malignant diseases (eg, lung
and intrathoracic cancers) and nonmalignant ones (eg, cyanotic
heart disease, cirrhosis, and lung abscess). Cancer-associated
polyarthritis is rare, has both oligoarticular and polyarticular forms,
and should be considered when “seronegative rheumatoid arthritis”
develops abruptly in an elderly patient. Palmar fasciitis manifests as
bilateral palmar swelling with finger contractures and may be the
first indication of cancer, particularly ovarian carcinoma. Remitting
seronegative synovitis with non-pitting edema (“RS3PE”) presents
with a symmetric small joint polyarthritis associated with non-pitting
edema of the hands; it can be idiopathic or associated with
malignancy. Palpable purpura due to leukocytoclastic vasculitis may
be the presenting complaint in myeloproliferative disorders. Hairy
cell leukemia can be associated with medium-sized vessel vasculitis
such as polyarteritis nodosa. Acute leukemia can produce joint
pains that are disproportionately severe in comparison to the
minimal swelling and heat that are present. Leukemic arthritis
complicates approximately 5% of cases. Rheumatic manifestations
of myelodysplastic syndromes include cutaneous vasculitis, lupus-
like syndromes, neuropathy, and episodic intense arthritis.
Erythromelalgia, a painful warmth and redness of the extremities that
(unlike Raynaud) improves with cold exposure or with elevation of
the extremity, is often associated with myeloproliferative diseases,
particularly essential thrombocythemia.
Naschitz JE et al. Musculoskeletal syndromes associated with
malignancy (excluding hypertrophic osteoarthropathy). Curr Opin
Rheumatol. 2008 Jan;20(1):100–5. [PMID: 18281865]
 
NEUROGENIC ARTHROPATHY (Charcot Joint)
Neurogenic arthropathy is joint destruction resulting from loss or
diminution of proprioception, pain, and temperature perception.
Although traditionally associated with tabes dorsalis, it is more
frequently seen in diabetic neuropathy, syringomyelia, spinal cord
injury, pernicious anemia, leprosy, and peripheral nerve injury. As
normal muscle tone and protective reflexes are lost, secondary
degenerative joint disease ensues, resulting in an enlarged, boggy,
relatively painless joint with extensive cartilage erosion, osteophyte
formation, and multiple loose joint bodies. Radiographic changes
may be degenerative or hypertrophic in the same patient.
Treatment is directed toward the primary disease; mechanical
devices are used to assist in weight bearing and prevention of
further trauma. In some instances, amputation becomes
unavoidable.
Thompson P et al. Diabetic foot: Charcot neuropathic
osteoarthropathy. Adv Skin Wound Care. 2009 Feb;22(2):72–3.
[PMID: 19155710]
 
PALINDROMIC RHEUMATISM
Palindromic rheumatism is a disease of unknown cause
characterized by frequent recurring attacks (at irregular intervals) of
acutely inflamed joints. Periarticular pain with swelling and transient
subcutaneous nodules may also occur. The attacks cease within
several hours to several days. The knee and finger joints are most
commonly affected, but any peripheral joint may be involved.
Systemic manifestations other than fever do not occur. Although
hundreds of attacks may take place over a period of years, there is
no permanent articular damage. Laboratory findings are usually
normal. Palindromic rheumatism must be distinguished from acute
gouty arthritis and an atypical acute onset of rheumatoid arthritis. In
some patients, palindromic rheumatism is a prodrome of rheumatoid
arthritis.
Symptomatic treatment with NSAIDs is usually all that is
required during the attacks. Hydroxychloroquine may be of value in
preventing recurrences.
OSTEONECROSIS (Avascular Necrosis of Bone)
Osteonecrosis is a complication of corticosteroid use, alcoholism,
trauma, SLE, pancreatitis, gout, sickle cell disease, dysbaric
syndromes (eg, “the bends”), knee menisectomy, and infiltrative
diseases (eg, Gaucher disease). The most commonly affected sites
are the proximal and distal femoral heads, leading to hip or knee
pain. Other commonly affected sites include the ankle, shoulder,
and elbow. Osteonecrosis of the jaw has been rarely associated
with use of bisphosphonate therapy, almost always when the
bisphosphonate is used for treating metastatic cancer or multiple
myeloma rather than osteoporosis. Initially, radio-graphs are often
normal; MRI, CT scan, and bone scan are all more sensitive
techniques. Treatment involves avoidance of weight bearing on the
affected joint for at least several weeks. The value of surgical core
decompression is controversial. For osteo necrosis of the hip, a
variety of procedures designed to preserve the femoral head have
been developed for early disease, including vascularized and
nonvascularized bone grafting procedures. These procedures are
most effective in avoiding or forestalling the need for total hip
arthroplasty in young patients who do not have advanced disease.
Without a successful intervention of this nature, the natural history of
avascular necrosis is usually progression of the bony infarction to
cortical collapse, resulting in significant joint dysfunction. Total hip
replacement is the usual outcome for all patients who are candidates
for that procedure.
Abrahamsen B. Bisphosphonate adverse effects, lessons from
large databases. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Jul;22(4):404–9.
[PMID: 20473174]
 
ALLERGIC DISEASES
 
Allergy is an immunologically mediated hypersensitivity reaction to a
foreign antigen manifested by tissue inflammation and organ
dysfunction. These responses have a genetic basis, but the clinical
expression of disease depends on both immunologic responsiveness
and antigen exposure. Allergic disorders may be local or systemic.
Because the allergen is foreign (ie, environmental), the skin and
respiratory tract are the organs most frequently involved in allergic
disease. Allergic reactions may also localize to the vasculature,
gastrointestinal tract, or other visceral organs. Anaphylaxis is the
most extreme form of systemic allergy.
 Immunologic Classification
An immunologic classification for hypersensitivity reactions serves
as a rational basis for diagnosis and treatment. The classification
follows.
A. Type I—IgE-Mediated (Immediate) Hypersensitivity
IgE antibodies occupy receptor sites on mast cells. Within minutes
after exposure to the allergen, a multivalent antigen links adjacent
IgE molecules, activating and degranulating mast cells. Clinical
manifestations depend on the effects of released mediators on target
end organs. Both preformed and newly generated mediators cause
vasodilation, visceral smooth muscle contraction, mucous secretory
gland stimulation, vascular permeability, and tissue inflammation.
Arachidonic acid metabolites, cytokines, and other mediators
induce a late-phase inflammatory response that appears several
hours later. There are two clinical subgroups of IgE-mediated
allergy: atopy and anaphylaxis.
1. Atopy—The term “atopy” is applied to a group of diseases
(allergic rhinitis, allergic asthma, atopic dermatitis, and allergic
gastroenteropathy) occurring in persons with an inherited tendency
to develop antigen-specific IgE reaction to environmental allergens
or food antigens. Aeroallergens such as pollens, mold spores,
animal danders, and house dust mite antigen are common triggers
for allergic conjunctivitis, allergic rhinitis, and allergic asthma. The
allergic origin of atopic dermatitis is less well understood, but some
patients’ symptoms can be triggered by exposure to dust mite
antigen and ingestion of certain foods. There is a strong familial
tendency toward the development of atopy.
2. Anaphylaxis—Certain allergens—especially drugs, insect
venoms, latex, and foods—may induce an IgE antibody response,
causing a generalized release of mediators from mast cells and
resulting in systemic anaphylaxis. This is characterized by (1)
hypotension or shock from widespread vasodilation, (2)
bronchospasm, (3) gastrointestinal and uterine muscle contraction,
and (4) urticaria or angioedema. The condition is potentially fatal
and can affect both nonatopic and atopic persons. Isolated urticaria
p
p p
and angioedema are cutaneous forms of anaphylaxis, are much
more common, and have a better prognosis.
B. Type II—Antibody-Mediated (Cytotoxic) Hypersensitivity
Cytotoxic reactions involve the specific reaction of either IgG or
IgM antibody to cell-bound antigens. This results in activation of the
complement cascade and the destruction of the cell to which the
antigen is bound. Examples include immune hemolytic anemia and
Rh hemolytic disease in the newborn.
C. Type III—Immune Complex-Mediated Hypersensitivity
Immune complex-mediated reactions occur when antigen and IgG
or IgM antibodies form circulating immune complexes. Deposition
of these complexes in tissues or in vascular endothelium can
produce immune complex-mediated tissue injury through activation
of the complement cascade, anaphylatoxin generation, and
chemotaxis of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Serum sickness is the
classic example of type III hypersensitivity. Immune complex
disease also can develop in the setting of chronic infections such as
subacute bacterial endocarditis and hepatitis B.
D. Type IV—T Cell–Mediated Hypersensitivity (Delayed Hypersensitivity,
Cell-Mediated Hypersensitivity)
Type IV delayed hypersensitivity is mediated by activated T cells,
which accumulate in areas of antigen deposition. The most common
expression of delayed hypersensitivity is allergic contact dermatitis,
which develops when a low-molecular-weight sensitizing substance
haptenates with dermal proteins, becoming a complete antigen.
Sensitized T cells release cytokines, activating macrophages and
promoting the subsequent dermal inflammation; this occurs 1–2
days after the time of contact. Common topical agents associated
with allergic contact dermatitis include nickel, formaldehyde,
potassium dichromate, thiurams, mercaptos, parabens, quaternium-
15, and ethylenediamine. Rhus (poison oak and ivy) contact
dermatitis is caused by cutaneous exposure to oils from the
toxicodendron plants. Acute contact dermatitis is characterized by
erythema and induration with vesicle formation, often with pruritus,
with exudation and crusting in more severe cases. Chronic allergic
contact dermatitis may be associated with fissuring, lichenification,
or dyspigmentation and may be mistaken for other forms of
dermatitis. To diagnose allergic contact dermatitis, patch testing can
be performed.
ATOPIC DISEASE
 
Clinical manifestations resembling allergic hypersensitivity can also
occur in the absence of an immunologic mechanism. Therefore, the
diagnosis of allergy requires answers to the following questions: (1)
What is the nature of the disease? (2) Is the disease caused by an
IgE-mediated mechanism? (3) What specific allergens are
responsible?
The relevant history includes a survey of allergen exposure
associated with home, work, hobbies, and habits as well as
medications. Physical examination is most useful if performed during
exposure. Demonstration of allergic hypersensitivity by in vivo or in
vitro testing confirms clinical suspicions of allergic disease.
 Specific IgE Antibody Tests
To maximize the positive predictive value of allergy testing, a
positive test result must be correlated with the history. Patients
selected for testing include those with moderate to severe disease,
those who are potential candidates for allergen immunotherapy, and
those with strong predisposing factors for atopic diatheses, eg, a
strong family history of atopy or ongoing exposure to potential
sources of allergen. Since the development of rhinitis precedes the
presentation of asthma in over half of cases, early intervention may
decrease the risk of more severe clinical allergic disease. The type
of immune response must be consistent with the nature of the
disease. IgE antibody causes allergic rhinitis but not allergic contact
dermatitis. IgE antibodies are detected by in vivo (skin tests) or in
vitro methods.
Bischoff SC. Food allergy and eosinophilic gastroenteritis and
colitis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Jun;10(3):238–45.
[PMID: 20431371]
 
Novak N. New insights into the mechanism and management of
allergic diseases: atopic dermatitis. Allergy. 2009 Feb;64(2): 265–
75. [PMID: 19178406]
 
Ong PY. Emerging drugs for atopic dermatitis. Expert Opin Emerg
Drugs. 2009 Mar;14(1):165–79. [PMID: 19216704]
 
Sicherer SH et al. Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis,
and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects in 2008.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Feb;123(2):319–27. [PMID:
19203656]
 
SERUM SICKNESS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, pruritic rash, arthralgias, and arthritis; nephritis in severe
cases.
 Occurs 7–10 days following administration of an exogenous
antigen (eg, heterologous gamma globulin) when specific igg
antibodies develop against the antigen.
 Immune complex–mediated small vessel vasculitis and tissue
injury.
 
 General Considerations
Serum sickness occurs when an antibody response to exogenously
administered antigens results in the formation of immune complexes.
Deposition of these complexes in vascular endothelium and tissues
produces immune complex–mediated small vessel vasculitis and
tissue injury through activation of complement, generation of
anaphylatoxins, and chemoattraction of polymorphonuclear
leukocytes. The skin, joints, and kidneys are commonly affected. It
is self-limited and resolves after the antigen is cleared. First
observed in the preantibiotic era when heterologous serum
preparations were used for passive immunization, serum sickness is
now less common but still occurs with the use of heterologous anti-
thymocyte globulin for transplant rejection and, infrequently, after
the administration of murine monoclonal antibodies or even non-
protein drugs.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Sustained high fever (> 101°F) is typical. The earliest manifestation
is often a maculopapular or urticarial pruritic rash. Angioedema can
occur. Polyarthralgias, frank polyarthritis, and lymphadenopathy are
common. Nephritis is usually mild but can progress to acute renal
failure.
B. Laboratory Findings
The ESR is increased, and leukocytosis is common. Other
nonspecific 
laboratory 
findings 
include 
elevated 
hepatic
aminotransferases. When nephritis is present, the urinalysis reveals
proteinuria, hematuria, and red cell casts. Hypocomplementemia is
usually present in cases due to administration of hetero logous
gamma globulin but not in milder cases precipitated by non-protein
drugs. Circulating immune complexes may be found, but current
assays are limited in sensitivity.
 Treatment
This disease is self-limited, and treatment is usually conservative for
mild cases. NSAIDs help relieve the arthralgias, and antihistamines
and topical corticosteroids can be of benefit for the skin
manifestation. A high-dose course of corticosteroids is administered
for 
serious 
reactions, 
especially 
those complicated by
glomerulonephritis and other manifestations of vasculitis. Plasma
exchange may be of benefit for cases refractory to corticosteroids.
PSEUDOALLERGIC REACTIONS
These reactions resemble immediate hypersensitivity reactions but
are not mediated by allergen-IgE interaction. Instead, direct mast
cell 
activation 
occurs. 
Examples 
of 
pseudoallergic 
or
“anaphylactoid” reactions include radio-contrast reactions, direct
mast cell activation by opioids, and the now rare “red man
syndrome” from rapid infusion of vancomycin. In contrast to IgE-
mediated reactions, these can often be prevented by prophylactic
medical regimens.
Radiocontrast Media Reactions
Reactions to radiocontrast media do not appear to be mediated by
IgE antibodies, yet clinically they are similar to anaphylaxis. If a
patient has had an anaphylactoid reaction to conventional
radiocontrast media, the risk for a second reaction upon reexposure
may be as high as 30%. Patients with asthma or those being treated
with β-adrenergic blocking medications may be at increased risk.
The management of patients at risk for radiocontrast medium
reactions includes use of the low-osmolality contrast preparations
and prophylactic administration of prednisone (50 mg orally every 6
hours beginning 18 hours before the procedure) and
diphenhydramine (25–50 mg intramuscularly 60 minutes before the
procedure). The use of the lower-osmolality radiocontrast media in
combination with the pretreatment regimen decreases the incidence
of reactions to < 1%.
Liccardi G et al; Cardarelli Hospital Radiocontrast Media and
Anesthetic-Induced Anaphylaxis Prevention Working Group.
Strategies for the prevention of asthmatic, anaphylactic and
anaphylactoid reactions during the administration of anesthetics
and/or contrast media. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol.
2008;18(1):1–11. [PMID: 18361095]
 
Vermeire S et al. Serum sickness, encephalitis and other
complications of anti-cytokine therapy. Best Pract Res Clin
Gastroenterol. 2009;23(1):101–12. [PMID: 19258190]
 
PRIMARY
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
DISORDERS
 
The primary immunologic deficiency diseases include congenital and
acquired disorders of humoral immunity (B cell function) or cell-
mediated immunity (T cell function). Most of these diseases are rare
and, because they are genetically determined, usually present in
childhood. Nonetheless, several immunodeficiency disorders can
present in adulthood, most notably selective IgA deficiency and
common variable immunodeficiency.
Fried AJ et al. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management of
primary antibody deficiencies and infections. Clin Microbiol Rev.
2009 Jul;22(3):396–414. [PMID: 19597006]
 
Slatter MA et al. Primary immunodeficiency syndromes. Adv Exp
Med Biol. 2010;685:146–65. [PMID: 20687503]
 
SELECTIVE IMMUNOGLOBULIN A DEFICIENCY
Selective IgA deficiency is the most common primary
immunodeficiency disorder and is characterized by serum IgA levels
< 15 mg/dL with normal levels of IgG and IgM; its prevalence is
about 1:500 individuals. Most persons are asymptomatic because
of compensatory increases in secreted IgG and IgM. Some affected
patients have frequent and recurrent infections, such as sinusitis,
otitis, and bronchitis. Some cases of IgA deficiency may
spontaneously remit. When IgG2 subclass deficiency occurs in
combination with IgA deficiency, affected patients are more
susceptible to encapsulated bacteria and the degree of immune
impairment can be more severe. Patients with a combined IgA and
IgG subclass deficiency should be assessed for functional antibody
responses to glycoprotein antigen immunization.
Atopic disease and autoimmune disorders can be associated with
IgA deficiency. Occasionally, a sprue-like syndrome with
steatorrhea has been associated with an isolated IgA deficit.
Treatment with commercial immune globulin is ineffective, since IgA
and IgM are present only in trace quantities in these preparations.
Individuals with selective IgA deficiency may have high titers of
anti-IgA antibodies and are at risk for anaphylactic reactions
following exposure to IgA through infusions of plasma (or blood
transfusions). These anti-IgA antibodies develop in the absence of
prior exposure to human plasma or blood, possibly due to
crossreactivity to bovine IgA in cow's milk or prior sensitization to
maternal IgA in breast milk.
Yel L. Selective IgA deficiency. J Clin Immunol. 2010 Jan;30(1):
10–6. [PMID: 20101521]
 
COMMON VARIABLE IMMUNODEFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Defect in terminal differentiation of B cells, with absent plasma
cells and deficient synthesis of secreted antibody.
 Frequent sinopulmonary infections secondary to humoral immune
deficiency.
 Confirmation by evaluation of serum immuno-globulin levels and
deficient functional antibody responses.
 
 General Considerations
The most common cause of panhypogammaglobulinemia in adults is
common 
variable 
immunodeficiency, 
a 
heterogeneous
immunodeficiency disorder clinically characterized by an increased
incidence of recurrent infections, autoimmune phenomena, and
neoplastic diseases. The onset generally is during adolescence or
early adulthood but can occur at any age. The prevalence of
common variable immunodeficiency is about 1:80,000 in the United
States. Most cases are sporadic; 10–20% are familial.
Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Increased susceptibility to pyogenic infections is the hallmark of the
disease. Virtually all patients suffer from recurrent sinusitis, with
bronchitis, otitis, pharyngitis, and pneumonia also being common
infections. Infections may be prolonged or associated with unusual
complications such as meningitis or sepsis.
Gastrointestinal disorders are commonly associated with
common variable immunodeficiency, and a sprue-like syndrome,
with 
diarrhea, 
steatorrhea, 
malabsorption, 
protein-losing
enteropathy, and hepatosplenomegaly, may develop in patients.
Paradoxically, there is an increased incidence of autoimmune
disease (20%), although patients may not display the usual serologic
markers. Autoimmune cytopenias are most common, but
autoimmune endocrinopathies, seronegative rheumatic disease, and
gastro intestinal disorders are also commonly seen. Lymph nodes
may be enlarged in these patients, yet biopsies show marked
reduction in plasma cells. Noncaseating granulomas are frequently
found in the spleen, liver, lungs, or skin. There is an increased
propensity for the development of B cell neo plasms (50- to 400-
fold increase risk of lymphoma), gastric carcinomas, and skin
cancers.
B. Laboratory Findings
The pattern of immunoglobulin isotype deficiency is variable. Most
patients present with significantly depressed IgG levels, but over
time all antibody classes (IgG, IgA, and IgM) may be affected.
Diagnosis is confirmed in patients with recurrent infections by
demonstration of functional or quantitative defects in antibody
production. Serum IgG levels are usually < 250 mg/dL; serum IgA
and IgM levels are also sub-normal. Decreased to absent functional
antibody responses to protein antigen immunizations establish the
diagnosis.
The causes of the panhypogammaglobulinemia in common
variable immunodeficiency patients include intrinsic B cell defects
that prevent terminal maturation into antibody-secreting plasma
cells. The absolute B cell count in the peripheral blood in most
patients, despite the underlying cellular defect, is normal. A subset
of these patients have concomitant T cell immunodeficiency with
increased numbers of activated CD8 cells, splenomegaly, and
decreased delayed-type hypersensitivity.
 Treatment
Patients may be treated aggressively with antibiotics at the first sign
of infection. Since antibody deficiency predisposes patients to high-
risk pyogenic infections, antibiotic coverage should be sure to cover
encapsulated bacteria. Only after the development of bronchiectasis
or after sinus surgery do patients become significantly affected by
more virulent organisms such as S aureus or P aeruginosa.
Maintenance intravenous immune globulin therapy is indicated, with
infusions of 300–500 mg/kg of intravenous immune globulin given at
about monthly intervals. Adjustment of dosage or of the infusion
interval is made on the basis of clinical responses and steady-state
trough serum IgG levels. Such therapy is effective in decreasing the
incidence of potentially life-threatening infections and increasing
quality of life. The yearly cost of monthly infusions can be in excess
of $20,000–$30,000.
Chapel H et al. Update in understanding common variable
immunodeficiency disorders (CVIDs) and the management of
patients with these conditions. Br J Haematol. 2009
Jun;145(6):709–27. [PMID: 19344423]
 
Park MA et al. Common variable immunodeficiency: a new look at
an old disease. Lancet. 2008 Aug 9;372(9637):489–502. [PMID:
18692715]
 
 
 
Electrolyte & Acid-Base
Disorders
Kerry C. Cho, MD
ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT
The diagnosis and treatment of fluid and electrolyte disorders are
based on (1) careful history, (2) physical examination and
assessment of total body water and its distribution, (3) serum
electrolyte concentrations, (4) urine electrolyte concentrations, and
(5) serum osmolality. The pathophysiology of electrolyte disorders
is rooted in basic principles of total body water and its distribution
across fluid compartments.
A. Body Water and Fluid Distribution
Total body water is different in men than in women, and it
decreases with aging (Table 21–1). Approximately 50-60% of total
body weight is water; two-thirds (40% of body weight) is
intracellular, while one-third (20% of body weight) is extracellular.
One-fourth of extracellular fluid (5% of body weight) is
intravascular. Water may be lost from either or both compartments
(intracellular and extracellular). Changes in total body water content
are best evaluated by documenting changes in body weight.
Effective circulating volume may be assessed by physical
examination (eg, blood pressure, pulse, jugular venous distention).
Quantitative measurements of effective circulating volume and
intravascular volume may be invasive (ie, central venous pressure or
pulmonary wedge pressure) or noninvasive (ie, inferior vena cava
diameter and right atrial pressure by echocardiography) but still
require careful interpretation.
B. Serum Electrolytes
The cause of electrolyte disorders may be determined by reviewing
the history, underlying diseases, and medications.
C. Evaluation of Urine
The urine concentration of an electrolyte indicates renal handling of
the electrolyte and whether the kidney is appropriately excreting or
retaining the electrolyte. A 24-hour urine collection for daily
electrolyte excretion is the gold standard for renal electrolyte
handling, but it is slow and onerous. A more convenient method is
the fractional excretion (FE) of an electrolyte X (FEx) calculated
from a spot urine sample:
A low fractional excretion indicates renal reabsorption (high
avidity or electrolyte retention), while a high fractional excretion
indicates renal wasting (low avidity or electrolyte excretion). Thus,
the fractional excretion helps the clinician determine whether the
kidney's response is appropriate for a specific electrolyte disorder.
D. Serum Osmolality
Solute concentration is measured by osmolality. Osmoles per
kilogram of water is osmolality; osmoles per liter of solution is
osmolarity. At physiological solute concentrations (normally 285–
295 mosm/kg), the two measurements are clinically interchangeable.
Tonicity refers to osmolytes that are impermeable to cell
membranes. Differences in osmolyte concentration across cell
membranes lead to osmosis and fluid shifts, stimulation of thirst, and
secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Substances that easily
permeate cell membranes (eg, urea, ethanol) are ineffective osmoles
that do not cause fluid shifts across fluid compartments.
Serum osmolality can be estimated from the following formula:
(1 mosm/L of glucose equals 180 mg/L and 1 mosm/L of urea
nitrogen equals 28 mg/L). Sodium is the major extracellular cation;
doubling the serum sodium in the formula for estimated osmolality
accounts for counterbalancing anions. A discrepancy between
measured a osmol estimated osmolality of > 10 mosm/kg suggests
an osmolal gap, which is the presence of other unmeasured osmoles
such as ethanol, methanol, isopropanol, and ethylene glycol (see
Table 38–5).
 
Table 21–1. Total body water (as percentage of body weight) in
relation to age and sex.
 
DISORDERS OF SODIUM
CONCENTRATION
 
HYPONATREMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The patient's volume status and serum osmolality are essential to
determine etiology.
 Hyponatremia usually reflects excess water retention relative to
sodium rather than sodium deficiency.
 Hypotonic fluids commonly cause hyponatremia in hospitalized
patients.
 
 General Considerations
Defined as a serum sodium concentration < 135 mEq/L,
hyponatremia is the most common electrolyte abnormality in
hospitalized patients. The clinician should be wary about
hyponatremia since mismanagement can result in neurologic
catastrophes from cerebral osmotic demyelination. Indeed,
iatrogenic complications from aggressive or inappropriate therapy
can be more harmful than hyponatremia itself.
A common misperception is that the sodium concentration is a
reflection of total body sodium or total body water. In fact, total
body water and sodium can be low, normal, or high in
hyponatremia since the kidney can regulate sodium and water
homeostasis independently. Most cases of hyponatremia reflect
water imbalance and abnormal water handling, not sodium
imbalance, indicating the primary role of ADH in the
pathophysiology of hyponatremia. A diagnostic algorithm using
serum osmolality and volume status separates the causes of
hyponatremia into therapeutically useful categories (Figure 21–1).
 Etiology
A. Isotonic & Hypertonic Hyponatremia
Serum osmolality identifies isotonic and hypertonic hyponatremia,
although these cases can often be identified by careful history or
previous laboratory tests.
Figure 21–1. Evaluation of hyponatremia using serum osmolality
and extracellular fluid volume status. ACE, angiotensin-converting
enzyme; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone.
(Adapted, with permission, from Narins RG et al. Diagnostic
strategies in disorders of fluid, electrolyte and acid-base
homeostasis. Am J Med. 1982 Mar;72(3):496–520.)
 
Isotonic hyponatremia is seen with severe hyperlipidemia and
hyperproteinemia. Lipids (including chylomicrons, triglycerides, and
cholesterol) and proteins (> 10 g/dL, eg, paraproteinemias and
intravenous immunoglobulin therapy) interfere with the measurement
of serum sodium, causing pseudohyponatremia. Serum osmolality is
isotonic because lipids and proteins do not affect osmolality
measurement. Newer sodium assays using ion-specific electrodes
will not produce pseudohyponatremia.
Hypertonic hyponatremia occurs with hyperglycemia and
mannitol administration for increased intracranial pressure. Glucose
and mannitol osmotically pull intracellular water into the extracellular
space. The translocation of water lowers the serum sodium
concentration. 
Translocational 
hyponatremia 
is 
not
pseudohyponatremia or an artifact of sodium measurement. The
sodium concentration falls 2 mEq/L for every 100 mg/dL (or 5.56
mmol/L) rise in glucose when the glucose concentration is between
200 mg/dL and 400 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L and 22.2 mmol/L). If the
glucose concentration is > 400 mg/dL, the sodium concentration
falls 4 mEq/L for every 100 mg/dL rise in glucose. There is some
controversy about the correction factor for the serum sodium in the
presence of hyperglycemia. Many guidelines recommend a
correction factor, whereby the serum sodium concentration
decreases by 1.6 mEq/L for every 100 mg/dL (5.56 mmol/L) rise in
plasma glucose above normal, but there is evidence that the
decrease may be greater when patients have more severe
hyperglycemia (greater than 400 mg/dL or 22.2 mmol/L) and/or
volume depletion. One group has suggested (based on short-term
exposure of normal volunteers to markedly elevated glucose levels)
that, when the serum glucose is greater than 200 mg/dL, the serum
sodium concentration decreases by at least 2.4 mEq/L.
B. Hypotonic Hyponatremia
Most cases of hyponatremia are hypotonic, highlighting sodium's
role as the predominant extracellular osmole. The next step is
classifying hypotonic cases by the patient's volume status.
1. Hypovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia—Hypovolemic
hyponatremia occurs with renal or extrarenal volume loss and
hypotonic fluid replacement (Figure 21–1). Total body sodium and
total body water are decreased. To maintain intravascular volume,
the pituitary increases ADH secretion, causing free water retention
from hypotonic fluid replacement. The body sacrifices serum
osmolality to preserve intravascular volume. In short, losses of
water and salt are replaced by water alone. Without ongoing
hypotonic fluid intake, the renal or extrarenal volume loss would
produce hypovolemic hypernatremia.
Cerebral salt wasting is a distinct and rare subset of hypovolemic
hyponatremia seen in patients with intracranial disease (eg,
infections, cerebrovascular accidents, tumors, and neurosurgery).
Clinical features include refractory hypovolemia and hypotension,
often requiring continuous infusion of isotonic or hypertonic saline
and ICU monitoring. The exact pathophysiology is unclear but
includes renal sodium wasting possibly through brain natriuretic
peptide, ADH release, and decreased aldosterone secretion.
2. 
Euvolemic 
hypotonic 
hyponatremia—Euvolemic
hyponatremia has the broadest differential diagnosis. Most
processes are mediated directly or indirectly through ADH,
including hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, medications, and the
syndrome of inappropriate ADH (SIADH). The exceptions are
primary polydipsia, beer potomania, and reset osmostat.
A. HORMONAL ABNORMALITIES—Hypothyroidism and adrenal
insufficiency can cause hyponatremia. Exactly how hypothyroidism
induces hyponatremia is unclear but may be related to ADH.
Adrenal insufficiency may be associated with the hyperkalemia and
metabolic acidosis of hypoaldosteronism. Cortisol provides
feedback inhibition for ADH release.
B. THIAZIDE DIURETICS AND OTHER MEDICATIONS—Thiazides
induce hyponatremia typically in older female patients within days of
initiating therapy. The mechanism appears to be a combination of
mild diuretic-induced volume contraction, ADH effect, and intact
urinary concentrating ability resulting in water retention and
hyponatremia. Loop diuretics do not cause hyponatremia as
frequently because of disrupted medullary concentrating gradient
and impaired urine concentration.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) increase ADH
by inhibiting prostaglandin formation. Prostaglandins and selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (eg, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and
citalopram) can cause hyponatremia, especially in geriatric patients.
Enhanced secretion or action of ADH may result from increased
serotonergic tone. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
do not block the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II in the
brain. Angiotensin II stimulates thirst and ADH secretion.
Hyponatremia during amiodarone-loading has been reported; it
usually improves with dose reduction.
Abuse of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, also
known as Ecstasy) can lead to hyponatremia and severe neurologic
symptoms, including seizures, cerebral edema, and brainstem
herniation. MDMA and its metabolites increase ADH release from
the hypothalamus. Primary polydipsia may contribute to
hyponatremia since MDMA users typically increase fluid intake to
prevent hyperthermia.
C. NAUSEA, PAIN, SURGERY, AND MEDICAL PROCEDURES —Nausea
and pain are potent stimulators of ADH release. Severe
hyponatremia can develop after elective surgery in healthy patients,
especially premenopausal women. Hypotonic fluids in the setting of
elevated ADH levels can produce severe, life-threatening
hyponatremia. Medical procedures such as colonoscopy have also
been associated with hyponatremia.
D. HIV INFECTION—Hyponatremia is seen in up to 50% of
hospitalized HIV patients and 20% of ambulatory HIV patients.
The differential diagnosis is broad: medication effect, adrenal
insufficiency, hypoaldosteronism, central nervous system or
pulmonary disease, SIADH, malignancy, and volume depletion.
E. ENDURANCE EXERCISE HYPONATREMIA—Hyponatremia after
endurance exercise (eg, triathlon events and marathons) may be
caused by a combination of excessive hypotonic fluid intake and
continued ADH secretion. Reperfusion of the exercise-induced
ischemic splanchnic bed causes delayed absorption of excessive
quantities of hypotonic fluid ingested during exercise. Sustained
elevation of ADH prevents water excretion in this setting. Current
guidelines suggest that endurance athletes drink water according to
thirst rather than according to specified hourly rates of fluid intake.
F. SYNDROME OF INAPPROPRIATE ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE
SECRETION—Under normal circumstances, hypovolemia and
hyperosmolality stimulate ADH secretion. ADH release is
inappropriate without these physiological cues. Normal regulation of
ADH release occurs from both the central nervous system and the
chest via baroreceptors and neural input. The major causes of
SIADH (Table 21–2) are disorders affecting the central nervous
system (structural, metabolic, psychiatric, or pharmacologic
processes) or the lungs (infectious, mechanical, oncologic).
Medications commonly cause SIADH by increasing ADH or its
action. Some carcinomas, especially small cell lung carcinoma, can
autonomously secrete ADH.
 
Table 21–2. Causes of syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
(SIADH).
 
Central nervous system disorders
     Head trauma
     Stroke
     Subarachnoid hemorrhage
     Hydrocephalus
     Brain tumor
     Encephalitis
     Guillain-Barré syndrome
     Meningitis
     Acute psychosis
     Acute intermittent porphyria
Pulmonary lesions
     Tuberculosis
     Bacterial pneumonia
     Aspergillosis
     Bronchiectasis
     Neoplasms
     Positive pressure ventilation
Malignancies
     Bronchogenic carcinoma
     Pancreatic carcinoma
     Prostatic carcinoma
     Renal cell carcinoma
     Adenocarcinoma of colon
     Thymoma
     Osteosarcoma
     Malignant lymphoma
     Leukemia
Drugs
     Increased ADH production
        Antidepressants: tricyclics, monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, SSRIs
        Antineoplastics: cyclophosphamide, vincristine
        Carbamazepine
        Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; Ecstasy)
        Clofibrate
        Neuroleptics: thiothixene, thioridazine, fluphenazine,
haloperidol, trifluoperazine
     Potentiated ADH action
        Carbamazepine
        Chlorpropamide, tolbutamide
        Cyclophosphamide
        NSAIDs
        Somatostatin and analogs
        Amiodarone
Others
     Postoperative
     Pain
     Stress
     AIDS
     Pregnancy (physiologic)
     Hypokalemia
ADH, antidiuretic hormone; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;
SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
G. PSYCHOGENIC POLYDIPSIA AND BEER POTOMANIA—Marked
free water intake (generally > 10 L/d) may produce hyponatremia.
Euvolemia is maintained through renal excretion of sodium. Urine
sodium is therefore generally elevated (> 20 mEq/L), and ADH
levels are appropriately suppressed. As the increased free water is
excreted, the urine osmolality approaches the minimum of 50
mosm/kg. Polydipsia occurs in psychiatric patients. Psychiatric
medications may interfere with water excretion or increase thirst
through anticholinergic side effects, further increasing water intake.
The hyponatremia of beer potomania occurs in patients who
consume large amounts of beer. Free water excretion is decreased
because of decreased solute consumption and production; muscle
wasting and malnutrition are contributing factors. Without enough
solute, these patients have decreased free water excretory capacity
even if they maximally dilute the urine.
H. RESET OSMOSTAT—Reset osmostat is a rare cause of
hyponatremia characterized by appropriate ADH regulation in
response to water deprivation and fluid challenges. Patients with
reset osmostat regulate serum sodium and serum osmolality around
a lower set point, concentrating or diluting urine in response to
hyperosmolality and hypoosmolality. The mild hypo-osmolality of
pregnancy is a form of reset osmostat.
3. Hypervolemic hypotonic hyponatremia—Hypervolemic
hyponatremia occurs in the edematous states of cirrhosis, heart
failure, nephrotic syndrome, and advanced kidney disease (Figure
21–1). In cirrhosis and heart failure, effective circulating volume is
decreased due to peripheral vasodilation or decreased cardiac
output. Increased reninangiotensin-aldosterone system activity and
ADH secretion result in water retention. Note the patho
physiological similarity to hypovolemic hyponatremia—the body
sacrifices osmolality in an attempt to restore effective circulating
volume.
The pathophysiology of hyponatremia in nephrotic syndrome in
not completely understood, but the primary disturbance may be
renal sodium retention, resulting in overfilling of the intravascular
space and secondary edema formation as fluid enters the interstitial
space. Previously, it was thought that the decreased oncotic
pressure of hypoalbuminemia caused fluid shifts from the
intravascular space to the interstitial compartment. Intravascular
underfilling led to secondary renal sodium retention. However,
patients receiving therapy for glomerular disease and nephrotic
syndrome often have edema resolution prior to normalization of the
serum albumin.
Patients with advanced kidney disease typically have sodium
retention and decreased free water excretory capacity, resulting in
hypervolemic hyponatremia.
Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Whether hyponatremia is symptomatic depends on its severity and
acuity. Chronic disease can be severe (sodium concentration < 110
mEq/L), yet remarkably asymptomatic because the brain has
adapted by decreasing its tonicity over weeks to months. Acute
disease that has developed over hours to days can be severely
symptomatic with relatively modest hyponatremia. Mild
hyponatremia (sodium concentrations of 130–135 mEq/L) is usually
asymptomatic.
Mild symptoms of nausea and malaise progress to headache,
lethargy, and disorientation as the sodium concentration drops. The
most serious symptoms are respiratory arrest, seizure, coma,
permanent brain damage, brainstem herniation, and death.
Premenopausal women are much more likely than menopausal
women to die or suffer permanent brain injury from hyponatremic
encephalopathy, suggesting a hormonal role in the pathophysiology.
Evaluation starts with a careful history for new medications,
changes in fluid intake (polydipsia, anorexia, intravenous fluid rates
and composition), fluid output (nausea and vomiting, diarrhea,
ostomy output, polyuria, oliguria, insensible losses). The physical
examination should help categorize the patient's volume status into
hypovolemia, euvolemia, or hypervolemia.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory assessment should include serum electrolytes, serum
creatinine, serum osmolality, and urine sodium. The etiology of most
cases of hyponatremia will be apparent from the history, physical,
and basic laboratory tests. Additional tests of thyroid and adrenal
function will occasionally be necessary.
SIADH is a clinical diagnosis characterized by (1) hyponatremia;
(2) decreased osmolality (< 280 mosm/kg); (3) absence of heart,
kidney, or liver disease; (4) normal thyroid and adrenal function
(see Chapter 26); and (5) urine sodium usually over 20 mEq/L. In
clinical practice, ADH levels are not measured. Patients with
SIADH may have low blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (< 10 mg/dL [or
< 3.6 mmol/L]) and hypouricemia (< 4 mg/dL [or < 238
mcmol/L]), which are not only dilutional but result from increased
urea and uric acid clearances in response to the volume-expanded
state. Azotemia may reflect volume contraction, ruling out SIADH,
which is seen in euvolemic patients.
 Complications
The most serious complication of hyponatremia is iatrogenic
cerebral osmotic demyelination from overly rapid sodium
correction.
 Treatment
Regardless of the patient's volume status, another common feature
is to restrict free water and hypotonic fluid intake, since these
solutions will exacerbate hyponatremia. Free water intake from oral
intake and intravenous fluids should generally be < 1–1.5 L/d.
Hypovolemic patients require adequate fluid resuscitation from
isotonic fluids (either normal saline or lactated Ringer solution) to
suppress the hypovolemic stimulus for ADH release. Patients with
cerebral salt wasting may require hypertonic saline to prevent
circulatory collapse; some may respond to fludrocortisone.
Hypervolemic patients may require loop diuretics or dialysis, or
both, to correct increased total body water and sodium. Euvolemic
patients may respond to free water restriction alone.
Pseudohyponatremia 
from 
hypertriglyceridemia 
or
hyperproteinemia requires no therapy except confirmation with the
clinical laboratory. Translocational hyponatremia from glucose
or mannitol can be managed with glucose correction or mannitol
discontinuation (if possible). No specific therapy is necessary in
patients with reset osmostat since they successfully regulate their
serum sodium with fluid challenges and water deprivation.
Symptomatic and severe hyponatremia generally require
hospitalization for careful monitoring of fluid balance and weights,
treatment, and frequent sodium checks. Inciting medications should
be discontinued if possible.
There is no consensus about the optimal rate of sodium
correction in symptomatic hyponatremic patients. A reasonable rate
is 10–12 mEq/L/d in mildly to moderately symptomatic patients. A
more aggressive rate of 1–1.5 mEq/L/h (to a maximum correction
of 10–12 mEq/L) has been used in severely symptomatic patients.
Sodium concentration should be monitored as frequently as every
1–2 hours. As symptoms improve or resolve, the correction rate
should be reduced to roughly 0.5 mEq/L/h. To avoid
overcorrection, the clinician should stabilize the sodium around 125
mEq/L to 130 mEq/L.
Also called central pontine myelinolysis, cerebral osmotic
demyelination may occur outside the brainstem. Demyelination may
occur days after sodium correction or initial neurologic recovery
from hyponatremia. Hypoxic episodes during hyponatremia may
contribute to demyelination. The neurologic effects are generally
catastrophic and irreversible.
In severely symptomatic patients, the clinician should calculate
the sodium deficit and deliver 3% hypertonic saline at the
appropriate rate. In general, the saline infusion rate should be
approximately 0.5 mL/kg body weight/h; rates of 1 mL/kg/h or
greater may represent a miscalculated sodium deficit. Hypertonic
saline in hypervolemic patients can be hazardous, resulting in
worsening volume overload, pulmonary edema, and ascites.
For patients who cannot adequately restrict free water or have an
inadequate response to conservative measures, demeclocycline
(300-600 mg orally twice daily) inhibits the effect of ADH on the
distal tubule. Onset of action may require 1 week, and urinary
concentrating ability may be permanently impaired, resulting in
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI) and even hypernatremia.
Cirrhosis may increase the nephrotoxicity of demeclocycline.
Vasopressin antagonists may revolutionize the treatment of
euvolemic and hypervolemic hyponatremia, especially in heart
failure. Lixivaptan, tolvaptan, and satavaptan are oral selective
vasopressin-2 receptor antagonists. V2 receptors mediate the
diuretic effect of ADH. For hospitalized patients with euvolemic
SIADH, conivaptan is given as an intravenous loading dose of 20
mg delivered over 30 minutes, then as 20 mg continuously over 24
hours. Subsequent infusions may be administered every 1–3 days at
20–40 mg/d by continuous infusion. Tolvaptan and conivaptan are
available in the United States. (Lixivaptan and satavaptan are not
yet approved by the FDA for use in the United States.)
 When to Refer
 
•    Nephrology or endocrinology consultation should be
considered in severe, symptomatic, refractory, or
complicated cases of hyponatremia.
•    Aggressive therapies with hypertonic saline,
demeclocycline, vasopressin antagonists, or dialysis
mandate specialist consultation.
•    Consultation may be necessary with end-stage liver or
heart disease.
 When to Admit
Hospital admission is necessary for symptomatic patients or those
requiring aggressive therapies for close monitoring and frequent
laboratory testing.
Ellison DH et al. Clinical practice. The syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuresis. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 17;356(20):2064–72.
[PMID: 17507705]
 
Liamis G et al. A review of drug-induced hyponatremia. Am J
Kidney Dis. 2008 Jul;52(1):144–53. [PMID: 18468754]
 
Rozen-Zvi B et al. Vasopressin receptor antagonists for the
treatment of hyponatremia: systemic review and meta-analysis. Am
J Kidney Dis. 2010 Aug;56(2):325–37. [PMID: 20538391]
 
Verbalis JG et al. Hyponatremia treatment guidelines 2007: expert
panel recommendations. Am J Med. 2007;11(Suppl 1):S1–S21.
[PMID: 17981159]
 
HYPERNATREMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Increased thirst and water intake is the first defense against
hypernatremia.
 Urine osmolality helps differentiate renal from nonrenal water
loss.
 
General Considerations
Hypernatremia is defined as a sodium concentration > 145 mEq/L.
All patients with hypernatremia have hyperosmolality, unlike
hyponatremic patients who can have a low, normal, or high serum
osmolality. The hypernatremic patient is typically hypovolemic due
to free water losses, although hypervolemia is frequently seen, often
as an iatrogenic complication in hospitalized patients with impaired
access to free water. Rarely, excessive sodium intake may cause
hypernatremia. Hypernatremia in primary aldosteronism is mild and
usually does not cause symptoms.
An intact thirst mechanism and access to water are the primary
defense against hypernatremia. The hypothalamus can sense minimal
changes in serum osmolality, triggering the thirst mechanism and
increased water intake. Thus, whatever the underlying disorder (eg,
dehydration, lactulose or mannitol therapy, central and nephrogenic
DI), excess water loss can cause hypernatremia only when
adequate water intake is not possible.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
When the patient is dehydrated, orthostatic hypotension and oliguria
are typical findings. Because water shifts from the cells to the
intravascular space to protect volume status, these symptoms may
be delayed. Lethargy, irritability, and weakness are early signs.
Hyperthermia, delirium, seizures, and coma may be seen with
severe hypernatremia (ie, sodium > 158 mEq/L). Symptoms in the
elderly may not be specific; a recent change in consciousness is
associated with a poor prognosis. Osmotic demyelination is an
uncommon but reported consequence of severe hypernatremia.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Urine osmolality > 400 mosm/kg—Renal waterconserving
ability is functioning.
A. NONRENAL LOSSES—Hypernatremia will develop if water
intake falls behind hypotonic fluid losses from excessive sweating,
the respiratory tract, or bowel movements. Lactulose causes an
osmotic diarrhea with loss of free water.
B. RENAL LOSSES—While severe hyperglycemia can cause
translocational hyponatremia (see above), progressive volume
depletion from glucosuria can result in hypernatremia. Osmotic
diuresis can occur with the use of mannitol or urea.
2. Urine osmolality < 250 mosm/kg—Hypernatremia with a
dilute urine (osmolality < 250 mosm/kg) is characteristic of DI.
Central DI results from inadequate ADH release. Nephrogenic DI
results from renal insensitivity to ADH; common causes include
lithium, demeclocycline, relief of urinary obstruction, interstitial
nephritis, hypercalcemia, and hypokalemia.
 Treatment
Treatment of hypernatremia includes correcting the cause of the
fluid loss, replacing water, and replacing electrolytes (as needed). In
response to increases in plasma osmolality, brain cells synthesize
solutes called idiogenic osmoles, which cause intracellular fluid
shifts. Osmole production begins 4–6 hours after dehydration and
takes several days to reach steady state. If hypernatremia is rapidly
corrected, the osmotic imbalance may cause cerebral edema and
potentially severe neurologic impairment. Fluids should be
administered over a 48-hour period, aiming for serum sodium
correction of approximately 1 mEq/L/h (1 mmol/L/h). There is no
consensus about the optimal rates of sodium correction in
hypernatremia and hyponatremia.
A. Choice of Type of Fluid for Replacement
1. Hypernatremia with hypovolemia—Hypovolemic patients
should receive isotonic saline to restore euvolemia and to treat
hyperosmolality, since isotonic saline (308 mosm/kg) is often hypo-
osmolar compared with plasma. After adequate volume
resuscitation with normal saline, 0.45% saline or 5% dextrose (or
both) can be used to replace any remaining free water deficit.
Milder volume deficits may be treated with 0.45% saline and 5%
dextrose.
2. Hypernatremia with euvolemia—Water ingestion or
intravenous 5% dextrose will result in the excretion of excess
sodium in the urine. If the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is
decreased, diuretics will increase urinary sodium excretion but may
impair renal concentrating ability, increasing the quantity of water
that needs to be replaced.
3. Hypernatremia with hypervolemia—Treatment includes 5%
dextrose solution to reduce hyperosmolality. Loop diuretics may be
necessary to promote natriuresis and lower total body sodium. In
severe rare cases with kidney disease, hemodialysis may be
necessary to correct the excess total body sodium and water.
B. Calculation of Water Deficit
Fluid replacement should include the free water deficit and
additional maintenance fluid to replace ongoing and anticipated fluid
losses.
1. Acute hypernatremia—In acute dehydration without much
solute loss, free water loss is similar to the weight loss. Initially, a
5% dextrose solution may be used. As correction of water deficit
progresses, therapy should continue with 0.45% saline with
dextrose.
2. Chronic hypernatremia—The water deficit is calculated to
restore normal sodium concentration, typically 140 mEq/L. Total
body water (TBW) (Table 21–1) correlates with muscle mass and
therefore decreases with advancing age, cachexia, and dehydration
and is lower in women than in men. Current TBW equals 40–60%
current body weight.
 When to Refer
Patients with refractory or unexplained hypernatremia should be
referred for subspecialist consultation.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with symptomatic hypernatremia require
hospitalization for evaluation and treatment.
•    Significant comorbidities or concomitant acute
illnesses, especially if contributing to hypernatremia, may
necessitate hospitalization.
Adrogue HJ et al. Hypernatremia. N Engl J Med. 2000 May
18;342(20):1493–9. [PMID: 10816188]
 
Chassagne P et al. Clinical presentation of hypernatremia in elderly
patients: a case control study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006
Aug;54(8):1225–30. [PMID: 16913989]
 
Lin M et al. Disorders of water imbalance. Emerg Med Clin North
Am. 2005 Aug;23(3):749–70. [PMID: 15982544]
 
Lindner G et al. Hypernatremia in the critically ill is an independent
risk factor for mortality. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007 Dec; 50(6):952–
7. [PMID: 18037096]
 
Reynolds RM et al. Disorders of sodium balance. BMJ. 2006 Mar
25;332(7543):702–5. [PMID: 16565125]
 
VOLUME OVERLOAD
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Disorder of excessive sodium retention in the setting of low
arterial underfilling (eg, congestive heart failure or cirrhosis).
 Hyponatremia from water retention in edematous states is
associated with sodium retention.
 
The hallmark of a volume overloaded state is sodium retention.
Abnormally low arterial filling, such as from congestive heart failure
or cirrhosis, activates the neuro humoral axis, which stimulates the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, the sympathetic nervous
system, and ADH (vasopressin) release. Sodium retention with
edema results. The stimulus for vasopressin release is nonosmotic.
Released in response to baroreceptor activation, vasopressin
stimulates renal V2 receptors, resulting in water reabsorption,
edema formation, and hyponatremia.
Adler SM et al. Disorders of body water homeostasis in critical
illness. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2006 Dec; 35(4): 873–
94. [PMID: 17127152]
 
Chen HH et al. Pathophysiology of volume overload in acute heart
failure syndromes. Am J Med. 2006 Dec;119(12 Suppl 1): S11–
6. [PMID: 17113395]
 
Ellis DH. Disorders of sodium and water. Am J Kidney Dis. 2005
Aug;46(2):356–61. [PMID: 16112057]
 
Schrier RW. Water and sodium retention in edematous disorders:
role of vasopressin and aldosterone. Am J Med. 2006 Jul;119(7
Suppl 1):S47–53. [PMID: 16843085]
 
HYPEROSMOLAR DISORDERS
& OSMOLAR GAPS
 
HYPEROSMOLALITY WITH TRANSIENT OR NO
SIGNIFICANT SHIFT IN WATER
Urea and alcohol readily cross cell membranes and can produce
hyperosmolality. Urea is an ineffective osmole with little effect on
osmotic water movement across cell membranes. Alcohol quickly
equilibrates between the intra cellular and extracellular
compartments, adding 22 mosm/L for every 100 mg/dL (or 21.7
mmol/L) of ethanol. Ethanol ingestion should be considered in any
case of stupor or coma with an elevated osmol gap (measured
osmolality–calculated osmolality > 10 mosm/kg). Other toxic
alcohols such as methanol and ethylene glycol cause an osmol gap
and a metabolic acidosis with an increased anion gap (see Chapter
39). The combination of an increased anion gap metabolic acidosis
and an osmol gap exceeding 10 mosm/kg is not specific for toxic
alcohol ingestion and may occur with alcoholic ketoacidosis or
lactic acidosis (see Metabolic Acidosis).
HYPEROSMOLALITY ASSOCIATED WITH
SIGNIFICANT SHIFTS IN WATER
Increased concentrations of solutes that do not readily enter cells
cause a shift of water from intracellular to extracellular.
Hyperosmolality of effective osmoles such as sodium and glucose
causes symptoms, primarily neurologic. The severity of symptoms
depends on the degree of hyperosmolality and rapidity of
development. In acute hyperosmolality, somnolence and confusion
can appear when the osmolality exceeds 320–330 mosm/kg; coma,
respiratory arrest, and death can result when osmolality exceeds
340–350 mosm/kg.
Stoner GD. Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state. Am Fam
Physician. 2005 May 1;71(9):1723–30. [PMID: 15887451]
 
DISORDERS OF POTASSIUM
CONCENTRATION
 
HYPOKALEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe hypokalemia may induce dangerous arrhythmias and
rhabdomyolysis.
 Transtubular potassium concentration gradient (TTKg) can
distinguish renal from nonrenal loss of potassium.
 
 General Considerations
Hypokalemia can result from insufficient dietary potassium intake,
intracellular shifting of potassium from the extracellular space,
extrarenal potassium loss, or renal potassium loss (Table 21–3).
Cellular uptake of potassium is increased by insulin and β-
adrenergic stimulation and blocked by α-adrenergic stimulation.
Aldosterone is an important regulator of total body potassium,
increasing potassium secretion in the distal renal tubule. The most
common cause of hypokalemia, especially in developing countries,
is gastrointestinal loss from infectious diarrhea. The potassium
concentration in intestinal secretion is ten times higher (80 mEq/L)
than in gastric secretions. Hypokalemia in the presence of acidosis
suggests profound potassium depletion and requires urgent
treatment. Selflimited hypokalemia occurs in 50–60% of trauma
patients, perhaps related to enhanced release of epinephrine.
 
Table 21–3. Causes of hypokalemia.
 
Decreased potassium intake
Potassium shift into the cell
     Increased postprandial secretion of insulin
     Alkalosis
     Trauma (via β-adrenergic stimulation?)
     Periodic paralysis (hypokalemic)
     Barium intoxication
Renal potassium loss
     Increased aldosterone (mineralocorticoid) effects
        Primary hyperaldosteronism
        Secondary aldosteronism (dehydration, heart failure)
        Renovascular hypertension
        Malignant hypertension
        Ectopic ACTH-producing tumor
        Gitelman syndrome
        Bartter syndrome
        Cushing syndrome
        Licorice (European)
        Renin-producing tumor
        Congenital abnormality of steroid metabolism (eg,
adrenogenital
              syndrome, 17α-hydroxylase defect, apparent
mineralocorticoid
              excess, 11β-hydroxylase deficiency)
     Increased flow of distal nephron
        Diuretics (furosemide, thiazides)
        Salt-losing nephropathy
     Hypomagnesemia
        Unreabsorbable anion
        Carbenicillin, penicillin
     Renal tubular acidosis (type I or II)
        Fanconi syndrome
        Interstitial nephritis
        Metabolic alkalosis (bicarbonaturia)
     Congenital defect of distal nephron
        Liddle syndrome
Extrarenal potassium loss
     Vomiting, diarrhea, laxative abuse
     Villous adenoma, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Hypokalemia increases the likelihood of digitalis toxicity. In
patients with heart disease, hypokalemia induced by β2-adrenergic
agonists and diuretics may substantially increase the risk of
arrhythmias. Numerous genetic mutations affect fluid and electrolyte
metabolism, including disorders of potassium metabolism (Table
21–4).
Magnesium is an important cofactor for potassium uptake and
maintenance of intracellular potassium levels. Loop diuretics (eg,
furosemide) cause substantial renal potassium and magnesium
losses. Magnesium depletion should be considered in refractory
hypokalemia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Muscular weakness, fatigue, and muscle cramps are frequent
complaints in mild to moderate hypokalemia. Gastrointestinal
smooth muscle involvement may result in constipation or ileus.
Flaccid paralysis, hyporeflexia, hypercapnia, tetany, and
rhabdomyolysis may be seen with severe hypokalemia (< 2.5
mEq/L). The presence of hypertension may be a clue to the
diagnosis of hypokalemia from aldosterone or mineralocorticoid
excess (Table 21–4). Renal manifestations include nephrogenic DI
and interstitial nephritis.
 
Table 21–4. genetic disorders associated with electrolyte
metabolism disturbances.
 
 
 
Disease
Site of Mutation
Potassium
Hypokalemia
Dihydropyridine sensitive
     Hypokalemic periodic
paralysis
Dihydropyridine-sensitive
skeletal muscle voltage-
gated calcium channel
     Bartter syndrome
Na+-K+-2Cl− cotransporter,
K+ channel (ROMK), or Cl−
channel of thick ascending
limb of Henle
(hypofunction), barttin
     Gitelman syndrome
Thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl−
contransporter
     Liddle syndrome
β or γ subunit of amiloride-
sensitive Na+ channel
(hyperfunction)
     Apparent
mineralocorticoid excess
11β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (failure to
inactivate cortisol)
     Glucocorticoidremediable
hyperaldosteronism
Regulatory sequence of
11β−hydroxylase controls
aldosterone synthase
inappropriately
Hyperkalemia
     Hyperkalemic periodic
paralysis
α subunit of calcium channel
     Pseudohypoaldosteronism
type I
β or γ subunit of
amiloridesensitive Na+
channel (hypofunction)
     Pseudohypoaldosteronism
        type II (Gordon
syndrome)
HNK2, HNK4
Calcium
     Familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia
Ca2+-sensing protein
(hypofunction)
     Familial hypocalcemia
Ca2+-sensing protein
(hyperfunction)
Phosphate
     Hypophosphatemic rickets PEX gene, FGF23
Magnesium
     Hypomagnesemia-
       hypercalciuria syndrome Paracellin-1
Water
     Nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus
Vasopressin receptor-2
(Type 1), aquaporin-2
Acid-base
     Proximal RTA
Na+ HCO3− cotransporter
     Distal RTA
Cl− HCO3− exchanger H+-
ATPase
     Proximal and distal RTA
Carbonic anhydrase II
FGF23, fibroblast growth factor 23; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinary potassium concentration is low (< 20 mEq/L) as a result of
extrarenal loss (eg, diarrhea, vomiting) and inappropriately high (>
40 mEq/L) with renal loss (eg, mineralocorticoid excess, Bartter
syndrome, Liddle syndrome) (Table 21–3).
The transtubular [K+] gradient (TTKG) is a simple and rapid
evaluation of net potassium secretion. TTKG is calculated as
follows:
Hypokalemia with a TTKG > 4 suggests renal potassium loss
with increased distal K+ secretion. In such cases, plasma renin and
aldosterone levels are helpful in differential diagnosis. The presence
of nonabsorbed anions, such as bicarbonate, increases the TTKG.
C. Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows decreased amplitude and
broadening of T waves, prominent U waves, premature ventricular
contractions, and depressed ST segments.
 Treatment
Oral potassium supplementation is the safest and easiest treatment
for mild to moderate deficiency. Dietary potassium is almost entirely
coupled to phosphate—rather than chloride—and is therefore not
effective in correcting potassium loss associated with chloride
depletion from diuretics or vomiting. In the setting of abnormal
kidney function and mild to moderate diuretic dosage, 20 mEq/d of
oral potassium is generally sufficient to prevent hypokalemia, but
40–100 mEq/d over a period of days to weeks is needed to treat
hypokalemia and fully replete potassium stores.
Intravenous potassium is indicated for patients with severe
hypokalemia and for those who cannot take oral supplementation.
For severe deficiency, potassium may be given through a peripheral
intravenous line in a concentration up to 40 mEq/L and at rates up
to 10 mEq/h. Concentrations of up to 20 mEq/h may be given
through a central venous catheter. Continuous ECG monitoring is
indicated, and the serum potassium level should be checked every
3–6 hours. Avoid glucose-containing fluid to prevent further shifts of
potassium into the cells. Magnesium deficiency should be corrected,
particularly in refractory hypokalemia.
 When to Refer
Patients with unexplained hypokalemia, refractory hyperkalemia, or
clinical features suggesting alternative diagnoses (eg, aldosteronism
or hypokalemic periodic paralysis) should be referred for
endocrinology or nephrology consultation.
When to Admit
Patients with symptomatic or severe hypokalemia, especially with
cardiac manifestations, require cardiac monitoring, frequent
laboratory testing, and potassium supplementation.
Born-Frontsberg E et al. Cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
comorbidities of hypokalemic and normokalemic primary
aldosteronism: results of the German Conn's Registry. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;94(4):1125-30. [PMID: 19190103]
 
Greenlee M et al. Narrative review: evolving concepts in potassium
homeostasis and hypokalemia. Ann Intern Med. 2009 May
5;150(9):619–25. [PMID: 19414841]
 
Huang CL et al. Mechanism of hypokalemia in magnesium
deficiency. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Oct;18(10):2649–52.
[PMID: 17804670]
 
Palmer BF. A physiologic-based approach to the evaluation of a
patient with hypokalemia. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010 Dec;56(6):
1184–90. [PMID: 20828906]
 
HYPERKALEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Serum potassium level > 5.0 mEq/l (> 5.0 mmol/l).
 Hyperkalemia may develop in patients taking ACE inhibitors,
angiotensin-receptor blockers, potassium-sparing diuretics, or
their combination, even with no or only mild kidney dysfunction.
 The ECG may show peaked T waves, widened QRS and
biphasic QRS–T complexes, or may be normal despite life-
threatening hyperkalemia.
 Measurement of plasma potassium level differentiates potassium
leak from blood cells in cases of clotting, leukocytosis, and
thrombocytosis from elevated serum potassium.
 Rule out extracellular potassium shift from the cells in acidosis
and assess renal potassium excretion.
 
 General Considerations
Hyperkalemia usually occurs in patients with advanced kidney
disease but can also develop with normal kidney function (Table
21–5). Acidosis causes intracellular potassium to shift
extracellularly. Serum potassium concentration rises about 0.7
mEq/L for every decrease of 0.1 pH unit during acidosis. Fist
clenching during venipuncture may raise the potassium concentration
by 1–2 mEq/L by causing acidosis and potassium shift from cells. In
the absence of acidosis, serum potassium concentration rises about
1 mEq/L when there is a total body potassium excess of 1–4
mEq/kg. However, the higher the serum potassium concentration,
the smaller the excess necessary to raise the potassium levels
further.
Mineralocorticoid deficiency from Addison disease or chronic
kidney disease (CKD) is another cause of hyperkalemia with
decreased renal excretion of potassium. Mineralocorticoid
resistance due to genetic disorders, interstitial kidney disease, or
urinary tract obstruction also leads to hyperkalemia.
 
Table 21–5. Causes of hyperkalemia.
 
Spurious
     Leakage from erythrocytes when separation of serum
from clot is delayed (plasma K+ normal)
     Marked thrombocytosis or leukocytosis with release of
intracellular K+ (plasma K+ normal)
     Repeated fist clenching during phlebotomy, with
release of K+ from forearm muscles
     Specimen drawn from arm with intravenous K+ infusion
Decreased excretion
     Kidney disease, acute and chronic
     Renal secretory defects (may or may not have frank
kidney disease):
          kidney transplant, interstitial nephritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus,
          sickle cell disease, amyloidosis, obstructive
nephropathy
     Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism (often in diabetic
patients with
          mild to moderate nephropathy) or selective
hypoaldosteronism
          (some patients with AIDS)
     Drugs that inhibit potassium excretion: spironolactone,
         eplerenone, drospirenone, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors,
angiotensin II
         receptor blockers, triamterene, amiloride,
trimethoprim, pentamidine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus)
Shift of K+ from within the cell
     Massive release of intracellular K+ in burns,
rhabdomyolysis,
         hemolysis, severe infection, internal bleeding,
vigorous exercise
     Metabolic acidosis (in the case of organic acid
accumulation—eg,
        lactic acidosis—a shift of K+ does not occur since
organic acid can easily move across the cell membrane)
     Hypertonicity (solvent drag)
     Insulin deficiency (metabolic acidosis may not be
apparent)
     Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
     Drugs: succinylcholine, arginine, digitalis toxicity, β-
adrenergic antagonists
     α-Adrenergic stimulation?
Excessive intake of K+
     Especially in patients taking medications that decrease
potassium secretion (see above)
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.
ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs),
commonly used in patients with congestive heart failure or CKD,
may cause hyperkalemia. The concomitant use of spironolactone,
eplerenone, or β-blockers further increases the risk of
hyperkalemia. Thiazide or loop diuretics and sodium bicarbonate
may minimize hyperkalemia. Persistent mild hyperkalemia in the
absence of ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy is usually due to type IV
renal tubular acidosis (RTA). Heparin inhibits aldosterone
production in the adrenal glands, causing hyperkalemia.
Trimethoprim is structurally similar to amiloride and triamterene,
and all three drugs inhibit renal potassium excretion through
suppression of sodium channels in the distal nephron.
Cyclosporine and tacrolimus can induce hyperkalemia in organ
transplant recipients, especially kidney transplant patients, partly
due to suppression of the basolateral Na+–K+-ATPase in principal
cells. Hyperkalemia is commonly seen in HIV patients and has been
attributed to impaired renal excretion of potassium due to
pentamidine or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or to hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism.
 Clinical Findings
Hyperkalemia impairs neuromuscular transmission, causing muscle
weakness, flaccid paralysis, and ileus. Electrocardiography is not a
sensitive method for detecting hyperkalemia, since nearly half of
patients with a serum potassium level > 6.5 mEq/L will not manifest
ECG changes. ECG changes in hyperkalemia include bradycardia,
PR interval prolongation, peaked T waves, QRS widening, and
biphasic QRS–T complexes. Conduction disturbances, such as
bundle branch block and atrioventricular block, may occur.
Ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest are terminal events.
 Prevention
Inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis (ie, ACE
inhibitors, ARBs, and spironolactone) and potassium-sparing
diuretics (eplerenone, triamterene) should be used cautiously in
patients with heart failure, liver failure, and kidney disease.
Laboratory monitoring should be performed within 1 week of drug
initiation or dosage increase.
 Treatment
The diagnosis should be confirmed by repeat laboratory testing to
rule out spurious hyperkalemia, especially in the absence of
medications that cause hyperkalemia or in patients without kidney
disease or a previous history of hyperkalemia. Plasma potassium
concentration can be measured to avoid hyperkalemia due to
potassium leakage out of red cells, white cells, and platelets. Kidney
dysfunction should be ruled out at the initial assessment.
Treatment consists of withholding exogenous potassium,
identifying the cause, reviewing the patient's medications and dietary
potassium intake, and correcting the hyperkalemia. Emergent
treatment is indicated when cardiac toxicity, muscle paralysis, or
severe hyperkalemia (potassium > 6.5 mEq/L) is present, even in
the absence of ECG changes. Insulin, bicarbonate, and β-agonists
shift potassium intracellularly within minutes of administration (Table
21–6). Intravenous calcium may be given to antagonize the cell
membrane effects of potassium, but its use should be restricted to
life-threatening hyperkalemia in patients taking digitalis because
hypercalcemia may cause digitalis toxicity. Hemodialysis may be
required to remove potassium in patients with acute or chronic
kidney injury.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with hyperkalemia from kidney disease and
reduced renal potassium excretion should see a
nephrologist.
•    Transplant patients may need adjustment of their
immunosuppression regimen by transplant specialists.
 When to Admit
Patients with severe hyperkalemia > 6 mEq/L, any degree of
hyperkalemia associated with ECG changes, or concomitant illness
(eg, tumor lysis, rhabdomyolysis, metabolic acidosis) should be sent
to the emergency department for urgent treatment.
Einhorn LM et al. The frequency of hyperkalemia and its
significance in chronic kidney disease. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Jun
22;169(12):1156–62. [PMID: 19546417]
 
Khanna A et al. The management of hyperkalemia in patients with
cardiovascular disease. Am J Med. 2009 Mar;122(3): 215–21.
[PMID: 19272479]
 
Palmer BF. A physiologic-based approach to the evaluation of a
patient with hyperkalemia. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010 Aug;56(2):
387–93. [PMID: 20493606]
 
Shingarev R et al. A physiologic-based approach to the treatment
of acute hyperkalemia. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010 Sep;56(3): 578–
84. [PMID: 20570423]
 
Weisberg LS. Management of severe hyperkalemia. Crit Care
Med. 2008 Dec;36(12):3246–51. [PMID: 18936701]
 
DISORDERS OF CALCIUM
CONCENTRATION
 
The normal total plasma (or serum) calcium concentration is 8.5–
10.5 mg/dL (or 2.1–2.6 mmol/L). Ionized calcium (normal: 4.6–5.3
mg/dL [or 1.15–1.32 mmol/L]) is physiologically active and
necessary for muscle contraction and nerve function.
The calcium-sensing receptor, a transmembrane protein that
detects the extracellular calcium concentration, has been identified in
the parathyroid gland and the kidney. Functional defects in this
protein are associated with diseases of abnormal calcium
metabolism such as familial hypocalcemia and familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia (Table 21–4).
HYPOCALCEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often mistaken as a neurologic disorder.
 Check for decreased parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, or
magnesium depletion.
 If the ionized calcium level is normal despite a low total serum
calcium, calcium metabolism is usually normal.
 
 General Considerations
The most common cause of low total serum calcium is
hypoalbuminemia. When serum albumin concentration is lower than
4 g/dL (40 g/L), serum Ca2+ concentration is reduced by 0.8–1
mg/dL (0.20–0.25 mmol/L) for every 1 g/dL (10 g/L) of albumin.
The most accurate measurement of serum calcium is the ionized
calcium concentration. True hypocalcemia (decreased ionized
calcium) implies insufficient action of PTH or active vitamin D.
Important causes of hypocalcemia are listed in Table 21–7.
 
Table 21–6. Treatment of hyperkalemia.
 
1 Can be both emergency and nonemergency treatment of hyperkalemia.
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Cogan MG. Fluid and
Electrolytes: Physiology and Pathophysiology. McGraw-Hill, 1991.
 
The most common cause of hypocalcemia is advanced CKD, in
which decreased production of active vitamin D3 (1,25
dihydroxyvitamin D3) and hyperphosphatemia both play a role (see
Chapter 22). Some cases of primary hypoparathyroidism are due to
mutations of the calcium-sensing receptor in which inappropriate
suppression of PTH release leads to hypocalcemia (see Chapter
26). Magnesium depletion reduces both PTH release and tissue
responsiveness to PTH, causing hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia in
pancreatitis is a marker of severe disease. Elderly hospitalized
patients with hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia, with or without
an elevated PTH level, are likely vitamin D deficient.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hypocalcemia increases excitation of nerve and muscle cells,
primarily affecting the neuromuscular and cardiovascular systems.
Spasm of skeletal muscle causes cramps and tetany. Laryngospasm
with stridor can obstruct the airway. Convulsions, perioral and
peripheral paresthesias, and abdominal pain can develop. Classic
physical findings include Chvostek sign (contraction of the facial
muscle in response to tapping the facial nerve) and Trousseau sign
(carpal spasm occurring with occlusion of the brachial artery by a
blood pressure cuff). QT prolongation predisposes to ventricular
arrhythmias. In chronic hypoparathyroidism, cataracts and
calcification of basal ganglia may appear (see Chapter 26).
 
Table 21–7. Causes of hypocalcemia.
 
Decreased intake or absorption
     Malabsorption
     Small bowel bypass, short bowel
     Vitamin D deficit (decreased absorption, decreased
production of 25-hydroxyvitamin D or 1,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D)
Increased loss
     Alcoholism
     Chronic kidney disease
     Diuretic therapy
Endocrine disease
     Hypoparathyroidism (genetic, acquired; including
hypomagnesemia and hypermagnesemia)
     Post-parathyroidectomy (hungry bone syndrome)
     Pseudohypoparathyroidism
     Calcitonin secretion with medullary carcinoma of the
thyroid
     Familial hypocalcemia
Associated Diseases
     Pancreatitis
     Rhabdomyolysis
     Septic shock
Physiologic causes
     Associated with decreased serum albumin1
     Decreased end-organ response to vitamin D
     Hyperphosphatemia
     Induced by aminoglycoside antibiotics, plicamycin, loop
diuretics, foscarnet
1Ionized calcium concentration is normal.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum calcium concentration is low (< 8.5 mg/dL [or < 2.1
mmol/L]). In true hypocalcemia, the ionized serum calcium
concentration is also low (< 4.6 mg/dL [or < 1.15 mmol/L]). Serum
phosphate is usually elevated in hypoparathyroidism or in advanced
CKD, whereas it is suppressed in early CKD or vitamin D
deficiency.
Serum magnesium concentration is commonly low. In respiratory
alkalosis, total serum calcium is normal but ionized calcium is low.
The ECG shows a prolonged QT interval.
 Treatment*
A. Severe, Symptomatic Hypocalcemia
In the presence of tetany, arrhythmias, or seizures, intravenous
calcium gluconate is indicated. Because of the short duration of
action, continuous calcium infusion is usually required. Ten to 15
milligrams of calcium per kilogram body weight, or six to eight 10-
mL vials of 10% calcium gluconate (558–744 mg of calcium), is
added to 1 L of D5W and infused over 4–6 hours. By monitoring
the serum calcium level frequently (every 4–6 hours), the infusion
rate is adjusted to maintain the serum calcium level at 7–8.5 mg/dL.
B. Asymptomatic Hypocalcemia
Oral calcium (1–2 g) and vitamin D preparations, including active
vitamin D sterols, are used. Calcium carbonate is well tolerated and
less expensive than many other calcium tablets. A check of urinary
calcium excretion is recommended after the initiation of therapy
because hypercalciuria (urine calcium excretion > 300 mg or > 7.5
mmol per day) or urine calcium:creatinine ratio > 0.3 may impair
kidney function in these patients. The low serum calcium associated
with hypoalbuminemia does not require replacement therapy. If
serum Mg2+ is low, therapy must include magnesium replacement,
which by itself will usually correct hypocalcemia.
 When to Refer
Patients with complicated hypocalcemia from hypoparathyroidism,
familial hypocalcemia, or CKD require referral to an endocrinologist
or nephrologist.
 When to Admit
Patients with tetany, arrhythmias, seizures, or other symptoms of
hypocalcemia require immediate evaluation and therapy.
Bosworth M et al. Clinical inquiries: what is the best workup for
hypocalcemia? J Fam Pract. 2008 Oct;57(10):677–9. [PMID:
18842196]
 
Peacock M. Calcium metabolism in health and disease. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jan;5(Suppl 1):S23–30. [PMID: 20089499]
 
Piccoli GB et al. Severe hypocalcemia caused by intravascular
calcium phosphate precipitation after sodium phosphatecontaining
bowel preparation. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010 Feb; 55(2):A35–7.
[PMID: 20116677]
 
Shoback D. Clinical practice. Hypoparathyroidism. N Engl J Med.
2008 Jul 24;359(4):391–403. [PMID: 18650515]
 
HYPERCALCEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy-associated
hypercalcemia are the most common causes.
 Hypercalciuria usually precedes hypercalcemia.
 Most often, asymptomatic, mild hypercalcemia (≥ 10.5 mg/dl [or
2.6 mmol/l]) is due to primary hyperparathyroidism, whereas the
symptomatic, severe hypercalcemia (≥ 14 mg/dl [or 3.5 mmol/l])
is due to hypercalcemia of malignancy.
 
*See 
also Chapter 26 for discussion of the treatment of
hypoparathyroidism.
 
 General Considerations
Important causes of hypercalcemia are listed in Table 21–8.
Primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy account for 90% of
cases. Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most common cause of
hypercalcemia (usually mild) in ambulatory patients. Chronic
hypercalcemia (over 6 months) or some manifestation such as
nephrolithiasis also suggests a benign cause. Tumor production of
PTH-related proteins (PTHrP) is the most common paraneoplastic
endocrine syndrome, accounting for most cases of hypercalcemia in
inpatients (see Table 39–13). The neoplasm is clinically apparent in
nearly all cases when the hypercalcemia is detected, and the
prognosis is poor. Granulomatous diseases, such as sarcoidosis and
tuberculosis, cause hypercalcemia via overproduction of active
vitamin D3 (1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3).
 
Table 21–8. Causes of hypercalcemia.
 
Increased intake or absorption
     Milk-alkali syndrome
     Vitamin D or vitamin A excess
Endocrine disorders
     Primary hyperparathyroidism
     Secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism (usually
associated with hypocalcemia)
     Acromegaly
     Adrenal insufficiency
     Pheochromocytoma
     Thyrotoxicosis
Neoplastic diseases
     Tumors producing PTH-related proteins (ovary, kidney,
lung)
     Multiple myeloma (elaboration of osteoclast-activating
factor)
     Lymphoma (occasionally from production of calcitriol)
Miscellaneous causes
     Thiazide diuretic use
     Granulomatous diseases (production of calcitriol)
     Paget disease of bone
     Hypophosphatasia
     Immobilization
     Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
     Complications of kidney transplantation
     Lithium intake
PTH, parathyroid hormone.
Milk-alkali syndrome has had a resurgence due to calcium
ingestion for prevention of osteoporosis. Heavy calcium carbonate
intake causes hypercalcemic acute renal failure, likely from renal
vasoconstriction. The decreased GFR impairs bicarbonate
excretion, while hypercalcemia stimulates proton secretion and
bicarbonate reabsorption. Metabolic alkalosis decreases calcium
excretion, maintaining hypercalcemia.
Hypercalcemia causes nephrogenic DI through activation of
calcium-sensing receptors in collecting ducts, which reduces ADH-
induced water permeability. Volume depletion further worsens
hypercalcemia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The history and physical examination should focus on the duration
of hypercalcemia and evidence for a neoplasm. Hypercalcemia may
affect gastrointestinal, kidney, and neurologic function. Mild
hypercalcemia is often asymptomatic. Symptoms usually occur if the
serum calcium is > 12 mg/dL (or > 3 mmol/L) and tend to be more
severe if hypercalcemia develops acutely. Symptoms include
constipation and polyuria, except in hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, in
which polyuria is absent. Other symptoms include nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, peptic ulcer disease, renal colic, and hematuria from
nephrolithiasis. Polyuria from hypercalciuria-induced nephrogenic
DI can result in volume depletion and acute kidney injury.
Neurologic manifestations range from mild drowsiness to weakness,
depression, lethargy, stupor, and coma in severe hypercalcemia.
Ventricular ectopy and idioventricular rhythm occur and can be
accentuated by digitalis.
B. Laboratory Findings
The ionized calcium exceeds 1.32 mmol/L. A high serum chloride
concentration and a low serum phosphate concentration in a ratio >
33:1 (or > 102 if SI units are utilized) suggests primary
hyperparathyroidism where PTH decreases proximal tubular
phosphate reabsorption. A low serum chloride concentration with a
high serum bicarbonate concentration, along with elevated BUN
and 
creatinine, 
suggests 
milk-alkali 
syndrome. 
Severe
hypercalcemia (> 15 mg/dL [or > 3.75 mmol/L]) generally occurs
in malignancy. More than 300 mg (or > 7.5 mmol) per day of
urinary calcium excretion suggests hypercalciuria; < 100 mg (or <
2.5 mmol) per day suggests hypocalciuria. Hypercalciuric patients
—such as those with malignancy or those receiving oral active
vitamin D therapy—may easily develop hypercalcemia in case of
volume depletion. Serum phosphate may or may not be low,
depending on the cause. Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia occurs in
milk-alkali syndrome, thiazide diuretic use, and familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia.
The chest radiograph may reveal malignancy or granulomatous
disease. The ECG shows a shortened QT interval. Measurements
of PTH and PTHrP help distinguish between hyperparathyroidism
(elevated 
PTH) 
and 
malignancyassociated 
hypercalcemia
(suppressed PTH, elevated PTHrP).
 Treatment
Until the primary cause can be identified and treated, renal excretion
of calcium is promoted through aggressive hydration and forced
calciuresis. The tendency in hypercalcemia is hypovolemia from
nephrogenic DI. In dehydrated patients with normal cardiac and
kidney function, 0.45% saline or 0.9% saline can be given rapidly
(250–500 mL/h). A meta-analysis questioned the efficacy and
safety profile of intravenous furosemide for hypercalcemia.
Thiazides can worsen hypercalcemia.
Bisphosphonates are the treatment of choice for hypercalcemia
of malignancy. Although they are safe, effective, and normalize
calcium in > 70% of patients, bisphosphonates may require up to
48–72 hours before reaching full therapeutic effect. Calcitonin may
be helpful in the short-term until bisphosphonates reach therapeutic
levels. In emergency cases, dialysis with low calcium dialysate may
be needed. The calcimimetic agent cinacalcet hydrochloride
suppresses PTH secretion and decreases serum calcium
concentration and holds promise as a treatment option. See
Chapter 39 for a discussion of the treatment of hypercalcemia of
malignancy and Chapter 26 for a discussion of the treatment of
hypercalcemia of hyperparathyroidism.
Typically, if dialysis patients do not receive proper
supplementation of calcium and active vitamin D, hypocalcemia and
hyperphosphatemia develop. On the other hand, hypercalcemia can
sometimes develop, particularly in the setting of severe secondary
hyperparathyroidism, characterized by high PTH levels and
subsequent release of calcium from bone. Therapy may include
intravenous vitamin D, which further increases the serum calcium
concentration. Another type of hypercalcemia occurs when PTH
levels are low. Bone turnover is decreased, which results in a low
buffering capacity for calcium. When calcium is administered in
calcium-containing phosphate binders or dialysate, or when vitamin
D is administered, hypercalcemia results. Hypercalcemia in dialysis
patients usually occurs in the presence of hyperphosphatemia, and
metastatic calcification may occur. Malignancy should be
considered as a cause of the hypercalcemia.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients may require referral to an oncologist or
endocrinologist depending on the underlying cause of
hypercalcemia.
•    Patients with granulomatous diseases (eg, tuberculosis
and other chronic infections, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis 
[formerly 
Wegener 
granulomatosis],
sarcoidosis) may require assistance from infectious
disease specialists, rheumatologists, or pulmonologists.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with symptomatic or severe hypercalcemia
require immediate treatment.
•    Unexplained hypercalcemia with associated conditions,
such as acute kidney injury or suspected malignancy, may
require urgent treatment and expedited evaluation.
Kallas M et al. Rare causes of calcitriol-mediated hypercalcemia: a
case report and literature review. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
Jul;95(7):3111–7. [PMID: 20427501]
 
LeGrand SB et al. Narrative review: furosemide for hypercalcemia:
an unproven yet common practice. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Aug
19;149(4):259–63. [PMID: 18711156]
 
Medarov BI. Milk-alkali syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009
Mar;84(3): 261–7. [PMID: 19252114]
 
Mundy GR et al. PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) in hyper calcemia.
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Apr;19(4):672–5. [PMID: 18256357]
 
DISORDERS OF
PHOSPHORUS
CONCENTRATION
 
Plasma phosphorus is mainly inorganic phosphate and represents a
small fraction (< 0.2%) of total body phosphate.
Important determinants of plasma inorganic phosphate are renal
excretion, intestinal absorption, and shift between the intracellular
and extracellular spaces. The kidney is the most important regulator
of the serum phosphate level. PTH decreases reabsorption of
phosphate in the proximal tubule while 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
increases reabsorption. Renal proximal tubular reabsorption of
phosphate is decreased by volume expansion, corticosteroids, and
proximal tubular dysfunction (as in Fanconi syndrome). Fibroblast
growth factor 23 (FGF23) is a potent phosphaturic hormone.
Intestinal absorption of phosphate is facilitated by active vitamin D.
PTH stimulates phosphate release from bone and renal phosphate
excretion; 
primary 
hyperparathyroidism 
can 
lead 
to
hypophosphatemia and depletion of bone phosphate stores. By
contrast, growth hormone augments proximal tubular reabsorption
of phosphate. Cellular phosphate uptake is stimulated by various
factors and conditions, including alkalemia, insulin, epinephrine,
feeding, hungry bone syndrome, and accelerated cell proliferation.
Phosphorus metabolism and homeostasis are intimately related to
calcium metabolism. See sections on metabolic bone disease in
Chapter 26.
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe hypophosphatemia may cause tissue hypoxia and
rhabdomyolysis.
 Renal loss of phosphate can be diagnosed by measuring urinary
phosphate excretion and by calculating maximal tubular
phosphate reabsorption rate (TmP/GFR).
 PTH and FGF23 are the major factors that decrease TmP/GFR,
leading to renal loss of phosphate.
 
 General Considerations
The leading causes of hypophosphatemia are listed in Table 21–9.
Hypophosphatemia may occur in the presence of normal phosphate
stores. Serious depletion of body phosphate stores may exist with
low, normal, or high serum phosphate concentrations.
Serum phosphate levels decrease transiently after food intake,
thus fasting samples are recommended for accuracy. Moderate
hypophosphatemia (1.0–2.4 mg/dL [or 0.32–0.79 mmol/L]) occurs
commonly in hospitalized patients and may not reflect decreased
phosphate stores.
In severe hypophosphatemia (< 1 mg/dL [or < 0.32 mmol/L]),
the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen increases through a decrease
in the erythrocyte 2,3-diphosphoglycerate concentration, impairing
tissue oxygenation and cell metabolism and resulting in muscle
weakness or even rhabdomyolysis. Severe hypophosphatemia is
common and multifactorial in alcoholic patients. In acute alcohol
withdrawal, increased plasma insulin and epinephrine along with
respiratory alkalosis promote intracellular shift of phosphate.
Vomiting, diarrhea, and poor dietary intake contribute to
hypophosphatemia. Chronic alcohol use results in a decrease in the
renal threshold of phosphate excretion. This renal tubular
dysfunction reverses after a month of abstinence. Patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma commonly have
hypophosphatemia, attributed to xanthine derivatives causing shifts
of phosphate intracellularly and the phosphaturic effects of β-
adrenergic agonists, loop diuretics, xanthine derivatives, and
corticosteroids. The metabolic syndrome, a major contributor to
coronary heart disease risk, is associated with low phosphate (and
magnesium) levels but the clinical significance of these disturbances
is unclear. Refeeding or glucose administration to phosphate-
depleted patients may cause fatal hypophosphatemia.
 
Table 21–9. Causes of hypophosphatemia.
 
Diminished supply or absorption
     Starvation
     Parenteral alimentation with inadequate phosphate
content
     Malabsorption syndrome, small bowel bypass
     Absorption blocked by oral antacids with aluminum or
magnesium
     Vitamin D–deficient and vitamin D–resistant
osteomalacia
Increased loss
     Phosphaturic drugs: theophylline, diuretics,
bronchodilators, corticosteroids
     Hyperparathyroidism (primary or secondary)
     Hyperthyroidism
     Renal tubular defects with excessive phosphaturia
(congenital,
        induced by monoclonal gammopathy, heavy metal
poisoning), alcoholism
     Hypokalemic nephropathy
     Inadequately controlled diabetes mellitus
     Hypophosphatemic rickets
     Phosphatonins of oncogenic osteomalacia (eg, FGF23
production)
Intracellular shift of phosphorus
     Administration of glucose
     Anabolic steroids, estrogen, oral contraceptives, β-
adrenergic agonists, xanthine derivatives
     Hungry bone syndrome
     Respiratory alkalosis
     Salicylate poisoning
Electrolyte abnormalities
     Hypercalcemia
     Hypomagnesemia
     Metabolic alkalosis
Abnormal losses followed by inadequate repletion
     Diabetes mellitus with acidosis, particularly during
aggressive therapy
     Recovery from starvation or prolonged catabolic state
     Chronic alcoholism, particularly during restoration of
nutrition; associated with hypomagnesemia
     Recovery from severe burns
FGF23, fibroblast growth factor 23.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Acute, severe hypophosphatemia (< 1.0 mg/dL [or < 0.32
mmol/L]) can lead to rhabdomyolysis, paresthesias, and
encephalopathy (irritability, confusion, dysarthria, seizures, and
coma). Respiratory failure or failure to wean from mechanical
ventilation may occur as a result of diaphragmatic weakness.
Arrhythmias and heart failure are uncommon but serious
manifestations. Hematologic manifestations include acute hemolytic
anemia from erythrocyte fragility, platelet dysfunction with petechial
hemorrhages, and impaired chemotaxis of leukocytes (leading to
increased susceptibility to gram-negative sepsis).
Chronic severe depletion may cause anorexia, pain in muscles
and bones, and fractures.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urine phosphate excretion is a useful clue in the evaluation of
hypophosphatemia. 
The 
normal 
renal 
response 
to
hypophosphatemia is decreased urinary phosphate excretion to <
100 mg/day. The fractional excretion of phosphate (FEPO4) should
be < 5%. The main factors regulating FEPO4 are PTH and
phosphate intake. Increased PTH or phosphate intake decreases
FEPO4 (ie, more phosphate is excreted into the urine).
Measurement of plasma PTH or PTHrP levels may be helpful.
p
y
p
The clinical utility of serum FGF levels is undetermined except in
uncommon diseases.
Other clinical features may be suggestive of hypophosphatemia,
such as hemolytic anemia and rhabdomyolysis. Fanconi syndrome
may present with any combination of uricosuria, aminoaciduria,
normoglycemic glucosuria, normal anion gap metabolic acidosis,
and phosphaturia. In chronic hypophosphatemia, radiographs and
bone biopsies show changes resembling osteomalacia.
 Treatment
Hypophosphatemia can be prevented by including phosphate in
repletion and maintenance fluids. A rapid decline in calcium levels
can occur with parenteral administration of phosphate; oral
replacement 
of 
phosphate 
is 
preferable. 
Moderate
hypophosphatemia (1.0–2.5 mg/dL [or 0.32–0.79 mmol/L]) is
usually asymptomatic and does not require treatment. The
hypophosphatemia in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) will
usually 
correct 
with 
normal 
dietary 
intake. 
Chronic
hypophosphatemia can be treated with oral phosphate repletion.
Mixtures of sodium and potassium phosphate salts may be given to
provide 0.5–1 g (16–32 mmol) of phosphate per day. For severe,
symptomatic hypophosphatemia (< 1 mg/dL [or < 0.32 mmol/L]),
an infusion should provide 279–310 mg/12 h (or 9–10 mmol/12 h)
until the serum phos phorus exceeds 1 mg/dL and the patient can be
switched to oral therapy. The infusion rate should be decreased if
hypotension occurs. Monitoring of plasma phosphate, calcium, and
potassium every 6 hours is necessary because the response to
phosphate supplementation is not predictable. Magnesium
deficiency often coexists and should be treated.
Contraindications 
to 
phosphate 
replacement 
include
hypoparathyroidism, advanced CKD, tissue damage and necrosis,
and hypercalcemia. When an associated hyperglycemia is treated,
phosphate accompanies glucose into cells, and hypophosphatemia
may ensue.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with refractory hypophosphatemia with
increased urinary phosphate excretion may require
evaluation by an endocrinologist (for such conditions as
hyperparathyroidism and vitamin D disorders) or a
nephrologist (for such conditions as renal tubular defects).
•    Patients with decreased gastrointestinal absorption
may require referral to a gastroenterologist.
When to Admit
Patients with severe or refractory hypophosphatemia will require
intravenous phosphate.
Brunelli SM et al. Hypophosphatemia: clinical consequences and
management. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Jul;18(7):1999–2003.
[PMID: 17568018]
 
Geerse DA et al. Treatment of hypophosphatemia in the intensive
care unit: a review. Crit Care. 2010;14(4):R147. [PMID:
20682049]
 
Liamis G et al. Medication-induced hypophosphatemia: a review.
QJM. 2010 Jul;103(7):449–59. [PMID: 20356849]
 
Mehanna HM et al. Refeeding syndrome: what it is, and how to
prevent and treat it. BMJ. 2008 Jun 28;336(7659):1495–8.
[PMID: 18583681]
 
HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Advanced CKD is the most common cause.
 Hyperphosphatemia in the presence of hypercalcemia imposes a
high risk of metastatic calcification.
 
 General Considerations
Advanced CKD with decreased urinary excretion of phosphate is
the most common cause of hyperphosphatemia. Other causes are
listed in Table 21–10.
 
Table 21–10. Causes of hyperphosphatemia.
 
Massive load of phosphate into the extracellular fluid
     Exogenous sources
        Hypervitaminosis D
        Laxatives or enemas containing phosphate
        Intravenous phosphate supplement
     Endogenous sources
        Rhabdomyolysis (especially if chronic kidney disease
coexists)
        Cell lysis by chemotherapy of malignancy, particularly
lymphoproliferative diseases
        Metabolic acidosis (lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis)
        Respiratory acidosis (phosphate incorporation into
cells is disturbed)
Decreased excretion into urine
     Chronic kidney disease
     Acute kidney injury
     Hypoparathyroidism
     Pseudohypoparathyroidism
     Acromegaly
Pseudohyperphosphatemia
     Multiple myeloma
     Hyperbilirubinemia
     Hypertriglyceridemia
     Hemolysis in vitro
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical manifestations are those of the underlying disorder or
associated condition.
B. Laboratory Findings
In addition to elevated phosphate, blood chemistry abnormalities
are those of the underlying disease.
 Treatment
Treatment is directed at the underlying cause. Exogenous sources of
phosphate, including enteral or parenteral nutrition and medications,
should be reduced or eliminated. Dietary phosphate absorption can
be reduced by oral phosphate binders, such as calcium carbonate,
calcium acetate, sevelamer carbonate, lanthanum carbonate, and
aluminum hydroxide. Sevelamer, lanthanum, and aluminum may be
used in patients with hypercalcemia, although aluminum use should
be limited to a few days because of the risk of aluminum
accumulation and neurotoxicity. In acute kidney injury and
advanced CKD, dialysis will reduce serum phosphate.
 When to Admit
Patients 
with 
acute 
severe 
hyperphosphatemia 
require
hospitalization for emergent therapy, possibly including dialysis.
Concomitant illnesses, such as acute kidney injury or cell lysis, may
necessitate admission.
Hruska KA et al. Hyperphosphatemia of chronic kidney disease.
Kidney Int. 2008 Jul;74(2):148–57. [PMID: 18449174]
 
Kuhlmann MK. Management of hyperphosphatemia. Hemodial
Int. 2006 Oct;10(4):338–45. [PMID: 17014508]
 
Prié D et al. Genetic disorders of renal phosphate transport. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Jun 24;362(25):2399–409. [PMID: 20573928]
 
Tonelli M et al. Oral phosphate binders in patients with kidney
failure. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 8;362(14):1312–24. [PMID:
20375408]
 
DISORDERS OF MAGNESIUM
CONCENTRATION
 
Normal plasma magnesium concentration is 1.8–3.0 mg/dL (or
0.75–1.25 mmol/L), with about one-third bound to protein and
two-thirds existing as free cation. Magnesium excretion is via the
kidney. Magnesium's physiologic effects on the nervous system
resemble those of calcium.
Altered magnesium concentration usually provokes an associated
alteration of Ca2+. Both hypomagnesemia and hypermagnesemia
can decrease PTH secretion or action. Severe hypermagnesemia (>
5 mg/dL [or 2.1 mmol/L]) suppresses PTH secretion with
consequent hypocalcemia; this disorder is typically seen only in
patients receiving magnesium therapy for preeclampsia. Severe
hypomagnesemia causes PTH resistance in end-organs and
eventually decreased PTH secretion in severe cases.
HYPOMAGNESEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Serum concentration of magnesium may not be decreased even in
the presence of magnesium depletion. Check urinary magnesium
excretion if renal magnesium wasting is suspected.
 Causes neurologic symptoms and arrhythmias.
 Impairs release of PTH.
 
 General Considerations
Causes of hypomagnesemia are listed in Table 21–11.
Normomagnesemia does not exclude magnesium depletion because
only 1% of total body magnesium is in the extracellular fluid (ECF).
y
y
g
(
)
Hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia share many etiologies, including
diuretics, diarrhea, alcoholism, aminoglycosides, and amphotericin.
Renal potassium wasting also occurs from hypomagnesemia, and is
refractory to potassium replacement until magnesium is repleted.
Hypomagnesemia also suppresses PTH release and causes end-
organ resistance to PTH and low 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 levels.
The resultant hypocalcemia is refractory to calcium replacement
until the magnesium is normalized. Molecular mechanisms of
magnesium wasting have been revealed in some hereditary
disorders.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Common symptoms are those of hypokalemia and hypocalcemia,
with weakness and muscle cramps. Marked neuromuscular and
central nervous system hyperirritability may produce tremors,
athetoid movements, jerking, nystagmus, a Babinski response,
confusion, and disorientation. Cardiovascular manifestations include
hypertension, tachycardia, and ventricular arrhythmias.
 
Table 21–11. Causes of hypomagnesemia.
 
Diminished absorption or intake
     Malabsorption, chronic diarrhea, laxative abuse
     Prolonged gastrointestinal suction
     Small bowel bypass
     Malnutrition
     Alcoholism
     Total parenteral alimentation with inadequate Mg2+
content
Increased renal loss
     Diuretic therapy (loop diuretics, thiazide diuretics)
     Hyperaldosteronism, Gitelman syndrome (a variant of
Bartter syndrome)
     Hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism
     Hypercalcemia
     Volume expansion
     Tubulointerstitial diseases
     Transplant kidney
     Drugs (aminoglycoside, cetuximab, cisplatin,
amphotericin B, pentamidine)
Others
     Diabetes mellitus
     Post-parathyroidectomy (hungry bone syndrome)
     Respiratory alkalosis
     Pregnancy
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinary excretion of magnesium exceeding 10–30 mg/day or a
fractional excretion > 2% indicates renal magnesium wasting.
Hypocalcemia and hypokalemia are often present. The ECG shows
a prolonged QT interval, due to lengthening of the ST segment.
PTH secretion is often suppressed (see Hypocalcemia, above).
 Treatment
Magnesium oxide, 250–500 mg orally once or twice daily, is useful
for treating chronic hypomagnesemia. Treatment of symptomatic
hypomagnesemia should include infusion of 1–2 g of magnesium
sulfate, followed by an infusion of 6 g magnesium sulfate in at least 1
L of fluids over 24 hours, repeated for up to 7 days to replete
magnesium stores. Magnesium sulfate may be given intramuscularly
in a dosage of 200–800 mg/day (8–33 mmol/day) in four divided
doses. Serum levels must be monitored daily and dosage adjusted
to keep the concentration from rising above 3 mg/dL. Tendon
reflexes may be checked for hyporeflexia of hypermagnesemia. K+
and Ca2+ replacement may be required, but patients with
hypokalemia and hypocalcemia of hypomagnesemia do not recover
without magnesium supplementation.
Patients with normal kidney function can excrete excess
magnesium; hypermagnesemia should not develop with replacement
dosages. In patients with CKD, magnesium replacement should be
done cautiously to avoid hypermagnesemia. Reduced doses (50–
75% dose reduction) and more frequent monitoring (at least twice
daily) are indicated.
Musso CG. Magnesium metabolism in health and disease. Int Urol
Nephrol. 2009;41(2):357–62. [PMID: 19274487]
 
Naderi AS et al. Hereditary etiologies of hypomagnesemia. Nat
Clin Pract Nephrol. 2008 Feb;4(2):80–9. [PMID: 18227801]
 
Pham PC et al. Hypomagnesemia in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Mar;2(2):366–73. [PMID:
17699436]
 
HYPERMAGNESEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often associated with advanced CKD and chronic intake of
magnesium-containing drugs.
 
 General Considerations
Hypermagnesemia is almost always the result of advanced CKD
and impaired magnesium excretion. Antacids and laxatives are
underrecognized sources of magnesium. Pregnant patients may have
severe hypermagnesemia from intravenous magnesium for
preeclampsia and eclampsia. Magnesium replacement should be
done cautiously in patients with CKD; dose reductions up to 75%
may be necessary to avoid hypermagnesemia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Muscle weakness, decreased deep tendon reflexes, mental
obtundation, and confusion are characteristic manifestations.
Weakness, flaccid paralysis, ileus, urinary retention, and
hypotension are noted. Serious findings include respiratory muscle
paralysis and cardiac arrest.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum Mg2+ is elevated. In the common setting of CKD, BUN,
creatinine, potassium, phosphate, and uric acid may all be elevated.
Serum Ca2+ is often low. The ECG shows increased PR interval,
broadened QRS complexes, and peaked T waves, probably
related to associated hyperkalemia.
 Treatment
Exogenous sources of magnesium should be discontinued. Calcium
antagonizes Mg2+ and may be given intravenously as calcium
chloride, 500 mg or more at a rate of 100 mg (4.1 mmol) per
minute. Hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis may be necessary to
remove magnesium, particularly with severe kidney disease.
Long-term use of magnesium hydroxide and magnesium sulfate
should be avoided in patients with advanced stages of CKD.
Moe SM. Disorders involving calcium, phosphorus, and
magnesium. Prim Care. 2008 Jun;35(2):215–37. [PMID:
18486714]
 
Topf JM et al. Hypomagnesemia and hypermagnesemia. Rev
Endocr Metab Disord. 2003 May;4(2):195–206. [PMID:
12766548]
 
ACID–BASE DISORDERS
 
Assessment of a patient's acid–base status requires measurement of
arterial pH, PCO2, and plasma bicarbonate (HCO3−). Blood gas
analyzers directly measure pH and PCO2. The HCO3− value is
calculated from the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation:
The total venous CO2 measurement is a more direct
determination of HCO3−. Because of the dissociation characteristics
of carbonic acid (H2CO3) at body pH, dissolved CO2 is almost
exclusively in the form of HCO3−, and for clinical purposes the total
carbon dioxide content is equivalent (± 3 mEq/L) to the HCO3−
concentration:
H+ + HCO3− ↔ H2CO3 ↔ CO2 + H2O
Venous blood gases can provide useful information for acid–base
assessment since the arteriovenous differences in pH and PCO2 are
small and relatively constant. Venous blood pH is usually 0.03–0.04
units lower than arterial blood pH, and venous blood PCO2 is 7 or
8 mm Hg higher than arterial blood PCO2. Calculated HCO3−
concentration in venous blood is at most 2 mEq/L higher than
arterial blood HCO3−. Arterial and venous blood gases will not be
equivalent during a cardiopulmonary arrest; arterial samples should
be obtained for the most accurate measurements of pH and PCO2.
TYPES OF ACID–BASE DISORDERS
There are two types of acid–base disorders: acidosis and alkalosis.
These disorders can be either metabolic (decreased or increased
HCO3−) or respiratory (decreased or increased PCO2). Primary
respiratory disorders affect blood acidity by changes in PCO2, and
primary metabolic disorders are disturbances in HCO3−
concentration. A primary disturbance is usually accompanied by a
compensatory response, but the compensation does not fully
correct the pH disturbance of the primary disorder. If the pH is <
7.40, the primary process is acidosis, either respiratory (PCO2 >
40 mm Hg) or metabolic (HCO3− < 24 mEq/L). If the pH is higher
than 7.40, the primary process is alkalosis, either respiratory
(PCO2 < 40 mm Hg) or metabolic (HCO3− > 24 mEq/L). One
respiratory or metabolic disorder with its appropriate compensatory
response is a simple acid-base disorder.
MIXED ACID–BASE DISORDERS
Two or three simultaneous disorders can be present in a mixed
acid-base disorder, but there can never be two primary respiratory
disorders. Uncovering a mixed acidbase disorder is clinically
important, but requires a methodical approach to acid-base analysis
(see box, Step-by-Step Analysis of Acid-Base Status). Once the
primary disturbance has been determined, the clinician should
assess whether the compensatory response is appropriate (Table
21–12). An inadequate or an exaggerated response indicates the
presence of another primary acid-base disturbance.
The anion gap should always be calculated for two reasons.
First, it is possible to have an abnormal anion gap even if the
sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate levels are normal. Second, a
large anion gap (> 20 mEq/L) suggests a primary metabolic acid-
base disturbance regardless of the pH or serum bicarbonate level
because a markedly abnormal anion gap is never a compensatory
response to a respiratory disorder. In patients with an increased
anion gap metabolic acidosis, clinicians should calculate the
corrected bicarbonate. In increased anion gap acidoses, there
should be a mole for mole decrease in HCO3− as the anion gap
increases. A corrected HCO3− value higher or lower than normal
(24 mEq/L) indicates the concomitant presence of metabolic
alkalosis or normal anion gap metabolic acidosis, respectively.
 
Table 21–12. Primary acid-base disorders and expected
compensation.
 
Adrogué HJ et al. Assessing acid-base disorders. Kidney Int.
2009 Dec;76(12):1239–47. [PMID: 19812535]
 
Kellum JA. Disorders of acid-base balance. Crit Care Med. 2008
Nov;35(11):2630–6. [PMID: 17893626]
 
Rastegar A. Clinical utility of Stewart's method in diagnosis and
management of acid-base disorders. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2009 Jul;4(7):1267–74. [PMID: 19520748]
 
METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Decreased HCO3− with acidemia.
 Classified into increased anion gap acidosis and normal anion gap
acidosis.
 Lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis, and toxins produce metabolic
acidoses with the largest anion gaps.
 Normal anion gap acidosis is mainly caused by gastrointestinal
HCO3− loss or RTA. Urinary anion gap may help distinguish
between these causes.
 
 General Considerations
The hallmark of metabolic acidosis is decreased HCO3−. Metabolic
acidoses are classified by the anion gap, either normal or increased
(Table 21–13). The anion gap is the difference between readily
measured anions and cations.
In plasma,
Major unmeasured cations are calcium (2 mEq/L), magnesium (2
mEq/L), γ-globulins, and potassium (4 mEq/L). Major unmeasured
anions are albumin (2 mEq/L per g/dL), phosphate (2 mEq/L),
sulfate (1 mEq/L), lactate (1–2 mEq/L), and other organic anions
(3–4 mEq/L). Traditionally, the normal anion gap has been 12 ± 4
mEq/L. With current autoanalyzers, the reference range may be
lower (6 ± 1 mEq/L), primarily from an increase in Cl− values.
Despite its usefulness, the anion gap can be misleading. Non-acid–
base disorders may cause errors in anion gap interpretation; these
disorders 
including 
hypoalbuminemia, 
hypernatremia, 
or
hyponatremia; antibiotics (eg, carbenicillin is an unmeasured anion;
polymyxin is an unmeasured cation) may also cause errors in anion
gap interpretation. Although not usually associated with metabolic
acidosis, a decreased anion gap can occur because of a reduction in
unmeasured anions or an increase in unmeasured cations. In
hypoalbuminemia, a 2 mEq/L decrease in anion gap will occur for
every 1 g/dL decline in serum albumin.
 
Table 21–13. anion gap in metabolic acidosis.1
 
Decreased (< 6 mEq)
     Hypoalbuminemia (decreased unmeasured anion)
     Plasma cell dyscrasias
        Monoclonal protein (cationic paraprotein)
(accompanied by chloride and bicarbonate)
     Bromide intoxication
Increased (> 12 mEq)
     Metabolic anion
        Diabetic ketoacidosis
        Alcoholic ketoacidosis
        Lactic acidosis
        Chronic kidney disease (advanced stages) (PO43−,
SO42−)
        Starvation
        Metabolic alkalosis (increased number of negative
charges on protein)
     Drug or chemical anion
        Salicylate intoxication
        Sodium carbenicillin therapy
        Methanol (formic acid)
        Ethylene glycol (oxalic acid)
Normal (6–12 mEq)
     Loss of HCO3−
        Diarrhea
        Recovery from diabetic ketoacidosis
        Pancreatic fluid loss ileostomy (unadapted)
        Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
     Chloride retention
        Renal tubular acidosis
        Ileal loop bladder
     Administration of HCL equivalent or NH4Cl
        Arginine and lysine in parenteral nutrition
1Reference ranges for anion gap may vary based on differing laboratory
methods.
STEP-BY-STEP ANALYSIS OF ACID-BASE STATUS
Step 1: Determine the primary (or main) disorder—whether it is
metabolic or respiratory—from blood pH, HCO3−, and PCO2
values.
 
Step 2: Determine the presence of mixed acid-base disorders by
calculating the range of compensatory responses (Table 21–12).
 
Step 3: Calculate the anion gap (Table 21–13).
 
Step 4: Calculate the corrected HCO3− concentration if the anion
gap is increased (see above).
 
Step 5: Examine the patient to determine whether the clinical signs
are compatible with the acid-base analysis.
 
 
INCREASED ANION GAP ACIDOSIS (Increased
Unmeasured Anions)
Normochloremic metabolic acidosis generally results from addition
of organic acids such as lactate, acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate,
and exogenous toxins. Other anions such as isocitrate, α-
ketoglutarate, malate and d-lactate, may contribute to the anion gap
of lactic acidosis, DKA, and acidosis of unknown etiology. Uremia
causes an increased anion gap metabolic acidosis from unexcreted
organic acids and anions.
A. Lactic Acidosis
Lactic acid is formed from pyruvate in anaerobic glycolysis,
typically in tissues with high rates of glycolysis, such as gut
(responsible for over 50% of lactate production), skeletal muscle,
brain, skin, and erythrocytes. Normally, lactate levels remain low (1
mEq/L) because of metabolism of lactate principally by the liver
through gluconeogenesis or oxidation via the Krebs cycle. The
kidneys metabolize about 30% of lactate.
In lactic acidosis, lactate levels are at least 4–5 mEq/L but
commonly 10–30 mEq/L. There are two basic types of lactic
acidosis.
Type A (hypoxic) lactic acidosis is more common, resulting from
decreased tissue perfusion; cardiogenic, septic, or hemorrhagic
shock; and carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning. These
conditions increase peripheral lactic acid production and decrease
hepatic metabolism of lactate as liver perfusion declines.
Type B lactic acidosis may be due to metabolic causes (eg,
diabetes, ketoacidosis, liver disease, kidney disease, infection,
leukemia, or lymphoma) or toxins (eg, ethanol, methanol,
salicylates, isoniazid, or metformin). Propylene glycol can cause
lactic acidosis from decreased liver metabolism; it is used as a
vehicle for intravenous drugs, such as nitroglycerin, etomidate, and
diazepam. Parenteral nutrition without thiamine causes severe
refractory lactic acidosis from deranged pyruvate metabolism.
Patients with short bowel syndrome may develop d-lactic acidosis
with encephalopathy due to carbohydrate malabsorption and
subsequent fermentation by colonic bacteria.
Nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhibitors can cause type
B lactic acidosis due to mitochondrial toxicity.
Idiopathic lactic acidosis, usually in debilitated patients, has an
extremely high mortality rate. (For treatment of lactic acidosis, see
below and Chapter 27.)
B. Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA)
DKA is characterized by hyperglycemia and metabolic acidosis
with an increased anion gap:
H+ + B− + NaHCO3 ↔ CO2 + NaB + H2O
where B− is β-hydroxybutyrate or acetoacetate, the ketones
responsible for the increased anion gap. The anion gap should be
calculated from the measured serum electrolytes; correction of the
serum sodium for the dilutional effect of hyperglycemia will
exaggerate the anion gap. Diabetics with ketoacidosis may have
lactic acidosis from tissue hypoperfusion and increased anaerobic
metabolism.
During the recovery phase of DKA, a hyperchloremic non-anion
gap acidosis can develop because saline resuscitation results in
chloride retention, restoration of GFR, and ketoaciduria. Ketone
salts (NaB) are formed as bicarbonate is consumed:
HB + NaHCO3 → NaB + H2CO3
The kidney reabsorbs ketone anions poorly but can compensate
for the loss of anions by increasing the reabsorption of Cl−.
Patients with DKA and normal kidney function may have marked
ketonuria and severe metabolic acidosis but only a mildly increased
anion gap. Thus, the size of the anion gap correlates poorly with the
severity of the DKA; the urinary loss of Na+ or K+ salts of β-
hydroxybutyrate will lower the anion gap without altering the H+
excretion or the severity of the acidosis. Urine dipsticks for ketones
test primarily for acetoacetate and, to a lesser degree, acetone but
not the predominant ketoacid, β-hydroxybutyrate. Dipstick tests for
ketones may become more positive even as the patient improves
due to the metabolism of hydroxybutyrate. Thus, the patient's
clinical status and pH are better markers of improvement than the
anion gap or ketone levels.
C. Alcoholic Ketoacidosis
Chronically malnourished patients who consume large quantities of
alcohol daily may develop alcoholic ketoacidosis. Most of these
patients have mixed acid–base disorders (10% have a triple acid–
base disorder). Although decreased HCO3− is usual, 50% of the
patients may have normal or alkalemic pH. Three types of
metabolic acidosis are seen in alcoholic ketoacidosis: (1)
Ketoacidosis is due to β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate excess.
(2) Lactic acidosis: Alcohol metabolism increases the NADH:NAD
ratio, causing increased production and decreased utilization of
lactate. Accompanying thiamine deficiency, which inhibits pyruvate
carboxylase, further enhances lactic acid production in many cases.
Moderate to severe elevations of lactate (> 6 mmol/L) are seen
with concomitant disorders such as sepsis, pancreatitis, or
hypoglycemia. (3) Hyperchloremic acidosis from bicarbonate loss in
the urine is associated with ketonuria (see above). Metabolic
alkalosis occurs from volume contraction and vomiting. Respiratory
alkalosis results from alcohol withdrawal, pain, or associated
disorders such as sepsis or liver disease. Half of the patients have
hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. When serum glucose levels are >
250 mg/dL, the distinction from DKA is difficult. The absence of a
diabetic history and normoglycemia after initial therapy support the
diagnosis of alcoholic ketoacidosis.
D. Toxins
(See also Chapter 38.) Multiple toxins and drugs increase the anion
gap by increasing endogenous acid production. Common examples
include methanol (metabolized to formic acid), ethylene glycol
(glycolic and oxalic acid), and salicylates (salicylic acid and lactic
acid). The latter can cause a mixed disorder of metabolic acidosis
with respiratory alkalosis. In toluene poisoning, a metabolite
hippurate is rapidly excreted by the kidney and may present as a
normal anion gap acidosis. Isopropanol, which is metabolized to
acetone, increases the osmolar gap, but not the anion gap.
E. Uremic Acidosis
As the GFR drops below 15–30 mL/min, the kidneys are
increasingly unable to excrete H+ and organic acids, such as
phosphate and sulfate, resulting in an increased anion gap acidosis.
Hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis develops in earlier
stages of CKD.
NORMAL ANION GAP ACIDOSIS (Table 21–14)
The two major causes are gastrointestinal HCO3− loss and defects
in renal acidification (renal tubular acidoses). The urinary anion gap
can differentiate between these causes (see below).
A. Gastrointestinal HCO3− Loss
The gastrointestinal tract secretes bicarbonate at multiple sites.
Small bowel and pancreatic secretions contain large amounts of
HCO3−; massive diarrhea or pancreatic drainage can result in
HCO3− loss. Hyperchloremia occurs because the ileum and colon
secrete HCO3− in exchange for Cl− by countertransport. The
resultant volume contraction causes increased Cl− retention by the
kidney in the setting of decreased HCO3−. Patients with
ureterosigmoidostomies can develop hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis because the colon secretes HCO3− in the urine in exchange
for Cl−.
B. Renal Tubular Acidosis (RTA)
Hyperchloremic acidosis with a normal anion gap and normal (or
near normal) GFR, and in the absence of diarrhea, defines RTA.
The defect is either inability to excrete H+ (inadequate generation of
new HCO3−) or inappropriate reabsorption of HCO3−. Three
major types can be differentiated by the clinical setting, urinary pH,
urinary anion gap (see below), and serum K+ level. The
pathophysiologic mechanisms of RTA have been elucidated by
identifying the responsible molecules and gene mutations.
1. Classic distal RTA (type I)—This disorder is characterized by
selective deficiency in H+ secretion in α intercalated cells in the
collecting tubule. Despite acidosis, urinary pH cannot be acidified
and is above 5.5, which retards the binding of H+ to phosphate (H+
+ HPO42– → H2PO4) and inhibits titratable acid excretion.
Furthermore, urinary excretion of NH4+Cl− is decreased, and the
urinary anion gap is positive (see below). Enhanced K+ excretion
occurs probably because there is less competition from H+ in the
distal nephron transport system. Furthermore, hyperaldosteronism
occurs in response to renal salt wasting, which will increase
potassium excretion. Nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis are often
seen in patients with distal RTA since chronic acidosis decreases
tubular calcium reabsorption. Hypercalciuria, alkaline urine, and
lowered level of urinary citrate cause calcium phosphate stones and
nephrocalcinosis.
Distal RTA develops as a consequence of paraproteinemias,
autoimmune disease, and drugs and toxins such as amphotericin.
 
Table 21–14. Hyperchloremic, normal anion gap metabolic
acidoses.
 
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Cogan MG. Fluid and
Electrolytes: Physiology and Pathophysiology. McGraw-Hill, 1991
2. Proximal RTA (type II)—Proximal RTA is due to a selective
defect in the proximal tubule's ability to reabsorb filtered HCO3−.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide) can cause proximal
RTA. About 90% of filtered HCO 3− is absorbed by the proximal
tubule. A proximal defect in HCO3− reabsorption will overwhelm
the distal tubule's limited capacity to reabsorb HCO3−, resulting in
bicarbonaturia and metabolic acidosis. Distal delivery of HCO3−
declines as the plasma HCO3− level decreases. When the plasma
HCO3− level drops to 15–18 mEq/L, the distal nephron can
reabsorb the diminished filtered load of HCO3−. Bicarbonaturia
resolves, and the urinary pH can be acidic. Thiazide-induced
volume contraction can be used to enhance proximal HCO3−
reabsorption, leading to the decrease in distal HCO3− delivery and
improvement of bicarbonaturia and renal acidification. The
increased delivery of HCO3− to the distal nephron increases K+
secretion, and hypokalemia results if a patient is loaded with excess
HCO3− and K+ is not adequately supplemented. Proximal RTA can
exist with other proximal reabsorption defects, such as Fanconi
syndrome, resulting in glucosuria, aminoaciduria, phosphaturia, and
uricosuria. Causes include multiple myeloma and nephrotoxic drugs.
3. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronemic RTA (type IV)—Type
IV is the most common RTA in clinical practice. The defect is
aldosterone deficiency or antagonism, which impairs distal nephron
Na+ reabsorption and K+ and H+ excretion. Renal salt wasting and
hyperkalemia are frequently present. Common causes are diabetic
nephropathy, 
tubulointerstitial 
renal 
diseases, 
hypertensive
nephrosclerosis, and AIDS. In patients with these disorders, drugs,
such as ACE inhibitors, spironolactone, and NSAIDs, can
exacerbate the hyperkalemia.
C. Dilutional Acidosis
Rapid dilution of plasma volume by 0.9% NaCl may cause
hyperchloremic acidosis.
D. Recovery from DKA
See earlier section, Increased Anion Gap Acidosis (Increased
Unmeasured Anion).
E. Posthypocapnia
In prolonged respiratory alkalosis, HCO3− decreases and Cl−
increases from decreased renal NH4+Cl− excretion. If the
respiratory alkalosis is corrected quickly, HCO3− will remain low
until the kidneys can generate new HCO3−, which generally takes
several days. In the meantime, the increased PCO2 with low
HCO3− causes metabolic acidosis.
F. Hyperalimentation
Hyperalimentation fluids may contain amino acid solutions that
acidify when metabolized, such as arginine hydrochloride and lysine
hydrochloride.
 
Assessment 
of 
Hyperchloremic
Metabolic Acidosis by Urinary Anion Gap
Increased renal NH4+Cl− excretion to enhance H+ removal is the
normal physiologic response to metabolic acidosis. The daily urinary
excretion of NH4Cl can be increased from 30 mEq to 200 mEq in
response to acidosis.
The urinary anion gap (Na+ + K+ − Cl−) reflects the ability of the
kidney to excrete NH4Cl. The urinary anion gap differentiates
between gastrointestinal and renal causes of hyperchloremic
acidosis. If the cause is gastrointestinal HCO3− loss (diarrhea), renal
acidification remains normal and NH4Cl excretion increases, and
the urinary anion gap is negative. If the cause is distal RTA, the
urinary anion gap is positive, since the basic lesion in the disorder is
the inability of the kidney to excrete H+ as NH4Cl. In proximal
(type II) RTA, the kidney has defective HCO3− reabsorption,
leading to increased HCO3− excretion rather than decreased
NH4Cl excretion; the urinary anion gap is often negative.
Urinary pH may not readily differentiate between the two causes.
Despite acidosis, if volume depletion from diarrhea causes
inadequate Na+ delivery to the distal nephron and therefore
decreased exchange with H+, urinary pH may not be lower than
5.3. In the presence of this relatively high urinary pH, however, H+
excretion continues due to buffering of NH3 to NH4+, since the p K
of this reaction is as high as 9.1. Potassium depletion, which can
accompany diarrhea (and surreptitious laxative abuse), may also
impair renal acidification. Thus, when volume depletion is present,
the urinary anion gap is a better measure of ability to acidify the
urine than urinary pH.
When large amounts of other anions are present in the urine, the
urinary anion gap may not be reliable. In such a situation, NH4+
excretion can be estimated using the urinary osmolar gap.
NH4+ excretion (mmol/L) +
0.5 × Urinary osmolar gap =
0.5 [U osm - 2(U Na+ + U K+) + U urea + U glucose]
where urine concentrations and osmolality are in mmol/L.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of metabolic acidosis are mainly those of the underlying
disorder. Compensatory hyperventilation is an important clinical sign
and may be misinterpreted as a primary respiratory disorder;
Kussmaul breathing (deep, regular, sighing respirations) may be
seen with severe metabolic acidosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Blood pH, serum HCO3−, and PCO2 are decreased. Anion gap
may be normal (hyperchloremic) or increased (normochloremic).
Hyperkalemia may be seen (see above).
 Treatment
A. Increased Anion Gap Acidosis
Treatment is aimed at the underlying disorder, such as insulin and
fluid therapy for diabetes and appropriate volume resuscitation to
restore tissue perfusion. The metabolism of lactate will produce
HCO3− and increase pH. Supplemental HCO3− is indicated for
treatment of hyperkalemia (Table 21–6) and some forms of normal
anion gap acidosis but has been controversial for treatment of
increased anion gap metabolic acidosis with respect to efficacy and
safety. Large amounts of HCO3− may have deleterious effects,
including hypernatremia, hyperosmolality, volume overload, and
worsening of intracellular acidosis.
In addition, alkali administration stimulates phosphofructokinase
activity, thus exacerbating lactic acidosis via enhanced lactate
production. Ketogenesis is also augmented by alkali therapy.
In salicylate intoxication, alkali therapy must be started unless
blood pH is already alkalinized by respiratory alkalosis, since an
increased pH converts salicylate to more impermeable salicylic acid,
decreasing central nervous system damage. In alcoholic
ketoacidosis, thiamine should be given with glucose to avoid
Wernicke encephalopathy. The bicarbonate deficit can be
calculated as follows:
HCO3− deficit =
0.5 × body weight in kg × (24 - HCO3-)
Half of the calculated deficit should be administered within the
first 3–4 hours to avoid overcorrection and volume overload. In
methanol intoxication, ethanol had been used as a competitive
substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase, which metabolizes methanol to
formaldehyde. Inhibition of alcohol dehydrogenase by fomepizole is
the standard of care.
B. Normal Anion Gap Acidosis
Treatment of RTA is mainly achieved by administration of alkali
(either as bicarbonate or citrate) to correct metabolic abnormalities
and prevent nephrocalcinosis and CKD.
Large amounts of alkali (10–15 mEq/kg/d) may be required to
treat proximal RTA because most of the alkali is excreted into the
urine, which exacerbates hypokalemia. Thus, a mixture of sodium
and potassium salts is preferred. Thiazides may reduce the amount
of alkali required, but hypokalemia may develop. Treatment of type
1 distal RTA requires less alkali (1–3 mEq/kg/day) than proximal
RTA. Potassium supplementation may be necessary.
For type IV RTA, dietary potassium restriction may be
necessary and potassium-retaining drugs should be withdrawn.
Fludrocortisone may be effective in cases with hypoaldosteronism,
but should be used with care, preferably in combination with loop
diuretics. In some cases, alkali supplementation (1–3 mEq/kg/d)
may be required.
 When to Refer
Most clinicians will refer patients with renal tubular acidoses to a
nephrologist for evaluation and possible alkali therapy.
 When to Admit
Patients will require emergency department evaluation or hospital
admission depending on the severity of the acidosis and underlying
conditions.
Jammalamadaka D et al. Ethylene glycol, methanol and isopropyl
alcohol intoxication. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Mar;339(3): 276–81.
[PMID: 20090509]
 
Kraut JA et al. Metabolic acidosis: pathophysiology, diagnosis and
management. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2010 May;6(5):274–85. [PMID:
20308999]
 
Liamis G et al. Pharmacologically-induced metabolic acidosis: a
review. Drug Saf. 2010 May 1;33(5):371–91. [PMID:
20397738]
 
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 High HCO3− with alkalemia.
 Evaluate effective circulating volume by physical examination and
check urinary chloride concentration to differentiate saline-
responsive alkalosis from saline-unresponsive alkalosis.
 
 Classification
Metabolic alkalosis is characterized by high HCO3−. Abnormalities
that generate HCO3− are called “initiation factors,” whereas
abnormalities that promote renal conservation of HCO3− are called
“maintenance factors.” Metabolic alkalosis may remain even after
the initiation factors have resolved.
The causes of metabolic alkalosis are classified into two groups
based on “saline responsiveness” using the urine Cl− as a marker for
volume status (Table 21–15). Salineresponsive metabolic alkalosis
is a sign of extracellular volume contraction, and saline-unresponsive
alkalosis implies excessive total body bicarbonate with either
euvolemia or hypervolemia. The compensatory increase in PCO2
rarely exceeds 55 mm Hg; higher PCO2 values imply a
superimposed primary respiratory acidosis.
A. Saline-Responsive Metabolic Alkalosis
Much more common than saline-unresponsive alkalosis, saline-
responsive alkalosis is characterized by normotensive extracellular
volume contraction and hypokalemia. Hypotension and orthostasis
may be seen. In vomiting or nasogastric suction, loss of acid (HCL)
initiates the alkalosis, but volume contraction from Cl− loss
maintains the alkalosis because the kidney avidly reabsorbs Na+ to
restore the ECF. Increased sodium reabsorption necessitates
increased HCO3− reabsorption proximally, and the urinary pH
remains acidic despite alkalemia (paradoxical aciduria). Renal Cl−
reabsorption is high, and urine Cl− is low (< 10–20 mEq/L). In
alkalosis, bicarbonaturia may force Na+ excretion as the
accompanying cation even if volume depletion is present. Therefore,
urine Cl− is preferred to urine Na+ as a measure of extracellular
volume. Diuretics may limit the utility of urine chloride by increasing
urine chloride and sodium excretion, even in the setting of volume
contraction.
Metabolic alkalosis is generally associated with hypokalemia due
to the direct effect of alkalosis on renal potassium excretion and
secondary 
hyperaldosteronism from 
volume 
depletion.
Hypokalemia exacerbates the metabolic alkalosis by increasing
bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal tubule and hydrogen ion
secretion in the distal tubule. Administration of KCl will correct the
disorder.
1. Contraction alkalosis—Diuretics decrease extracellular volume
from urinary loss of NaCl and water. The plasma HCO3−
concentration increases because the extracellular fluid volume
contracts around a stable total body bicarbonate. Contraction
alkalosis is the opposite of dilutional acidosis.
2. Posthypercapnia alkalosis—In chronic respiratory acidosis,
the kidney decreases bicarbonate excretion, increasing plasma
HCO3− concentration (Table 21–12). Hypercapnia directly affects
the proximal tubule to decrease NaCl reabsorption, which can
cause extracellular volume depletion. If PCO2 is rapidly corrected,
metabolic alkalosis will exist until the kidney excretes the retained
bicarbonate. Many patients with chronic respiratory acidosis
receive diuretics, which further exacerbates the metabolic alkalosis.
B. Saline-Unresponsive Alkalosis
1. Hyperaldosteronism—Primary hyperaldosteronism causes
extracellular volume expansion and hypertension by increasing distal
sodium reabsorption. Aldosterone increases H+ and K+ excretion,
producing metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia. In an attempt to
decrease extracellular volume, high levels of NaCl are excreted with
a high urine Cl− (> 20 mEq/L). Therapy with NaCl will increase
volume expansion and hypertension and will not treat the underlying
problem of mineralocorticoid excess.
2. Alkali administration with decreased GFR—The normal
kidney has a substantial capacity for bicarbonate excretion,
protecting against metabolic alkalosis even with large HCO3−
intake. However, urinary excretion of bicarbonate is inadequate in
CKD. If large amounts of HCO3− are consumed, as with intensive
antacid therapy, metabolic alkalosis will occur. Lactate, citrate, and
gluconate can also cause metabolic alkalosis because they are
metabolized to bicarbonate. In milk-alkali syndrome, sustained
heavy ingestion of absorbable antacids and milk causes
hypercalcemic kidney injury and metabolic alkalosis. Volume
contraction from renal hypercalcemic effects exacerbates the
alkalosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
There are no characteristic symptoms or signs. Orthostatic
hypotension may be encountered. Concomitant hypokalemia may
cause weakness and hyporeflexia. Tetany and neuromuscular
irritability occur rarely.
B. Laboratory Findings
The arterial blood pH and bicarbonate are elevated. With
respiratory compensation, the arterial PCO2 is increased. Serum
potassium and chloride are decreased. There may be an increased
anion gap. The urine chloride can differentiate between saline-
responsive (< 25 mEq/L) and unresponsive (> 40 mEq/L) causes.
 Treatment
Mild alkalosis is generally well tolerated. Severe or symptomatic
alkalosis (pH > 7.60) requires urgent treatment.
A. Saline-Responsive Metabolic Alkalosis
Therapy for saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis is correction of
the extracellular volume deficit with isotonic saline. Diuretics should
be discontinued. H2-blockers or proton pump inhibitors may be
helpful in patients with alkalosis from nasogastric suctioning. If
pulmonary or cardiovascular disease prohibits adequate
resuscitation, acetazolamide will increase renal bicarbonate
excretion. Hypokalemia may develop because bicarbonate
excretion may induce kaliuresis. Severe cases, especially those with
reduced kidney function, may require dialysis with low-bicarbonate
dialysate.
 
Table 21–15. Metabolic alkalosis.
 
 
 
Saline-Responsive (UCl <
25 mEq/L)
Saline-Unresponsive (UCl
> 40 mEq/L)
Excessive body bicarbonate
content
     Renal alkalosis
        Diuretic therapy
        Poorly reabsorbable
anion therapy: carbenicillin,
penicillin, sulfate, phosphate
        Posthypercapnia
     Gastrointestinal alkalosis
        Loss of HCL from
Excessive body bicarbonate
content
     Renal alkalosis
        Normotensive
           Bartter syndrome
(renal salt wasting and
secondary
hyperaldosteronism)
           Severe potassium
depletion
           Refeeding alkalosis
           Hypercalcemia and
h
th
idi
vomiting or nasogastric
suction
        Intestinal alkalosis:
chloride diarrhea
        NaHCO3 (baking soda)
        Sodium citrate, lactate,
gluconate, acetate
        Transfusions
        Antacids
Normal body bicarbonate
content
        “Contraction alkalosis”
hypoparathyroidism
     Hypertensive
        Endogenous
mineralocorticoids
           Primary
aldosteronism
           Hyperreninism
           Adrenal enzyme
deficiency: 11- and 17-
hydroxylase
           Liddle syndrome
     Exogenous alkali
     Exogenous
mineralocorticoids
     Licorice
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Narins RG et al.
Diagnostic strategies in disorders of fluid, electrolyte and acid-base
homeostasis. Am J Med. 1982 Mar;72(3):496–520.
B. Saline-Unresponsive Metabolic Alkalosis
Therapy for saline-unresponsive metabolic alkalosis includes
surgical removal of a mineralocorticoid-producing tumor and
blockage of aldosterone effect with an ACE inhibitor or with
spironolactone. Metabolic alkalosis in primary aldosteronism can be
treated only with potassium repletion.
Boscaro M et al. Diagnosis and management of primary
aldosteronism. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2008 Aug;
15(4):332–8. [PMID: 18594273]
 
Gennari FJ et al. Acid-base disturbances in gastrointestinal
disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Nov;3(6):1861–8. [PMID:
18922984]
 
Gennari FJ et al. An unusual case of metabolic alkalosis. Am J
Kidney Dis. 2010 Jun;55(6):1130–5. [PMID: 20400219]
 
Medarov BI. Milk-alkali syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Mar;
84(3):261–7. [PMID: 19252114]
 
RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS
(HYPERCAPNIA)
Respiratory acidosis results from hypoventilation and subsequent
hypercapnia. Pulmonary and extrapulmonary disorders can cause
hypoventilation.
Acute respiratory failure is associated with severe acidosis and
only a small increase in the plasma bicarbonate. After 6–12 hours,
the primary increase in PCO2 evokes a renal compensation to
excrete more acid and to generate more HCO3−; complete
metabolic compensation by the kidney takes several days.
Chronic respiratory acidosis is generally seen in patients with
underlying lung disease, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Renal excretion of acid as NH4Cl results in hypochloremia.
When chronic respiratory acidosis is corrected suddenly,
posthypercapnic metabolic alkalosis ensues until the kidneys excrete
the excess bicarbonate over 2-3 days.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
With acute onset, somnolence, confusion, mental status changes,
asterixis, and myoclonus may develop. Severe hypercapnia
increases cerebral blood flow, cerebrospinal fluid pressure, and
intracranial pressure; papilledema and pseudotumor cerebri may be
seen.
B. Laboratory Findings
Arterial pH is low and PCO2 is increased. Serum HCO3− is
elevated but does not fully correct the pH. If the disorder is chronic,
hypochloremia is seen.
 Treatment
If opioid overdose is a possible diagnosis or there is no other
obvious cause for hypoventilation, the clinician should consider a
diagnostic and therapeutic trial of intravenous naloxone (see
Chapter 38). In all forms of respiratory acidosis, treatment is
directed at the under lying disorder to improve ventilation.
Adrogué HJ. Diagnosis and management of severe respiratory
acidosis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010 Nov;56(5):994–1000. [PMID:
20673604]
 
Brown LK. Hypoventilation syndromes. Clin Chest Med. 2010
Jun;31(2):249–70. [PMID: 20488285]
 
RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS
(HYPOCAPNIA)
Respiratory alkalosis occurs when hyperventilation reduces the
PCO2, increasing serum pH. The most common cause of
respiratory alkalosis is hyperventilation syndrome (Table 21–16),
but bacterial septicemia and cirrhosis are other common causes. In
pregnancy, progesterone stimulates the respiratory center,
producing an average PCO2 of 30 mm Hg and respiratory
alkalosis. Symptoms of acute respiratory alkalosis are related to
decreased cerebral blood flow induced by the disorder.
 
Table 21–16. Causes of respiratory alkalosis.
 
Hypoxia
     Decreased inspired oxygen tension
     High altitude
     Ventilation/perfusion inequality
     Hypotension
     Severe anemia
CNS-mediated disorders
     Voluntary hyperventilation
     Anxiety-hyperventilation syndrome
     Neurologic disease
     Cerebrovascular accident (infarction, hemorrhage)
     Infection
     Trauma
     Tumor
     Pharmacologic and hormonal stimulation
        Salicylates
        Nicotine
        Xanthines
        Pregnancy (progesterone)
     Hepatic failure
     Gram-negative septicemia
     Recovery from metabolic acidosis
     Heat exposure
Pulmonary disease
     Interstitial lung disease
     Pneumonia
     Pulmonary embolism
     Pulmonary edema
Mechanical overventilation
Adapted, with permission, from Gennari FJ. Respiratory acidosis and
alkalosis. In: Maxwell and Kleeman's Clinical Disorders of Fluid and
Electrolyte Metabolism, 5th ed. Narins RG (editor). McGraw-Hill, 1994.
Determination of appropriate metabolic compensation may reveal
an associated metabolic disorder (see above under Mixed Acid–
Base Disorders).
As in respiratory acidosis, the metabolic compensation is greater
if the respiratory alkalosis is chronic (Table 21–12). Although serum
HCO3− is frequently < 15 mEq/L in metabolic acidosis, such a low
level in respiratory alkalosis is unusual and may represent a
concomitant primary metabolic acidosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In acute cases (hyperventilation), there is light-headedness, anxiety,
perioral numbness, and paresthesias. Tetany occurs from a low
ionized calcium, since severe alkalosis increases calcium binding to
albumin.
B. Laboratory Findings
Arterial blood pH is elevated, and PCO2 is low. Serum bicarbonate
is decreased in chronic respiratory alkalosis.
 Treatment
Treatment is directed toward the underlying cause. In acute
hyperventilation syndrome from anxiety, the traditional treatment of
breathing into a paper bag should be discouraged because it does
not correct PCO2 and may decrease PO2. Reassurance may be
sufficient for the anxious patient, but sedation may be necessary if
the process persists. Hyper ventilation is usually self-limited since
muscle weakness caused by the respiratory alkalemia will suppress
ventilation. Rapid correction of chronic respiratory alkalosis may
result in metabolic acidosis as PCO2 is increased in the setting of a
previous compensatory decrease in HCO3−.
Curley G et al. Bench-to-bedside review: carbon dioxide. Crit
Care. 2010;14(2):220. [PMID: 20497620]
 
Laffey JG et al. Hypocapnia. N Engl J Med. 2002 Jul
4;347(1):43–53. [PMID: 12097540]
 
FLUID MANAGEMENT
 
Daily parenteral maintenance fluids and electrolytes for an average
adult would include 2500–3000 mL of 5% dextrose in 0.2% saline
solution (34 mEq Na+ plus 34 mEq Cl−/L) with 30 mEq/L of KCl.
Guidelines for gastrointestinal fluid losses are shown in Table 21–
17.
Weight loss or gain is the best indication of water balance.
Insensible water loss should be considered in febrile patients. Water
loss increases by 100–150 mL/d for each degree of body
temperature over 37 °C.
In patients requiring maintenance and possibly replacement of
fluid and electrolytes by parenteral infusion, the total daily ration
should be administered continuously over 24 hours to ensure
optimal utilization.
If intravenous fluids are the only source of water, electrolytes,
and calories for longer than a week, parenteral nutrition containing
amino acids, lipids, trace metals, and vitamins may be indicated.
(See Chapter 29.)
For parenteral alimentation, 620 mg (20 mmol) of phosphorus is
required for every 1000 nonprotein kcal to maintain phosphate
balance and to ensure anabolic function. For prolonged parenteral
fluid maintenance, a daily ration is 620–1240 mg (20–40 mmol) of
phosphorus.
 
Table 21–17. Replacement guidelines for sweat and gastrointestinal
fluid losses.
 
1 In the absence of diarrhea, colonic fluid Na+ levels are low (40 mEq/L).
 
 
Kidney disease
Suzanne Watnick, MD
Tonja Dirkx, MD
Kidney disease can be discovered incidentally during a routine
medical evaluation or with evidence of kidney dysfunction, such as
hypertension, edema, nausea, or hematuria. The initial approach in
both situations should be to assess the cause and severity of renal
abnormalities. In all cases this evaluation includes (1) an estimation
of disease duration, (2) a careful urinalysis, and (3) an assessment
of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The history and physical
examination, though equally important, are variable among renal
syndromes—thus, specific symptoms and signs are discussed under
each disease entity.
ASSESSMENT OF KIDNEY
DISEASE
 
 Disease Duration
Kidney disease may be acute or chronic. Acute kidney injury, also
known as acute renal failure, is worsening of kidney function over
hours to days, resulting in the retention of nitrogenous wastes (such
as urea nitrogen) and creatinine in the blood. Retention of these
substances is called azotemia. Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
results from an abnormal loss of kidney function over months to
years. Differentiating between the two is important for diagnosis,
treatment, and outcome. Oliguria is unusual in CKD. Anemia (from
low kidney erythropoietin production) is rare in the initial period of
acute kidney disease. Small kidneys are most consistent with CKD,
whereas normal to large-size kidneys can be seen with both chronic
and acute disease.
 Urinalysis
A urinalysis can provide information similar to a renal biopsy in a
way that is cost-effective and, of course, noninvasive. The urine is
collected in midstream or, if that is not feasible, by bladder
catheterization. The urine should be examined within 1 hour after
collection to avoid destruction of formed elements. Urinalysis
includes a dipstick examination followed by microscopic assessment
if the dipstick has positive findings. The dipstick examination
measures urinary pH, protein, hemoglobin, glucose, ketones,
bilirubin, nitrites, and leukocyte esterase. Urinary specific gravity is
often reported, too. Microscopy searches for all formed elements—
crystals, cells, casts, and infecting organisms.
Various findings on the urinalysis are indicative of certain patterns
of kidney disease. A bland (normal) urinary sediment is common,
especially in CKD and acute disorders that are not intrinsic to the
kidney, such as limited effective blood flow to the kidney or
obstruction of outflow of urine. Casts are composed of Tamm-
Horsfall urinary mucoprotein in the shape of the nephron segment
where they were formed. Heavy proteinuria and lipiduria are
consistent with the nephrotic syndrome. The presence of hematuria
with dysmorphic red blood cells, red blood cell casts, and
proteinuria is indicative of glomerulonephritis. Dysmorphic red
blood cells are misshapen during abnormal passage from the
capillary through the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) into
the urinary space of Bowman capsule. Pigmented granular casts and
renal tubular epithelial cells alone or in casts suggest acute tubular
necrosis. White blood cells, including neutrophils and eosinophils,
white blood cell casts (Table 22–1), red blood cells, and small
amounts of protein can be found in interstitial nephritis and
pyelonephritis; Wright and Hansel stains can detect eosinophiluria.
Pyuria alone can indicate a urinary tract infection. Hematuria and
proteinuria are discussed more thoroughly below.
A. Proteinuria
Proteinuria is defined as excessive protein excretion in the urine,
generally > 150–160 mg/24 h in adults. Significant proteinuria is a
sign of an underlying kidney abnormality, usually glomerular in origin
when > 1 g/d. Less than 1 g/d can be due to multiple causes along
the nephron segment, as listed below. Proteinuria can be
accompanied by other clinical abnormalities—elevated blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine levels, abnormal urinary
sediment, or evidence of systemic illness (eg, fever, rash, vasculitis).
There are four primary reasons for development of proteinuria:
(1) Functional proteinuria is a benign process stemming from
stressors such as acute illness, exercise, and “orthostatic
proteinuria.” The latter condition, generally found in people under
age 30 years, usually results in urinary protein excretion of < 1 g/d.
The orthostatic nature of the proteinuria is confirmed by measuring
an 8-hour overnight supine urinary protein excretion, which should
be < 50 mg. (2) Overload proteinuria can result from
overproduction of circulating, filterable plasma proteins (monoclonal
gammopathies), such as Bence Jones proteins associated with
multiple myeloma. Urinary protein electrophoresis will exhibit a
discrete protein peak. Other examples of overload proteinuria
include myoglobinuria in rhabdo myolysis and hemoglobinuria in
hemolysis. (3) Glomerular proteinuria results from effacement of
epithelial cell foot processes and altered glomerular permeability
with an increased filtration fraction of normal plasma proteins.
Glomerular diseases exhibit some degree of proteinuria. The urinary
protein electrophoresis will have a pattern exhibiting a large albumin
spike indicative of increased permeability of albumin across a
damaged GBM. (4) Tubular proteinuria occurs as a result of
faulty reabsorption of normally filtered proteins in the proximal
tubule, such as β2-microglobulin and immunoglobulin light chains.
Causes include acute tubular necrosis, toxic injury (lead,
aminoglycosides), drug-induced interstitial nephritis, and hereditary
metabolic disorders (Wilson disease and Fanconi syndrome).
 
Table 22–1. Significance of specific urinary casts.
 
 
 
Type
Significance
Hyaline
casts
Concentrated urine, febrile disease, after
strenuous exercise, in the course of diuretic
therapy (not indicative of renal disease)
Red cell
casts
Glomerulonephritis
White
cell
casts
Pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis (indicative of
infection or inflammation)
Renal
tubular
cell
casts
Acute tubular necrosis, interstitial nephritis
Coarse, Nonspecific; can represent acute tubular
granular
casts
Nonspecific; can represent acute tubular
necrosis
Broad,
waxy
casts
Chronic kidney disease (indicative of stasis in
enlarged collecting tubules)
Evaluation of proteinuria by urinary dipstick primarily detects
albumin, while overlooking positively charged light chains of
immunoglobulins. These proteins can be detected by the addition of
sulfosalicylic acid to the urine specimen. Precipitation without
dipstick detection of albumin indicates the presence of paraproteins.
The next step is an estimation of proteinuria from a 24-hour urine
collection. A finding of > 150–160 mg/24 h is abnormal, and > 3.5
g/24 h is consistent with nephrotic-range proteinuria. The simplest
method is to collect a random urine sample. The ratio of urinary
protein concentration to urinary creatinine concentration
([Uprotein]/[Ucreatinine]) correlates with 24-hour urine protein
collection (< 0.2 is normal and corresponds to excretion of < 200
mg/24 h). The benefit of a urine protein-to-creatinine ratio is the
ease of collection and the lack of error from overcollection or
undercollection of urine. If a patient has proteinuria with or without
loss of kidney function, kidney biopsy may be indicated, particularly
if the kidney disease is acute in onset. The clinical consequences of
proteinuria are discussed in the section Nephrotic Spectrum
Glomerular Diseases below.
B. Hematuria
Hematuria is significant if there are more than three red cells per
high-power field on at least two occasions. It is usually detected
incidentally by the urine dipstick examination or clinically following
an episode of macroscopic hematuria. The diagnosis must be
confirmed via microscopic examination, as false-positive dipstick
tests can be caused by myoglobin, oxidizing agents, beets and
rhubarb, hydrochloric acid, and bacteria. Transient hematuria is
common, but in patients younger than 40 years, it is less often of
clinical significance due to lower concern for malignancy.
Hematuria may be due to renal or extrarenal causes. Extrarenal
y
causes are addressed in Chapters 23 and 39; most worrisome are
urologic malignancies. Renal causes account for approximately 10%
of cases and are best considered anatomically as glomerular or
nonglomerular. The most common extraglomerular sources include
cysts, calculi, interstitial nephritis, and renal neoplasia. Glomerular
causes include immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, thin GBM
disease, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), other
hereditary glomerular diseases (eg, Alport syndrome), and systemic
nephritic syndromes.
Currently, the United States Health Preventive Services Task
Force does not recommend screening for hematuria. See Chapter
23 for evaluation of hematuria.
 Estimation of GFR
The GFR provides a useful index of kidney function at the level of
the glomerulus. Patients with kidney disease can have a decreased
GFR from any process that causes loss of nephron (and thus
glomerular) mass. However, they can also have a normal or
increased GFR, either from hyperfiltration at the glomerulus or
disease at a different segment of the nephron, interstitium, or
vascular supply. The GFR measures the amount of plasma
ultrafiltered across the glomerular capillaries and correlates with the
ability of the kidneys to filter fluids and various substances. Daily
GFR in normal individuals is variable, with a range of 150–250
L/24 h or 100–120 mL/min/1.73 m2 of body surface area. GFR
can be measured indirectly by determining the renal clearance of
plasma substances that are not bound to plasma proteins, are freely
filterable across the glomerulus, and are neither secreted nor
reabsorbed along the renal tubules. The formula used to determine
the renal clearance of a substance is
where C is the clearance, U and P are the urine and plasma
concentrations of the substance (mg/dL), and  is the urine flow
rate (mL/min). In clinical practice, the clearance rate of endogenous
creatinine, the creatinine clearance, is one way of estimating GFR.
Creatinine is a product of muscle metabolism produced at a
relatively constant rate and cleared by renal excretion. It is freely
filterable by the glomerulus and not reabsorbed by the renal tubules
at steady state. With stable kidney function, creatinine production
and excretion are equal; thus, plasma creatinine concentrations
remain constant. However, it is not a perfect indicator of GFR for
the following reasons: (1) A small amount is normally eliminated by
tubular secretion, and the fraction secreted progressively increases
as GFR declines (overestimating GFR); (2) with severe kidney
failure, gut microorganisms degrade creatinine; (3) an individual's
meat intake and muscle mass affect baseline plasma creatinine
levels; (4) commonly used drugs such as aspirin, cimetidine,
probenecid, and trimethoprim reduce tubular secretion of creatinine,
increasing the plasma creatinine concentration and falsely indicating
kidney dysfunction; and (5) the accuracy of the measurement
necessitates a stable plasma creatinine concentration over a 24-hour
period, so that during the development of and recovery from acute
kidney injury, when the serum creatinine is changing, the creatinine
clearance is of questionable value (Table 22–2).
One way to measure creatinine clearance is to collect a timed
urine sample and determine the plasma creatinine level midway
through the collection. An incomplete or prolonged urine collection
is a common source of error. One way of estimating the
completeness of the collection is to calculate a 24-hour creatinine
excretion; the amount should be constant:
Ucr ×  = 15-20 mg/kg for healthy young women
Ucr ×  = 20-25 mg/kg for healthy young men
The creatinine clearance (Ccr) is approximately 100 mL/min/1.73
m2 in healthy young women and 120 mL/min/1.73 m2 in healthy
young men. The Ccr declines by an average of 0.8 mL/min/yr after
age 40 years as part of the aging process, but 35% of subjects in
one study had no decline in kidney function over 10 years.
 
Table 22–2. Conditions affecting serum creatinine independently of
glomerular filtration rate.
 
 
 
Condition
Mechanism
Conditions elevating creatinine
Ketoacidosis, cephalothin,
cefoxitin, flucytosine
Noncreatinine chromogen
Other drugs: aspirin,
cimetidine, probenecid,
trimethoprim
Inhibition of tubular
creatinine secretion
Conditions decreasing creatinine
Advanced age
Physiologic decrease in
muscle mass
Cachexia
Pathologic decrease in
muscle mass
Liver disease
Decreased hepatic
creatine synthesis and
cachexia
Ccr can be estimated from the formula of Cockcroft and Gault,
which incorporates age, sex, and weight to estimate Ccr from
plasma creatinine levels without any urinary measurements:
For women, the creatinine clearance is multiplied by 0.85
because muscle mass is less. This formula overestimates GFR in
patients who are obese or edematous and is most accurate when
normalized for body surface area of 1.73 m2.
BUN is another index used in assessing kidney function. It is
synthesized mainly in the liver and is the end product of protein
catabolism. Urea is freely filtered by the glomerulus, and about 30–
70% is reabsorbed in the renal tubules. Unlike creatinine clearance,
which overestimates GFR, urea clearance underestimates GFR.
Urea reabsorption may be decreased in volume replete patients,
whereas volume depletion causes increased urea reabsorption from
the kidney, increasing BUN. A normal BUN:creatinine ratio is 10:1,
although this can vary between individuals. With volume depletion,
the ratio can increase to 20:1 or higher. Other causes of increased
BUN include increased catabolism (gastrointestinal [GI] bleeding,
cell lysis, and corticosteroid usage), increased dietary protein, and
decreased renal perfusion (congestive heart failure, renal artery
stenosis) (Table 22–3). Reduced BUN is seen in liver disease and
in the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)
secretion.
As patients approach end-stage renal disease (ESRD), a more
accurate measure of GFR than creatinine clearance is the average of
the creatinine and urea clearances. The creatinine clearance
overestimates GFR, as mentioned above, while the urea clearance
underestimates GFR. Therefore, an average of the two more
accurately approximates the true GFR.
The estimated GFR is a complex four-variable equation,
including serum creatinine, age, weight, and race, that is often
reported alongside serum creatinine measurements and more
accurate than creatinine or urea clearance. This was derived from
data collected for the Modification of Diet and Renal Disease
(MDRD) study and has been validated in several other populations.
Many laboratories will report a value for the estimated GFR in
addition to a serum creatinine. Several web-based calculators will
calculate this; one location is www.nephron.com.
 
Table 22–3. Conditions affecting BUN independently of GFR.
 
Increased BUN
     Reduced effective circulating blood volume (prerenal
azotemia)
     Catabolic states (gastrointestinal bleeding,
corticosteroid use)
     High-protein diets
     Tetracycline
Decreased BUN
     Liver disease
     Malnutrition
     Sickle cell anemia
     SIADH
BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; SIADH,
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone.
Other useful, well-validated estimators of GFR include the CKD-
EPI formula. This is more accurate and precise than the MDRD
equation at higher levels of true GFR, possibly decreasing false-
positive results. However, this estimation equation did not include
large numbers of elderly or nonwhite patients.
Cystatin C is another endogenous marker of GFR, filtered freely
at the glomerulus and produced at a relatively constant rate,
irrespective of muscle mass. It is reabsorbed and partially
metabolized in the renal tubular epithelial cells. Studies show less
variability with age, gender, or race for cystatin C versus serum
creatinine.
RENAL BIOPSY
Indications for percutaneous needle biopsy include (1) unexplained
acute kidney injury or CKD; (2) acute nephritic syndromes; (3)
unexplained proteinuria and hematuria; (4) previously identified and
treated lesions to plan future therapy; (5) systemic diseases
associated with kidney dysfunction, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus, Goodpasture syndrome, and granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis), to confirm the
extent of renal involvement and to guide management; (6) suspected
transplant rejection, to differentiate it from other causes of acute
kidney injury; and (7) to guide treatment. If a patient is unwilling to
accept therapy based on biopsy findings, the risk of biopsy may
outweigh its benefit. Relative contraindications include a solitary or
ectopic kidney (exception: transplant allografts), horseshoe kidney,
uncorrected bleeding disorder, severe uncontrolled hypertension,
renal infection, renal neoplasm, hydronephrosis, ESRD, congenital
anomalies, multiple cysts, or an uncooperative patient.
Prior to biopsy, patients should not use medications that prolong
clotting times and should have well-controlled blood pressure.
Blood work should include a hemoglobin, platelet count,
prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time. After biopsy,
hematuria occurs in nearly all patients. Less than 10% will have
macroscopic hematuria. Patients should remain supine for 4–6
hours postbiopsy. A patient with a 6-hour postbiopsy hematocrit >
3% lower than baseline should be closely monitored.
Percutaneous kidney biopsies are generally safe. Approximately
1% of patients will experience significant bleeding requiring blood
transfusions. More than half of patients will have at least a small
hematoma. Risk of major bleeding persists up to 72 hours after the
biopsy. Any type of anticoagulation therapy should be held for 5–7
days postbiopsy if possible. The risks of nephrectomy and mortality
are about 0.06–0.08%. When a percutaneous needle biopsy is
technically not feasible and renal tissue is deemed clinically essential,
a closed renal biopsy via interventional radiologic techniques or
open renal biopsy under general anesthesia can be done.
Bairy M et al. Safety of outpatient kidney biopsy: one center's
experience with 178 native kidney biopsies. Am J Kidney Dis.
2008 Sep;52(3):631–2. [PMID: 18725027]
 
Campbell KH et al. Kidney disease in the elderly: update on recent
literature. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2008 May; 17(3):298–
303. [PMID: 18408482]
 
Patel JV et al. Hematuria: etiology and evaluation for the primary
care physician. Can J Urol. 2008 Aug;15(Suppl 1):54–61.
[PMID: 18700066]
 
Stevens LA et al. Comparative performance of the CKD
Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) and the Modification of
Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study equations for estimating
GFR levels above 60 mL/min/1.73 m2. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010
Sep;56(3):486–95. [PMID: 20557989]
 
Wyatt C et al. Reporting of estimated GFR in the primary care
clinic. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007 May;49(5):634–41. [PMID:
17472845]
 
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
(ACUTE RENAL FAILURE)
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden increase in BUN or serum creatinine.
 Oliguria often associated.
 Symptoms and signs depend on cause.
 
 General Considerations
Acute kidney injury, also known as acute renal failure, is defined as
a sudden decrease in kidney function, resulting in an inability to
maintain acid-base, fluid and electrolyte balance and to excrete
nitrogenous wastes. Serum creatinine is a convenient marker. A
clinically applicable definition of acute kidney injury has been
developed. The RIFLE criteria describe three progressive levels of
acute kidney injury (risk, injury, and failure) based on the elevation
in serum creatinine or decline in urinary output with two outcome
measures (loss and ESRD). Risk, injury, and failure are defined,
respectively, as a 1.5-fold increase in serum creatinine, a twofold or
threefold increase in serum creatinine, or a decline in urinary output
to 0.5 mL/kg/h over 6, 12, or 24 hours. These definitions were
created by an international consensus panel and correlate with
prognosis. The AKIN criteria are also predictive of outcomes, and
closely follow the RIFLE criteria, with the addition of a change in
serum creatinine of ≥ 0.3 mg/day qualifying as a risk for injury. In
the absence of functioning kidneys, serum creatinine concentration
will typically increase by 1–1.5 mg/dL daily, although with certain
conditions, such as rhabdomyolysis, serum creatinine can increase
more rapidly. On average, 5% of hospital admissions and 30% of
intensive care unit (ICU) admissions carry a diagnosis of acute
kidney injury, and it will develop in 25% of hospitalized patients.
Patients with acute kidney injury of any type are at higher risk for
all-cause mortality according to recent prospective cohorts, whether
y
g
p
p
,
or not there is substantial renal recovery.
Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The uremic milieu of acute kidney injury can cause nonspecific
symptoms. When present, symptoms are often due to uremia or its
underlying cause. Uremia can cause nausea, vomiting, malaise, and
altered sensorium. Hypertension can occur, and fluid homeostasis is
often altered. Hypovolemia can cause states of low blood flow to
the kidneys, sometimes termed “prerenal” states, whereas
hypervolemia can result from intrinsic or “postrenal” disease.
Pericardial effusions can occur with uremia, and a pericardial
friction rub can be present. Effusions may result in cardiac
tamponade. Arrhythmias occur, especially with hyperkalemia. The
lung examination may show rales in the presence of hypervolemia.
Acute kidney failure can cause nonspecific diffuse abdominal pain
and ileus as well as platelet dysfunction; thus, bleeding and clotting
disorders are more common in these patients. The neurologic
examination reveals encephalopathic changes with asterixis and
confusion; seizures may ensue.
B. Laboratory Findings
Elevated BUN and creatinine are present, though these elevations
do not in themselves distinguish acute kidney disease from CKD.
Hyperkalemia often occurs from impaired renal potassium
excretion. The ECG can reveal peaked T waves, PR prolongation,
and QRS widening. A long QT segment can occur with
hypocalcemia. Anion gap and non-gap metabolic acidosis (due to
decreased organic and nonorganic acid clearance) is often noted.
Hyperphosphatemia occurs when phosphorus cannot be secreted
by damaged tubules either with or without increased cell catabolism.
Metastatic calcium phosphate deposition may be observed when
the product of calcium and phosphorus is elevated (eg, exceeding
55-65 mg2/dL2). Anemia can occur as a result of decreased
erythropoietin production over weeks, and associated platelet
dysfunction is typical.
 Classification & Etiology
Acute kidney injury can be divided into three categories: prerenal
causes (renal hypoperfusion leading to lower GFR), intrinsic renal
disease, and postrenal causes (obstructive uropathy). Identifying the
cause is the first step toward treating the patient (Table 22–4).
A. Prerenal Causes
Prerenal causes are the most common reason for acute kidney
insults and injury, accounting for 40–80% of cases, depending on
the population studied. Prerenal azotemia is due to renal
hypoperfusion, which is an appropriate physiologic change. If it can
be immediately reversed with restoration of renal blood flow, renal
parenchymal damage often does not occur. If hypo perfusion
persists, ischemia can result, causing intrinsic kidney injury.
Decreased renal perfusion can occur in several ways, such as a
decrease in intravascular volume, a change in vascular resistance, or
low cardiac output. Causes of volume depletion include
hemorrhage, GI losses, dehydration, excessive diuresis,
extravascular space sequestration, pancreatitis, burns, trauma, and
peritonitis.
Changes in vascular resistance can occur systemically with
sepsis, anaphylaxis, anesthesia, and afterload-reducing drugs.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors prevent efferent
renal arteriolar constriction out of proportion to the afferent
arteriolar constriction; thus, GFR will decrease. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) prevent afferent arteriolar
vasodilation by inhibiting prostaglandin-mediated signals. Thus, in
cirrhosis and congestive heart failure, when prostaglandins are
recruited to increase renal blood flow, NSAIDs will have
particularly deleterious effects. Epinephrine, norepinephrine, high-
dose dopamine, anesthetic agents, and cyclosporine also can cause
renal vasoconstriction. Renal artery stenosis causes increased
resistance and decreased renal perfusion.
 
Table 22–4. Classification and differential diagnosis of acute kidney
injury.
 
BUN:Cr, blood urea nitrogen:creatinine ratio; FENa, fractional excretion of
sodium; UNa, urinary concentration of sodium.
 
Low cardiac output is a state of low effective renal arterial blood
flow. This occurs in states of cardiogenic shock, congestive heart
failure, pulmonary embolism, and pericardial tamponade.
Arrhythmias and valvular disorders can also reduce cardiac output.
In the ICU setting, positive pressure ventilation will decrease venous
return, also decreasing cardiac output.
When GFR falls acutely, it is important to determine whether
acute kidney injury is due to prerenal or intrinsic renal causes. The
history and physical examination are important, and urinalysis can
be helpful. The BUN:creatinine ratio will typically exceed 20:1 due
to increased urea reabsorption. In an oliguric patient, another useful
index is the fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa). With decreased
GFR, the kidney will reabsorb salt and water avidly if there is no
intrinsic tubular dysfunction. Thus, patients with prerenal causes
should have a low fractional excretion percent of sodium (< 1%).
Oliguric patients with intrinsic kidney dysfunction typically have a
high fractional excretion of sodium (> 1–2%). The FENa is
calculated as follows: FENa = clearance of Na+/GFR = clearance
of Na+/Ccr:
Renal sodium handling is more accurately assessed by the FENa
in oliguric states than in nonoliguric states because the FENa could
be relatively low in nonoliguric acute tubular necrosis if sodium
intake and excretion are relatively low. (Oliguria is defined as
urinary output < 400–500 mL/d, or < 20 mL/h.) Diuretics can
cause increased sodium excretion. Thus, if the FENa is high within
12–24 hours after diuretic administration, the cause of acute kidney
injury may not be accurately predicted. Acute kidney injury due to
glomerulonephritis can have a low FENa because sodium
reabsorption and tubular function may not be compromised.
Treatment of prerenal insults depends entirely on the causes, but
maintenance of euvolemia, attention to serum potassium, and
avoidance of nephrotoxic drugs are benchmarks of therapy. This
involves careful assessment of volume status, cardiac function, and
drug usage.
B. Postrenal Causes
Postrenal causes are the least common reason for acute kidney
injury, accounting for approximately 5–10% of cases, but important
to detect because of their reversibility. Postrenal azotemia when
urinary flow from both kidneys, or a single functioning kidney, is
obstructed. Occasionally, postrenal uropathies can occur when a
single kidney is obstructed if the contralateral kidney cannot adjust
for the loss in function, (eg, in a patient with advanced CKD).
Obstruction leads to elevated intraluminal pressure, causing kidney
parenchymal damage, with marked effects on renal blood flow and
tubular function, and a decrease in GFR.
Postrena causes include urethral obstruction, bladder dysfunction
or obstruction, and obstruction of both ureters or renal pelvises. In
men, benign prostatic hyperplasia is the most common cause.
Patients taking anticholinergic drugs are particularly at risk.
Obstruction can also be caused by bladder, prostate, and cervical
cancers; retroperitoneal fibrosis and other processes; and
neurogenic bladder. Less common causes are blood clots, bilateral
ureteral stones, urethral stones or stricture, and bilateral papillary
necrosis. In patients with a single functioning kidney, obstruction of
a solitary ureter can cause postrenal azotemia.
Patients may be anuric or polyuric and may complain of lower
abdominal pain. Obstruction can be constant or intermittent and
partial or complete. On examination, the patient may have an
enlarged prostate, distended bladder, or mass detected on pelvic
examination.
Laboratory examination may initially reveal high urine osmolality,
low urine sodium, high BUN:creatinine ratio, and low FENa (as
tubular function may not be compromised initially). These indices
are similar to a prerenal picture because extensive intrinsic renal
damage has not occurred. After several days, the urine sodium
increases as the kidneys fail and are unable to concentrate the urine
—thus, isosthenuria is present. The urine sediment is generally
benign.
Patients with acute kidney injury and suspected postrenal insults
should undergo bladder catheterization and ultrasonography to
assess for hydroureter and hydronephrosis. After reversal of the
underlying process, these patients often undergo a postobstructive
saliuresis and diuresis, and care should be taken to avoid volume
depletion. Rarely, obstruction is not diagnosed by ultrasonography.
For example, patients with retroperitoneal fibrosis from tumor or
radiation may not show dilation of the urinary tract. If suspicion
does exist, a CT scan or MRI can establish the diagnosis. Prompt
treatment of obstruction within days by catheters, stents, or other
surgical procedures can result in partial or complete reversal of the
acute process.
C. Intrinsic Acute Kidney Injury
Intrinsic renal disorders account for up to 50% of all cases of acute
kidney injury. Intrinsic dysfunction is considered after prerenal and
postrenal causes have been excluded. The sites of injury are the
tubules, interstitium, vasculature, and glomeruli.
 When to Refer
 
•    If a patient has signs of acute kidney injury that have not
reversed over 1–2 weeks, but no signs of acute uremia, the
patient can usually be referred to a nephrologist rather than
admitted.
•    If a patient has signs of persistent urinary tract
obstruction, the patient should be referred to a urologist.
 When to Admit
The patient should be admitted if there is sudden loss of kidney
function resulting in abnormalities that cannot be handled
expeditiously in an outpatient setting (eg, hyperkalemia, volume
overload, uremia) or other requirements for acute intervention, such
as emergent urologic intervention or dialysis.
Jun M et al. Intensities of renal replacement therapy in acute
kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jun;5(6):956–63. [PMID: 20395356]
 
Lafrance JP et al. Acute kidney injury associates with increased
long-term mortality. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Feb;21(2): 345–52.
[PMID: 20019168]
 
Stevens LM et al. JAMA patient page. Kidney failure. JAMA.
2009 Feb 11;301(6):686. [PMID: 19211477]
 
ACUTE TUBULAR NECROSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute kidney injury.
 Ischemic or toxic insult.
 Urine sediment with pigmented granular casts and renal tubular
epithelial cells is pathognomonic but not essential.
 
 General Considerations
Acute kidney injury due to tubular damage is termed “acute tubular
necrosis” and accounts for approximately 85% of intrinsic acute
kidney injury. The two major causes of acute tubular necrosis are
ischemia and nephrotoxin exposure. Ischemia causes tubular
damage from states of low kidney perfusion, often termed a
“prerenal” state. Ischemic acute kidney injury is characterized not
only by inadequate GFR but also by renal blood flow inadequate to
maintain parenchymal cellular formation. This occurs in the setting of
prolonged hypotension or hypoxemia, such as volume depletion,
shock, and sepsis. Major surgical procedures can involve
prolonged periods of hypoperfusion, which are exacerbated by
vasodilating anesthetic agents. Aside from the serum creatinine,
other urinary and serum biomarkers, including neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin and cystatin C, are being investigated in order
to diagnose and treat acute kidney injury earlier in its course, with
the potential for better outcomes.
Exogenous nephrotoxins more commonly cause damage than
endogenous nephrotoxins.
A. Exogenous Nephrotoxins
Aminoglycosides cause some degree of acute tubular necrosis in
up to 25% of hospitalized patients receiving therapeutic levels of the
drugs. Nonoliguric kidney injury typically starts to occur after 5–10
days of exposure. Predisposing factors include underlying kidney
damage, volume depletion, and advanced age. Aminoglycosides
can remain in renal tissues for up to a month, so kidney function
may not recover for some time after stopping the medication.
Monitoring of peak and trough levels is important, but trough levels
are more helpful in predicting renal toxicity. Gentamicin is as
nephrotoxic as tobramycin; streptomycin is the least nephrotoxic of
the aminoglycosides, likely due to the number of cationic amino side
chains present on each molecule.
Amphotericin B is typically nephrotoxic after a dose of 2–3 g.
This causes a type I renal tubular acidosis with severe
vasoconstriction and distal tubular damage, which can lead to
hypokalemia and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Vancomycin,
intravenous acyclovir, and several cephalosporins have been
known to cause acute tubular necrosis.
Radiographic contrast media may be directly nephrotoxic.
Contrast nephropathy is the third leading cause of new acute kidney
injury in hospitalized patients. It probably results from the synergistic
combination of direct renal tubular epithelial cell toxicity and renal
medullary ischemia. Predisposing factors include advanced age,
preexisting kidney disease (serum creatinine > 2 mg/dL), volume
depletion, diabetic nephropathy, congestive heart failure, multiple
myeloma, repeated doses of contrast, and recent exposure to other
nephrotoxic agents, including NSAIDs and ACE inhibitors. The
combination of diabetes mellitus and kidney dysfunction poses the
greatest risk (15–50%) for contrast nephropathy. Lower volumes
of contrast with lower osmolality are recommended in high-risk
patients. Toxicity usually occurs within 24–48 hours after the
radiocontrast study. Nonionic contrast media may be less toxic, but
this has not been well proven. Prevention should be the goal when
using these agents. The mainstay of therapy is a liter of intravenous
0.9% saline over 10–12 hours both before and after the contrast
administration—cautiously in patients with preexisting cardiac
dysfunction. Neither mannitol nor furosemide offers benefit over
0.9% (normal) saline administration. In fact, furosemide may lead to
increased rates of renal dysfunction in this setting. In some but not
all studies, N-acetylcysteine given before and after contrast
decreased the incidence of dye-induced nephrotoxicity.
Acetylcysteine is a thiol-containing antioxidant with little toxicity
whose mechanism of action is unclear. It is rarely given unless a
patient has a preexisting risk factor. With little harm and possible
benefit, administering acetylcysteine 600 mg orally every 12 hours
twice, before and after a dye load, for patients at risk for acute
kidney injury, is a reasonable strategy. Intravenous N-
acetylcysteine, 1200 mg prior to an emergent procedure, has shown
benefit compared with placebo and may be a good option if a
patient needs contrast dye urgently. One large prospective
randomized controlled trial showed no benefit of N-acetylcysteine in
over 2300 patients randomized to either 1200 mg orally twice
versus placebo prior to and after angiographic procedures. The
primary endpoint was a 25% increase in serum creatinine within
48–96 hours after the procedure. Some investigators have shown a
benefit using sodium bicarbonate (154 mEq/L, intravenously at 3
mL/kg/h for 1 hour before the procedure, then 1 mL/kg/h for 6
hours after the procedure) over a more conventional regimen of
normal saline as the isotonic volume expander. However, others
have shown sodium bicarbonate was not superior to sodium
chloride when using similar administration regimens. Other
nephrotoxic agents should be avoided during the day before and
after dye administration.
Cyclosporine toxicity is usually dose dependent. It causes distal
tubular dysfunction (a type 4 renal tubular acidosis) from severe
vasoconstriction. Regular blood level monitoring is important to
prevent both acute and chronic nephrotoxicity. With patients who
are taking cyclosporine for renal transplant rejection, kidney biopsy
is often necessary to distinguish transplant rejection from
cyclosporine toxicity. Renal function usually improves after reducing
the dose or stopping the drug.
Other exogenous nephrotoxins include antineoplastics, such as
cisplatin and organic solvents, and heavy metals such as mercury,
cadmium, and arsenic.
B. Endogenous Nephrotoxins
Endogenous nephrotoxins include heme-containing products, uric
acid, and paraproteins. Myoglobinuria as a consequence of
rhabdomyolysis leads to acute tubular necrosis. Necrotic muscle
releases large amounts of myoglobin, which is freely filtered across
the glomerulus. The myoglobin is reabsorbed by the renal tubules,
and direct damage can occur. Distal tubular obstruction from
pigmented casts and intrarenal vasoconstriction can also cause
damage. This type of kidney injury occurs in the setting of crush
injury, or muscle necrosis from prolonged unconsciousness,
seizures, cocaine, and alcohol abuse. Dehydration and acidosis
predispose to the development of myoglobinuric acute kidney
injury. Patients may complain of muscular pain and often have signs
of muscle injury. Rhabdomyolysis of clinical importance commonly
occurs with a serum creatine kinase (CK) > 20,000–50,000
international units/L. One study showed that 58% of patients with
acute kidney injury from rhabdomyolysis had CK levels > 16,000
international units/L. Only 11% of patients without kidney injury had
CK values > 16,000 international units/L. The globin moiety of
myoglobin will cause the urine dipstick to read falsely positive for
hemoglobin: the urine appears dark brown, but no red cells are
present. With lysis of muscle cells, patients also become
hyperkalemic, 
hyperphosphatemic, 
and 
hyperuricemic.
Hypocalcemia may ensue due to phosphorus and calcium
precipitation. The mainstay of treatment is volume repletion. Other
adjunctive treatments include mannitol for free radical clearance and
diuresis as well as alkalinization of the urine. These modalities have
not been proved to change outcomes in human trials. Hypocalcemia
should not be treated unless the patient is symptomatic. As the
patient recovers, calcium can move back from tissues to plasma, so
early exogenous calcium administration is not recommended unless
the patient has symptoms or the level becomes exceedingly low in
an unconscious patient because such repletion could result in
hypercalcemia later in the course of the illness.
Hemoglobin can cause a similar form of acute tubular necrosis.
Massive intravascular hemolysis is seen in trans-fusion reactions and
in certain hemolytic anemias. Reversal of the underlying disorder
and hydration are the mainstays of treatment.
Hyperuricemia can occur in the setting of rapid cell turnover
and lysis. Chemotherapy for germ cell neoplasms and leukemia and
lymphoma are the primary causes. Acute kidney injury occurs with
intratubular deposition of uric acid crystals; serum uric acid levels
are often > 15–20 mg/dL and urine uric acid levels > 600 mg/24 h.
A urine uric acid to urine creatinine ratio > 1.0 indicates risk of
acute kidney injury.
Bence Jones protein seen in conjunction with multiple myeloma
can cause direct tubular toxicity and tubular obstruction. Other renal
complications from multiple myeloma include hypercalcemia and
renal tubular dysfunction, including proximal renal tubular acidosis
(see Multiple Myeloma, below).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
See Acute Kidney Injury.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia are commonly encountered.
BUN:creatinine ratio is usually < 20:1 because tubular function is
not intact, per the mechanisms described in the general section on
acute kidney injury (Table 22–4). Urinalysis may show evidence of
acute tubular damage. The urine may be brown. Urinary output can
be either oliguric or nonoliguric, with oliguria portending a worse
prognosis. Urine sodium concentration is typically elevated, but the
FENa is more indicative of tubular function, as discussed above. On
microscopic examination, an active sediment may show pigmented
granular casts or “muddy brown” casts. Renal tubular epithelial cells
and epithelial cell casts can be present (see Table 22–1).
 Treatment
Treatment is aimed at hastening recovery and avoiding
complications. Preventive measures should be taken to avoid
volume overload and hyperkalemia. Loop diuretics have been used
in large doses (eg, furosemide in doses ranging from 20 mg to 160
mg orally or intravenously twice daily, or as a continuous infusion)
to affect adequate diuresis and may help convert oliguric to
nonoliguric renal failure. Such a conversion has never been shown
to affect outcomes such as mortality, though. One retrospective
study has shown potentially worse outcomes in patients who receive
doses of furosemide, including non-recovery of renal function and
an increased risk of death. A prospective randomized controlled
trial has shown no difference between the administration of large
doses of diuretics versus placebo on either recovery from acute
kidney injury or death. Widespread use of diuretics in critically ill
patients with acute kidney injury should thus be discouraged.
Disabling side effects of supranormal dosing include hearing loss
and cerebellar dysfunction. This is mainly due to peak furosemide
levels and can be avoided by the use of a furosemide drip. A
starting dose of 0.1–0.3 mg/kg/h is appropriate, increasing to a
maximum of 0.5–1 mg/kg/h. A bolus of 1–1.5 mg/kg should be
administered at the beginning of each dose escalation. Intravenous
thiazide diuretics can be used to augment urinary output;
chlorothiazide, 250–500 mg intravenously every 8–12 hours, is a
reasonable choice. Another good choice to augment diuresis is
metolazone at doses of 2.5–5 mg given orally once to twice daily,
30 minutes prior to loop diuretics. It is less expensive than
intravenous chlorothiazide and has reasonable bioavailability. Short-
term effects of loop diuretics include activation of the renin–
angiotensin system. One prospective randomized trial showed the
long-term benefits of plasma ultrafiltration over the use of
intravenous diuretics in patients with decompensated heart failure.
This intervention can be considered in ICU patients with acute
kidney injury in need of volume removal who are nonresponsive to
diuretics. Nutritional support should maintain adequate intake while
preventing excessive catabolism. Dietary protein restriction of 0.6
g/kg/d helps prevent metabolic acidosis. Hypocalcemia and
hyperphosphatemia can be improved with diet and phosphate-
binding agents, such as aluminum hydroxide (500 mg orally with
meals) over the short term, and calcium carbonate (500–1500 mg
orally three times daily), calcium acetate (667 mg, two or three
tablets, orally before meals), sevelamer carbonate (800–1600 mg
orally three times daily), and lanthanum carbonate (1000 mg orally
with meals) over longer periods. Hypocalcemia should not be
treated in patients with rhabdomyolysis unless they are
symptomatic. Hypermagnesemia can occur because of reduced
magnesium excretion by the renal tubules, so magnesium-containing
antacids and laxatives should be avoided in these patients. Dosages
of all medications must be adjusted according to the estimated
degree of renal impairment for drugs eliminated by the kidney.
Indications for dialysis in acute kidney injury from acute tubular
necrosis or other intrinsic disorders include life-threatening
electrolyte disturbances (such as hyperkalemia), volume overload
unresponsive to diuresis, worsening acidosis, and uremic
complications (eg, encephalopathy, pericarditis, and seizures). In
gravely ill patients, less severe but worsening abnormalities may also
be indications for dialytic support. Two prospective randomized
control trials, each with more than 1100 patients, showed that an
intensive dialysis dose was not superior to a more conventional
dose.
 Course & Prognosis
The clinical course of acute tubular necrosis is often divided into
three phases: initial injury, maintenance, and recovery. The
maintenance phase is expressed as either oliguric (urinary output <
500 mL/d) or nonoliguric. Nonoliguric acute tubular necrosis has a
better outcome. Conversion from oliguric to nonoliguric states may
be attempted but has not been shown to change the prognosis.
Drugs such as dopamine and diuretics are sometimes used for this
purpose but have not been shown to improve outcomes. In
numerous studies, dopamine use in this setting has been shown to
have no benefit. Average duration of the maintenance phase is 1–3
weeks but may be several months. Cellular repair and removal of
tubular debris occur during this period. The recovery phase can be
heralded by diuresis. GFR begins to rise; BUN and serum
creatinine fall.
The mortality rate associated with acute kidney injury is 20–50%
in hospitalized settings, and up to 70% with additional comorbid
illnesses. Increased mortality is associated with advanced age,
severe underlying disease, and multi-system organ failure. Leading
causes of death are infections, fluid and electrolyte disturbances,
and worsening of underlying disease. Mortality rates may be starting
to improve slightly according to two retrospective cohort studies
conducted within the last 10 years.
 When to Refer
 
•    A patient with acute tubular necrosis should be referred
to a nephrologist when the etiology is unclear or renal
function continues to worsen despite intervention.
•    Also, referral is appropriate if fluid, electrolyte, and acid-
base abnormalities are recalcitrant to interventions.
•    Studies have shown that nephrology referral improves
outcome in acute kidney injury.
 When to Admit
Admission is appropriate when a patient has symptoms signs of
acute kidney injury that require immediate inter vention, such as
intravenous fluids, dialytic therapy, or that requires a team approach
that cannot be coordinated as an outpatient.
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever.
 Transient maculopapular rash.
 Acute or chronic kidney injury.
 Pyuria (including eosinophiluria), white blood cell casts, and
hematuria.
 
 General Considerations
Acute interstitial nephritis accounts for 10–15% of cases of intrinsic
renal failure. An interstitial inflammatory response with edema and
possible tubular cell damage is the typical pathologic finding. Cell-
mediated immune reactions prevail over humoral responses. T
lymphocytes can cause direct cytotoxicity or release lymphokines
that recruit monocytes and inflammatory cells.
Although drugs account for over 70% of cases, acute interstitial
nephritis also occurs in infectious diseases, immunologic disorders,
or as an idiopathic condition. The most common drugs are
penicillins and cephalosporins, sulfonamides and sulfonamide-
containing diuretics, NSAIDs, rifampin, phenytoin, and allopurinol.
Proton pump inhibitors have also been recognized as a cause of
acute interstitial nephritis. Infectious causes include streptococcal
infections, leptospirosis, cytomegalovirus, histoplasmosis, and
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Immunologic entities are more
commonly associated with glomerulonephritis, but systemic lupus
erythematosus, 
Sjögren 
syndrome, 
sarcoidosis, 
and
cryoglobulinemia can cause interstitial nephritis.
Clinical Findings
Clinical features can include fever (> 80%), rash (25–50%),
arthralgias, and peripheral blood eosinophilia (80%). The urine
often contains red cells (95%), white cells, and white cell casts.
Proteinuria can be a feature, particularly in NSAID-induced
interstitial nephritis, but is usually modest. Eosinophiluria can be
detected by Wright or Hansel stain.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Acute interstitial nephritis often carries a good prognosis. Recovery
occurs over weeks to months, but urgent dialytic therapy may be
necessary in up to one-third of all referred patients before
resolution. Patients rarely progress to ESRD. Those with prolonged
courses of oliguric failure and advanced age have a worse
prognosis. Treatment consists of supportive measures and removal
of the inciting agent. If kidney injury persists after these steps, a
short course of corticosteroids can be given, although the data to
support use of corticosteroids are not substantial. Short-term, high-
dose methylprednisolone (0.5–1 g/d intravenously for 1–4 days) or
prednisone (60 mg/d orally for 1–2 weeks) followed by a
prednisone taper can be used in these more severe cases of drug-
induced interstitial nephritis.
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hematuria, dysmorphic red cells, red cell casts, and mild
proteinuria.
 Dependent edema and hypertension.
 Acute renal insufficiency.
 
 General Considerations
Acute glomerulonephritis is a relatively uncommon cause of acute
kidney injury, accounting for about 5% of cases. Pathologically,
inflammatory glomerular lesions are seen. These include
mesangioproliferative, focal and diffuse proliferative, and crescentic
lesions. The larger the percentage of glomeruli involved and the
more severe the lesion, the more likely it is that the patient will have
a poor clinical outcome.
Categorization of acute glomerulonephritis can be done by
serologic analysis. Markers include anti-GBM antibodies,
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs), and other immune
markers of disease (see Table 20–10).
Immune complex deposition usually occurs when moderate
antigen excess over antibody production occurs. Complexes
formed with marked antigen excess tend to remain in the circulation.
Antibody excess with large antigen–antibody aggregates usually
results in phagocytosis and clearance of the precipitates by the
mononuclear phagocytic system in the liver and spleen. Causes
include IgA nephro pathy (Berger disease), peri-infectious or post-
infectious glomerulonephritis, endocarditis, lupus nephritis, cryoglo
bulinemic glomerulonephritis (often associated with hepatitis C
virus), and MPGN.
Anti-GBM–associated acute glomerulonephritis is either
confined to the kidney or associated with pulmonary hemorrhage.
The latter is termed “Goodpasture syndrome.” Injury is related to
autoantibodies aimed against type IV collagen in the GBM rather
than to immune complex deposition.
Pauci-immune acute glomerulonephritis is a form of small-
vessel vasculitis associated with ANCAs, causing primary and
secondary kidney diseases that do not have direct immune complex
deposition or antibody binding. Tissue injury is believed to be due
to cell-mediated immune processes. An example is granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis), a systemic
necrotizing vasculitis of small arteries and veins associated with
intravascular and extravascular granuloma formation. In addition to
glomerulonephritis, these patients can have upper airway,
pulmonary, and skin manifestations of disease. Cytoplasmic ANCA
(C-ANCA) is a common pattern. Microscopic polyangiitis is
another pauci-immune vasculitis causing acute glomerulonephritis.
Perinuclear staining (P-ANCA) is the common pattern. ANCA-
associated and anti-GBM-associated acute glomerulonephritis can
evolve to crescentic glomerulonephritis and often have poor
outcomes unless treatment is started early. Both are described more
fully below.
Other vascular causes of acute glomerulonephritis include
hypertensive emergencies and the thrombotic microangiopathies
such 
as 
hemolytic-uremic 
syndrome 
and 
thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura (see Chapter 14).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with acute glomerulonephritis are often hypertensive and
edematous, and have an abnormal urinary sediment. The edema is
found first in body parts with low tissue tension, such as the
periorbital and scrotal regions.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum creatinine can rise over days to months, depending on the
rapidity of the underlying process. The BUN:creatinine ratio is not a
reliable marker of kidney function and is more reflective of the
underlying volume status of the patient. Dipstick and microscopic
evaluation will reveal evidence of hematuria, moderate proteinuria
(usually < 3 g/d), and cellular elements such as red cells, red cell
casts, and white cells. Red cell casts are specific for
glomerulonephritis, and a detailed search is warranted. Either spot
urinary protein-creatinine ratios or 24-hour urine collections can
quantify protein excretion, the latter can quantify creatinine
clearance when renal function is stable. However, in cases of
rapidly changing serum creatinine values, the urinary creatinine
clearance is an unreliable marker of GFR. The FENa is usually low
unless the renal tubulo-interstitial space is affected, and renal
dysfunction is marked (see Table 22–4).
Further tests include complement levels (C3, C4, CH50), ASO
titer, anti-GBM antibody levels, ANCAs, antinuclear antibody
titers, cryoglobulins, hepatitis serologies, blood cultures, renal
ultrasound, and occasionally renal biopsy (see Table 20–10).
Treatment
Depending on the nature and severity of disease, treatment can
consist of high-dose corticosteroids and cytotoxic agents such as
cyclophosphamide. Plasma exchange can be used in Goodpasture
disease and pauci-immune glomerulonephritis as a temporizing
measure until chemotherapy can take effect. Treatment and
prognosis for specific diseases are discussed more fully below.
Cruz DN et al. Clinical review: RIFLE and AKIN–time for
reappraisal. Crit Care. 2009;13(3):211. [PMID: 19638179]
 
Hoste EA et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney injury. Contrib
Nephrol. 2010;165:1–8. [PMID: 20427949]
 
Navaneethan SD et al. Sodium bicarbonate therapy for prevention
of contrast-induced nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2009 Apr;53(4):617–27. [PMID:
19027212]
 
Vaidya VS et al. Urinary biomarkers for sensitive and specific
detection of acute kidney injury in humans. Clin Transl Sci. 2008
Dec;1(3):200–8. [PMID: 19212447]
 
CARDIORENAL SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cardiac dysfunction: signs or symptoms of heart failure, ischemic
injury or arrhythmias.
 Kidney disease: acute or chronic, depending on type of
cardiorenal syndrome.
 
 General Considerations
Cardiorenal syndrome is a pathophysiologic disorder of the heart
and kidneys wherein the acute or chronic deterioration of one organ
results in the acute or chronic deterioration of the other. This
syndrome has been classified into five types.
Type 1 consists of acute kidney injury stemming from acute
cardiac disease. Type 2 is CKD due to chronic cardiac disease.
Type 3 is acute cardiac disease as a result of acute kidney injury.
Type 4 is chronic cardiac decompensation from CKD. Type 5
consists of heart and kidney dysfunction due to other acute or
chronic systemic disorders (such as sepsis). Identifying and defining
this common syndrome may assist in the future with treatments to
improve its morbidity and mortality.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Decline in the GFR over months to years
 Persistent proteinuria or abnormal renal morphology.
 Symptoms and signs of uremia when nearing end-stage disease.
 Hypertension in most cases.
 Bilateral small kidneys on ultrasound in advanced disease.
 
 General Considerations
CKD affects more than 20 million Americans, or one in nine adults.
Most are unaware of the condition because they remain
asymptomatic until the disease has significantly progressed. The
National Kidney Foundation's staging system helps clinicians
formulate practice plans (Table 22–5). Over 70% of cases of late-
stage CKD (stage 5 CKD and ESRD) in the United States are due
to diabetes mellitus or hypertension. Glomerulonephritis, cystic
diseases, and other urologic diseases account for another 12%, and
15% of patients have other or unknown causes (Table 22–6).
Recently, mutations at several gene loci, most notably APOL-1,
have been shown to be associated with an increased risk of the
development of CKD in African Americans.
 
Table 22–5. Stages of chronic kidney disease: a clinical action
plan.1,2
 
1 From National Kidney Foundation, KDOQI, Chronic Kidney Disease
Guidelines.
2 Chronic kidney disease is defined as either kidney damage or GFR < 60
mL/min/1.73 m2 for 3 or more months. Kidney damage is defined as
pathologic abnormalities or markers of damage, including abnormalities
in blood or urine tests or imaging studies.
3 Includes actions from preceding stages.
GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
 
Table 22–6. Major causes of chronic kidney disease.
 
Glomerular diseases
Primary glomerular diseases
     Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis
     Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
     IgA nephropathy
     Membranous nephropathy
Secondary glomerular diseases
     Diabetic nephropathy
     Amyloidosis
     Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
     HIV-associated nephropathy
     Collagen-vascular diseases
     Sickle cell nephropathy
     HIV-associated membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
     Drug hypersensitivity
     Heavy metals
     Analgesic nephropathy
     Reflux/chronic pyelonephritis
     Idiopathic
Hereditary diseases
     Polycystic kidney disease
     Medullary cystic disease
     Alport syndrome (hereditary nephritis)
Obstructive nephropathies
     Prostatic disease
     Nephrolithiasis
     Retroperitoneal fibrosis/tumor
     Congenital
Vascular diseases
     Hypertensive nephrosclerosis
     Renal artery stenosis
CKD is rarely reversible and usually leads to a progressive
decline in kidney function even after the inciting event has been
removed. Destruction of nephrons (inciting event) leads to
compensatory hypertrophy of the remaining nephrons, which must
increase their individual GFRs to supranormal in order to maintain
overall homeostasis. One consequence of this compensatory
hyperfiltration is that the serum creatinine may remain relatively
normal even in the face of significant loss of renal mass; therefore, it
is a relatively insensitive marker for renal damage and scarring. In
addition, compensatory hyperfiltration leads to overwork injury in
the remaining nephrons, which in turn causes progressive glomerular
sclerosis and interstitial fibrosis. Angiotensin receptor blockers
(ARBs) and ACE inhibitors can help reduce hyperfiltration injury
and have been shown to be helpful in slowing the progression of
many forms of CKD. Fortunately, an individual's decreased renal
mass as a result of kidney donation is not associated with the
development of CKD later in life.
CKD is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease;
proteinuric CKD confers an even higher risk of cardiovascular
mortality.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In the early stages, CKD is asymptomatic. Symptoms develop
slowly, are nonspecific, and do not manifest until kidney disease is
far advanced (GFR < 10–15 mL/min/1.73 m2). At this point, the
build-up of metabolic waste products, or uremic toxins, can result in
the uremic syndrome (Table 22–7). General symptoms of uremia
may include fatigue, weakness, and malaise. GI symptoms, such as
anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and a metallic taste in the mouth, are
common. Neurologic problems may include irritability, difficulty in
concentrating, insomnia, subtle memory defects, restless legs,
paresthesias, and twitching. Pruritus is common and difficult to treat.
Alterations in sexual function, including decreased libido, and
menstrual irregularities are common. Chest pain is rare but can
occur with pericarditis. Drug toxicity can develop as renal clearance
worsens; in particular, hypoglycemia may become problematic, and
even life-threatening, in diabetics since insulin is renally eliminated.
The most common physical finding in CKD is hypertension. It is
often present in early stages of CKD and may worsen with CKD
progression. The uremic patient (CKD stage 5) appears chronically
ill. The skin may be sallow, with easy bruisability. Rarely seen in the
current era is uremic frost, a cutaneous reflection of ESRD. Uremic
fetor is the characteristic fishy odor of the breath. Cardiopulmonary
signs may include rales, cardiomegaly, jugular venous distention,
edema, and a pericardial friction rub (rarely). Mental status can vary
from decreased concentration to confusion, stupor, and coma.
Myoclonus and asterixis may be signs of uremia.
 
Table 22–7. Symptoms and signs of uremia.
 
 
Table 22–8. Reversible causes of kidney injury.
 
 
 
Reversible Factors
Diagnostic Clues
Infection
Urine culture and sensitivity tests
Obstruction
Bladder catheterization, then renal
Orthostatic blood pressure and
Extracellular fluid
volume depletion
pulse: ↓ blood pressure and ↑ pulse
upon sitting up or standing from a
supine position
Hypokalemia,
hypercalcemia, and
hyperuricemia
(usually > 15 mg/dL)
Serum electrolytes, calcium,
phosphate, uric acid
Nephrotoxic agents
Drug history
Hypertension
Blood pressure, chest radiograph
Congestive heart
failure
Physical examination, chest
radiograph
Symptoms and signs of uremia warrant immediate hospital
admission and nephrology consultation for initiation of dialysis. The
uremic syndrome should resolve or lessen significantly with dialytic
therapy.
In any patient with kidney disease, it is important to identify and
correct all possibly reversible insults or exacerbating factors (Table
22–8). Urinary tract infections, obstruction, extracellular fluid
volume depletion, nephrotoxins (such as NSAIDs), hypertension,
and congestive heart failure should be excluded. Any of the above
can worsen underlying CKD.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of CKD is made by documenting elevations of the
BUN and serum creatinine over at least 3 months. Persistent
proteinuria or abnormalities on renal imaging (eg, polycystic
kidneys) are also diagnostic of CKD, even when estimated GFR is
normal. It is helpful to plot the inverse of serum creatinine (1/SCr)
versus time or estimated GFR (if reported by the laboratory) versus
time. If three or more prior measurements are available, the time to
ESRD can thus be estimated (Figure 22–1). If the slope of the line
acutely declines, new and potentially reversible renal insults should
be excluded as outlined above. Anemia, hyperphosphatemia,
hypocalcemia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis can occur with
both acute kidney disease and CKD. The urinalysis shows
isosthenuria if tubular concentrating and diluting ability are impaired.
The urinary sediment can show broad waxy casts as a result of
dilated, hypertrophic nephrons. Proteinuria may be present. If so, it
should be quantified as described above. Quantification of urinary
protein is important for several reasons. First, it helps narrow the
differential diagnosis of the etiology of the CKD (Table 22–6); for
example, glomerular diseases tend to present with protein excretion
of > 1 g/d. Second, the presence of proteinuria is associated with
more rapid progression of CKD and cardiovascular mortality.
Figure 22–1. Decline in kidney function plotted against time to
end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The solid line indicates the linear
decline in kidney function over time. The dotted line indicates the
approximate time to ESRD.
 
C. Imaging
The finding of small echogenic kidneys bilaterally (< 9–10 cm) by
ultrasonography supports a diagnosis of CKD, although normal or
even large kidneys can be seen with adult polycystic kidney disease,
diabetic nephropathy, HIV-associated nephropathy, multiple
myeloma, amyloidosis, and obstructive uropathy.
 Complications
The complications of CKD tend to occur at relatively predictable
stages of disease as noted in Figure 22–2.
A. Cardiovascular Complications
Patients with CKD experience greater morbidity and mortality from
cardiovascular disease in comparison to the general population.
Death from cardiovascular causes accounts for 45% of all deaths of
patients receiving dialysis. Eighty to 90 percent of patients with
CKD die, primarily of cardiovascular disease, before reaching need
for dialysis. The precise biologic mechanisms for this enhanced
mortality are unclear but may have to do with the uremic milieu
including abnormal phosphorus and calcium homeostasis, increased
burden of oxidative stress, increased vascular reactivity, increased
left ventricular hypertrophy, and underlying coexistent comorbidities
such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
Figure 22–2. Complications of chronic kidney disease (CKD)
by stage and glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Complications arising
from CKD tend to occur at the stages depicted, although there is
considerable variability noted in clinical practice. HTN,
hypertension; PTH, parathyroid hormone. (Adapted, with
permission, from William Bennett, MD.)
 
1. Hypertension—Hypertension is the most common complication
of CKD. As kidney disease progresses, hypertension due to salt
and water retention usually develops. Hyperreninemic states and
exogenous erythropoietin administration can also exacerbate
hypertension.
As with other patient populations, control of hypertension should
focus on both nonpharmacologic therapy (eg, diet, exercise, weight
loss, treatment of obstructive sleep apnea) and pharmacologic
therapy. CKD results in disturbed sodium homeostasis such that the
ability of the kidney to adjust to variations in sodium and water
intake becomes limited as GFR declines. The clinician should
recommend institution of a diet with mildly decreased salt intake (3
g/d), and salt intake should be reduced to 2 g/d if hypertension
persists or signs of CHF develop. Diuretics are nearly always
needed to help control hypertension. However, volume contraction
as a result of very low sodium intake or over-diuresis in the
presence of impaired sodium homeostasis can result in further
impairment of the GFR. In addition to diuretics, initial drug therapy
should include ACE inhibitors or ARBs as recommended by
national guidelines (if serum potassium permits). When an ACE
inhibitor or an ARB is initiated or uptitrated, patients should have
serum creatinine and potassium checked within 5–14 days.
Hyperkalemia or a rise in serum creatinine > 30% from baseline
mandates reduction or cessation of the drug. Second-line
antihypertensive agents include calcium channel-blocking agents and
β-blocking agents. Because of the difficulty in controlling
hypertension in CKD, adjunctive drugs (eg, α-blocking agents, such
as prazosin; centrally acting agents, such as clonidine; and
vasodilators, such as hydralazine and minoxidil) are often needed.
Current guidelines suggest a blood pressure goal < 130/80 mm Hg
for patients with CKD. Some literature suggests a goal of < 125/75
mm Hg in patients with nephrotic range proteinuria. Ongoing
randomized controlled trials are looking at the benefit of systolic
blood pressure goals of < 120 mm Hg versus < 140 mm Hg
regarding outcomes such as ESRD and cardiac death in high-risk
populations.
2. Coronary artery disease—Patients with CKD are at higher
risk for death from cardiovascular disease than the general
population. Modifiable risk factors for cardiovascular disease, such
as hypertension, tobacco use, and hyperlipidemia, should be
aggressively treated in patients with CKD.
3. Congestive heart failure—The complications of CKD result in
increased cardiac workload via underlying hypertensive disease,
volume overload, and anemia. Patients with CKD may also have
accelerated rates of atherosclerosis. All of these factors contribute
to left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, which are
present in most patients starting dialysis. Over time, systolic
dysfunction may also develop. Water and salt restriction is usually
necessary. Diuretics are of value if they can affect an increased urine
volume, although thiazides are ineffective by themselves when the
GFR is < 20–30 mL/min/1.73 m2. Loop diuretics are commonly
used, potentially in combination with thiazide diuretics, and higher
doses are required as renal function declines. Digoxin is excreted by
the kidney, and its toxicity is exacerbated in the presence of
electrolyte disturbances which are common in CKD. The proven
efficacy of ACE inhibitors in congestive heart failure holds true for
patients with CKD. Despite the risks of hyperkalemia and
worsening renal function, ACE inhibitors can be used for patients
with a serum creatinine > 3 mg/dL with close supervision and
laboratory test monitoring.
4. Pericarditis—Pericarditis may develop in uremic patients but is
rare. Symptoms include chest pain and fever. Pulsus paradoxus can
be present; a friction rub may be auscultated, but the lack of a rub
does not rule out a significant pericardial effusion. The chest
radiograph can show an enlarged cardiac silhouette, and the ECG,
generalized ST and T wave changes, characteristically a progression
from diffuse ST elevation followed by a return to baseline and then
T wave inversion. If pericardial effusion occurs, the ECG often
shows nonspecific T wave changes and low QRS voltage; electrical
alternans is a pathognomonic finding. Cardiac tamponade can
occur; patients with tamponade have signs of poor cardiac output,
with jugular venous distention and lungs clear to auscultation.
Uremic pericarditis is a mandatory indication for hospitalization and
initiation of hemodialysis.
B. Disorders of Mineral Metabolism
The mineral and bone disorder of CKD refers to the complex
disturbances of calcium and phosphorus metabolism, parathyroid
hormone (PTH), active vitamin D, and possibly fibroblast growth
factor-23 (FGF-23) homeostasis (see Chapter 21 and Figure 22–
3). A typical pattern seen as early as CKD stage 3 is
hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, hypovitaminosis D, and
secondary hyperparathyroidism as a result of the first three
abnormalities. Traditionally, the emphasis on treating these
disturbances centered around concern for the consequential bone
disease and increased fracture risk noted in CKD patients. Now, it
is recognized that such disturbances also lead to vascular
calcification and may be partly responsible for the accelerated
cardiovascular disease and excess mortality seen in the CKD
population. Epidemiologic studies in humans show an association
between elevated phosphorus levels and increased risk of
cardiovascular mortality in early CKD through ESRD. As yet, there
are no intervention trials suggesting the best course of treatment in
these patients; control of mineral and PTH levels per current
guidelines is discussed below.
Bone disease, or renal osteodystrophy, in advanced CKD is
common and there are several types of lesions. Renal
osteodystrophy can only be diagnosed by bone biopsy, which is
rarely done. The most common bone disease, osteitis fibrosa
cystica, is a result of secondary hyperparathyroidism and the
osteoclast-stimulating effects of PTH. This is a high-turnover
disease with osteoclastic bone resorption and subperiosteal lesions.
Metastatic calcifications, such as tumoral calcinosis, can occur.
Radiographically, lesions are most prominent in the phalanges and
lateral ends of the clavicles. Becoming more common is adynamic
bone disease, or low-bone turnover, resulting from relatively low
PTH levels or activity. This may result from overzealous
pharmacologic suppression of PTH or from spontaneously low
PTH production. Osteomalacia, or lack of bone mineralization, is
another lesion associated with CKD. In the past, osteomalacia was
associated with aluminum toxicity—either as a result of chronic
ingestion of prescribed aluminum-containing phosphorus binders or
from high levels of aluminum in untreated dialysate. Currently,
osteomalacia is more likely to result from hypovitaminosis D; there
is also theoretical risk of osteomalacia associated with use of
bisphosphonates in advanced CKD.
Figure 22–3. Mineral abnormalities of chronic kidney disease
(CKD). Decline in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and loss of renal
mass lead directly to increased serum phosphorus and
hypovitaminosis D. Both of these abnormalities result in
hypocalcemia and hyperparathyroidism. Many CKD patients also
have nutritional 25(OH) vitamin D deficiency. PTH, parathyroid
hormone.
 
All of the above entities can cause bony pain, proximal muscle
weakness, and higher risk for fractures. Fractures in patients with
CKD put them at increased risk for mortality compared with those
without CKD.
Treatment involves correction of calcium, phosphorus, and
vitamin D levels toward normal values along with treatment of
hyperparathyroidism. Understanding the interplay between these
abnormalities can help target therapy (Figure 22–3). Declining GFR
leads to phosphorus retention. This results in hypocalcemia as
phosphorus complexes with calcium, deposits in soft tissues, and
stimulates PTH. Loss of renal mass, and low 25-OH vitamin D
levels often seen in CKD patients results in low 1,25(OH) vitamin D
production by the kidney. Because 1,25(OH) vitamin D is a
suppressor of PTH production, hypovitaminosis D also leads to
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Treatment of hyperphosphatemia (serum phosphorus > 4.5
mg/dL in pre-ESRD CKD, or > 5.5 mg/dL in ESRD patients)
involves dietary phosphorus restriction initially, followed by the
administration of oral phosphorus binders if targets are not achieved
(see below). Dietary phosphorus restriction to 1000 mg/d can be
challenging as many phosphorus sources are also rich in protein;
care must be taken to avoid protein malnutrition. Oral phosphorus
binders, such as calcium carbonate (650 mg/tablet) or calcium
acetate (667 mg/capsule), block absorption of dietary phosphorus
in the gut and are given three or four times daily at the beginning of
meals. These should be titrated to a serum phosphorus of < 4.6
mg/dL in stage 3–4 of CKD (GFR of 15–59 mL/min) and < 4.6–
5.5 mg/dL in ESRD patients. National guidelines recommend
maximal elemental calcium doses of 1500 mg/d (eg, nine tablets of
calcium acetate); doses should be decreased if serum calcium rises
above 10 mg/dL. Phosphorus-binding agents that do not contain
calcium are sevelamer and lanthanum. Sevelamer, 800 mg orally,
and lanthanum carbonate, 1000 mg orally, are given at the beginning
of meals. Aluminum hydroxide is a highly effective phosphorus
binder but can cause osteomalacia and neurologic complications
when used long-term. While it can be used in the acute setting for
serum phosphorus > 7 mg/dL or for short periods (eg, 3 weeks) in
CKD patients, long-term use should be avoided.
Active vitamin D (1,25[OH] vitamin D, or calcitriol) or active
vitamin D analogs are recommended to treat secondary
hyperparathyroidism in stage 3–5 CKD. Serum 25-OH vitamin D
levels should be measured and vitamin D repletion attempted orally
(see Chapter 26) prior to considering administration of active
vitamin D. Active vitamin D (calcitriol) increases serum calcium and
phosphorus levels; both need to be monitored closely during
calcitriol therapy, and its dose should be decreased if hypercalcemia
or hyperphosphatemia occurs. Typical calcitriol dosing is 0.25 or
0.5 mcg orally daily or every other day initially. Cinacalcet is a
calcimimetic agent that targets the calcium-sensing receptor on the
chief cells of the parathyroid gland and suppresses PTH production.
Cinacalcet, 30–90 mg orally once a day, can be used if elevated
serum phosphorus or calcium levels prohibit the use of vitamin D
analogs; cinacalcet can cause hypocalcemia.
C. Hematologic Complications
1. Anemia—The anemia of CKD is primarily due to decreased
erythropoietin production, which often becomes clinically significant
during stage 3 CKD. Many patients are iron deficient as well due to
impaired GI iron absorption.
Erythropoietin-like agents (eg, recombinant erythropoietin
[epoetin] and darbepoetin) are FDA-approved in CKD for a goal
hemoglobin (Hgb) of 10–12 g/dL if no other treatable causes for
anemia are present. One study in patients with CKD showed no
benefit of starting erythropoietin-like agents before Hgb values were
< 9 g/dL. The dose needed can vary; the starting dose of epoetin is
50 units/kg (3000–4000 units/dose) once or twice a week.
Darbepoetin is started at 0.45 mcg/kg and can be administered
every 2–4 weeks. These agents can be given intravenously (eg, to
the hemodialysis patient) or subcutaneously (eg, to the predialysis or
dialysis patient). Both medications should be titrated to a Hgb of
10–12 g/dL for optimal safety; studies show that targeting a higher
Hgb increases risk of stroke and possibly other cardiovascular
events. When titrating doses, Hgb levels should rise no more than 1
g/dL every 3–4 weeks. Subcutaneous administration of
erythropoietin requires a 33% lower dose for the same effect.
Hypertension is a complication of erythropoietin or darbepoetin
therapy in about 20% of patients. The dosage may require
adjustment, or antihypertensive drugs may need to given.
Iron stores must be adequate to ensure response to
erythropoietin. Patients with CKD tend to have progressively
increasing level of hepcidin, a molecule that blocks GI iron
absorption and mobilization of iron from body stores. Therefore,
traditional measures of iron stores are measured in CKD patients
but are considered abnormal at a higher reference level. In CKD, a
serum ferritin < 100–200 ng/mL or iron saturation < 20% is
suggestive of iron deficiency. Iron stores should be repleted with
oral or parenteral iron prior to the initiation of erythropoietic agents.
Iron therapy should be withheld if the serum ferritin is > 500–800
ng/mL, even if the iron saturation is < 20%. Oral therapy with
ferrous sulfate, gluconate, or fumarate (the latter two tend to be
better tolerated), 325 mg once to three times daily, is the initial
therapy for patients who are not yet receiving dialysis. For those
that do not respond due to poor GI absorption or lack of tolerance,
intravenous iron may be necessary.
The preliminary investigation of anemia in any CKD patient
should also include assessment of thyroid function tests, serum
vitamin B12, and red blood cell folate stores, and fecal occult blood
testing prior to initiating erythropoietin therapy.
2. Coagulopathy—The coagulopathy of CKD is mainly caused by
platelet dysfunction. Platelet counts may be mildly decreased, and
the bleeding time is prolonged due to abnormal adhesiveness and
aggregation. Clinically, patients can have petechiae, purpura, and an
increased tendency for bleeding during surgery.
Treatment is required only in patients who are symptomatic.
Raising the Hgb to 9–10 g/dL in anemic patients can reduce
bleeding time via increased blood viscosity. Desmopressin (25 mcg
intravenously every 8–12 hours for two doses) is a short-lived but
effective treatment for platelet dysfunction and it is often used in
preparation for surgery. Conjugated estrogens, 2.5–5 mg orally for
5–7 days, may have an effect for several weeks but is very seldom
used. Dialysis improves the bleeding time but does not normalize it.
Cryoprecipitate (10–15 bags) is rarely used and lasts < 24 hours.
D. Hyperkalemia
Potassium balance generally remains intact in CKD until stages 4–5.
However, hyperkalemia may occur at earlier stages when certain
conditions are present. The most common condition is type 4 renal
tubular acidosis, which is particularly seen in patients with diabetes
mellitus or high potassium diets or in those taking medications that
decrease renal potassium secretion (amiloride, triamterene,
spironolactone, eplerenone, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, ARBs) or
block cellular potassium uptake ↓β-blockers). Other causes include
acidemic states and any type of cellular destruction causing release
of intracellular contents (which are high in potassium), such as
hemolysis and rhabdomyolysis.
Treatment of acute hyperkalemia is discussed in Chapter 21 (see
Table 21–6). Cardiac monitoring is indicated for any ECG changes
seen with hyperkalemia or a serum potassium level > 6.0–6.5
mEq/L. The ion exchange resin sodium polystyrene sulfonate
exchanges sodium for potassium and results in GI potassium
excretion and is often used to treat acute hyperkalemia in addition
to β-agonists, insulin plus glucose, and calcium gluconate as
indicated. Chronic hyperkalemia is best treated with dietary
potassium restriction (2 g/d) and minimization or elimination of any
medications that may impair renal potassium excretion, as noted
above. Loop diuretics may also be administered for their kaliuretic
effect as long as the patient is not volume-depleted.
E. Acid–Base Disorders
Damaged kidneys are unable to excrete the 1 mEq/kg/d of acid
generated by metabolism of dietary proteins in the typical Western
diet. The resultant metabolic acidosis is primarily due to loss of renal
mass; distal tubular defects may contribute to or worsen the
acidosis. Although patients with CKD are in positive hydrogen ion
balance, the arterial blood pH is maintained at 7.33–7.37 and
serum bicarbonate concentration rarely falls below 15 mmol/L. The
excess hydrogen ions are buffered by the large calcium carbonate
and calcium phosphate stores in bone. This results in leaching of
calcium and phosphorus from the bone and contributes to the
metabolic bone disease described above. To help mitigate damage
to bone and encourage normal growth, the serum bicarbonate level
should be maintained at > 21 mmol/L. The most commonly used
alkali salt is sodium bicarbonate. Administration should begin with
20–30 mmol/d divided into two doses per day and titrated as
needed. Citrate salts increase the absorption of dietary aluminum
and should be avoided in CKD patients.
F. Neurologic Complications
Uremic encephalopathy, resulting from the aggregation of uremic
toxins, does not occur until GFR falls below 5–10 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Symptoms begin with difficulty in concentrating and can progress to
lethargy, confusion, and coma. Physical findings may include
nystagmus, weakness, asterixis, and hyperreflexia. These symptoms
and signs improve after initiation of dialysis.
Neuropathy is found in 65% of CKD stage 5 and ESRD patients
but can also be seen in patients with CKD stage 4. Peripheral
neuropathies manifest themselves as sensorimotor polyneuropathies
(stocking-glove distribution) and isolated or multiple isolated
mononeuropathies; other CKD-associated neuropathies result in
erectile dysfunction and autonomic dysfunction. Patients may have
restless leg syndrome, loss of deep tendon reflexes, and distal pain.
The earlier initiation of dialysis may prevent peripheral neuropathies,
although the response to dialysis is variable.
G. Endocrine Disorders
In advanced CKD, circulating insulin levels are higher because of
decreased renal insulin clearance, and, in diabetics, there is risk of
developing dangerous hypoglycemia if this phenomenon is not
anticipated. Doses of oral hypoglycemics and insulin may need
reduction. Metformin is associated with risk of lactic acidosis when
estimated GFR is < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 and should be discontinued
at this point.
Decreased libido and erectile dysfunction are common in
advanced CKD. Men have decreased testosterone levels; women
are often anovulatory. Women with serum creatinine < 1.4 mg/dL
are not at increased risk for poor outcomes in pregnancy; however,
those with serum creatinine > 1.4 mg/dL may experience faster
progression of CKD with pregnancy. Fetal survival is not
compromised, however, unless CKD is advanced. Despite a high
degree of infertility in patients with ESRD, pregnancy can occur in
this setting—particularly in women who are well dialyzed and well
nourished. However, fetal mortality approaches 50%, and babies
who survive are often premature. In female patients with ESRD,
renal transplantation with a well-functioning allograft affords the best
chances for a successful pregnancy.
 Treatment
A. Dietary Management
Every patient with CKD should be evaluated by a renal nutritionist.
Specific recommendations should be made concerning protein, salt,
water, potassium, and phosphorus intake.
1. Protein restriction—Experimental models have shown that
protein restriction slows the progression to ESRD; however, this
has not been consistently proved in clinical trials. The questionable
benefits of protein restriction in slowing the rate of decline of GFR
must be weighed against the risk of cachexia upon the initiation of
dialysis; low serum albumin at the start of dialysis is one of the
strongest predictors of mortality in this population.
2. Salt and water restriction—In advanced CKD, the kidney is
unable to adapt to large changes in sodium intake. Intake > 3–4 g/d
can lead to edema, hypertension, and congestive heart failure,
whereas intake of < 1 g/d can lead to volume depletion and
hypotension. For the nondialysis patient approaching ESRD, 2 g/d
of sodium is an initial recommendation. A daily intake of 2 L of fluid
maintains water balance.
3. Potassium restriction—Restriction is needed once the GFR
has fallen below 10–20 mL/min, or earlier if the patient is
hyperkalemic. Patients should receive detailed lists concerning
potassium content of foods and should limit their intake to < 50–60
mEq/d (2 g); this is about half of normal intake.
4. Phosphorus restriction—The phosphorus level should be kept
in the ‘normal’ range (<4.5 mg/dL) predialysis, and between 3.5
and 5.5 mg/dL when on dialysis, with a dietary restriction of 800–
1000 mg/d. Foods rich in phosphorus such as cola beverages, eggs,
dairy products, nuts, beans, and meat should be limited, although
care must be taken to avoid protein malnutrition. Below a GFR of
20–30 mL/min, dietary restriction is rarely sufficient to reach target
levels, and phosphorus binders are usually required. The treatment
of hyperphosphatemia is discussed above in the section on
disorders of mineral metabolism.
5. Magnesium restriction—Magnesium is excreted primarily by
the kidneys. Dangerous hypermagnesemia is rare unless the patient
ingests medications high in magnesium or receives it parenterally. All
magnesium-containing laxatives and antacids are relatively
contraindicated in CKD.
B. Dialysis
When GFR declines to 5–10 mL/min (with or without uremic
symptoms), hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and kidney
transplantation are required to sustain life. According to the Kidney
Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) guidelines, dialysis
initiation should be considered when GFR is 10 mL/min or serum
creatinine is 8 mg/dL in nondiabetic patients, or GFR is 15 mL/min
or serum creatinine is 6 mg/dL in diabetic patients. Recent studies
suggest that the well-selected patient without overt uremic
symptoms may wait to initiate dialysis until GFR is closer to 7
mL/min. Other indications for dialysis include (1) uremic symptoms
as described above, (2) fluid overload unresponsive to diuresis, (3)
refractory hyperkalemia, and (4) severe metabolic acidosis (pH <
7.20). Preparation for dialysis requires a team approach. Dietitians
and social workers should be involved as well as primary care
clinicians and nephrologists. The patient and family need early
counseling regarding the risks and benefits of therapy. For very
elderly patients, or those with multiple debilitating or life-limiting
comorbidities, dialysis therapy may not meaningfully prolong life,
and the option of not starting dialysis with the development of
ESRD should be discussed with the patient and family.
Alternatively, a 90-day trial of dialysis is another option.
Conversely, for patients who are otherwise relatively well, kidney
transplantation should be considered prior to initiation of dialysis.
This expedites the detailed and time-consuming work-up for
transplantation for eligible patients.
1. Hemodialysis—Hemodialysis requires a constant flow of blood
along one side of a semipermeable membrane with a cleansing
solution, or dialysate, along the other. Diffusion and convection
allow the dialysate to remove unwanted substances from the blood
while adding back needed components. Vascular access for
hemodialysis can be accomplished by an arteriovenous fistula (the
preferred method) or prosthetic graft. Indwelling catheters confer a
high risk of bloodstream infection and should be considered
temporary measures. Native fistulas typically last longer than
prosthetic shunts but require a longer time (6–8 weeks or more
after surgical construction) for maturation. Infection, thrombosis,
and aneurysm formation are complications seen more often in grafts
than fistulas. Staphylococcus species are the most common cause
of soft-tissue infections and bacteremia.
Patients typically require hemodialysis three times a week.
Sessions last 3–5 hours depending on patient size, type of dialyzer
used, and other factors. Recent trials of daily dialysis have shown
improvements in certain cardiac parameters and quality of life.
Results from nocturnal dialysis trials have not been uniform but have
shown improvements over thrice weekly dialysis for blood pressure
control, mineral metabolism, and (in one trial) quality of life. Home
hemodialysis requires a trained helper, large equipment, and hidden
costs. The availability of these modalities (daily, nocturnal, and
home hemodialysis) is becoming more widespread.
2. Peritoneal dialysis—With peritoneal dialysis, the peritoneal
membrane is the “dialyzer.” Dialysate is instilled into the peritoneal
cavity through an indwelling catheter; water and solutes move
across the capillary bed that lies between the visceral and parietal
layers of the membrane into the dialysate during a “dwell.” After
equilibration, the dialysate is drained, and fresh dialysate is instilled
—this is an “exchange.”
There are three kinds of peritoneal dialysis: continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), in which the patient
exchanges the dialysate four to six times a day manually; continuous
cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD), which utilizes a cycler machine to
automatically perform exchanges at night; and nocturnal intermittent
peritoneal dialysis (NIPD), where patients use a cycler machine at
night without any fluid in the peritoneum during the day. As with
hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis prescriptions are guided by
adequacy measurements (ie, dialytic clearance of urea).
Peritoneal dialysis permits significant patient autonomy. Its
continuous nature minimizes the symptomatic volume and electrolyte
shifts observed in hemodialysis patients, and poorly dialyzable
compounds (such as phosphates) are better cleared, which permits
less dietary restriction. However, peritoneal dialysate removes large
amounts of albumin, and nutritional status must be closely watched.
The most common complication of peritoneal dialysis is
peritonitis. Rates are improving (< 0.5 episodes per patient-year).
Peritonitis may present with nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain,
diarrhea or constipation, and fever. The dialysate is usually cloudy;
and a diagnostic peritoneal fluid cell count is > 100 white blood
cells/mcL of which over 50% are polymorphonuclear neutrophils.
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common infecting organism, but
streptococci and gram-negative species are also common.
The total costs of peritoneal dialysis are lower than hemodialysis.
Patients treated with both modalities more often prefer peritoneal
dialysis.
C. Kidney Transplantation
Up to 50% of all patients with ESRD are suitable for
transplantation. Older age is becoming less of a barrier, as long as
reasonable life expectancy is anticipated. Two-thirds of kidney
transplants come from deceased donors, with the remainder from
living related or unrelated donors. There are nearly 80,000 patients
on the active waiting list for a deceased donor transplant in the
United States; the average wait is 2–6 years, depending on
geographic location. This is becoming progressively longer as more
people are going onto waiting lists while the deceased donor pool is
not expanding.
The 1- and 3-year kidney graft survival rates are approximately
95% and 88%, respectively, for living donor transplants and 89%
and 78%, respectively, for deceased donor transplants. Factors that
determine outcome include antigenic disparity (ABO blood groups
and major histo-compatibility or HLA) between donor and
recipient, the type of immunologic response mounted by the host,
and the immunosuppressive regimen used to prevent graft rejection.
Nonimmunologic factors that affect the risk of chronic rejection
include age and race of recipient; donor age; length of time on
dialysis; and coexisting hyperlipidemia, hypertension, or
cytomegalovirus infection.
Immunosuppressive regimens to prevent allograft rejection
generally include a combination of a corticosteroid, an
antimetabolite (azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil), and a
calcineurin inhibitor (tacrolimus or cyclosporine) or mTor inhibitor
(sirolimus). Maintenance doses are lower than doses given at the
time of transplant, with the aim of preventing recurrent rejection and
chronic allograft nephropathy, prolonging graft survival, and
minimizing potentially serious medication side effects. Aside from
medication use, the life of a transplant recipient can return to nearly
normal, although these patients are at higher risk for certain cancers
and infections.
 Prognosis
Compared with kidney transplant recipients and age-matched
controls, mortality is higher for patients undergoing dialysis. Studies
are conflicting regarding survival advantage for peritoneal dialysis
compared with hemodialysis, but the most recent analyses suggest
that mortality in peritoneal dialysis patients is slightly lower during
the first 2 years on dialysis.
Survival rates on dialysis depend on the underlying disease
process. Five-year Kaplan-Meier survival rates vary from 21% for
patients with diabetes to 47% for patients with glomerulonephritis.
Overall 5-year survival is currently estimated at 36%. Patients
undergoing dialysis have an average life-expectancy of 3–5 years,
but survival for as long as 25 years may be achieved depending on
the disease entity. The most common cause of death is cardiac
disease (45%). Other causes include infection (14%),
cerebrovascular disease (6%), and malignancy (4%). Diabetes,
advanced age, a low serum albumin, lower socioeconomic status,
and inadequate dialysis are all significant predictors of mortality.
For ESRD patients who elect not to undergo dialysis, death
ensues within days to weeks. In general, uremia develops and
patients lose consciousness prior to death. Arrhythmias can occur
as a result of electrolyte imbalance. Volume overload and dyspnea
can be managed by volume restriction and opioids as described in
Chapter 5. Involvement of a palliative care team is essential.
 When to Refer
 
•    A patient with stage 3–5 CKD should be referred to a
nephrologist for management in conjunction with the
primary care provider.
•    A patient with other forms of CKD such as those with
significant proteinuria (>1 g/d) or polycystic kidney disease
should be referred to a nephrologist at earlier stages.
 When to Admit
 
•    Admission should be considered for patients with
decompensation of problems related to CKD, such as
worsening of acid-base status, electrolyte abnormalities,
and volume status that cannot be appropriately treated in
the outpatient setting.
•    Admission is appropriate when a patient needs to start
dialysis and is not stable for outpatient initiation.
Abboud H et al. Clinical practice. Stage IV chronic kidney
disease. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jan 7;362(1):56–65. [PMID:
20054047]
 
Galliford J et al. Modern renal transplantation: present challenges
and future prospects. Postgrad Med J. 2009 Feb;85(1000): 91–
101. [PMID: 19329704]
 
Go AS et al. Chronic kidney disease and the risks of death,
cardiovascular events, and hospitalization. N Engl J Med. 2004
Sep 23;351(13):1296–305. [PMID: 15385656]
 
Hemmelgarn BR et al. Relation between kidney function,
proteinuria, and adverse outcomes. JAMA. 2010 Feb
3;303(5):423–9. [PMID: 20124537]
 
Himmelfarb J et al. Hemodialysis. N Engl J Med. 2010 Nov 4;
363(19):1833–45. [PMID: 21047227]
 
James MT et al. Early recognition and prevention of chronic
kidney disease. Lancet. 2010;375(9722):1296–309. [PMID:
20382326]
 
Power A et al. Management of the dialysis patient for the hospital
physician. Postgrad Med J. 2009 Jul;85(1005):376–381. [PMID:
19581248]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Kidney transplantation.
JAMA. 2009 Apr 22;301(16):1730. [PMID: 19383965]
 
RENAL ARTERY STENOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Produced by atherosclerotic occlusive disease (80–90% of
patients) or fibromuscular dysplasia (10–15%).
 Hypertension.
 Acute kidney injury in patients starting ACE inhibitor therapy.
 
 General Considerations
Atherosclerotic ischemic renal disease accounts for nearly all cases
of renal artery stenosis. Fibromuscular dysplasia is a rare cause of
renal artery stenosis. Approximately 5% of Americans with
hypertension suffer from renal artery stenosis. It occurs most
commonly in those over 45 years of age with a history of
atherosclerotic disease. Other risk factors include CKD, diabetes
mellitus, tobacco use, and hypertension.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with atherosclerotic ischemic renal disease may have
refractory hypertension, new-onset hypertension (in an older
patient), pulmonary edema with poorly controlled blood pressure,
and acute kidney injury upon starting an ACE inhibitor. In addition
to hypertension, physical examination may reveal an audible
abdominal bruit on the affected side. Fibromuscular dysplasia
primarily affects young women. Unexplained hypertension in a
woman younger than 40 years is reason to screen for this disorder.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory values can show elevated BUN and serum creatinine
levels in the setting of significant renal ischemia.
C. Imaging
Abdominal ultrasound can reveal asymmetric kidney size when one
renal artery is affected out of proportion to the other.
Three prevailing methods used for screening are Doppler
ultrasonography, CT angiography, and magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA). Doppler ultrasonography is highly sensitive
and specific (> 90% with an experienced ultra-sonographer) and
relatively inexpensive. However, this method is extremely operator
and patient dependent. Measurements of blood flow must be made
at the aorta and along each third of the renal artery in order to
assess the disease. This test is a poor choice for patients who are
obese, unable to lie supine, or have interfering bowel gas patterns.
CT angiography consists of intravenous digital subtraction
angiography with arteriography and is a noninvasive procedure. The
procedure uses a spiral (helical) CT scan with intravenous contrast
injection. The sensitivities from various studies range from 77% to
98%, with less varying specificities in a range of 90–94%.
MRA is an excellent but expensive way to screen for renal
artery stenosis, particularly in those with atherosclerotic disease.
Sensitivity is 77–100%, although one study with particular flaws
showed a sensitivity of only 62%. Specificity ranges from 71% to
96%. Turbulent blood flow can cause false-positive results. The
imaging agent for MRA (gadolinium) has been associated with
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, which occurs primarily in patients
with a GFR of < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2, and rarely in patients with a
GFR of 15–30 mL/min/1.73 m2. It has also been seen in those with
acute kidney injury and kidney transplants.
Renal angiography is the gold standard for diagnosis. CO2
subtraction angiography can be used in place of dye when the risk
of dye nephropathy exists—eg, in diabetic patients with kidney
injury. Lesions are most commonly found in the proximal third or
ostial region of the renal artery. The risk of atheroembolic
phenomena after angiography ranges from 5% to 10%.
Fibromuscular dysplasia has a characteristic “beads-on-a-string”
appearance on angiography.
 Treatment
Treatment of atherosclerotic ischemic renal disease is controversial.
Options include medical management, angioplasty with or without
stenting, and surgical bypass. A 2009 study has shown that
intervention is no better than optimal medical management in typical
patients in whom renal artery stenosis was diagnosed via gold-
standard mechanisms. Angioplasty might reduce the number of
antihypertensive medications but does not significantly change the
progression of kidney dysfunction in comparison to patients
medically managed. Stenting produces significantly better
angioplastic results. However, blood pressure is equally improved,
and serum creatinines are similar at 6 months of observation
compared with both angioplasty and stents. Angioplasty is equally
as effective as, and safer than, surgical revision. Treatment of
fibromuscular 
dysplasia 
with 
percutaneous 
transluminal
angioplasty is often curative.
ASTRAL Investigators; Wheatley K et al. Revascularization
versus medical therapy for renal-artery stenosis. N Engl J Med.
2009 Nov 12;361(20):1953–62. [PMID: 19907042]
 
Balk E et al. Effectiveness of management strategies for renal
artery stenosis: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2006 Dec
19;145(12):901–12. [PMID: 17062633]
 
Hildreth CJ et al. JAMA patient page. Renal artery stenosis.
JAMA. 2008 Nov 5;300(17):2084. [PMID: 18984899]
 
Textor SC et al. Renovascular hypertension and ischemic
nephropathy. Am J Hypertens. 2010 Nov;23(11):1159–69.
[PMID: 20864945]
 
GLOMERULAR DISEASES
 
Abnormalities of glomerular function can be caused by damage to
the major components of the glomerulus: the epithelium
(podocytes), basement membrane, capillary endothelium, or
mesangium. The damage may be caused by overwork injury, such
as in CKD; by an inflammatory process, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus; by a podocyte protein mutation, such as in
hereditary focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis; or a deposition
disease, such as diabetes or amyloidosis. A specific histologic
pattern of glomerular injury results from this damage and can be
seen on renal biopsy.
 Classification
Clinically, a glomerular disease can be classified as being in one of
two spectra—either in the nephritic spectrum or the nephrotic
spectrum (Figure 22–4). In the “least severe” end of the nephritic
spectrum, the findings of glomerular hematuria (ie, dysmorphic red
blood cells) are characteristic. The nephritic syndrome, comprising
glomerular hematuria, subnephrotic proteinuria (<3 g/d), edema,
and elevated creatinine, falls in the mid-portion of the spectrum. The
rapidly progressive glomerulonephridities are at the “most severe”
and clinically urgent end of the nephritic spectrum.
The nephrotic spectrum comprises diseases that present with
primarily proteinuria of at least 0.5–1 g/d and a bland urine
sediment (no cells or cellular casts). The more severe end of the
nephrotic spectrum comprises the nephrotic syndrome, which is
characterized by the constellation of nephrotic-range proteinuria of
> 3 g/d, hypoalbuminuria, edema, and hyperlipidema. Differentiating
between a clinical presentation within the nephritic spectrum versus
the nephrotic spectrum is important because it helps narrow the
differential diagnosis of the underlying glomerular disease (Tables
22–9 and 22–10).
Glomerular diseases can also be classified according to whether
they cause only renal abnormalities (primary renal disease) or
whether the renal abnormalities result from a systemic disease
(secondary renal disease).
Further evaluation prior to renal biopsy may include serologic
testing for systemic diseases that can result in glomerular damage
(Figure 22–5).
Beck LH Jr et al. Glomerular and tubulointerstitial diseases. Prim
Care. 2008 Jun;35(2):265–96. [PMID: 18486716]
 
Figure 22–4. Glomerular diseases present within one of the
clinical spectra shown, the exact presentation is determined by the
severity of the underlying disease and the pattern of injury. Nephritic
diseases are characterized by the presence of an active urine
sediment with glomerular hematuria and often with proteinuria.
Nephrotic spectrum diseases are proteinuric with bland urine
sediments (no cells or cellular casts). all glomerular diseases may
progress to a chronic, scarred state. (Adapted with permission from
Megan Troxell, MD, PhD.)
 
NEPHRITIC SPECTRUM GLOMERULAR DISEASES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Glomerular hematuria (dysmorphic red blood cells), possibly red
blood cell urinary casts.
 Less than nephrotic range proteinuria (0.3–3 g/d).
 Hypertension is common.
 Entity classified into one of three groups: asymptomatic
glomerular hematuria, acute nephritic syndrome, or rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis.
 Edema, if present, in dependent (eg, periorbital or scrotal) areas.
 
 General Considerations
Glomerulonephritis is a term given to those diseases that present in
the nephritic spectrum and usually signifies an inflammatory process
causing renal dysfunction. It can be acute, developing over days to
weeks, with or without resolution, or may be more chronic and
indolent with progressive scarring. As noted above, diseases that
cause a nephritic spectrum presentation may present with
glomerular hematuria with some proteinuria, with nephritic
syndrome, or with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (Figure
22–4). The presentation depends on the severity of the underlying
inflammation and the pattern of injury caused by the disease
process.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
If the nephritic syndrome is present, edema is first seen in regions of
low tissue pressure such as the periorbital and scrotal areas.
Hypertension in the nephritic syndrome is due to sodium retention
resulting from acute decrease in GFR. Heavy glomerular bleeding
from inflammation may result in gross hematuria (smoky or cola-
colored urine).
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Serologic testing—Serologic tests, including complement
levels, antinuclear antibodies, cryoglobulins, hepatitis serologies,
ANCAs, anti-GBM antibodies, and antistreptolysin O (ASO) titers
(Figure 22–5), are done based on the history and physical
examination to narrow the differential diagnosis of the nephritic
spectrum disorder.
2. Urinalysis—The urinalysis shows protein and red blood cells.
On microscopy, these cells are misshapen from traversing a
damaged capillary membrane—so-called dysmorphic red blood
cells. Red blood cell casts are seen with heavy glomerular bleeding
and tubular stasis. When quantified, proteinuria is usually
subnephrotic (<3 g/d).
Figure 22–5. Serologic analysis of patients with
glomerulonephritis. MPGN, membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis. (Reproduced, with permission, from Greenberg
A et al. Primer on Kidney Diseases. Academic Press, 1994 and
Jennette JC, Falk RJ. Diagnosis and management of
glomerulonephritis and vasculitis presenting as acute renal failure.
Med Clin North Am. 1990;74(4):893–908. © Elsevier.)
 
 
Table 22–9. Classification and findings in glomerulonephritis:
Nephritic spectrum presentations.
 
GBM, glomerular basement membrane.
3. Biopsy—Renal biopsy should be considered if there are no
contraindications (eg, bleeding disorders, thrombocytopenia,
uncontrolled hypertension). Light microscopy delineates the pattern
of injury; underlying disease process can be further categorized
according to the immunofluorescence pattern and appearance on
electron microscopy (Table 22–9).
 Treatment
General measures for all include aggressive treatment of
hypertension and fluid overload if present. Dialysis may be needed
as discussed in the acute kidney injury section. The inflammatory
glomerular injury may require corticosteroids or cytotoxic agents, or
both. (See specific diseases discussed below.)
 When to Refer
Any patient in whom a glomerulonephritis is suspected should be
referred to a nephrologist.
 When to Admit
Any suspicion of acute nephritic syndrome or rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis 
warrants 
consideration 
of 
immediate
hospitalization.
POSTINFECTIOUS GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Proteinuria.
 Glomerular hematuria.
 Symptoms 1–3 weeks after infection (often pharyngitis or
impetigo).
 
 General Considerations
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis is most often due to infection with
nephritogenic group A β-hemolytic streptococci. It can occur
sporadically or in clusters and during epidemics. It commonly
appears after pharyngitis or impetigo with onset 1–3 weeks after
infection (average 7–10 days).
Other infections have been associated with postinfectious
glomerulonephritis including bacteremic states (especially with S
aureus), bacterial pneumonias, deep-seated abscesses, gram-
negative infections, infective endocarditis, and shunt infections.
Viral, 
fungal, 
and 
parasitic 
causes 
of 
postinfectious
glomerulonephritis pattern of glomerular injury include hepatitis B or
C, HIV, cytomegalovirus infection, infectious mononucleosis,
coccidioidomycosis, 
malaria, 
mycobacteria, 
syphilis, 
and
toxoplasmosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Disease presentation can vary widely across the nephritic spectrum
from asymptomatic glomerular hematuria (especially in epidemic
cases) to nephritic syndrome with hypertension, oliguria, edema,
and perhaps cola-colored urine.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum 
complement 
levels 
are 
low; 
in 
postinfectious
glomerulonephritis due to group A streptococcal infection, anti-
streptolysin O (ASO) titers can be high unless the immune response
has been blunted with previous antibiotic treatment. Glomerular
hematuria and subnephrotic proteinuria are present; severe cases
may demonstrate elevated serum creatinine and red cell casts in the
urine. Renal biopsy shows a diffuse proliferative pattern of injury on
light microscopy. Immunofluorescence shows IgG and C3 in a
granular pattern in the mesangium and along the capillary basement
membrane. Electron microscopy shows large, dense subepithelial
deposits or “humps.”
 Treatment
The underlying infection should be identified and treated
appropriately, but otherwise, treatment for postinfectious
glomerulonephritis is supportive. Antihypertensives, salt restriction,
and diuretics should be used if needed. Corticosteroids have not
been shown to improve outcome. Prognosis depends on the
severity of the glomerular injury and age of the patient. Children are
more likely to fully recover; adults are more prone to the
development 
of 
severe 
disease 
(rapidly 
progressive
glomerulonephritis with crescent formation) and CKD.
Kanjanabuch T et al. An update on acute postinfectious
glomerulonephritis worldwide. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2009 May;5(5):
259–69. [PMID: 19384327]
 
IGA NEPHROPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Proteinuria: minimal to nephrotic range.
 Glomerular hematuria: microscopic is common; macroscopic
(gross) after infection.
 Positive IgA staining on renal biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
IgA nephropathy (Berger disease) is a primary renal disease of IgA
deposition in the glomerular mesangium. The inciting cause is
unknown but may be due to abnormal glycosylation of IgA subclass
1 molecules. IgA nephropathy is associated with hepatic cirrhosis,
celiac disease, and infections such as HIV and cytomegalovirus;
susceptibility to IgA nephropathy seems to be inheritable.
IgA nephropathy is the most common primary glomerular disease
worldwide, particularly in Asia. It is most commonly seen in children
and young adults, with males affected two to three times more
commonly than females.
 Clinical Findings
An episode of gross hematuria is the most common presenting
symptom. Frequently, this is associated with an upper respiratory
infection (50%), GI symptoms (10%), or a flu-like illness (15%).
The urine becomes red or cola-colored 1–2 days after illness onset.
In contrast to postinfectious glomerulonephritis, this feature has
been called “synpharyngitic hematuria” since there is no significant
latent period. IgA nephropathy can present as any of the nephritic
syndromes from asymptomatic microscopic hematuria to rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis. Less commonly, it can present as a
nephrotic syndrome.
There are no serologic tests that aid in the diagnosis of IgA
nephropathy; serum IgA subclass 1 testing may be a possibility in
the future. Serum complements are normal. The typical pattern of
injury seen on renal biopsy is a focal glomerulonephritis with
mesangial proliferation; immunofluorescence demonstrates diffuse
mesangial IgA and C3 deposits.
 Treatment
In patients with significant proteinuria (> 1 g/d), ACE inhibitors or
ARBs should be used to reduce proteinuria and treat hypertension
(see Table 11–8). The target blood pressure is < 130/80 mm Hg,
and proteinuria should be reduced to < 500 mg/d. In patients with
proteinuria of 1.0–3.5 g/d and GFR > 70 mL/min, corticosteroid
therapy has proven beneficial. One such regimen (methylpredniso-
lone, 1 g/d intravenously for 3 days during months 1, 3, and 5, plus
prednisone in a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg orally every other day for 6
months) showed a 2% doubling of creatinine after 6 years in the
treatment group versus a 21% doubling of creatinine in the control
group. For patients with a GFR < 70 mL/min and a predicted
progression to ESRD in < 5 years, some experts have suggested a
trial of low-dose cyclophosphamide followed by maintenance
azathioprine. Other treatments have included fish oil, with variable
results in clinical trials. There are very few side effects of long-term
fish oil administration aside from fishy breath and eructations.
Kidney transplantation is an excellent option for patients with
ESRD, but recurrent disease has been documented in 30% of
patients 5–10 years post-transplant. Fortunately, recurrent disease
rarely leads to failure of the allograft.
 Prognosis
Approximately one-third of patients experience spontaneous clinical
remission. Progressive CKD develops in 40–50% of patients. The
remaining patients show chronic microscopic hematuria and a stable
serum creatinine. The most unfavorable prognostic indicator is
proteinuria > 1 g/d; other unfavorable prognostic indicators include
hypertension, persistent microscopic hematuria and proteinuria,
glomerulosclerosis or glomerular crescents on biopsy, and abnormal
GFR on presentation.
Berthoux FC et al. Natural history of primary IgA nephropathy.
Semin Nephrol. 2008 Jan;28(1):4–9. [PMID: 18222341]
 
Cheng J et al. Efficacy and safety of glucocorticoids therapy for
IgA nephropathy: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Am J Nephrol. 2009;30(4):315–22. [PMID: 19546530]
 
Glassock RJ. IgA nephropathy: challenges and opportunities.
Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Aug;75(8):569–76. [PMID: 18756838]
 
HENOCH-SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA
Henoch-Schönlein purpura is a small-vessel leukocytoclastic
vasculitis associated with IgA subclass 1 deposition in vessel walls.
It is most common in children and is often associated with an inciting
infection, such as group A streptococcus or other exposure. There
is a male predominance. It classically presents with palpable
purpura in the lower extremities and buttock area; arthralgias; and
abdominal symptoms, such as nausea, colic, and melena. A
decrease in GFR is common with a nephritic presentation. The renal
lesions are identical to those found in IgA nephropathy. Most
patients with microscopic hematuria and minimal proteinuria recover
fully over several weeks. Progressive CKD and possibly ESRD
may develop in persons with more severe nephritic syndrome and
heavy proteinuria. To date, although several treatment regimens of
various immunosuppressive agents have been tested, none have
been definitively proven to alter the course of severe Henoch-
Schönlein purpura nephritis.
Further details about Henoch-Schönlein purpura are provided in
Chapter 20.
Chartapisak W et al. Interventions for preventing and treating
kidney disease in Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP). Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8; (3):CD005128. [PMID:
19588365]
 
Pillebout E et al; CESAR study group. Addition of cyclophosph-
amide to steroids provides no benefit compared with steroids
alone in treating adult patients with severe Henoch Schönlein
purpura. Kidney Int. 2010 Sep;78(5):495–502. [PMID:
20505654]
 
Saulsbury FT. Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Curr Opin Rheumatol.
2010 Sep;22(5):598–602. [PMID: 20473173]
 
PAUCI-IMMUNE GLOMERULONEPHRITIS (ANCA-
Associated)
Pauci-immune necrotizing glomerulonephritis is caused by the small-
vessel vasculitides granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly
Wegener granulomatosis), Churg-Strauss disease, and microscopic
polyangiitis. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis also involves
granulomatous inflammation of the respiratory tract with a
necrotizing vasculitis of small-and medium-sized vessels.
Microscopic polyangiitis (polyarteritis) is similar to granulomatosis
with polyangiitis without granulomatous inflammation, but both
commonly exhibit a necrotizing glomerulonephritis (70–80% of
cases 
also 
involve 
the 
kidneys). 
ANCA-associated
glomerulonephritis can also present as a primary renal lesion without
systemic involvement. The pathogenesis of these entities is
unknown, but more than 95% of pauci-immune glomerulonephritis
(systemic and renal-limited disease) is associated with increased
titers of circulating ANCA. The ANCAs appear to be responsible
for neutrophil activation and consequent vascular damage, although
immunofluorescence of biopsy specimens do not reveal any
evidence of immune activity (hence “pauci-immune”). Renal
involvement classically presents as a rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of a systemic inflammatory disease, including fever,
malaise, and weight loss may be present and usually precede initial
presentation by several months. In addition to hematuria and
proteinuria from glomerular inflammation, some patients exhibit
purpura from dermal capillary involvement and mononeuritis
multiplex from nerve arteriolar involvement. Ninety percent of
patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener
granulomatosis) have upper (especially sinus) or lower respiratory
tract symptoms with nodular lesions that can cavitate and bleed.
Hemoptysis is a concerning sign and usually warrants
hospitalization.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serologically, ANCA subtype analysis is done. A cytoplasmic
pattern (C-ANCA) is specific for antiproteinase-3 antibodies, while
a perinuclear pattern (P-ANCA) is specific for antimyeloperoxidase
antibodies. Over 80% of patients with granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis) have C-ANCA; the
remainder can have a P-ANCA pattern. Microscopic angiitis has
either a P-ANCA or C-ANCA pattern about 80% of the time.
Pathologically, the small vessels and glomeruli lack immune deposits
on immunofluorescence staining (hence the designation pauci-
immune); however, a cell-mediated immune response is often seen.
Necrotizing lesions and crescents are the pattern of injury
associated with this rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
 Treatment
Treatment should be instituted early. Induction therapy of high-dose
corticosteroids (methylprednisolone, 1–2 g/d intravenously for 3
days, followed by prednisone, 1 mg/kg orally for 1 month, with a
slow taper over the next 6 months) and cytotoxic agents
(cyclophosphamide, 0.5–1 g/m2 intravenously per month or 1.5–2
mg/kg orally for 3–6 months) is followed by long-term azathioprine
or mycophenolate mofetil. Plasma exchange has been shown to be
beneficial in conjunction with induction therapy. Rituximab has
recently been shown to be noninferior to cyclophosph-amide for
induction.
 Prognosis
Without treatment, prognosis is extremely poor. However, with
aggressive treatment, complete remission can be achieved in about
75% of patients. Prognosis depends on the extent of renal
involvement before treatment is started. ANCA titers should be
monitored to follow treatment efficacy and herald relapse. Patients
receiving cyclophosph-amide should receive prophylaxis for
Pneumocystis jiroveci, such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
double-strength orally 3 days per week.
Hiemstra TF et al; European Vasculitis Study Group (EUVAS).
Mycophenolate mofetil vs azathioprine for remission maintenance
in antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010 Dec 1; 304(21):2381–
8. [PMID: 21060104]
 
Rutgers A et al. Pauci-immune necrotizing glomerulonephritis.
Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2010 Aug;36(3):559–72. [PMID:
20688250]
 
ANTI-GLOMERULAR BASEMENT MEMBRANE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS & GOODPASTURE
SYNDROME
Goodpasture syndrome is defined by the clinical constellation of
glomerulonephritis and pulmonary hemorrhage; injury to both is
mediated by antibodies to epitopes in the GBM (Figure 22–5). Up
to one-third of patients with anti-GBM glomerulonephritis have no
evidence of concomitant lung injury. Anti-GBM-associated
glomerulonephritis accounts for about 10% of patients with rapidly
progressive acute glomerulonephritis. The incidence in males is
approximately six times that in females, and the disease occurs most
commonly in the second and third decades. Lung involvement has
been associated with pulmonary infection, tobacco use, and
hydrocarbon solvent exposure; HLA-DR2 and -B7 antigens may
predispose as well.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset of disease is preceded by an upper respiratory tract
infection in 20–60% of cases; hemoptysis, dyspnea, and possible
respiratory failure may ensue. Other findings are consistent with a
rapidly progressive acute glomerulonephritis, though a recent series
from Australia suggests that some cases may present with much
milder forms of the nephritic spectrum of disease (eg, glomerular
hematuria and proteinuria without raised creatinine).
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory evaluation can show iron deficiency anemia if pulmonary
hemorrhage has been prolonged. Serum complement levels are
normal. Sputum may contain hemosiderin-laden macrophages.
Chest radiographs can show shifting pulmonary infiltrates due to
pulmonary hemorrhage. The diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide
is markedly increased. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding circulating
anti-GBM antibodies, which are positive in over 90% of patients.
About 15% of patients also have elevated ANCA titers. Renal
biopsy typically shows crescent formation on light microscopy, with
linear IgG staining along the GBM on immunofluorescence.
 Treatment
The treatment of choice is a combination of plasma exchange
therapy to remove circulating antibodies, and administration of
immunosuppressive drugs to prevent formation of new antibodies
and control the inflammatory response. Corticosteroids are typically
given initially in pulse doses of methylprednisolone, 1–2 g/d for 3
days, then prednisone orally 1 mg/kg/d. Cyclophosphamide is
administered intravenously at a dose of 0.5–1 g/m2 per month or
orally at a dosage of 2–3 mg/kg/d. Daily plasma exchange is
performed for up to 2 weeks. A poorer prognosis exists in patients
with oliguria and a serum creatinine > 6–7 mg/dL, or requiring
dialysis upon presentation. Anti-GBM antibody titers should
decrease as the clinical course improves.
Levy JB et al. Clinical features and outcome of patients with both
ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies. Kidney Int. 2004 Oct; 66(4):
1535–40. [PMID: 15458448]
 
CRYOGLOBULIN-ASSOCIATED
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
Essential (mixed) cryoglobulinemia is a disorder associated with
cold-precipitable immunoglobulins (cryoglobulins). Glomerular
disease results from the precipitation of cryoglobulins in glomerular
capillaries (Figure 22–5). The cause is typically hepatitis C infection,
but other infections (such as hepatitis B) or other occult viral,
bacterial, and fungal infections can be causative; it is also associated
with some connective tissue diseases.
Patients exhibit purpuric and necrotizing skin lesions in dependent
areas, arthralgias, fever, and hepatosplenomegaly. Serum
complement levels are depressed. Rheumatoid factor is often
elevated when cryoglobulins are present. Renal biopsy may show
several different patterns of injury; there may be crescent formation,
glomerular capillary thrombi, or MPGN. Treatment consists of
aggressively treating the underlying infection. Pulse corticosteroids,
plasma exchange, and cytotoxic agents can be used. Interferon-α
(IFN-α) has been shown to benefit patients with hepatitis C–related
cryoglobulinemia.
Iannuzzella F et al. Management of hepatitis C virus-related mixed
cryoglobulinemia. Am J Med. 2010 May;123(5):400–8. [PMID:
20399313]
 
IDIOPATHIC MEMBRANOPROLIFERATIVE
GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
MPGN in its primary form is an idiopathic renal disease that usually
presents with nephritic features ranging from asymptomatic
glomerular hematuria and proteinuria, to episodes of gross
hematuria, to the acute nephritic syndrome. MPGN may also
present with the nephrotic syndrome. Most patients are under 30
years of age, and a recent history of upper respiratory tract infection
is present in nearly half. At least two major subgroups are
recognized: type I and type II. Both are characterized by
hypocomplementemia; in type I MPGN, the classic complement
pathway is activated, leading to low or normal C3 with low C4,
whereas in type II disease, the alternative complement pathway is
activated and C3 is low while C4 is normal. Prognosis is worse in
type II disease.
Renal biopsy in type I MPGN demonstrates a thickened GBM
due to immune complex deposition and abnormal mesangial cell
proliferation between the GBM and the endothelial cells. This gives
a characteristic “splitting” or “tram-track” appearance to the
capillary wall. Immunofluorescence shows IgG, IgM, and granular
deposits of C3, C1q, and C4. Subendothelial deposits are seen on
electron microscopy.
Type II MPGN (dense deposit disease) is less common than
type I and is associated with C3 nephritic factor, a circulating IgG
antibody. Light microscopy is similar to type I. Electron microscopy
shows a characteristic ribbon-like deposit of homogeneous material
that replaces part of the GBM.
Treatment of idiopathic MPGN is controversial. After ruling out
secondary or systemic causes, treatment consists of corticosteroid
therapy (there is no standard dosage for adults) and antiplatelet
drugs (aspirin, 500–975 mg/d orally, plus dipyridamole, 225 mg/d
orally), although the efficacy of this regimen is not well proven. The
rationale for anti-platelet therapy is that platelet consumption is
increased in MPGN and may play a role in glomerular injury.
Uncontrolled studies suggest that there may be some role for other
immunosuppressive 
regimens, 
including 
cyclophosphamide,
cyclosporine, and mycophenolate mofetil. ACE inhibitors and
ARBs should be used to treat hypertension and proteinuria. In the
past, 50% of patients progressed to ESRD in 10 years; this rate
may now be slightly lower with the introduction of more aggressive
therapy. Less favorable prognostic findings include type II disease,
early renal insufficiency, hypertension, and persistent nephrotic
syndrome. Both types of MPGN will recur after renal
transplantation; however, type II recurs more commonly.
Alchi B et al. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. Pediatr
Nephrol. 2010 Aug;25(8):1409–18. [PMID: 19908070]
 
HEPATITIS C VIRUS INFECTION
Renal disease in the setting of hepatitis C viral infection was not
well-recognized until 1993. Now it accounts for approximately 8%
of patients with ESRD. The three patterns of renal injury associated
with hepatitis C are secondary MPGN, cryoglobulinemic
glomerulonephritis, and membranous nephropathy. A type I MPGN
(see section above) is the most common lesion found on kidney
biopsy. These patients typically have hematuria and proteinuria,
hypertension, and anemia. Occasionally, they also exhibit features of
the nephrotic syndrome. Many patients have elevated serum
transaminases 
and 
an 
elevated 
rheumatoid 
factor.
Hypocomplementemia is very common, with C4 typically more
reduced than C3. Cryoglobulinemic disease is discussed above.
Membranous glomerulopathy is the least common of the three and
presents with a typical nephrotic picture; neither cryoglobulins nor
rheumatoid factor is present.
 Treatment
In patients with hepatitis C virus–associated MPGN not receiving
treatment for liver disease, the question arises whether to initiate
therapy for kidney disease. The main indications for therapy are
poor renal function, nephrotic syndrome, new or worsening
hypertension, fibrosis or tubulointerstitial disease on biopsy, and
progressive disease. IFN-α may result in suppression of viremia and
improvement in hepatic function. Renal function rarely improves
unless viral suppression occurs; however, renal function often
worsens when therapy is abated. Ribavirin is relatively
contraindicated in kidney disease because of the dose-related
hemolysis that occurs with renal dysfunction. Despite this, some
case series have shown benefit with combined IFN-α and ribavirin
in closely monitored settings.
Perico N et al. Hepatitis C infection and chronic renal diseases.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Jan;4(1):207–20. [PMID:
19129320]
 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune disease in which
renal involvement is common. In various series, renal involvement
ranges from 35% to 90% (see Chapter 20), with the higher
estimates encompassing subclinical disease.
Lupus nephritis may present as any entity in the spectrum of
clinical glomerular disease, although most presentations are as
glomerulonephritis. 
Nonglomerular 
syndromes 
include
tubulointerstitial nephritis and vasculitis. All patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus should have routine urinalyses to monitor for
the appearance of hematuria or proteinuria. If urinary abnormalities
are detected, renal biopsy is often performed. The World Health
Organization classification of renal glomerular lesions is class I,
normal; class II, mesangial proliferative; class III, focal and
segmental proliferative; class IV, diffuse proliferative; and class V,
membranous nephropathy. These are further classified as acute or
chronic, and global or segmental, both of which have prognostic
value.
 Treatment
Individuals with class I and class II injury patterns require no
treatment. Transformation of these types to a more active lesion
may occur and is usually accompanied by an increase in lupus
serologic activity and evidence of deteriorating renal function (eg,
rising serum creatinine, increasing proteinuria). Repeat biopsy to
confirm the transformation in these patients is recommended.
Patients with extensive class III lesions and all class IV lesions
should receive aggressive immunosuppressive therapy. The features
signifying the poorest prognosis in patients with class IV lesions are
an elevated serum creatinine, hematocrit < 26%, and African
American race. Indications for treatment of class V disease are
unclear; however, if superimposed proliferative lesions exist,
aggressive therapy should be instituted. Two different trials have
used corticosteroids with mycophenolate mofetil.
Corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 1 g intravenously daily for 3
days followed by prednisone, 1 mg/kg orally daily with subsequent
taper over 4–6 weeks) are a mainstay of treatment for some
patients with class III lesions and all patients with class IV lesions.
However, this therapy is associated with many side effects and may
not prevent progression of chronic lesions. Higher dose alternating
day therapy can be considered to reduce side effects. Adjunctive
agents, such as cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate mofetil, are
necessary to improve long-term renal survival in patients with
aggressive type III and type IV nephritis. Current data suggest that
African Americans and Hispanics respond more favorably to
mycophenolate mofetil rather than cyclophosphamide; in addition,
mycophenolate mofetil has a more favorable side-effect profile than
does cyclophosphamide. Cyclophosphamide induction typically
lasts 18–24 months (initially it is given intravenously every month for
six doses and then every 3 months for six doses) and is then
followed by mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine maintenance
therapy; mycophenolate mofetil is typically given at 2–3 g/day, then
tapered to 1–2 g/day for maintenance. Tacrolimus or cyclosporine
may also be considered, but the relapse rate is high upon
discontinuation of these agents.
The return to normal of various laboratory tests (double-stranded
DNA antibodies, serum C3, C4, CH50 levels) can be useful in
monitoring treatment. Urinary protein levels and sediment activity
are also helpful markers. Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
who undergo dialysis have a favorable prospect for long-term
survival; interestingly, systemic lupus symptoms tend to become
quiescent with the development of ESRD. Patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus undergoing kidney transplants have recurrent
renal disease in 8% of cases.
Fine DM. Pharmacological therapy of lupus nephritis. JAMA.
2005 Jun 22;293(24):3053–60. [PMID: 15972568]
 
Ginzler EM et al. Mycophenolate mofetil or intravenous
cyclophosphamide for lupus nephritis. N Engl J Med. 2005 Nov
24;353(21):2219–28. [PMID: 16306519]
 
Ortega LM et al. Lupus nephritis: pathologic features,
epidemiology and a guide to therapeutic decisions. Lupus. 2010
Apr;19(5):557–74. [PMID: 20089610]
 
NEPHROTIC SPECTRUM GLOMERULAR DISEASES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Bland urine sediment (few if any cells or cellular casts).
 Full-blown nephrotic syndrome consists of the following:
– Urine protein excretion > 3 g per 24 hours.
– Hypoalbuminemia (albumin < 3 g/dl).
– Peripheral edema.
– Hyperlipidemia.
– Oval fat bodies in the urine.
 
 General Considerations
In adults, about one-third of patients with nephrotic syndrome have
a systemic disease such as diabetes mellitus, amyloidosis, or
systemic lupus erythematosus. With the current epidemic of type 2
diabetes mellitus, the proportion with diabetes is slowly increasing.
The remainder have proteinuria due to primary renal disease. The
most common causes are minimal change disease, focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis, membranous nephropathy, and MPGN (see
above). Any of these disease processes can present on the less
severe end of the spectrum with a bland urinalysis and proteinuria,
or with the full-blown nephrotic syndrome. Serum creatinine may or
may not be abnormal at the time of presentation, depending on the
severity, acuity and chronicity of the disease.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Peripheral edema is a hallmark of the nephrotic syndrome,
occurring when the serum albumin concentration is < 3 g/dL (30
g/L). Edema is most likely due to sodium retention and, at albumin
levels < 2 g/dL (20 g/L), arterial underfilling from low plasma
oncotic pressure. Initially, this presents in the dependent areas of the
body subject to gravity, such as the lower extremities; however,
such edema can become generalized, including notable periorbital
edema. Patients can experience dyspnea due to pulmonary edema,
pleural effusions, and diaphragmatic compromise with ascites.
Complaints of abdominal fullness may also be present in patients
with ascites.
Patients with the nephrotic syndrome may also have an increase
incidence of infection owing to loss of immunoglobulins and certain
complement moieties in the urine; similarly, there can be increased
risk of venous thrombosis secondary to loss of anticoagulant
factors.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Urinalysis—Proteinuria occurs as a result of effacement of
podocytes (foot processes) and an alteration of the negative charge
of the GBM. The screening test for proteinuria is the urinary
dipstick analysis; however, this test indicates albumin only. The
addition of sulfosalicylic acid to the urine sediment allows abnormal
paraproteins to be detected. A spot urine protein to urine creatinine
ratio gives a reasonable approximation of grams of protein excreted
per day.
Microscopically, the urinary sediment has relatively few cellular
elements or casts. However, if marked hyperlipidemia is present,
the urine can have oval fat bodies resulting from lipid deposits in
sloughed renal tubular epithelial cells. They appear as “grape
clusters” under light microscopy and “Maltese crosses” under
polarized light.
2. Blood chemistries—The nephrotic syndrome results in
hypoalbuminemia [< 3 g/dL (30 g/L)] and hypoproteinemia [< 6
g/dL (60 g/L)]. Hyperlipidemia occurs in over 50% of patients with
early nephrotic syndrome, and becomes more frequent and worsens
in degree as the severity of the nephritic syndrome increases. A fall
in oncotic pressure triggers increased hepatic production of lipids
(cholesterol and apolipoprotein B). There is also decreased
clearance of very low-density lipoproteins, causing hypertri
glyceridemia. Patients may also have an elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate as a result of alterations in some plasma
components such as increased levels of fibrinogen. Patients may
become deficient in vitamin D, zinc, and copper from loss of binding
proteins in the urine.
Laboratory testing to determine the underlying cause may include
complement levels, serum and urine protein electrophoresis,
antinuclear antibodies, and serologic tests for hepatitis.
3. Renal biopsy—Specific classification and findings are shown in
Table 22–10. Renal biopsy is often performed in adults with new-
onset idiopathic nephrotic syndrome if a primary renal disease that
may require drug therapy (eg, corticosteroids, cytotoxic agents) is
suspected. Chronically and significantly elevated creatinine levels
may indicate irreversible kidney disease mitigating the usefulness of
kidney biopsy. In the setting of long-standing diabetes mellitus type
I or II, proteinuric renal disease is rarely biopsied unless atypical
features are also present, such as significant glomerular hematuria,
cellular casts, or other reason to suspect a second renal lesion.
 
Table 22–10. Classification and findings in glomerulonephritis:
Nephrotic spectrum presentations.
 
GBM, glomerular basement membrane; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.
 Treatment
A. Protein Loss
The daily total dietary protein intake should replace the daily urinary
protein losses so as to avoid negative nitrogen balance. Protein
malnutrition often occurs with urinary protein losses > 10 g/d. In the
past, protein restriction was suggested for patients with kidney
disease. The largest human trial to date (the MDRD Study) did not
show a significant benefit, but two meta-analyses in 1999 and 2001
have shown a mild renal benefit. For this reason, the KDOQI
recommends protein restriction to 0.6–0.8 g/kg/d in patients with a
GFR < 25 mL/min prior to starting dialysis. However, great care
must be taken to avoid malnutrition in these patients.
In both diabetic and nondiabetic patients, therapy that is aimed at
reducing proteinuria may also reduce progression of renal disease.
ACE inhibitors and ARBs lower urine protein excretion by lowering
efferent arteriolar resistance, thereby reducing glomerular capillary
pressure; they also have antifibrotic effects. ACE inhibitors and
ARBs (see Table 11–8) can be used in patients with reduced GFR
as long as significant hyperkalemia (potassium > 5.2–5.5 mEq/L)
does not occur and serum creatinine rises < 30%, stabilizing over 2
months; these patients should be monitored closely to avoid acute
kidney injury and hyperkalemia. “Head-to-head” comparisons of an
ACE inhibitor and an ARB have shown the ARB to be no better
than the ACE inhibitor in preventing progression of renal disease in
diabetic persons with proteinuria. The combination of an ACE
inhibitor and ARB versus ARB alone for slowing the progression of
diabetic nephropathy is being tested in a multicenter, prospective
randomized study.
B. Edema
Dietary salt restriction is essential for managing edema; most
patients also require diuretic therapy. Commonly used diuretics
include thiazide and loop diuretics (both are highly protein bound).
With hypoalbuminemia and decreased GFR, diuretic delivery to the
kidney is reduced, and patients often require larger doses. This
combination of loop and thiazide diuretics can potentiate the diuretic
effect. This may be needed for patients with refractory fluid
retention.
C. Hyperlipidemia
Hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia occur as noted
above. Dietary modification and exercise should be advocated;
however, 
effective 
lipid-lowering 
usually 
also 
requires
pharmacologic treatment (see Chapter 28). Statins are hepatically
cleared, so dosage is not altered for CKD. Rhabdomyolysis,
however, is more common in patients with CKD who take
gemfibrozil in combination with statins; combining fenofibrate or
niacin with a statin poses less risk of rhabdomyolysis.
D. Hypercoagulable State
Patients with serum albumin < 2 g/dL can become hypercoagulable.
Nephrotic patients have urinary losses of anti-thrombin, protein C,
and protein S and increased platelet activation. Patients are prone
to renal vein thrombosis and other venous thromboemboli,
particularly with membranous glomerulopathy. Anticoagulation
therapy is warranted for at least 3–6 months in patients with
evidence of thrombosis in any location. Patients with renal vein
thrombosis and recurrent thromboemboli require indefinite
anticoagulation.
 When to Refer
Any patient noted to have nephrotic syndrome should be referred
immediately to a nephrologist for aggressive volume and blood
pressure management, assessment for renal biopsy, and treatment
of the underlying disease. Proteinuria of > 1 g/d without the
nephrotic syndrome also merits nephrology referral, though with less
urgency.
 When to Admit
Patients with edema refractory to outpatient therapy or rapidly
worsening kidney function that may require inpatient interventions
should be admitted.
Kodner C. Nephrotic syndrome in adults: diagnosis and
management. Am Fam Physician. 2009 Nov 15;80(10):1129–34.
[PMID: 19904897]
 
NEPHROTIC SPECTRUM
DISEASE IN PRIMARY RENAL
DISORDERS
 
MINIMAL CHANGE DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Nephrotic range proteinuria.
 Kidney biopsy shows no changes on light microscopy.
 Characteristic foot-process effacement on electron microscopy.
 
 General Considerations
Minimal change disease is the most common cause of proteinuric
renal disease in children. Indeed, children with nephrotic syndrome
are often treated for minimal change disease empirically without a
biopsy diagnosis. Minimal change disease is less common in adults,
accounting for 20–25% of cases of primary nephrotic syndrome in
those over age 40 years. This entity can be idiopathic but also
occurs following viral upper respiratory infections, in association
with tumors such as Hodgkin disease, with drugs (gold and lithium),
and with hypersensitivity reactions (especially to NSAIDs and bee
stings).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients often exhibit the manifestations of full-blown nephrotic
syndrome. They are more susceptible to infection, especially with
gram-positive organisms, have a tendency toward thromboembolic
events, develop severe hyperlipidemia, and experience protein
malnutrition. Minimal change disease can rarely cause acute kidney
injury due to tubular changes and interstitial edema.
B. Histologic Findings
Glomeruli show no changes on light microscopy or
immunofluorescence. On electron microscopy, there is a
characteristic effacement of podocyte foot processes. A subgroup
of patients also shows mesangial cell proliferation; such patients
have more hematuria and hypertension and poor response to
standard corticosteroid treatment.
 Treatment
Treatment is with prednisone, 1 mg/kg/d orally. Adults often require
longer courses of therapy than children. It can take up to 16 weeks
to achieve a response to corticosteroids. Treatment should be
continued for several weeks after complete remission of proteinuria.
A significant number of patients will relapse and require further
corticosteroid treatment. Patients with frequent relapses and
corticosteroid resistance may need cyclophosphamide or
cyclosporine to induce subsequent remissions; tacrolimus may also
be considered, although controlled trials are lacking. Progression to
ESRD is rare. Complications most often arise from prolonged
corticosteroid use.
Palmer SC et al. Interventions for minimal change disease in adults
with nephrotic syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Jan
23; (1):CD001537. [PMID: 18253993]
 
Roberti I et al. Long-term outcome of children with steroid-
resistant nephrotic syndrome treated with tacrolimus. Pediatr
Nephrol. 2010 Jun;25(6):1117–24. [PMID: 20217433]
 
MEMBRANOUS NEPHROPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Nephrotic range proteinuria.
 Associated with coagulopathy, eg, renal vein thrombosis if
g
p
y, g,
nephrotic syndrome present.
 “Spike and dome” pattern on kidney biopsy from subepithelial
deposits.
 Secondary causes notably include hepatitis B virus and
carcinomas.
 
 General Considerations
Membranous nephropathy is the most common cause of primary
nephrotic syndrome in adults, usually presenting in the fifth and sixth
decades. It is an immune-mediated disease characterized by
immune complex deposition in the subepithelial portion of
glomerular capillary walls. The antigen in one primary form of the
disease appears to be a phospholipase A2 receptor on the
podocyte. Secondary disease is associated with infections, such as
hepatitis B, endocarditis, and syphilis; autoimmune disease, such as
systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed connective tissue disease, and
thyroiditis; carcinomas; and certain drugs, such as gold,
penicillamine, and captopril.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients have a higher risk of renal vein thrombosis than most
nephrotic patients. A higher incidence of occult neoplasms of lung,
stomach, breast, and colon is found in people over 50 years of age.
The course of disease is variable, with about 50% of patients
progressing to ESRD over 3–10 years. Poorer outcome is
associated with concomitant tubulointerstitial fibrosis, male gender,
elevated serum creatinine, hypertension, and heavy proteinuria (>
10 g/d).
B. Laboratory Findings
See above for laboratory findings in the nephrotic syndrome. By
light microscopy, capillary wall thickness is increased without
inflammatory changes or cellular proliferation; when stained with
silver methenamine, a “spike and dome” pattern may be observed
owing to projections of excess GBM between the subepithelial
deposits. Immunofluorescence shows IgG and C3 uniformly along
capillary loops. Electron microscopy shows a discontinuous pattern
of dense deposits along the subepithelial surface of the basement
membrane.
 Treatment
Treatment is controversial. After underlying causes are excluded,
treatment depends on the risk of renal disease progression. One
algorithm is based on the degree of proteinuria. In patients with
proteinuria < 3.5 g/d, the risk of progression is low. These
individuals should be closely monitored with a low-salt diet, strict
blood pressure control, and an ACE inhibitor or ARB for reduction
of proteinuria. Patients with proteinuria of 3.5–8 g/d but normal
renal function are at moderate risk. They should follow the above
suggestions and can elect immunosuppressive regimens with
corticosteroids and chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide for 6
months, although 65% of these patients experience partial or
complete remission within 3–4 years. Cyclosporine is a second
choice. The highest-risk patients—those with > 8 g/d of proteinuria
and possible renal dysfunction—might receive corticosteroids with a
cytotoxic agent as first-line immunosuppressant therapy, though the
choice of cyclosporine is also reasonable. Patients with
membranous nephropathy are excellent candidates for transplant.
Beck LH Jr et al. M-type phospholipase A2 receptor as target
antigen in idiopathic membranous nephropathy. N Engl J Med.
2009 Jul 2;361(1):11–21. [PMID: 19571279]
 
Quaglia M et al. Idiopathic membranous nephropathy:
management strategies. Drugs. 2009 Jul 9;69(10):1303–17.
[PMID: 19583450]
 
FOCAL SEGMENTAL GLOMERULOSCLEROSIS
This lesion can present as idiopathic disease or secondary to such
conditions as heroin use, morbid obesity, chronic urinary reflux, and
HIV infection. Idiopathic disease may be related to heritable
abnormalities of any of several podocyte proteins. Clinically,
patients show evidence of nephrotic syndrome. Decreased kidney
function is present in 25–50% at time of diagnosis. Patients with
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and nephrotic syndrome typically
progress to ESRD in 6–8 years.
Diagnosis requires renal biopsy. Light microscopy shows
sclerosis of portions (or segments) of some, but not all glomeruli
(thus, focal and not diffuse disease). IgM and C3 are seen in the
sclerotic lesions on immunofluorescence, although it is presumed
that these immune components are simply trapped in the sclerotic
glomeruli and are not participating in the pathogenesis of the
disease. Electron microscopy shows fusion of epithelial foot
processes as seen in minimal change disease (Table 22–10).
Treatment for primary focal and segmental glomerulo-sclerosis is
controversial, although supportive care for nephrotic patients is
indicated (diuretics for edema, ACE inhibitors or ARBs to target
proteinuria and hypertension, statins or niacin for hyperlipidemia).
High-dose oral prednisone (1–1.5 mg/kg/d) for 2–3 months
followed by a slow taper can induce remission within 5–9 months in
over half of patients. Other cytotoxic drug therapy can be
considered for steroid-resistant patients, including calcineurin
inhibitors and mycophenolate mofetil.
Gbadegesin R et al. Pathogenesis and therapy of focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis: an update. Pediatr Nephrol. 2010 Nov 26.
[Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21110043]
 
NEPHROTIC SPECTRUM
DISEASE FROM SYSTEMIC
DISORDERS
 
AMYLOIDOSIS
Amyloidosis is caused by extracellular deposition of the fibrous
protein amyloid in one or more sites in the body. The amyloid fibrils
are composed of proteins that have formed characteristic β-pleated
sheets. Primary renal amyloidosis (AL amyloidosis) may occur in
the absence of systemic disease or associated with multiple
myeloma; indeed, both are plasma cell dyscrasias, which
overproduce immunoglobulin light chain (the amyloid protein).
Secondary amyloidosis (AA amyloidosis) is due to a chronic
inflammatory disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory
bowel disease, or chronic infection. In these cases, acute phase
reactant serum amyloid A is synthesized in the liver and deposited in
the tissues. Amyloid-affected kidneys can be enlarged as a result of
this deposition disease. Pathologically, glomeruli are filled with
amorphous deposits that stain positive with Congo red and show
green birefringence.
Treatment options are few. Remissions can occur in secondary
amyloidosis if the inciting agent is removed. Primary amyloidosis of
the kidney progresses to ESRD in an average of 2–3 years. Five-
year overall survival is < 20%, with death occurring from ESRD
and heart disease. The use of alkylating agents and corticosteroids
—eg, melphalan and prednisone—can reduce proteinuria and
improve renal function in a small percentage of patients. Melphalan
and stem cell transplantation are associated with high toxicity (45%
mortality) but induce remission in 80% of the remaining patients.
Renal transplant is an option in patients with secondary amyloid.
Bergesio F et al; Immunopathology Group, Italian Society of
Nephrology. Renal involvement in systemic amyloidosis—an Italian
retrospective study on epidemiological and clinical data at
diagnosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007 Jun;22(6): 1608–18.
[PMID: 17395661]
 
Comenzo RL. Current and emerging views and treatments of
systemic immunoglobulin light-chain (Al) amyloidosis. Contrib
Nephrol. 2007;153:195–210. [PMID: 17075231]
 
DIABETIC NEPHROPATHY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Prior evidence of diabetes mellitus, typically over 10 years.
 Albuminuria (microscopic or macroscopic) pre-cedes decline in
(
p
p ) p
GFR.
 Signs of diabetic nephropathy on renal biopsy, if done.
 Other end-organ damage, such as retinopathy, is common.
 
 General Considerations
Diabetic nephropathy is the most common cause of ESRD in the
United States (about 4000 cases a year). Type 1 diabetes mellitus
carries a 30–40% chance of nephropathy after 20 years, whereas
type 2 has a 15–20% chance after 20 years. ESRD is much more
likely to develop in persons with type 1 diabetes mellitus, in part
due to fewer comorbidities and deaths before ESRD ensues. With
the current epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus, rates of diabetic
nephropathy are projected to continue to increase over at least the
next 2 decades. Patients at higher risk include males, African
Americans, and Native Americans.
 Clinical Findings
The first stage of diabetic nephropathy is hyperfiltration, with an
increase in GFR, followed by the development of microalbuminuria
(30–300 mg/d). As the nephropathy progresses, (macro)
albuminuria (>300 mg/d, or enough to be detected on regular
dipstick) is seen, and the GFR returns to normal and continues to
decrease. Yearly screening for the development of microalbuminuria
is recommended for all diabetic patients. In patients prone to
nephropathy, micro albuminuria develops within 10–15 years after
onset of diabetes and progresses over the next 3–7 years to overt
proteinuria (>300 mg of albuminuria per day).
The most common lesion in diabetic nephropathy is diffuse
glomerulosclerosis, but nodular glomerulosclerosis (Kimmelstiel-
Wilson nodules) is pathognomonic. The kidneys in these patients
are usually enlarged as a result of cellular hypertrophy and
proliferation.
Patients with diabetes are prone to other renal disease. These
include papillary necrosis, chronic interstitial nephritis, and type 4
(hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronemic) renal tubular acidosis. Patients
are more susceptible to acute kidney injury from many insults,
including intravenous contrast material. In diabetic patients with
consequent comorbidities, there is a poor prognosis once dialysis is
begun.
 Treatment
With the onset of microalbuminuria, aggressive treatment is
necessary. Strict glycemic control and treatment of hypertension
have been proven to slow progression of disease; current guidelines
support a goal blood pressure of 130/80 mm Hg in most patients,
and possibly 120/75 mm Hg in overtly proteinuric patients. In
particular, ACE inhibitors and ARBs lower the rate of progression
to clinical proteinuria and slow progression to ESRD by reducing
intraglomerular pressure as well as by treating hypertension; they
may also have antifibrotic effects. Even in the subset of patients with
markedly diminished GFR, these agents seem to provide renal
benefit if patients can avoid hyperkalemia and as long as GFR does
not decline more than 30% with the initiation of this therapy. Some
experts have advocated for combination ACE inhibitor and ARB
therapy as a way to maximally target proteinuria; however, the
ONTARGET trial suggested great caution in using combination
therapy because of the development of hyperkalemia and worsening
kidney function in the group given both telmisartan and ramipril.
Gaede P et al. Effect of a multifactorial intervention on mortality in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 7;358(6):580–91.
[PMID: 18256393]
 
Ruggenenti P et al. The RAAS in the pathogenesis and treatment
of diabetic nephropathy. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2010 Jun;6(6): 319–
30. [PMID: 20440277]
 
Seaquist ER et al. Approach to the patient with type 2 diabetes
and progressive kidney disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
Jul;95(7):3103–10. [PMID: 20610606]
 
HIV-ASSOCIATED NEPHROPATHY
HIV-associated nephropathy can present as the nephrotic
syndrome in patients with HIV infection. Decline in GFR can
progress rapidly. Most patients are African American, possibly
because of a genetic predisposition (eg, MYH9 or APOL-1 gene
mutations). Often, patients have low CD4 counts and have
advanced HIV disease, but HIV-associated nephropathy can also
be the initial presentation of disease.
Light microscopy shows focal segmental glomerulosclerosis as
described above. Lesions are often of the collapsing variety, and
renal biopsy specimens also exhibit severe tubulointerstitial damage.
Small, uncontrolled studies have shown that highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for a prolonged course can slow
progression of disease. Despite this minimal evidence, HAART has
been recommended for use in these patients given the therapy's
other beneficial effects and reasonable toxicity profile. Either ACE
inhibitors or ARBs can be used to control blood pressure and slow
disease progression. Cortico steroid treatment has been used with
variable success at a dosage of 1 mg/kg/d, along with cyclosporine.
Atta MG. Diagnosis and natural history of HIV-associated
nephropathy. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2010 Jan;17(1):52–8.
[PMID: 20005489]
 
Kalayjian RC. The treatment of HIV-associated nephropathy. Adv
Chronic Kidney Dis. 2010 Jan;17(1):59–71. [PMID: 20005490]
 
Kao WH et al; Family Investigation of Nephropathy and Diabetes
Research Group. MYH9 is associated with nondiabetic end-stage
renal disease in African Americans. Nat Genet. 2008
Oct;40(10):1185–92. [PMID: 18794854]
 
TUBULOINTERSTITIAL
DISEASES
 
Tubulointerstitial disease may be acute or chronic. Acute disease is
most commonly associated with toxins and ischemia. Interstitial
edema, infiltration with polymorphonuclear neutrophils, and tubular
cell necrosis can be seen. (See Acute Kidney Injury, above, and
Table 22–11.) Chronic disease is associated with insults from an
acute factor or progressive insults without any obvious acute cause.
Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy are present, with a
mononuclear cell predominance. The chronic disorders are
described below.
CHRONIC TUBULOINTERSTITIAL DISEASES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Kidney size is small and contracted.
 Decreased urinary concentrating ability.
 Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
 Reduced GFR.
 
 General Considerations
There are four main causes of chronic tubulointerstitial disease.
These are discussed below. Other causes include multiple myeloma
and gout, which are discussed in the section on multisystem disease
with variable kidney involvement.
A. Obstructive Uropathy
The most common cause of chronic tubulointerstitial disease is
prolonged obstruction of the urinary tract. In partial obstruction,
urinary output can exhibit polyuria (possibly due to vasopressin
insensitivity and poor ability to concentrate the urine) or oliguria
(due to decreased GFR). Azotemia and hypertension (due to
increased renin-angiotensin production) are usually present. The
major causes are prostatic disease in men; ureteral calculus in a
single functioning kidney; bilateral ureteral calculi; carcinoma of the
cervix, colon, or bladder; and retroperitoneal tumors or fibrosis.
 
Table 22–11. Causes of acute tubulointerstitial nephritis
(abbreviated list).
 
Drug reactions
Antibiotics
     β-Lactam antibiotics: methicillin, penicillin, ampicillin,
cephalosporins
     Ciprofloxacin
     Erythromycin
     Sulfonamides
     Tetracycline
     Vancomycin
     Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
     Ethambutol
     Rifampin
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Diuretics
     Thiazides
     Furosemide
Miscellaneous
     Allopurinol
     Cimetidine
     Phenytoin
Systemic infections
Bacteria
     Streptococcus
     Corynebacterium diphtheriae
     Legionella
Viruses
     Epstein-Barr
     
Others
     Mycoplasma
     Rickettsia rickettsii
     Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae
     Toxoplasma
Idiopathic
Tubulointerstitial nephritis-uveitis (TIN–U)
Abdominal, rectal, and genitourinary examinations are helpful.
Urinalysis can show hematuria, pyuria, and bacteriuria but is often
benign. Abdominal ultrasound may detect mass lesions,
hydroureter, and hydronephrosis. CT scanning and MRI provide
more detailed information.
B. Vesicoureteral Reflux
Reflux nephropathy is primarily a disorder of childhood and occurs
when urine passes retrograde from the bladder to the kidneys
during voiding. It is the second most common cause of chronic
tubulointerstitial disease. It occurs as a result of an incompetent
vesicoureteral sphincter. Urine can extravasate into the interstitium;
an inflammatory response develops, and fibrosis occurs. The
inflammatory response is due to either bacteria or normal urinary
components.
Patients are typically diagnosed as young children with a history
of recurrent urinary tract infections. This entity can be detected
before birth via screening fetal ultrasonography. After birth, a
voiding cystourethrogram can be done. Less commonly, this entity
is not diagnosed until adolescence or young adulthood when
patients present with hypertension and substantial proteinuria,
unusual in most tubular diseases. At this point, renal ultrasound or
IVP can show renal scarring and hydronephrosis. On renal biopsy,
focal glomerulosclerosis can be seen in those with kidney damage.
Although most damage occurs before age 5 years, progressive renal
deterioration to ESRD continues as a result of the early insults.
C. Analgesics
Analgesic nephropathy is most commonly seen in patients who
ingest large quantities of analgesic combinations. The drugs of
concern are phenacetin, paracetamol, aspirin, and NSAIDs, with
acetaminophen a possible but less certain culprit. Ingestion of at
least 1 g/d for 3 years of these analgesics is considered necessary
for kidney dysfunction to develop. This disorder occurs most
frequently in individuals who are using analgesics for chronic
headaches, muscular pains, and arthritis. Most patients grossly
underestimate their analgesic use.
Tubulointerstitial inflammation and papillary necrosis are seen on
pathologic examination. Papillary tip and inner medullary
concentrations of some analgesics are tenfold higher than in the
renal cortex. Phenacetin—once a common cause of this disorder
and now rarely available—is metabolized in the papillae by the
prostaglandin hydroperoxidase pathway to reactive intermediates
that bind covalently to interstitial cell macromolecules, causing
necrosis. Aspirin and other NSAIDs can cause damage by their
metabolism to active intermediates which can result in cell necrosis.
These drugs also decrease medullary blood flow (via inhibition of
prostaglandin synthesis) and decrease glutathione levels, which are
necessary for detoxification.
Patients can exhibit hematuria, mild proteinuria, polyuria (from
tubular damage), anemia (from GI bleeding or erythropoietin
deficiency), and sterile pyuria. As a result of papillary necrosis,
sloughed papillae can be found in the urine. An IVP may be helpful
for detecting these—contrast will fill the area of the sloughed
papillae, leaving a “ring shadow” sign at the papillary tip. However,
IVP is rarely used in patients with significant kidney dysfunction,
given the need for dye and associated acute kidney injury.
D. Heavy Metals
Environmental exposure to heavy metals—such as lead and
cadmium—is seen infrequently now in the United States. Chronic
lead exposure can lead to tubulointerstitial disease. Individuals at
risk are those with occupational exposure (eg, welders who work
with lead-based paint) and drinkers of alcohol distilled in
automobile radiators (“moonshine” whiskey users). Lead is filtered
by the glomerulus and is transported across the proximal convoluted
tubules, where it accumulates and causes cell damage. Fibrosed
arterioles and cortical scarring also lead to damaged kidneys.
Proximal tubular damage leads to decreased secretion of uric acid,
resulting in hyperuricemia and saturnine gout. Patients commonly are
hypertensive. Diagnosis is most reliably performed with a calcium
disodium edetate (EDTA) chelation test. Urinary excretion of > 600
mg of lead in 24 hours following 1 g of EDTA indicates excessive
lead exposure.
Occupational exposure to cadmium also causes proximal tubular
dysfunction. Hypercalciuria and nephrolithiasis can be seen. Other
heavy metals that can cause tubulointerstitial disease include
mercury and bismuth.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Polyuria is common because tubular damage leads to inability to
concentrate the urine. Volume depletion can also occur as a result
of a salt-wasting defect in some individuals.
B. Laboratory Findings
Patients are hyperkalemic because the distal tubules become
aldosterone resistant. A hyperchloremic renal tubular acidosis is
characteristic from a component of type 4 or type 1 renal tubular
acidosis. Less commonly, a proximal renal tubular acidosis is seen
due to direct proximal tubular damage. The cause of the renal
tubular acidosis is threefold: (1) reduced ammonia production, (2)
inability to acidify the distal tubules, and (3) proximal tubular
bicarbonate wasting. The urinalysis is nonspecific, as opposed to
that seen in acute interstitial nephritis. Proteinuria is typically < 2 g/d
(owing to inability of the proximal tubule to reabsorb freely filterable
proteins); a few cells may be seen; and broad waxy casts are often
present.
 Treatment
Treatment depends first on identifying the disorder responsible for
kidney dysfunction. The degree of interstitial fibrosis that has
developed can help predict recovery of renal function. Once there is
evidence for loss of parenchyma (small shrunken kidneys or
interstitial fibrosis on biopsy), little can prevent the progression
toward ESRD. Treatment is then directed at medical management.
Tubular dysfunction may require potassium and phosphorus
restriction and sodium, calcium, or bicarbonate supplements.
If hydronephrosis is present, relief of obstruction should be
accomplished promptly. Prolonged obstruction leads to further
tubular damage—particularly in the distal nephron—which may be
irreversible despite relief of obstruction. Neither surgical correction
of reflux nor medical therapy with antibiotics can prevent
deterioration toward ESRD once renal scarring has occurred.
Patients in whom lead nephropathy is suspected should continue
chelation therapy with EDTA if there is no evidence of irreversible
renal damage (eg, renal scarring or small kidneys). Continued
exposure should be avoided.
Treatment of analgesic nephropathy requires withdrawal of all
analgesics. Stabilization or improvement of renal function may occur
if significant interstitial fibrosis is not present. Hydration during
exposure to analgesics may also have some beneficial effects.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with stage 3–5 CKD should be referred to a
nephrologist 
when 
tubulointerstitial 
diseases 
are
p
g
suspected. Other select cases of stage 1–2 CKD should
also be referred.
•    Patients with urologic abnormalities should be referred
to a urologist.
Gooch K et al. NSAID use and progression of chronic kidney
disease. Am J Med. 2007 Mar;120(3):280.e1–7. [PMID:
17349452]
 
CYSTIC DISEASES OF THE
KIDNEY
 
Renal cysts are epithelium-lined cavities filled with fluid or semisolid
material. They develop primarily from renal tubular elements. One
or more simple cysts are found in 50% of individuals over the age of
50 years. They are rarely symptomatic and have little clinical
significance. In contrast, generalized cystic diseases are associated
with cysts scattered throughout the cortex and medulla of both
kidneys and can progress to ESRD (Table 22–12).
SIMPLE OR SOLITARY CYSTS
Simple cysts account for 65–70% of all renal masses. They are
generally found at the outer cortex and contain fluid that is
consistent with an ultrafiltrate of plasma. Most are found incidentally
on ultrasonographic examination. Simple cysts are typically
asymptomatic but can become infected.
The main concern with simple cysts is to differentiate them from
malignancy, abscess, or polycystic kidney disease. Renal cystic
disease can develop in dialysis patients. These cysts have a potential
for progression to malignancy. Ultrasound and CT scanning are the
recommended procedures for evaluating these masses. Simple cysts
must meet three sonographic criteria to be considered benign: (1)
echo free, (2) sharply demarcated mass with smooth walls, and (3)
an enhanced back wall (indicating good transmission through the
cyst). Complex cysts can have thick walls, calcifications, solid
components, and mixed echogenicity. On CT scan, the simple cyst
should have a smooth thin wall that is sharply demarcated. It should
not enhance with contrast media. A renal cell carcinoma will
enhance but typically is of lower density than the rest of the
parenchyma. Arteriography can also be used to evaluate a mass
preoperatively. A renal cell carcinoma is hypervascular in 80%,
hypovascular in 15%, and avascular in 5% of cases.
If a cyst meets the criteria for being benign, periodic reevaluation
is the standard of care. If the lesion is not consistent with a simple
cyst, surgical exploration is recommended.
Terada N et al. Risk factors for renal cysts. BJU Int. 2004 Jun;
93(9):1300–2. [PMID: 15180627]
 
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY
DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Multiple cysts in bilateral kidneys; total number depends on age.
 Large, palpable kidneys on examination.
 Combination of hypertension and abdominal mass suggestive of
disease.
 Family history is compelling but not necessary.
 Chromosomal abnormalities present in some patients.
 
 
Table 22–12. Clinical features of renal cystic disease.
 
General Considerations
This disorder is among the most common hereditary diseases in the
United States, affecting 500,000 individuals, or 1 in 800 live births.
Fifty percent of patients will have ESRD by age 60 years. The
disease has variable penetrance but accounts for 10% of dialysis
patients in the United States. At least two genes account for this
disorder: ADPKD1 on the short arm of chromosome 16 (85–90%
of patients) and ADPKD2 on chromosome 4 (10–15%). Patients
with the PKD2 mutation have slower progression of disease and
longer life expectancy than those with PKD1. Other sporadic cases
without these mutations have also been recognized.
 Clinical Findings
Abdominal or flank pain and microscopic or gross hematuria are
present in most patients. A history of urinary tract infections and
nephrolithiasis is common. A family history is positive in 75% of
cases, and > 50% of patients have hypertension (see below) that
may antedate the clinical manifestations of the disease. Patients have
large kidneys that may be palpable on abdominal examination. The
combination of hypertension and an abdominal mass should suggest
the disease. Forty to 50 percent have concurrent hepatic cysts.
Pancreatic and splenic cysts occur also. Hemoglobin and hematocrit
tend to be maintained as a result of erythropoietin production by the
cysts. The urinalysis may show hematuria and mild proteinuria. In
patients with PKD1, ultrasonography confirms the diagnosis—two
or more cysts in patients under age 30 years (sensitivity of 88.5%),
two or more cysts in each kidney in patients age 30–59 years
(sensitivity of 100%), and four or more cysts in each kidney in
patients age 60 years or older are diagnostic for autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney disease. If sonographic results are
unclear, CT scan is recommended and highly sensitive.
 Complications & Treatment
A. Pain
Abdominal or flank pain is caused by infection, bleeding into cysts,
and nephrolithiasis. Bed rest and analgesics are recommended. Cyst
decompression can help with chronic pain.
B. Hematuria
Gross hematuria is most commonly due to rupture of a cyst into the
renal pelvis, but it can also be caused by a kidney stone or urinary
tract infection. Hematuria typically resolves within 7 days with bed
rest and hydration. Recurrent bleeding should suggest the possibility
of underlying renal cell carcinoma, particularly in men over age 50
years.
C. Renal Infection
An infected renal cyst should be suspected in patients who have
flank pain, fever, and leukocytosis. Blood cultures may be positive,
and urinalysis may be normal because the cyst does not
communicate directly with the urinary tract. CT scans can be helpful
because an infected cyst may have an increased wall thickness.
Bacterial cyst infections are difficult to treat. Antibiotics with cystic
penetration should be used, eg, fluoroquinolones or trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole and chloramphenicol. Treatment may require 2
weeks of parenteral therapy followed by long-term oral therapy.
D. Nephrolithiasis
Up to 20% of patients have kidney stones, primarily calcium
oxalate. Hydration (2–3 L/d) is recommended.
E. Hypertension
Fifty percent of patients have hypertension at time of presentation,
and it will develop in most patients during the course of the disease.
Cyst-induced ischemia appears to cause activation of the renin–
angiotensin system, and cyst decompression can lower blood
pressure temporarily. Hypertension should be treated aggressively,
as this may prolong the time to ESRD. (Diuretics should be used
cautiously since the effect on renal cyst formation is unknown.)
F. Cerebral Aneurysms
About 10–15% of these patients have arterial aneurysms in the
circle of Willis. Screening arteriography is not recommended unless
the patient has a family history of aneurysms or is undergoing
elective surgery with a high risk of developing hypertension.
G. Other Complications
Vascular problems include mitral valve prolapse in up to 25% of
patients, aortic aneurysms, and aortic valve abnormalities. Colonic
diverticula are more common in patients with polycystic kidneys.
 Prognosis
Significant research is ongoing regarding therapy. Vasopressin
receptor antagonists have been successful in animal models but are
not yet well tested in humans. These agents lower renal epithelial
cell intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels, and in vitro evidence
suggests that intracellular cAMP plays a significant role in
cystogenesis in polycystic kidney disease. Avoidance of caffeine
may prevent cyst formation due to effects on G-coupled proteins.
Treatment of hypertension and a low-protein diet may slow the
progression of disease, although this is not well proven.
Grantham JJ. Clinical practice. Autosomal dominant polycystic
kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct 2;359(14):1477–85.
[PMID: 18832246]
 
Pei Y. Diagnostic approach in autosomal dominant polycystic
kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Sep;1(5):1108–14.
[PMID: 17699332]
 
Schrier RW. Randomized intervention studies in human polycystic
kidney and liver disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jun;
21(6):891–3. [PMID: 20431043]
 
Torres VE et al. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.
Lancet. 2007 Apr 14;369(9569):1287–301. [PMID: 17434405]
 
MEDULLARY SPONGE KIDNEY
This disease is a relatively common and benign disorder that is
present at birth and not usually diagnosed until the fourth or fifth
decade. It is caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the
MCKD1 
or MCKD2 genes on chromosomes 1 and 16,
respectively. Kidneys have a marked irregular enlargement of the
medullary and interpapillary collecting ducts. This is associated with
medullary cysts that are diffuse, giving a “Swiss cheese” appearance
in these regions.
 Clinical Findings
Medullary sponge kidney presents with gross or microscopic
hematuria, recurrent urinary tract infections, or nephrolithiasis.
Common abnormalities are a decreased urinary concentrating ability
and nephrocalcinosis; less common is incomplete type I distal renal
tubular acidosis. The diagnosis can be made by CT, which shows
cystic dilatation of the distal collecting tubules, a striated appearance
in this area, and calcifications in the renal collecting system.
 Treatment
There is no known therapy. Adequate fluid intake (2 L/d) helps
prevent stone formation. If hypercalciuria is present, thiazide
diuretics are recommended because they decrease calcium
excretion. Alkali therapy is recommended if renal tubular acidosis is
present.
 Prognosis
Renal function is well maintained unless there are complications
from recurrent urinary tract infections and nephrolithiasis.
MULTISYSTEM DISEASES
WITH VARIABLE KIDNEY
INVOLVEMENT*
 
MULTIPLE MYELOMA
Multiple myeloma is a malignancy of plasma cells (see Chapter 13).
Renal involvement occurs in about 25% of all patients. “Myeloma
kidney” is the presence of light chain immunoglobulins (Bence Jones
protein) in the urine causing renal toxicity. Bence Jones protein
causes direct renal tubular toxicity and results in tubular obstruction
by precipitating in the tubules. The earliest tubular damage results in
Fanconi syndrome (a type II proximal renal tubular acidosis). The
proteinuria seen with multiple myeloma is primarily due to light
chains that are not detected on urine dipstick, which mainly detects
albumin. Hypercalcemia and hyperuricemia are frequently seen.
Glomerular amyloidosis can develop in patients with multiple
myeloma; in these patients, dipstick protein determinations are
positive due to glomerular epithelial cell foot process effacement
and albumin “spilling” into Bowman capsule with resultant
albuminuria. Other conditions resulting in renal dysfunction include
plasma cell infiltration of the renal parenchyma and a hyperviscosity
syndrome compromising renal blood flow. Therapy for acute kidney
injury attributed to multiple myeloma includes correction of
hypercalcemia, volume repletion, and chemotherapy for the
underlying malignancy. Plasmapheresis had been considered
appropriate to decrease the burden of existing monoclonal proteins
while awaiting chemotherapeutic regimens to take effect. However,
in the largest randomized prospective trial to date, plasma-pheresis
did not provide any renal benefit to these patients. Pheresis therapy
still remains controversial.
*Other diseases with variable involvement described elsewhere in
this chapter include systemic lupus erythematosus, diabetes mellitus,
and the vasculitides such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(formerly Wegener granulomatosis) and Goodpasture disease.
 
Clark WF et al. Plasma exchange for myeloma kidney: cast(s)
away? Kidney Int. 2008 Jun;73(11):1211-3. [PMID: 18480853]
 
Korbet SM et al. Multiple myeloma. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006
Sep;17(9):2533–45. [PMID: 16885408]
 
Roussou M et al. Reversibility of renal failure in newly diagnosed
patients with multiple myeloma and the role of novel agents. Leuk
Res. 2010 Oct;34(10):1395–7. [PMID: 20510452]
 
SICKLE CELL DISEASE
Renal dysfunction associated with sickle cell disease is most
commonly due to sickling of red blood cells in the renal medulla
because of low oxygen tension and hypertonicity. Congestion and
stasis lead to hemorrhage, interstitial inflammation, and papillary
infarcts. Clinically, hematuria is common. Damage to renal
capillaries also leads to diminished concentrating ability. Isosthenuria
(urine osmolality equal to that of serum) is routine, and patients can
easily become dehydrated. Papillary necrosis occurs as well. These
abnormalities are commonly encountered in sickle cell trait. Sickle
cell glomerulopathy is less common but will inexorably progress to
ESRD. Its primary clinical manifestation is proteinuria. Optimal
treatment requires adequate hydration and control of the sickle cell
disease.
Davenport A et al. Sickle cell kidney. J Nephrol. 2008 Mar–Apr;
21(2):253–5. [PMID: 18446721]
 
TUBERCULOSIS
The classic renal manifestation of tuberculosis is the presence of
microscopic pyuria with a sterile urine culture—or “sterile pyuria.”
More often, other bacteria are also present. Microscopic hematuria
is often present with pyuria. Urine cultures are the gold standard for
diagnosis. Three to six first morning midstream specimens should be
performed to improve sensitivity. Papillary necrosis and cavitation
of the renal parenchyma occur less frequently, as do ureteral
strictures and calcifications. Adequate drug therapy can result in
resolution of renal involvement.
Figueiredo AA et al. Epidemiology of urogenital tuberculosis
worldwide. Int J Urol. 2008 Sep;15(9):827–32. [PMID:
18637157]
 
GOUT & THE KIDNEY
The kidney is the primary organ for excretion of uric acid. Patients
with proximal tubular dysfunction have decreased excretion of uric
acid and are more prone to gouty attacks. Depending on the pH
and uric acid concentration, deposition can occur in the tubules, the
interstitium, or the urinary tract. The more alkaline pH of the
interstitium causes urate salt deposition, whereas the acidic
environment of the tubules and urinary tract causes uric acid crystal
deposition at high concentrations.
Three disorders are commonly seen: (1) uric acid nephrolithiasis,
(2) acute uric acid nephropathy, and (3) chronic urate nephropathy.
Kidney dysfunction with uric acid nephrolithiasis stems from
obstructive nephropathy. Acute uric acid nephropathy presents
similarly to acute tubulointerstitial nephritis with direct toxicity from
uric acid crystals. Chronic urate nephropathy is caused by
deposition of urate crystals in the alkaline medium of the interstitium;
this can lead to fibrosis and atrophy. Epidemiologically,
hyperuricemia and gout have been associated with worsening
cardiovascular outcomes.
Treatment between gouty attacks involves avoidance of food and
drugs 
causing 
hyperuricemia, 
aggressive 
hydration, 
and
pharmacotherapy aimed at reducing serum uric acid levels. These
disorders are seen in both “overproducers” and “underexcretors” of
uric acid. The latter situation may seem counterintuitive; however,
these patients have hyperacidic urine, which explains the deposition
of relatively insoluble uric acid crystals.
Edwards NL. The role of hyperuricemia and gout in kidney and
cardiovascular disease. Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Jul;75(Suppl 5):
S13–6. [PMID: 18822470]
 
NEPHROGENIC SYSTEMIC FIBROSIS
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis is a multisystem disorder seen only in
patients with CKD (primarily with a GFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2,
but rarely with a GFR of 15–29 mL/min/1.73 m2), acute kidney
injury, and after kidney transplantation. Histopathologically, there is
an increase in dermal spindle cells positive for CD34 and
procollagen I. Collagen bundles with mucin and elastic fibers are
also noted.
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis was first recognized in
hemodialysis patients in 1997 and has been strongly linked to use of
contrast agents containing gadolinium. Incidence is projected to be
1–4% in the highest risk (ESRD) population that has received
gadolinium, and lower in patients with less severe kidney
dysfunction. The FDA has issued a warning regarding avoidance of
exposure to this agent for patients with GFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2.
 Clinical Findings
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis affects several organ systems,
including the skin, muscles, lungs, and cardiovascular system. The
most common manifestation is a debilitating fibrosing skin disorder
that can range from skin-colored to erythematous papules, which
coalesce to brawny patches. The skin can be thick and woody in
areas and is painful out-of-proportion to findings on examination.
 Treatment
Several case reports and series have described benefit for patients
after 
treatment 
with 
corticosteroids, 
photo-pheresis,
plasmapheresis, and sodium thiosulfate. The true effectiveness of
these interventions is still unclear. Alternative or no imaging agents
should be used for patients requiring MR with contrast at risk for
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis.
Agarwal R et al. Gadolinium-based contrast agents and
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 Mar;24(3):856–63.
[PMID: 18952698]
 
 
 
Urologic Disorders
Maxwell V. Meng, MD, FACS
Marshall L. Stoller, MD
Thomas J. Walsh, MD, MS
HEMATURIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Both gross and microscopic hematuria require evaluation.
 The upper urinary tract should be imaged, and cystoscopy should
be performed if there is hematuria in the absence of infection.
 
 General Considerations
An upper tract source (kidneys and ureters) can be identified in
10% of patients with gross or microscopic hematuria. For upper
tract sources, stone disease accounts for 40%, medical kidney
disease (medullary sponge kidney, glomerulonephritis, papillary
necrosis) for 20%, renal cell carcinoma for 10%, and urothelial cell
carcinoma of the ureter or renal pelvis for 5%. Drug ingestion and
associated medical problems may provide diagnostic clues.
Analgesic use (papillary necrosis), cyclophosphamide (chemical
cystitis), antibiotics (interstitial nephritis), diabetes mellitus, sickle
cell trait or disease (papillary necrosis), a history of stone disease,
or malignancy should all be investigated. The lower tract source of
gross hematuria (in the absence of infection) is most commonly from
urothelial cell carcinoma of the bladder. Microscopic hematuria in
the male is most commonly from benign prostatic hyperplasia. The
presence of hematuria in patients receiving anticoagulation therapy
cannot be ascribed to the anticoagulation; a complete evaluation is
warranted consisting of upper tract imaging, cystoscopy, and urine
cytology (see Chapter 39 for Bladder Cancer, Cancers of the
Ureter and Renal Pelvis, Renal Cell Carcinoma, and Kidney and
Testis Tumors).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
If gross hematuria occurs, a description of the timing (initial,
terminal, total) may provide a clue to the localization of disease.
Associated symptoms (ie, renal colic, irritative voiding symptoms,
constitutional symptoms) should be investigated. Physical
examination should emphasize signs of systemic disease (fever, rash,
lymphadenopathy, abdominal or pelvic masses) as well as signs of
medical kidney disease (hypertension, volume overload). Urologic
evaluation may demonstrate an enlarged prostate, flank mass, or
urethral disease.
B. Laboratory Findings
Initial laboratory investigations include a urinalysis and urine culture.
Proteinuria and casts suggest renal origin. Irritative voiding
symptoms, bacteriuria, and a positive urine culture in the female
suggest urinary tract infection, but follow-up urinalysis is important
after treatment to ensure resolution of the hematuria.
Further evaluation may include urinary cytology to assist in the
diagnosis of bladder neoplasm.
C. Imaging
Upper tract imaging (usually abdominal and pelvic CT scanning
without and with contrast) may identify neoplasms of the kidney or
ureter as well as benign conditions such as urolithiasis, obstructive
uropathy, papillary necrosis, medullary sponge kidney, or polycystic
kidney disease. CT urography and MRI have replaced intravenous
urography when imaging the upper tracts for sources of hematuria.
The role of ultrasonographic evaluation of the urinary tract for
hematuria is unclear. Although it may provide adequate information
for the kidney, its sensitivity in detecting ureteral disease is lower. In
addition, its higher degree of operator dependence may further
confound the issue.
D. Cystoscopy
Cystoscopy can be used to assess for bladder or urethral neoplasm,
benign prostatic enlargement, and radiation or chemical cystitis. For
gross hematuria, cystoscopy is ideally performed while the patient is
actively bleeding to allow better localization (ie, lateralize to one
side of the upper tracts, bladder, or urethra).
Follow-up
In patients with negative evaluations, repeat evaluations may be
warranted to avoid a missed malignancy; however, the ideal
frequency of such evaluations is not defined. Urinary cytology can
be repeated in 3–6 months, and cystoscopy and upper tract imaging
after a year.
 When to Refer
In the absence of infection, hematuria (either gross or microscopic)
requires evaluation.
Grossfeld G et al. Evaluation of asymptomatic microscopic
hematuria in adults: the American Urological Association best
practice policy—part I: definition, detection, prevalence, and
etiology. Urology. 2001 Apr;57(4):599–603. [PMID: 11306356]
 
Kelly JD et al. Assessment and management of non-visible
haematuria in primary care. BMJ. 2009 Jan;16(338):a3021.
[PMID: 19151065]
 
Rao PK et al. How to evaluate “dipstick hematuria”: what to do
before you refer. Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Mar;75(3):227–33.
[PMID: 18383931]
 
Rodgers MA et al. Diagnostic tests used in the investigation of
adult haematuria: A systematic review. BJU Int. 2006 Dec;
98(6):1154–60. [PMID: 16879444]
 
Yun EJ et al. Evaluation of the patient with hematuria. Med Clin
North Am. 2004 Mar;88(2):329–43. [PMID: 15049581]
 
GENITOURINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
1. Acute Cystitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Patient usually afebrile.
 Positive urine culture; blood cultures may also be positive.
 
 General Considerations
Acute cystitis is an infection of the bladder most commonly due to
the coliform bacteria (especially Escherichia coli) and occasionally
gram-positive bacteria (enterococci). The route of infection is
typically ascending from the urethra. Viral cystitis due to adenovirus
is sometimes seen in children but is rare in adults. Cystitis in men is
rare and implies a pathologic process such as infected stones,
prostatitis, or chronic urinary retention requiring further investigation.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Irritative voiding symptoms (frequency, urgency, dysuria) and
suprapubic discomfort are common. Women may experience gross
hematuria, and symptoms may often appear following sexual
intercourse. Physical examination may elicit suprapubic tenderness,
but examination is often unremarkable. Systemic toxicity is absent.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis shows pyuria and bacteriuria and varying degrees of
hematuria. The degree of pyuria and bacteriuria does not
necessarily correlate with the severity of symptoms. Urine culture is
positive for the offending organism, but colony counts exceeding
105/mL are not essential for the diagnosis.
C. Imaging
Because uncomplicated cystitis is rare in men, elucidation of the
underlying problem with appropriate investigations, such as
abdominal ultrasonography or cystoscopy (or both), is warranted.
Follow-up imaging using CT scanning is warranted if pyelonephritis,
recurrent infections, or anatomic abnormalities are suspected.
 Differential Diagnosis
In women, infectious processes such as vulvovaginitis and pelvic
inflammatory disease can usually be distinguished by pelvic
examination and urinalysis. In men, urethritis and prostatitis may be
distinguished by physical examination (urethral discharge or
prostatic tenderness).
Noninfectious causes of cystitis-like symptoms include pelvic
irradiation, chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide), bladder carcinoma,
interstitial cystitis, voiding dysfunction disorders, and psychosomatic
disorders.
 Prevention
Women who have more than three episodes of cystitis per year are
considered candidates for prophylactic antibiotic therapy to prevent
recurrence after treatment of urinary tract infection. Prior to
institution of therapy, a thorough urologic evaluation is warranted to
exclude any anatomic abnormality (eg, stones, reflux, fistula). The
three most commonly used oral agents for prophylaxis are
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (40 mg/200 mg), nitrofurantoin (100
mg), and cephalexin (250 mg). Single dosing at bedtime or at the
time of intercourse is the recommended schedule.
The risk of acquiring a catheter-associated urinary tract infection
in hospitalized patients can be minimized by using indwelling
catheters only when necessary, implementing systems to ensure
removal of catheters when no longer needed, using antimicrobial
catheters in high-risk patients, using external collection devices in
select men, identifying significant postvoid residuals by ultrasound,
maintaining proper insertion techniques, and utilizing alternatives
such as intermittent catheterization. As of 2008, the cost of treating
a catheter-associated urinary tract infection acquired by a
hospitalized patient is one of the complications that is not
reimbursed by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
 
Table 23–1. Empiric therapy for urinary tract infections.
 
1 Average wholesale price, (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
2 Increasing resistance noted (up to 20%).
 Treatment
Uncomplicated cystitis in women can be treated with short-term
antimicrobial therapy, which consists of single-dose therapy or 1–3
days of therapy. Fluoroquinolones and nitrofurantoin are the drugs
of choice for uncomplicated cystitis (Table 23–1). Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole can be ineffective because of the emergence of
resistant organisms. In men, uncomplicated urinary tract infection is
rare, and thus, the duration of antibiotic therapy depends on the
underlying etiology. Hot sitz baths or urinary analgesics
(phenazopyridine, 200 mg orally three times daily) may provide
symptomatic relief.
 Prognosis
Infections typically respond rapidly to therapy, and failure to
respond suggests resistance to the selected drug or anatomic
abnormalities requiring further investigation.
 When to Refer
•  Suspicion or radiographic evidence of anatomic
abnormality.
•  Evidence of urolithiasis.
•  Recurrent cystitis due to bacterial persistence.
Katchman EA et al. Three-day vs longer duration of antibiotic
treatment for cystitis in women: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Med. 2005 Nov;118(11):1196–207. [PMID:
16271900]
 
Lo E et al. Strategies to prevent catheter-associated urinary tract
infection in acute care hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol.
2008 Oct;29(S1):S41–50. [PMID: 18840088]
 
Norris DL 2nd et al. Urinary tract infections: diagnosis and
management in the emergency department. 2008 May;26(2):413–
30. [PMID: 18406981]
 
Saint S et al. Catheter-associated urinary tract infection and the
Medicare rule changes. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Jun 16;150(12):
877–84. [PMID: 19528567]
 
Saint S et al. Preventing hospital-acquired urinary tract infection in
the United States: a national study. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Jan
15;46(2):243–50. [PMID: 18171256]
 
2. Acute Pyelonephritis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever.
 Flank pain.
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Positive urine culture.
 
 General Considerations
Acute pyelonephritis is an infectious inflammatory disease involving
the kidney parenchyma and renal pelvis. Gram-negative bacteria are
the most common causative agents including E coli, Proteus,
Klebsiella, Enterobacter, 
and Pseudomonas. Gram-positive
bacteria are less commonly seen but include Enterococcus faecalis
and Staphylococcus aureus. The infection usually ascends from the
lower urinary tract—with the exception of S aureus, which usually
is spread by a hematogenous route.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms include fever, flank pain, shaking chills, and irritative
voiding symptoms (urgency, frequency, dysuria). Associated nausea
and vomiting, and diarrhea are common. Signs include fever and
tachycardia. Costovertebral angle tenderness is usually pronounced.
B. Laboratory Findings
Complete blood count shows leukocytosis and a left shift. Urinalysis
shows pyuria, bacteriuria, and varying degrees of hematuria. White
cell casts may be seen. Urine culture demonstrates heavy growth of
the offending agent, and blood culture may also be positive.
C. Imaging
In complicated pyelonephritis, renal ultrasound may show
hydronephrosis from a stone or other source of obstruction.
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute intra-abdominal disease such as appendicitis, cholecystitis,
pancreatitis, or diverticulitis must be distinguished from
pyelonephritis. A normal urinalysis is usually seen in gastrointestinal
disorders; however, on occasion, inflammation from adjacent bowel
(appendicitis or diverticulitis) may result in hematuria or sterile
pyuria. Abnormal liver function tests or elevated amylase levels may
assist in the differentiation. Lower lobe pneumonia is distinguishable
by the abnormal chest radiograph.
In males, the main differential diagnosis for acute pyelonephritis
includes acute epididymitis, acute prostatitis, and acute cystitis.
Physical examination and the location of the pain should permit this
distinction.
 Complications
Sepsis with shock can occur with acute pyelonephritis. In diabetic
patients, emphysematous pyelonephritis resulting from gas-
producing organisms may be life threatening if not adequately
treated. Healthy adults usually recover complete kidney function,
yet if coexistent kidney disease is present, scarring or chronic
pyelonephritis may result. Inadequate therapy could result in
abscess formation.
 Treatment
Severe infections or complicating factors require hospital admission.
Urine and blood cultures are obtained to identify the causative agent
and to determine antimicrobial sensitivity. Intravenous ampicillin and
an aminoglycoside are initiated prior to obtaining sensitivity results
(Table 23–1). In the outpatient setting, quinolones or nitrofurantoin
may be initiated (Table 23–1). Antibiotics are adjusted according to
sensitivities. Fevers may persist for up to 72 hours; failure to
respond warrants imaging (CT or ultrasound) to exclude
complicating factors that may require intervention. Catheter
drainage may be necessary in the face of urinary retention and
nephrostomy drainage if there is ureteral obstruction. In inpatients,
intravenous antibiotics are continued for 24 hours after the fever
resolves, and oral antibiotics are then given to complete a 14-day
course of therapy. Follow-up urine cultures are mandatory following
the completion of treatment.
 Prognosis
With prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment, acute
pyelonephritis carries a good prognosis. Complicating factors,
underlying kidney disease, and increasing patient age may lead to a
less favorable outcome.
 When to Refer
•  Evidence of complicating factors (urolithiasis,
obstruction).
•  Absence of clinical improvement in 48 hours.
 When to Admit
•  Evidence of sepsis and need for parenteral antibiotics.
•  Need for radiographic imaging or drainage of urinary
tract obstruction.
Meng MV et al. Infections of the upper urinary tract. In: Wessells
H et al (editors). Urological Emergencies: A Practical Guide.
New York: Humana Press, 2005.
 
3. Acute Bacterial Prostatitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever.
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Perineal or suprapubic pain; exquisite tenderness common on
rectal examination.
 Positive urine culture.
 
 General Considerations
Acute bacterial prostatitis is usually caused by gramnegative rods,
especially E coli and Pseudomonas species and less commonly by
gram-positive organisms (eg, enterococci). The most likely routes of
infection include ascent up the urethra and reflux of infected urine
into the prostatic ducts. Lymphatic and hematogenous routes are
probably rare.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Perineal, sacral, or suprapubic pain, fever, and irritative voiding
complaints are common. Varying degrees of obstructive symptoms
may occur as the acutely inflamed prostate swells, which may lead
to urinary retention. High fevers and a warm and often exquisitely
tender prostate are detected on examination. Care should be taken
to perform a gentle rectal examination, since vigorous manipulations
may result in septicemia. Prostatic massage is contraindicated.
B. Laboratory Findings
Complete blood count shows leukocytosis and a left shift. Urinalysis
shows pyuria, bacteriuria, and varying degrees of hematuria. Urine
cultures will demonstrate the offending pathogen (Table 23–2).
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute pyelonephritis or acute epididymitis should be distinguishable
by the location of pain as well as by physical examination. Acute
diverticulitis is occasionally confused with acute prostatitis;
however, the history and urinalysis should permit clear distinction.
Urinary retention from benign or malignant prostatic enlargement is
distinguishable by initial or follow-up rectal examination.
 Treatment
Hospitalization may be required, and parenteral antibiotics
(ampicillin and aminoglycoside) should be initiated until organism
sensitivities are available (Table 23–1). After the patient is afebrile
for 24–48 hours, oral antibiotics (eg, quinolones) are used to
complete 4–6 weeks of therapy. If urinary retention develops,
urethral catheterization or instrumentation is contraindicated, and a
percutaneous suprapubic tube is required. Follow-up urine culture
and examination of prostatic secretions should be performed after
the completion of therapy to ensure eradication.
 Prognosis
With effective treatment, chronic bacterial prostatitis is rare.
 When to Refer
•  Evidence of urinary retention.
•  Evidence of chronic prostatitis.
 When to Admit
•  Signs of sepsis.
•  Need for surgical drainage of bladder or prostatic
abscess.
Benway BM et al. Bacterial prostatitis. Urol Clin North Am. 2008
Feb;35(1):23–32. [PMID: 18061021]
 
4. Chronic Bacterial Prostatitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Perineal or suprapubic discomfort, often dull and poorly
localized.
 Positive expressed prostatic secretions and culture.
 
 
Table 23–2. Clinical characteristics of prostatitis and prostatodynia
syndromes.
 
General Considerations
Although chronic bacterial prostatitis may evolve from acute
bacterial prostatitis, many men have no history of acute infection.
Gram-negative rods are the most common etiologic agents, but only
one gram-positive organism (Enterococcus) is associated with
chronic infection. Routes of infection are the same as discussed for
acute infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Clinical manifestations are variable. Some patients are
asymptomatic, but most have varying degrees of irritative voiding
symptoms. Low back and perineal pain are not uncommon. Many
patients report a history of urinary tract infections. Physical
examination is often unremarkable, although the prostate may feel
normal, boggy, or indurated.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis is normal unless a secondary cystitis is present.
Expressed prostatic secretions demonstrate increased numbers of
leukocytes (>10 per high-power field), especially lipid-laden
macrophages. However, this finding is consistent with inflammation
and is not diagnostic of bacterial prostatitis (Table 23–2).
Leukocyte and bacterial counts from expressed prostatic secretions
do not correlate with severity of symptoms. Culture of the
secretions or the post-prostatic massage urine specimen is
necessary to make the diagnosis.
C. Imaging
Imaging tests are not necessary, although pelvic radio-graphs or
transrectal ultrasound may demonstrate prostatic calculi.
 Differential Diagnosis
Chronic urethritis may mimic chronic prostatitis, though cultures of
the fractionated urine may localize the source of infection to the
initial specimen, which would come from the urethra. Cystitis may
be secondary to prostatitis, but urine samples after prostatic
massage may localize the infection to the prostate. Anal disease may
share some of the symptoms of prostatitis, but physical examination
should permit a distinction between the two.
 Treatment
Few antimicrobial agents attain therapeutic intraprostatic levels in
the absence of acute inflammation. Trimethoprim does diffuse into
the prostate, and trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole is associated with
the best cure rates (Table 23–1). Other effective agents include
carbenicillin, erythromycin, cephalexin, and the quinolones. The
optimal duration of therapy remains controversial, ranging from 6 to
12 weeks. Symptomatic relief may be provided by anti-
inflammatory agents (indomethacin, ibuprofen) and hot sitz baths.
 Prognosis
Chronic bacterial prostatitis is difficult to cure, but its symptoms and
tendency to cause recurrent urinary tract infections can be
controlled by suppressive antibiotic therapy.
 When to Refer
•  Persistent symptoms.
•  Consideration of enrollment in clinical trials.
5. Nonbacterial Prostatitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Perineal or suprapubic discomfort, similar to that of chronic
bacterial prostatitis.
 Positive expressed prostatic secretions, but culture is negative.
 
 General Considerations
Nonbacterial prostatitis is the most common of the prostatitis
syndromes, and its cause is unknown. Speculation implicates
chlamydiae, mycoplasmas, ureaplasmas, and viruses, but no
substantial proof exists. In some cases, non-bacterial prostatitis may
represent a noninfectious inflammatory or autoimmune disorder.
Because the cause of nonbacterial prostatitis remains unknown, the
diagnosis is usually one of exclusion.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical presentation is identical to that of chronic bacterial
prostatitis; however, no history of urinary tract infections is present.
The National Institutes of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom
Index 
(NIH-CPSI)
(http://www2.niddk.nih.gov/NR/rdonlyres/93B6388F-B429-4603-
9C3C-6765BDEB49A1/0/NIHCPSIEnglish.pdf) 
has 
been
validated to quantify symptoms of chronic nonbacterial prostatitis or
chronic pelvic pain syndrome.
B. Laboratory Findings
Increased numbers of leukocytes are seen on expressed prostatic
secretions, but all cultures are negative.
 Differential Diagnosis
The major distinction is from chronic bacterial prostatitis. The
absence of a history of urinary tract infection and of positive cultures
makes the distinction (Table 23–2). In older men with irritative
voiding symptoms and negative cultures, the possibility of bladder
cancer must be excluded. Urinary cytologic examination and
cystoscopy are warranted.
Treatment
Because of the uncertainty regarding the etiology of non-bacterial
prostatitis, a trial of antimicrobial therapy directed against
Ureaplasma, Mycoplasma, 
or Chlamydia is warranted.
Erythromycin (250 mg orally four times daily) can be initiated for 14
days yet should be continued (for 3–6 weeks) only if a favorable
clinical response ensues. Some symptomatic relief may be obtained
with anti-inflammatory agents or sitz baths. Dietary restrictions are
not necessary unless the patient relates a history of symptom
exacerbation by certain substances such as alcohol, caffeine, and
perhaps certain foods.
 Prognosis
Annoying, recurrent symptoms are common, but serious sequelae
have not been identified.
Dhar NB et al. New therapies in chronic prostatitis. 2007 Jul;8(4):
313–8. [PMID: 18519016]
 
Nickel JC et al. Phenotypic approach to the management of
chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome. Curr Urol Rep.
2009 Jul;10(4):307–12. [PMID: 19570493]
 
6. Prostatodynia
Prostatodynia is a noninflammatory disorder that affects young and
middle-aged men and has variable causes, including voiding
dysfunction and pelvic floor musculature dysfunction. The term
“prostatodynia” is a misnomer, as the prostate is actually normal.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are the same as those seen with chronic prostatitis, yet
there is no history of urinary tract infection. Additional symptoms
may include hesitancy and interruption of flow. Patients may relate a
lifelong history of voiding difficulty. Physical examination is
unremarkable, but increased anal sphincter tone and periprostatic
tenderness may be observed.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis is normal. Expressed prostatic secretions show normal
numbers of leukocytes (Table 23–2). Urodynamic testing may show
signs of dysfunctional voiding (detrusor contraction without urethral
relaxation, high urethral pressures, spasms of the urinary sphincter)
and is indicated in patients failing empiric trials of α-blockers or
anticholinergics.
 Differential Diagnosis
Normal urinalysis will distinguish it from acute infectious processes.
Examination of expressed prostatic secretions will distinguish this
entity from prostatitis syndromes (Table 23–2).
 Treatment
Bladder neck and urethral spasms can be treated by α-blocking
agents (terazosin, 1–10 mg orally once a day, or doxazosin, 1–8 mg
orally once a day). Pelvic floor muscle dysfunction may respond to
diazepam and biofeedback techniques. Sitz baths may contribute to
symptomatic relief.
 Prognosis
Prognosis is variable depending on the specific cause.
Pontari MA. Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome.
Urol Clin North Am. 2008 Feb;35(1):81–9. [PMID: 18061026]
 
Rodriguez MA et al. Evidence for overlap between urological and
nonurological unexplained clinical conditions. J Urol. 2009
Nov;182(5):2123–31. [PMID: 19758633]
 
7. Acute Epididymitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever.
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Painful enlargement of epididymis.
 
 General Considerations
Most cases of acute epididymitis are infectious and can be divided
into one of two categories that have different age distributions and
etiologic agents. Sexually transmitted forms typically occur in
men under age 40 years, are associated with urethritis, and result
from Chlamydia trachomatis or Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Non-
sexually transmitted forms typically occur in older men, are
associated with urinary tract infections and prostatitis, and are
caused by gram-negative rods. The route of infection is probably
via the urethra to the ejaculatory duct and then down the vas
deferens to the epididymis. Amiodarone has been associated with
self-limited epididymitis, which is a dose-dependent phenomenon.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms may follow acute physical strain (heavy lifting), trauma,
or sexual activity. Associated symptoms of urethritis (pain at the tip
of the penis and urethral discharge) or cystitis (irritative voiding
symptoms) may occur. Pain develops in the scrotum and may
radiate along the spermatic cord or to the flank. Fever and scrotal
swelling are usually apparent. Early in the course, the epididymis
may be distinguishable from the testis; however, later the two may
appear as one enlarged, tender mass. The prostate may be tender
on rectal examination.
B. Laboratory Findings
Complete blood count shows leukocytosis and a left shift. In the
sexually transmitted variety, Gram staining of a smear of urethral
discharge may be diagnostic of gram-negative intracellular
diplococci (N gonorrhoeae). White cells without visible organisms
on urethral smear represent nongonococcal urethritis, and C
trachomatis is the most likely pathogen. In the non-sexually
transmitted variety, urinalysis shows pyuria, bacteriuria, and varying
degrees of hematuria. Urine cultures will demonstrate the offending
pathogen.
C. Imaging
Scrotal ultrasound may aid in the diagnosis if examination is difficult
because of the presence of a large hydrocele or because questions
exist regarding the diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Tumors generally cause painless enlargement of the testis. Urinalysis
is negative, and examination reveals a normal epididymis. Scrotal
ultrasound is helpful to define the pathology. Testicular torsion
usually occurs in prepubertal males but is occasionally seen in young
adults. Acute onset of symptoms and a negative urinalysis favor
testicular torsion or torsion of one of the testicular or epididymal
appendages. Prehn sign (elevation of the scrotum above the pubic
symphysis improves pain from epididymitis) may be helpful but is
not reliable.
 Treatment
Bed rest with scrotal elevation is important in the acute phase.
Treatment is directed toward the identified pathogen (Table 23–1).
The sexually transmitted variety is treated with 10–21 days of
antibiotics, and the sexual partner must be treated as well. Non-
sexually transmitted forms are treated for 21–28 days with
appropriate antibiotics, at which time evaluation of the urinary tract
is warranted to identify underlying disease.
 Prognosis
Prompt treatment usually results in a favorable outcome. Delayed or
inadequate treatment may result in epididymoorchitis, decreased
fertility, or abscess formation.
 When to Refer
•  Persistent symptoms and infection despite antibiotic
therapy.
•  Signs of sepsis or abscess formation.
Tracy CR et al. Diagnosis and management of epididymitis. Urol
Clin North Am. 2008 Feb;35(1):101–8. [PMID: 18061028]
 
INTERSTITIAL CYSTITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain with a full bladder or urinary urgency.
 Submucosal petechiae or ulcers on cystoscopic examination.
 Diagnosis of exclusion.
 
 General Considerations
Interstitial cystitis (painful bladder syndrome) is characterized by
pain with bladder filling that is relieved by emptying and is often
associated with urgency and frequency. This is a diagnosis of
exclusion, and patients must have a negative urine culture and
cytology and no other obvious cause such as radiation cystitis,
chemical 
cystitis 
(cyclophosphamide), 
vaginitis, 
urethral
diverticulum, or genital herpes. Up to 40% of patients referred to
urologists for interstitial cystitis may actually be found to have a
different diagnosis after careful evaluation.
Population-based studies have demonstrated a prevalence of
between 18 and 40 per 100,000 people. Both sexes are involved,
but most patients are women, with a mean age of 40 years at onset.
Patients with interstitial cystitis are more likely to report bladder
problems in childhood, and there appears to be a higher prevalence
in white and Jewish women. Up to 50% of patients may experience
spontaneous remission of symptoms, with a mean duration of 8
months without treatment.
The etiology of interstitial cystitis is unknown, and it is most likely
not a single disease but rather several diseases with similar
symptoms. Associated diseases include severe allergies, irritable
bowel syndrome, or inflammatory bowel disease. Theories
regarding the cause of interstitial cystitis include increased epithelial
permeability, neurogenic causes (sensory nervous system
abnormalities), and autoimmunity.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pain with bladder filling that is relieved with urination or urgency,
frequency, and nocturia are the most common symptoms. Patients
should be asked about exposure to pelvic radiation or treatment
with cyclophosphamide. Examination should exclude genital herpes,
vaginitis, or a urethral diverticulum.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis, urine culture, and urinary cytologies are obtained to
examine for infectious causes and bladder malignancy. Urodynamic
testing assesses bladder sensation and compliance and excludes
detrusor instability.
C. Cystoscopy
The bladder is distended with fluid (hydrodistention) to detect
glomerulations (submucosal hemorrhage), which may or may not be
present. Biopsy should be performed to exclude other causes such
as carcinoma, eosinophilic cystitis, and tuberculous cystitis. The
presence of submucosal mast cells is not needed to make the
diagnosis of interstitial cystitis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Exposures to radiation or cyclophosphamide are obtained by the
history. Bacterial cystitis, genital herpes, or vaginitis can be
excluded by urinalysis, culture, and physical examination. A urethral
diverticulum may be suspected if palpation of the urethra
demonstrates an indurated mass that results in the expression of pus
from the urethral meatus. Urethral carcinoma presents as a firm
mass on palpation.
 Treatment
There is no cure for interstitial cystitis, but most patients achieve
symptomatic relief from one of several approaches, including
hydrodistention, which is usually done as part of the diagnostic
evaluation. Approximately 20–30% of patients notice symptomatic
improvement following this maneuver. Also of importance is the
measurement of bladder capacity during hydrodistention, since
patients with very small bladder capacities (< 200 mL) are unlikely
to respond to medical therapy.
Amitriptyline (10–75 mg/d orally) is often used as first-line
medical therapy in patients with interstitial cystitis. Both central and
peripheral mechanisms may contribute to its activity. Nifedipine
(30–60 mg/d orally) and other calcium channel blockers have also
demonstrated some activity in patients with interstitial cystitis.
Pentosan polysulfate sodium (Elmiron) is an oral synthetic sulfated
polysaccharide that helps restore integrity to the epithelium of the
bladder in a subset of patients and has been evaluated in a placebo-
controlled trial. Other options include intravesical instillation of
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and heparin. Intravesical bacillus
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is not beneficial.
Other treatment modalities include transcutaneous electric nerve
stimulation (TENS) and acupuncture. Surgical therapy for interstitial
cystitis should be considered only as a last resort and may require
cystourethrectomy with urinary diversion.
 When to Refer
Persistent and bothersome symptoms in the absence of identifiable
cause.
Bogart LM et al. Symptoms of interstitial cystitis, painful bladder
syndrome and similar disease in women: a systematic review. J
Urol. 2007 Feb;177(2):450–6. [PMID: 17222607]
 
Dawson TE et al. Intravesical treatment for painful bladder
syndrome/interstitial cystitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007
Oct;17(4):CD006113. [PMID: 17943887]
 
Fall M et al. Treatment of bladder pain syndrome/interstitial cystitis
2008: can we make evidence-based decisions? Eur Urol. 2008
Jul;54(1):65–75. [PMID: 18403099]
 
Marinkovic SP et al. The management of interstitial cystitis or
painful bladder syndrome in women. BMJ. 2009 Jul
31;339:b2707. [PMID: 19648180]
 
Theoharides TC et al. Interstitial cystitis: bladder pain and beyond.
Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;9(17):2979–94. [PMID:
19006474]
 
URINARY STONE DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Flank pain.
 Nausea and vomiting.
 Identification on noncontrast CT.
 
 General Considerations
Urinary stone disease is exceeded in frequency as a urinary tract
disorder only by infections and prostatic disease and is estimated to
afflict 240,000–720,000 Americans per year. Men are more
frequently affected by urolithiasis than women, with a ratio of 2.5:1.
Initial presentation predominates in the third and fourth decades.
The ratio of men to women approaches parity in the sixth and
seventh decades.
Urinary calculi are polycrystalline aggregates composed of
varying amounts of crystalloid and a small amount of organic matrix.
Stone formation requires saturated urine that is dependent on pH,
ionic strength, solute concentration, and complexation. There are
five major types of urinary stones: calcium oxalate, calcium
phosphate, struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate), uric acid,
and cystine. The most common types are composed of calcium, and
for that reason most urinary stones (85%) are radiopaque (as seen
on plain abdominal radiographs). Uric acid stones can be
radiolucent yet frequently are composed of a combination of uric
acid and calcium oxalate and thus are radiopaque. Cystine stones
frequently have a smooth-edged ground-glass appearance.
Geographic factors contribute to the development of stones.
Areas of high humidity and elevated temperatures appear to be
contributing factors, and the incidence of symptomatic ureteral
stones is greatest during hot summer months. Persons in sedentary
occupations have a higher incidence of stones than manual laborers.
High protein and high salt intake may be important factors in the
development of urinary stones while carbohydrates and fats have
not been proven to have an impact on urinary stone disease.
Genetic factors may contribute to urinary stone formation.
Cystinuria is an autosomal recessive disorder. Homozygous
individuals have markedly increased excretion of cystine and
frequently have numerous recurrent episodes of urinary stones
despite attempts to optimize medical treatment. Distal renal tubular
acidosis may be transmitted as a hereditary trait, and urolithiasis
occurs in up to 75% of patients affected with this disorder.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Obstructing urinary stones usually present with colic. Pain usually
occurs suddenly and may awaken patients from sleep. It is localized
to the flank, is usually severe, and may be associated with nausea
and vomiting. Patients are constantly moving—in sharp contrast to
those with an acute abdomen. The pain may occur episodically and
may radiate anteriorly over the abdomen. As the stone progresses
down the ureter, the pain may be referred into the ipsilateral testis
or labium. If the stone becomes lodged at the ureterovesicular
junction, patients will complain of marked urinary urgency and
frequency. After the stone passes into the bladder, there typically is
minimal pain with passage through the urethra. Stone size does not
correlate with the severity of the symptoms.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis usually reveals microscopic or gross hematuria (~90%).
However, the absence of microhematuria does not exclude urinary
stones. Infection must be excluded, because the combination of
infection and urinary tract obstruction requires prompt intervention
as described below. Urinary pH is a valuable clue to the cause of
the possible stone. Normal urine pH is 5.8–5.9. There is a normal
postprandial urinary alkaline tide. Numerous dipstick measurements
are valuable in the complete workup of a patient in whom urinary
stones are suspected. Persistent urinary pH below 5.5 is suggestive
of uric acid or cystine stones, both relatively radiolucent as seen on
plain abdominal radio-graphs. In contrast, a persistent pH > 7.2 is
suggestive of a struvite infection stone, which is radiopaque on plain
radiographs. Patients with calcium-based stones typically have a
urinary pH between 5.5 and 6.8.
C. Metabolic Evaluation
Patients should strain their urine through cheesecloth or a urine
strainer. Stone analysis should be performed on recovered stones.
Controversy exists in deciding which patients need a thorough
metabolic evaluation for stone disease. Patients with uncomplicated
first-time stones should probably undergo blood screening for
abnormalities of serum calcium, electrolytes, and uric acid as a
baseline.
More extensive evaluation is required in patients who have
recurrent stones or those with a family history of nephrolithiasis.
Patients are encouraged to change their diet to reduce sodium
intake, reduce their animal protein intake during individual meals,
and to ingest adequate fluid intake to achieve a voided volume of
1.5–2.0 L of urine. After these dietary changes have been initiated,
a 24-hour urine collection should be obtained to ascertain urinary
volume, pH, calcium, uric acid, oxalate, phosphate, sodium, and
citrate excretion. Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) and calcium
can be obtained if the 24-hour urine collection reveals
hypercalciuria. Table 23–3 demonstrates the diagnostic criteria for
the hypercalciuric states. (See discussion below.)
D. Imaging
A plain abdominal radiograph (KUB, kidney-ureter-bladder) and
renal ultrasound examination will diagnose most stones. Spiral CT is
frequently the first-line tool in evaluating flank pain. Repeated CT
scans should be avoided due to the substantial radiation exposure to
these patients who have recurrent stones at a young age. CT scans
should be obtained in the prone position to help differentiate distal
ureterovesicular stones from those that have already passed into the
urinary bladder. Stone density can be estimated with Hounsfield
units (HU) on CT scans to help determine stone type. Stones with
low HU (< 450) are typically composed of uric acid, while those
with high HU (>1200) are typically composed of calcium oxalate
monohydrate. All stones whether radiopaque or radiolucent on plain
abdominal radiographs will be visible on noncontrast CT except the
rare calculi due to the protease inhibitor indinavir.
 Medical Treatment & Prevention
To reduce the recurrence rate of urinary stones, one must attempt
to achieve a stone-free status. Small stone fragments may serve as a
nidus for future stone development. Selected patients must be
thoroughly evaluated to reduce stone recurrence rates. Patients who
have formed uric acid stones may have recurrences within months if
appropriate therapy is not initiated. If no medical treatment is
provided after surgical stone removal, stones will generally recur in
50% of patients within 5 years. Of greatest importance in reducing
stone recurrence is an increased fluid intake. Absolute volumes are
not established, but increasing fluid intake to ensure a voided
volume of 1.5–2.0 L/d is recommended. Patients are encouraged to
ingest fluids during meals, 2 hours after each meal (when the body is
most dehydrated), and prior to going to sleep in the evening—
enough to awaken the patient to void—and to ingest additional
fluids during the night. Increasing fluids only during daylight hours
may not dilute a supersaturated urine overnight and thus initiate a
new stone.
 
Table 23–3. Diagnostic criteria of different types of hypercalciuria.
 
PTH, parathyroid hormone; ↑, elevated; ↓, low; N, normal.
A. Diet
Sodium intake should be restricted to 100 mEq/d. Increased
sodium intake will increase sodium and calcium excretion, increase
monosodium urates (that can act as a nidus for stone growth),
increase the relative saturation of calcium phosphate, and decrease
urinary citrate excretion. All of these factors encourage stone
growth. Animal protein intake should be limited to 1 g/kg/d. An
increased protein load can also increase calcium, oxalate, and uric
acid excretion and decrease urinary citrate excretion.
Bran can significantly decrease urinary calcium excretion by
increasing bowel transit time and mechanically binding to calcium.
Excess intake of oxalate and purines can increase the incidence of
stones in predisposed individuals. Dietary calcium or calcium
supplements should not be routinely decreased. In fact, decreased
calcium consumption has been found to increase stone recurrence.
Only type II absorptive hypercalciuric patients (see below) benefit
from a low calcium diet.
B. Calcium Nephrolithiasis
1. Hypercalciuric—Hypercalciuric calcium nephrolithiasis (>250
mg/24 h; > 4 mg/kg/24 h) can be caused by absorptive, resorptive,
and renal disorders.
Absorptive hypercalciuria is secondary to increased
absorption of calcium at the level of the small bowel, predominantly
in the jejunum, and can be further subdivided into types I, II, and
III. Type I absorptive hypercalciuria is independent of calcium
intake. There is increased urinary calcium on a regular or even a
calcium-restricted diet. Treatment is centered on decreasing bowel
absorption of calcium. Cellulose phosphate, a chelating agent, is an
effective form of therapy. An average dose is 10–15 g in three
divided doses. It binds to the calcium and impedes small bowel
absorption due to its increased bulk. Cellulose phosphate does not
change the intestinal transport mechanism. It should be given with
meals so it will be available to bind to the calcium. Taking this
chelating agent prior to bedtime is ineffective. Postmenopausal
women should be treated with caution. It is interesting, however,
that there is no enhanced decline in bone density after long-term
use. Inappropriate use may result in a negative calcium balance and
a secondary parathyroid stimulation. Long-term use without follow-
up metabolic surveillance may result in hypomagnesuria and
secondary hyperoxaluria and recurrent calculi. Routine follow-up
every 6–8 months will help encourage medical compliance and
permit adjustments in medical therapy based on repeat metabolic
studies.
Thiazide therapy is more commonly used and is an alternative to
cellulose phosphate in the treatment of type I absorptive
hypercalciuria. Thiazides decrease renal calcium excretion but have
no impact on intestinal absorption. This therapy results in increased
bone density of approximately 1% per year. Thiazides have limited
long-term utility (< 5 years) since they may lose their hypocalciuric
effect with continued therapy.
Type II absorptive hypercalciuria is diet dependent. Decreasing
calcium intake by 50% (approximately 400 mg/d) will decrease the
hypercalciuria to normal values (150–200 mg/24 h). There is no
specific medical therapy.
Type III absorptive hypercalciuria is secondary to a renal
phosphate leak. This results in increased vitamin D synthesis and
secondarily increased small bowel absorption of calcium. This can
be readily reversed by orthophosphates (250 mg three to four times
per day). Orthophosphates do not change intestinal absorption but
rather inhibit vitamin D synthesis.
Resorptive 
hypercalciuria 
is 
secondary 
to
hyperparathyroidism. 
Hypercalcemia, 
hypophosphatemia,
hypercalciuria, and an elevated PTH value are found. Appropriate
surgical resection of the parathyroid adenoma cures the disease and
the urinary stones. Medical management is invariably a failure.
Renal hypercalciuria occurs when the renal tubules are unable
to efficiently reabsorb filtered calcium, and hypercalciuria results.
Spilling 
calcium 
in 
the 
urine 
results 
in 
secondary
hyperparathyroidism. Serum calcium typically is normal. Thiazides
are effective long-term therapy in patients with this disorder.
2. Hyperuricosuric—Hyperuricosuric calcium nephrolithiasis is
secondary to dietary purine excess or endogenous uric acid
metabolic defects. Most cases (85%) can be treated with purine
dietary restrictions; those that are not reversed with dietary
modification are successfully treated with allopurinol. In contrast to
uric acid nephrolithiasis, patients with hyperuricosuric calcium
stones typically maintain a urinary pH > 5.5. Monosodium urates
absorb and adsorb inhibitors and promote heterogeneous
nucleation. Hyperuricosuric calcium nephrolithiasis is initiated with
epitaxy, or heterogeneous nucleation. In such situations, similar
crystal structures (ie, uric acid and calcium oxalate) can grow
together with the aid of a protein matrix infrastructure.
3. Hyperoxaluric—Hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis (>40 mg
oxalate/24h) is usually due to primary intestinal disorders. Patients
usually present with a history of chronic diarrhea frequently
associated with inflammatory bowel disease or steatorrhea. In these
situations, increased bowel fat or bile (or both) combine with
intraluminal calcium to form a soap-like product. Calcium is
therefore unavailable to bind to oxalate, which is then freely and
rapidly absorbed. A small increase in oxalate absorption will
significantly increase stone formation. If the diarrhea or steatorrhea
cannot be effectively curtailed, oral calcium should be taken with
meals; the calcium can be obtained by either ingesting milk products
or taking calcium supplements. Excess ascorbic acid (>2 g/d) will
substantially increase urinary oxalate levels. Rare enzymatic liver
defects can lead to primary hyperoxaluria that is routinely fatal
without a combined liver and kidney transplantation.
4. Hypocitraturic—Hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis may be
secondary to chronic diarrhea, type I (distal) renal tubular acidosis,
chronic hydrochlorothiazide treatment, or in any other condition that
results in a metabolic acidosis. The metabolic acidosis will
encourage citrate transport into the proximal tubular cells and be
consumed by the citric acid cycle in their mitochondria and result in
hypocitraturia (< 450 mg/24h). Hypocitraturia is frequently
associated with most forms of calcium stone formation. Urinary
citrate binds to calcium in solution, thereby decreasing available
calcium for precipitation and subsequent stone formation. Potassium
citrate supplements are usually effective treatment in these situations.
Urinary citrate is decreased in acidosis and is increased during
alkalosis. The potassium will supplement the frequently associated
hypokalemic states, and citrate will help correct the acidosis. A
typical dose is 20 mEq three times a day (available in 10-mEq
waxed tablets or in solution), or 30 mEq of crystal formulations
twice a day. Alternatively, oral lemonade has been shown to
increase urinary citrate by about 150 mg/24h.
C. Uric Acid Calculi
The average normal urinary pH is 5.8–5.9. Urinary pH is
consistently < 5.5 in persons who form uric acid stones. The p K of
uric acid is 5.75, at which point half of the uric acid is ionized as a
urate salt and is soluble, while the other half is insoluble. Increasing
the urinary pH above 6.2 dramatically increases uric acid solubility
and can effectively dissolve large calculi at a rate of 1 cm per month
as seen on plain abdominal radiographs, and effectively prevents
future uric acid stone formation. Potassium citrate is the most
frequently used medication to increase urinary pH. It can be given in
liquid preparation, as crystals that need to be taken with fluids, or as
tablets (10 mEq), two by mouth three or four times daily. Patients
with uric acid calculi should be given nitrazine pH paper with which
to monitor the effectiveness of their urinary alkalinization; the goal is
a urinary pH > 6.2 and < 6.5 (to avoid calcium phosphate
precipitation). Other contributing factors include hyperuricemia,
myeloproliferative disorders, malignancy with increased uric acid
production, abrupt and dramatic weight loss, and uricosuric
medications. If hyperuricemia is present, allopurinol (300 mg/d
orally) may be given. Although pure uric acid stones are relatively
radiolucent, most have some calcium components and can be
visualized on plain abdominal radiographs. Renal ultrasonography is
a helpful adjunct for appropriate diagnosis and long-term
management.
D. Struvite Calculi
Struvite stones are synonymous with magnesium-ammonium-
phosphate or infection stones. They are most commonly seen in
women with recurrent urinary tract infections recalcitrant to
appropriate antibiotics. They rarely present as ureteral stones
without prior upper tract endourologic intervention. Frequently, a
struvite stone is discovered as a large staghorn configured calculus
forming a cast of the renal collecting system. Struvite stones are
radiodense. Urinary pH is high, routinely above 7.2. These stones
are formed secondary to urease-producing organisms, including
Proteus, Pseudomonas, Providencia and, less commonly,
Klebsiella, Staphylococcus, and Mycoplasma. An E coli urinary
tract infection is not consistent with an infectious reservoir
originating from a struvite calculus. These frequently large stones are
relatively soft and amenable to percutaneous nephrolithotomy.
Appropriate perioperative antibiotics are required. They can recur
rapidly, and efforts should be taken to render the patient stone-free.
Postoperative irrigation through nephrostomy tubes can eliminate
small fragments. Acetohydroxamic acid is an effective urease
inhibitor, but it is poorly tolerated by most patients because of its
gastrointestinal toxicity.
E. Cystine Calculi
Cystine stones are a result of abnormal excretion of cystine,
ornithine, lysine, and arginine. Cystine is the only amino acid that
becomes insoluble in urine. These stones are particularly difficult to
manage medically. Prevention is centered around marked increased
fluid intake during the day and evening to achieve a urinary volume
of 3–4 L/d, urinary alkalinization, pH > 7.0 (monitored with
Nitrazine pH paper), and disulfide inhibitors such as tiopronin (α-
mercaptoproprionylglycine) or penicillamine. There are no known
inhibitors of cystine calculi.
 Surgical Treatment
Forced intravenous fluids will not push stones down the ureter.
Effective peristalsis directing a bolus of urine down the ureter
requires opposing ureteral walls to approach each other and touch,
which large dilated systems cannot do. In fact, forced diuresis is
counterproductive and will exacerbate the pain; a euvolemic state
should be achieved. Associated fever may represent infection, a
medical emergency requiring prompt drainage by a ureteral catheter
or a percutaneous nephrostomy tube. Antibiotics alone are
inadequate unless the obstruction is drained.
A. Ureteral Stones
Impediment to urine flow by ureteral stones usually occurs at two
sites: at the ureteropelvic junction and at the ureterovesicular
junction as the ureter enters the bladder. Prediction of spontaneous
stone passage is difficult. Stones < 6 mm in diameter as seen on a
plain abdominal radio-graph usually passes spontaneously. Medical
expulsive therapy with α-blockers (such as tamsulosin, 0.4 mg
orally once daily) in combination with a nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory agent (such as ibuprofen 600 mg orally three times per
day with a full stomach), with or without a short course of a low-
dose oral corticosteroid dramatically increases the rate of
spontaneous stone passage. Active medical expulsive therapy with
appropriate pain medications is appropriate for the first few weeks.
If spontaneous stone passage fails, with or without medical
expulsive therapy, or the patient has intolerable pain or persistent
nausea or vomiting, therapeutic intervention is required. Distal
ureteral stones are best managed with ureteroscopic stone
extraction or in situ extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL).
Ureteroscopic stone extraction involves placement of a small
endoscope through the urethra and into the ureter. Under direct
vision, basket extraction or stone laser fragmentation followed by
extraction is performed. Complications during endoscopic retrieval
increase as the duration of attempted medical expulsive therapy
increases beyond 6 weeks. Indications for earlier intervention
include severe pain unresponsive to medications, fever, persistent
nausea and vomiting requiring intravenous hydration, social
requirements requiring return to work, or anticipated travel. Most
upper tract stones that enter the bladder can exit the urethra with
minimal discomfort.
In situ SWL, an alternative, utilizes an external energy source that
is focused on the stone. This focused energy is additive, resulting in
minimal tissue insult except at the focus where the stone is
positioned with the aid of fluoroscopy or ultrasonography. This can
be performed under anesthesia as an outpatient procedure and has
a high stone fragmentation rate. Most stone fragments will pass
uneventfully within 2 weeks, but those that have not passed within 6
weeks are unlikely to pass without intervention. Women of
childbearing age are best not treated with SWL for a stone in the
lower ureter because the impact on the ovary is unknown.
Proximal and midureteral stones—those above the inferior
margin of the sacroiliac joint—can be treated with SWL or
ureteroscopy. SWL is delivered directly to the stone (in situ)
without the need to push the stone back into the renal pelvis. To
help ensure adequate drainage after SWL, a double J ureteral stent
may be placed, but it does not ensure passage of stone fragments.
Occasionally, stone fragments will obstruct the ureter after SWL.
Conservative management will usually result in spontaneous
resolution with eventual passage of the stone fragments. If this is
unsuccessful, adequate proximal drainage through a percutaneous
nephrostomy tube will facilitate passage. In rare instances,
ureteroscopic extraction will be required.
B. Renal Calculi
Patients with renal calculi presenting without pain, urinary tract
infections, or obstruction need not be treated. They should be
monitored with serial abdominal radiographs or renal
ultrasonographic examinations. If calculi are growing or become
symptomatic, intervention should be undertaken. Renal calculi 2 cm
in diameter are best treated with SWL. Calculi located in the
inferior calix frequently result in suboptimal stone-free rates as
measured at 3 months by x-ray. Such calculi and others of larger
diameter are best treated via percutaneous nephrolithotomy.
Perioperative antibiotic coverage should be given on the basis of
preoperative urine cultures.
 When to Refer
•  Evidence of urinary obstruction.
•  Anatomic abnormalities or solitary kidney.
•  Concomitant pyelonephritis.
 When to Admit
•  Intractable nausea and vomiting or pain.
•  Fever.
Fink HA et al. Diet, fluid, or supplements for secondary prevention
of nephrolithiasis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. Eur Urol. 2009 Jul;56(1):72–80. [PMID:
19321253]
 
Nouvenne A et al. Effects of a low-salt diet on idiopathic
hypercalciuria in calcium-oxalate stone formers: a 3-mo
randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010
Mar;91(3):565–70. [PMID: 20042524]
 
Pak CY. Medical management of urinary stone disease. Nephron
Clin Pract. 2004;98(2):c49–53. [PMID: 15499203]
 
Preminger GM et al; EAU/AUA Nephrolithiasis Guideline Panel.
2007 guideline for the management of ureteral calculi. J Urol. 2007
Dec;178(6):2418–34. [PMID: 17993340]
 
Stoller ML et al. The primary stone event: a new hypothesis
involving a vascular etiology. J Urol. 2004 May;171(5):1920–4.
[PMID: 15076312]
 
Tracy CR et al. Update on the medical management of stone
disease. Curr Opin Urol. 2009 Mar;19(2):200–4. [PMID:
19188774]
 
MALE ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION & SEXUAL
DYSFUNCTION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Erectile dysfunction can have organic and psychogenic etiologies.
 Organic erectile dysfunction may be an early sign of
cardiovascular disease and requires evaluation.
 Peyronie disease is a common fibrotic disorder of the penile
erectile bodies that causes penile deformity and sexual
dysfunction.
 
 General Considerations
Erectile dysfunction is the consistent inability to attain or maintain a
sufficiently rigid penile erection for sexual performance. The
condition affects nearly 30 million American men, and its incidence
is age related. Approximately 52% of men aged 40–70 years
experience erectile dysfunction. Most cases of erectile dysfunction
have an organic rather than a psychogenic cause. Normal male
erection is a neurovascular event relying on an intact autonomic and
somatic nerve supply to the penis, smooth and striated musculature
of the corpora cavernosa and pelvic floor, and arterial blood flow
supplied by the paired pudendal arteries. Erection is caused and
maintained by an increase in arterial flow, active relaxation of the
smooth muscle within the sinusoids of the paired corpora cavernosa
of the penis, and an increase in venous resistance. Contraction of
the bulbocavernosus and ischiocavernosus muscles results in further
rigidity of the penis with intracavernosal pressures far exceeding
systolic blood pressure. Nitric oxide is a pivotal neurotransmitter
that initiates and sustains erections; however, other molecules
contribute, including acetylcholine, prostaglandins, and vasoactive
intestinal peptide.
Male sexual dysfunction may be manifested in a variety of ways,
and patient history is critical to the proper classification and
treatment. Androgens have a strong influence on the sexual desire of
men. A loss of libido may indicate androgen deficiency on the
basis of either hypothalamic, pituitary, or testicular disease. Loss of
erections may result from arterial, venous, neurogenic, or
psychogenic causes. Concurrent medical problems may damage
one or more of the mechanisms. Of particular concern is endothelial
dysfunction, defined as the decreased bioavailability of nitric oxide
with subsequent impairment of arterial vasodilation. Erectile
dysfunction may be an early manifestation of endothelial
dysfunction, which precedes more severe, systemic atherosclerotic,
cardiovascular disease. In addition, many medications, especially
antihypertensive and antidepressant agents, are associated with
erectile dysfunction. It is important to determine whether the patient
has any normal erections in the early morning or during sleep. If
normal erections occur, an organic cause is less likely. The gradual
loss of erections over time is more suggestive of an organic cause.
The ability to attain but not maintain an erection may be the first sign
of endothelial dysfunction.
Peyronie disease is a fibrotic disorder of the tunica albuginea of
the penis resulting in varying degrees of penile curvature and sexual
dysfunction. Peyronie disease develops in approximately 5% of men
older than 50 years, but this may be an underestimate related to
embarrassment in seeking care. After onset of the disease, 10% of
men improve spontaneously. If left untreated, the disease
progresses in half of the remainder and the rest stabilize. The
etiology of Peyronie disease is not fully understood and is likely
multifactorial. The most promising hypothesis is that subtle penile
trauma is followed by abnormal wound healing, although other
potential disease modulators may include vascular disease and
hypogonadism.
Priapism is the occurrence of penile erection unrelated to sexual
stimulation, generally lasting longer than 4 hours, and potentially
leading to irreversible damage to the erectile mechanisms. Priapism
can be due to unregulated high blood flow, but more commonly, it is
due to trapping of blood within the erectile bodies resulting in penile
ischemia and infarction of the sinusoidal tissue. Priapism may be
caused by any of the treatments for erectile dysfunction, drug use,
and red blood cell dyscrasias.
The loss of seminal emission, or anejaculation, may result from
androgen deficiency by decreasing prostate and seminal vesicle
secretions as well as sympathetic denervation as a result of diabetes
mellitus or pelvic or retroperitoneal surgery. Retrograde
ejaculation may occur as a result of mechanical disruption of the
bladder neck, especially following transurethral resection of the
prostate, pelvic radiation, treatment with α-blockers, or due to
sympathetic denervation. If libido and erection are intact, the loss
of orgasm is usually of psychological origin. Premature
ejaculation is the persistent or recurrent ejaculation with minimal
stimulation before a person desires (associated with distress) and
may be primary or secondary. The former is usually psychogenic in
origin and additional history may elucidate the presence of a new
partner, unreasonable expectations about performance, or
emotional disorders. The latter is caused by erectile dysfunction and
may be corrected with erectile dysfunction treatment.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Erectile dysfunction should be distinguished from problems of penile
deformity, ejaculation, libido, and orgasm. The severity of the
dysfunction (maintaining vs attaining; chronic, occasional, or
situational) as well as its timing should be noted. The history should
include inquiries about dyslipidemia, hypertension, depression,
neurologic disease, diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, and
endocrine disorders as well as cardiac or peripheral vascular
disease. Pelvic trauma, surgery, or irradiation identifies patients at
increased risk for erectile dysfunction. Penile deformity or curvature
that prevents normal intercourse should be noted because this may
indicate the presence of Peyronie disease, which may complicate
treatment. The history should clarify the severity of curvature, loss
of penile length, and other deformities that may prevent normal,
painless sexual intercourse. Medication use should be noted, since
25% of all cases of sexual dysfunction may be drug related. The use
of alcohol, tobacco, and recreational drugs should be recorded,
since each is associated with an increased risk of sexual
dysfunction.
During the physical examination, secondary sexual characteristics
should be assessed. Motor and sensory examination should be
performed as well as palpation and quantification of lower extremity
vascular pulsations. The genitalia should be examined, noting the
presence of penile scarring or plaque formation (Peyronie disease)
and any abnormalities in size or consistency of either testicle.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory evaluation should consist of a complete blood count,
fasting lipid profile and glucose, testosterone, and prolactin. Patients
with abnormalities of testosterone or prolactin require further
evaluation with measurement of serum follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) to distinguish hypothalamic-
pituitary dysfunction from testes failure.
C. Special Tests
Further testing is based on the patient's goals and history and is
performed when etiology is unclear. Organic and psychogenic
erectile dysfunction can generally be differentiated by patient
history, where men with psychogenic erectile dysfunction will
describe normal nocturnal or morning erections, or erectile
dysfunction that is situational. If the distinction remains unclear,
clarity may be gained with the use of nocturnal penile tumescence
testing, where the frequency and rigidity of erections are recorded
by a tension meter attached to the penis before sleep. Patients with
psychogenic erectile dysfunction will have nocturnal erections of
adequate frequency and rigidity.
Patients with inadequate response to oral medications may
undergo further evaluation with direct injection of vasoactive
medications into the penis. These medications (prostaglandin E1,
papaverine, phentolamine or a combination of drugs) induce
erections in men with intact vascular systems. Patients who respond
with a rigid erection require no further vascular evaluation.
Additional vascular testing is indicated in select patients who do
not achieve an erection after penile injection and who are
candidates for vascular reconstructive surgery. Duplex ultrasound,
penile cavernosography, and pudendal arteriography can distinguish
arterial from venous erectile dysfunction and help predict which
patients may benefit from vascular surgery.
 Treatment
Most men suffering from erectile dysfunction can be treated
successfully with one of the approaches outlined below. Men who
have psychogenic erectile dysfunction will probably benefit from
behaviorally oriented sex therapy.
A. Hormonal Replacement
Testosterone replacement therapy is offered to men with
documented hypogonadism who have undergone endocrinologic
evaluation and in whom no prostate cancer has been found by
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening and DRE. Although
testosterone replacement does not induce the development of
prostate cancer, PSA levels do increase and should be monitored at
least once a year in addition to DRE.
B. Vasoactive Therapy
Sexual stimulation with subsequent nitric oxide release from the
parasympathetic nerves and endothelium initiates penile erection.
Nitric oxide enters smooth muscles cells, increases cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP) production, which mediates calcium
sequestration and cellular hyperpolarization. Phosphodiesterase-5
(PDE-5) degrades cGMP and fosters penile detumescence.
1. Oral agents—Sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil inhibit PDE-5,
allowing cGMP to function unopposed, thereby sustaining inflow of
blood into the erect penis. All drugs are similarly effective; some
patients who do not respond to one PDE-5 inhibitor may respond
to one of the other agents. Because of differences in receptor
binding affinity and pharmacokinetics, the drugs have variable
durations of activity and side effects. Each drug should be initiated
at the lowest dose and titrated to effect. There is no effect on libido,
and priapism is exceedingly rare. The additive effect on nitrates may
lead to exaggerated cardiac preload reduction and hypotension;
therefore, the drug is contraindicated in patients taking nitroglycerin
or nitrates. All patients being evaluated for acute chest pain should
be asked if they are taking a PDE-5 inhibitor before administering
nitroglycerin. Fixed atherosclerotic disease in the aortoiliac system is
associated with diminished efficacy.
The combination of PDE-5 inhibitors and α-receptor blockers
(which may be prescribed for lower urinary tract symptoms) may
cause a larger reduction in systemic blood pressure than when
PDE-5 inhibitors are used alone. However, these two classes of
medication may be safely used in combination if they are started in a
stepwise fashion, with appropriate titration. In select men, combined
treatment with PDE-5 inhibitors and testosterone replacement may
be warranted, since adequate androgen levels may be required for
the penile vasculature to be fully responsive to vasoactive drugs.
2. 
Injectable 
agents—Direct 
injection 
of 
vasoactive
prostaglandins with or without papaverine or phentolamine into the
penis is an acceptable form of treatment for many men with erectile
dysfunction. Injections are performed using a tuberculin syringe or a
metered-dose injection device. The base and lateral aspect of the
penis is used as the injection site to avoid injury to the superficial
blood supply located anteriorly. Complications are rare and include
bruising, dizziness, local pain, fibrosis, priapism, and infection.
Vasoactive prostaglandins (alprostadil) can also be delivered via a
urethral suppository with slightly less effectiveness.
The presence of a prolonged erection requires prompt medical
attention to prevent erectile dysfunction and fibrosis of the
cavernosal tissues. Initial management may include aspiration of
blood from the penis or injection of sympathomimetic drugs
(epinephrine or phenylephrine); if these maneuvers fail, surgical
shunts may need to be performed to drain blood from the corpora
cavernosa.
C. Vacuum Erection Device
The vacuum erection device causes erection by creating a vacuum
chamber around the penis, whereby blood is drawn into the
corpora cavernosa. Once adequate tumescence has been achieved,
an elastic constriction band is placed around the proximal penile
shaft to prevent loss of erection, and the vacuum cylinder is
removed. Such devices are highly effective, regardless of the cause
of erectile dysfunction; however, the devices are cumbersome with
a high rate of discontinued use. Complications are rare.
D. Penile Prostheses
Prosthetic devices may be implanted directly into the paired
corporal bodies. Such prostheses may be semi-rigid and malleable
or inflatable. Each is manufactured in a variety of sizes and
diameters. Even for men with normal erectile function, the penis is
flaccid 90% of time; therefore, inflatable devices may result in a
more natural appearance and better functionality. Complications are
rare but include mechanical failure, infection, and injury to adjacent
anatomic structures during surgery.
E. Vascular Reconstruction
Patients with disorders of the arterial system are candidates for
various forms of arterial reconstruction, including endarterectomy
and balloon dilation for proximal arterial occlusion and arterial
bypass procedures utilizing arterial (epigastric) or venous (deep
dorsal vein) segments for distal occlusion. Patients with venous
disorders may be managed with ligation of certain veins (deep
dorsal or emissary veins) or the crura of the corpora cavernosa.
Experience with vascular reconstructive procedures is limited, and
many patients so treated still fail to achieve a rigid erection.
F. Medical and Surgical Therapy for Peyronie Disease
A wide range of medical and surgical treatments have been used to
treat the disorder. There are no oral therapies for Peyronie disease
that are approved by the FDA; however, evidence from
randomized controlled trials supports the use of pentoxifylline,
colchicine, potassium aminobenzoate, L-carnitine, and liposomal
superoxide dismutase. The intraplaque injection of verapamil
improves penile deformity in some patients. Surgical treatment is an
alternative for men with compromised sexual function due to severe
curvature or lesions causing penile instability. The choice of
corrective procedure should be tailored to each patient after a
detailed evaluation of disease severity and sexual function.
 When to Refer
•  Patients with inadequate response to oral medications or
who are unable to tolerate side effects.
•  Patients with Peyronie disease (penile curvature) or other
penile deformity.
•  Patients with a history of pelvic or perineal trauma or
surgery.
•  Young patients or those with lifelong erectile dysfunction.
•  Ischemic priapism is a medical emergency and requires
immediate referral to a urologist or the emergency
department for intervention to allow restoration of penile
blood perfusion.
Jackson G et al. The second Princeton consensus on sexual
dysfunction and cardiac risk: new guidelines for sexual medicine. J
Sex Med. 2006 Jan;3(1):28–36. [PMID: 16409215]
 
McVary KT. Clinical practice. Erectile dysfunction. N Engl J Med.
2007 Dec 13;357(24):2472–81. [PMID: 18077811]
 
Meuleman EJ et al. Diagnostic tests for male erectile dysfunction
revisited. Committee Consensus Report of the International
Consultation in Sexual Medicine. J Sex Med. 2010 Jul;
7(7):2375–81. [PMID: 20487240]
 
Shin D et al. Erectile dysfunction: a disease marker for
cardiovascular disease. Cardiol Rev. 2011 Jan–Feb;19(1):5–11.
[PMID: 21135596]
 
Smith JF et al. Peyronie's disease: a critical appraisal of current
diagnosis and treatment. Int J Impot Res. 2008 Sep–Oct;20(5):
445–59. [PMID: 18650828]
 
Smith JF et al. Racial disparities in erectile dysfunction among
participants in the California Men's Health Study. J Sex Med.
2009 Sep 30. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 19796017]
 
Tsertsvadze A et al. Oral phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors and
hormonal treatments for erectile dysfunction: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Nov 3;151(9): 650–61.
[PMID: 19884626]
 
MALE INFERTILITY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Couple infertility is related to the male partner in 50% of cases.
 Causes include decreased or absent sperm production or
p
p
function, or obstruction of the male genital tract.
 Detailed history, physical examination, and repeated semen
analysis are the cornerstones of diagnosis and treatment.
 
 General Considerations
Infertility, the inability of a couple to conceive a child after 1 year of
sexual intercourse without contraceptive use, affects 15–20% of US
couples. Approximately one-third of cases result from male factors,
one-third from female factors, and one-third from combined factors;
therefore, evaluation of both partners is critical. Clinical evaluation is
warranted following 6 months of unprotected intercourse in select
couples. Following a detailed history and physical examination, a
semen analysis is essential for diagnosis and should be performed at
least twice, on two separate occasions (Figure 23–1). Because
spermatogenesis takes approximately 74 days, it is important to
review events from the past 3 months. Some types of male infertility
put men at higher risk for the later development of testicular germ
cell cancer; thus, they should be counseled appropriately and taught
self testicular exam.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The history should include prior testicular insults (torsion,
cryptorchidism, trauma), infections (mumps orchitis, epididymitis),
environmental factors (excessive heat, radiation, chemotherapy,
prolonged pesticide exposure), medications (anabolic steroids,
cimetidine, and spironolactone may affect spermatogenesis;
phenytoin may lower FSH; sulfasalazine and nitrofurantoin affect
sperm motility), and drugs (alcohol, tobacco, marijuana). Sexual
habits, frequency and timing of intercourse, use of lubricants, and
each partner's previous fertility experiences are important. Loss of
libido and headaches, visual disturbances, or galactorrhea may
indicate a pituitary tumor. The past medical or surgical history may
reveal thyroid or liver disease (abnormalities of spermatogenesis),
diabetic neuropathy (retrograde or anejaculation), radical pelvic or
retroperitoneal surgery (absent seminal emission secondary to
sympathetic nerve injury), or hernia repair (damage to the vas
deferens or testicular blood supply).
Physical examination should pay particular attention to features of
hypogonadism: underdeveloped secondary sexual characteristics,
diminished male pattern hair distribution (axillary, body, facial,
pubic), body habitus, and gynecomastia. The scrotal contents
should be carefully evaluated. Testicular size should be noted
(normal size approximately 4.5 × 2.5 cm, volume 18 mL).
Varicoceles are abnormally dilated and refluxing veins of the
pampiniform plexus that can be identified in the standing position by
gentle palpation of the spermatic cord and, on occasion, may only
be appreciated with the Valsalva maneuver. The vas deferens,
epididymis, and prostate should be palpated (absence of all or part
of the vas deferens may indicate the presence a cystic fibrosis
variant, congenital bilateral or unilateral absence of the vas
deferens).
B. Laboratory Findings
Semen analysis should be performed after 2 to 3 days of
ejaculatory abstinence. The specimen should be analyzed within 1
hour after collection. Abnormal sperm concentrations are < 15
million/mL (oligospermia is the presence of < 15 million sperm/mL
in the ejaculate; azoospermia is the absence of sperm). Normal
semen volumes range between 1.5 mL and 5 mL (volumes < 1.5
mL may result in inadequate buffering of the vaginal acidity and may
be due to retrograde ejaculation, ejaculatory duct obstruction, or
androgen insufficiency). Normal sperm motility and morphology
demonstrate 50–60% motile cells and > 30% or 4% normal
morphology (World Health Organization and Krueger guidelines,
respectively). Abnormal motility may result from varicocele,
antisperm antibodies, infection, abnormalities of the sperm flagella,
or partial ejaculatory duct obstruction. Abnormal morphology may
result from a varicocele, infection, or exposure history.
Figure 23–1. Male infertility: evaluation of male factor infertility.
FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; lH, luteinizing hormone; PRl,
prolactin; T, testosterone. (From Nicoll D et al [editors]: Pocket
Guide to Diagnostic Tests. McGraw-Hill, 2004. Adapted, with
permission, from Swerdloff RS et al. Evaluation of the male partner
of an infertile couple. An algorithmic approach. JAMA. 1982 May
7;247(17):2418–22. Copyright © 1982 by The American Medical
Association.)
 
Endocrine evaluation is warranted if sperm counts are low (< 15
million/mL) or if there is a basis from the history and physical
examination for suspecting an endocrinologic origin. Initial testing
should include serum FSH and testosterone. Specific abnormalities
in these hormones should prompt additional testing, including LH
and prolactin. Elevated FSH and LH levels and low testosterone
levels (hypergonadotropic hypogonadism) are associated with
primary testicular failure. Low FSH and LH associated with low
testosterone occur in secondary testicular failure (hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism) and may be of hypothalamic or pituitary origin.
Elevation of serum prolactin may indicate the presence of pituitary
prolactinoma.
C. Genetic Testing
Men with sperm concentrations < 10 million/mL should undergo
testing for Y chromosome microdeletions and karyotypic
abnormalities. Gene deletions from the long arm of the Y
chromosome may cause azoospermia or oligospermia with age-
related decline in spermatogenesis that is transmissible to male
offspring. Karyotyping may reveal Klinefelter syndrome. Partial or
complete absence of the vas deferens should prompt testing for
cystic fibrosis mutations.
D. Imaging
Scrotal ultrasound may detect a subclinical varicocele. Vasography
may be required in patients with suspected genital duct obstruction.
Men with low ejaculate volume and no evidence of retrograde
ejaculation should undergo transrectal ultrasound to evaluate the
prostate and seminal vesicles. MRI of the sella turcica should be
performed in men with markedly elevated prolactin or
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism to evaluate the anterior pituitary
gland. MRI of the pelvis and scrotum should be considered in men
for whom the testes cannot be identified in the scrotum by physical
examination or ultrasound.
E. Special Tests
Patients with low volume ejaculate should have post-ejaculation
urine samples centrifuged and analyzed for sperm to evaluate for
retrograde ejaculation. In cases of disproportionately low motility,
sperm vitality and the presence of autoantibodies should be
assessed. Rounds cells in concentrations > 1 million/mL should
prompt leukocyte esterase staining (immature germ cells are found
normally, but inflammatory cells may require treatment).
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Education about the proper timing for intercourse in relation to the
woman's ovulatory cycle as well as the avoidance of spermicidal
lubricants should be discussed. In cases of gonadotoxic exposure or
medication-related factors, the offending agent should be removed.
Patients with active genitourinary tract infections should be treated
with appropriate antibiotics. Healthy lifestyle habits, including
healthy diet, moderate exercise, and avoidance of gonadotoxins
(such as tobacco smoke) should be reinforced.
B. Varicocele
Varicocelectomy is performed by stopping retrograde blood flow in
spermatic cord veins. Surgical ligation may be accomplished via
subinguinal, inguinal, retroperitoneal, or laparoscopic approaches.
Percutaneous venographic embolization of varicoceles is feasible
but may have a higher recurrence rate.
C. Endocrine Therapy
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may be treated with chorionic
gonadotropin once primary pituitary disease has been excluded or
treated. Dosage is usually 2000 international units intramuscularly
three times a week. If sperm counts fail to rise after 12 months,
FSH therapy should be initiated.
D. Ejaculatory Dysfunction Therapy
Patients with retrograde ejaculation may benefit from α-adrenergic
agonists (pseudoephedrine, 60 mg orally three times a day) or
imipramine (25 mg orally three times a day). Medical failures may
require the collection of post-ejaculation urine for intrauterine
insemination. Anejaculation can be treated with vibratory stimulation
or electroejaculation in select cases.
E. Ductal Obstruction
Obstruction of the ejaculatory ducts may be corrected by
transurethral resection of the ducts in the prostatic urethra. If
obstruction of the vas deferens or epididymis is suspected, the level
of obstruction must be determined via a vasogram prior to operative
treatment, with the exception of prior vasectomy. Obstruction of the
vas deferens is best managed by microsurgical vasovasostomy or
vasoepididymostomy.
F. Assisted Reproductive Techniques
Intrauterine insemination, in vitro fertilization, and intracytoplasmic
sperm injection (ICSI) are alternatives to patients in whom other
means of treating reduced sperm concentration, motility, or
functionality has failed. With the use of ICSI, azoospermic men can
father their genetic progeny by surgical retrieval of sperm from the
testicle, epididymis, or vas deferens.
 When to Refer
•  Couples with clinical infertility or concern about fertility
potential.
•  Men with known genital insults, genetic diagnoses, or
syndromes that preclude natural fertility.
•  Reproductive-aged men with newly diagnosed cancer or
other disease that may require cytotoxic therapies with
interest in fertility preservation.
Patel ZP et al. Male factor assessment in infertility. Med Clin
North Am. 2011 Jan;95(1):223–34. [PMID: 21095425]
 
Practice Committee of American Society for Reproductive
Medicine in collaboration with Society for Male Reproduction and
Urology. Evaluation of the azoospermic male. Fertil Steril. 2008
Nov;90(5 Suppl):S74–7. [PMID: 19007652]
 
Richardson I et al. Outcomes of varicocelectomy treatment: an
updated critical analysis. Urol Clin North Am. 2008 May;
35(2):191–209. [PMID: 18423240]
 
Walsh TJ et al. Increased risk of testicular germ cell cancer among
infertile men. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Feb 23;169(4): 351–6.
[PMID: 19237718]
 
Walsh TJ et al. The genetics of male infertility. Semin Reprod
Med. 2009 Mar;27(2):124–36. [PMID: 19247914]
 
BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Obstructive or irritative voiding symptoms.
 May have enlarged prostate on rectal examination.
 Absence of urinary tract infection, neurologic disorder, stricture
disease, prostatic or bladder malignancy.
 
 General Considerations
Benign prostatic hyperplasia is the most common benign tumor in
men, and its incidence is age related. The prevalence of histologic
benign prostatic hyperplasia in autopsy studies rises from
approximately 20% in men aged 41–50 years, to 50% in men aged
51–60, and to over 90% in men over 80 years of age. Although
clinical evidence of disease occurs less commonly, symptoms of
prostatic obstruction are also age related. At age 55 years,
approximately 25% of men report obstructive voiding symptoms.
At age 75 years, 50% of men report a decrease in the force and
caliber of the urinary stream.
Risk factors for the development of benign prostatic hyperplasia
are poorly understood. Some studies have suggested a genetic
predisposition and some have noted racial differences.
Approximately 50% of men under age 60 years who undergo
surgery for benign prostatic hyperplasia may have a heritable form
of the disease. This form is most likely an autosomal dominant trait,
and first-degree male relatives of such patients carry an increased
relative risk of approximately fourfold.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms
The symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia can be divided into
obstructive and irritative complaints. Obstructive symptoms
include hesitancy, decreased force and caliber of the stream,
sensation of incomplete bladder emptying, double voiding (urinating
a second time within 2 hours), straining to urinate, and postvoid
dribbling. Irritative symptoms include urgency, frequency, and
nocturia.
The American Urological Association (AUA) symptom index
(Table 23–4) is perhaps the single most important tool used in the
evaluation of patients with this disorder and should be calculated for
all patients before starting therapy. The answers to seven questions
quantitate the severity of obstructive or irritative complaints on a
scale of 0–5. Thus, the score can range from 0 to 35, in increasing
severity of symptoms.
A detailed history focusing on the urinary tract should be
obtained to exclude other possible causes of symptoms such as
prostate cancer or disorders unrelated to the prostate such as
urinary tract infection, neurogenic bladder, or urethral stricture.
B. Signs
A physical examination, DRE, and a focused neurologic
examination should be performed on all patients. The size and
consistency of the prostate should be noted, but prostate size does
not correlate with the severity of symptoms or the degree of
obstruction. Benign prostatic hyperplasia usually results in a smooth,
firm, elastic enlargement of the prostate. Induration, if detected,
must alert the clinician to the possibility of cancer, and further
evaluation is needed (ie, PSA, transrectal ultrasound, and biopsy).
Examination of the lower abdomen should be performed to assess
for a distended bladder.
 
Table 23–4. american Urological association symptom index for
benign prostatic hyperplasia.1
 
1 Sum of seven circled numbers equals the symptom score. See text for
explanation.
Reproduced, with permission, from Barry MJ et al. The American
Urological Association symptom index for benign prostatic hyperplasia.
J Urol. 1992 Nov;148(5):1549–57.
C. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis should be performed to exclude infection or hematuria. A
serum PSA is considered optional, yet most clinicians will include it
in the initial evaluation, particularly if life expectancy is > 10 years.
PSA certainly increases the ability to detect prostate cancer over
DRE alone; however, because there is much overlap between levels
seen in benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate cancer, its use
remains controversial (see below in the section on screening for
prostate cancer).
D. Imaging
Upper tract imaging (CT or renal ultrasound) is recommended only
in the presence of concomitant urinary tract disease or
complications from benign prostatic hyperplasia (ie, hematuria,
urinary tract infection, chronic kidney disease, history of stone
disease).
E. Cystoscopy
Cystoscopy is not recommended to determine the need for
treatment but may assist in determining the surgical approach in
patients opting for invasive therapy.
F. Additional Tests
Cystometrograms and urodynamic profiles should be reserved for
patients with suspected neurologic disease or those who have failed
prostate surgery. Flow rates, postvoid residual urine determination,
and pressure-flow studies are considered optional.
 Differential Diagnosis
A history of prior urethral instrumentation, urethritis, or trauma
should be elucidated to exclude urethral stricture or bladder neck
contracture. Hematuria and pain are commonly associated with
bladder stones. Carcinoma of the prostate may be detected by
abnormalities on the DRE or an elevated PSA (see Chapter 39 for
Prostate Cancer). A urinary tract infection can mimic the irritative
symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia and can be readily
identified by urinalysis and culture; however, a urinary tract infection
can also be a complication of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Carcinoma of the bladder, especially carcinoma in situ, may also
present with irritative voiding complaints; however, urinalysis usually
shows evidence of hematuria (see Chapter 39 for Bladder Cancer).
Patients with a neurogenic bladder may also have many of the same
symptoms and signs as those with benign prostatic hyperplasia;
however, a history of neurologic disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus,
or back injury may be obtained, and diminished perineal or lower
extremity sensation or alterations in rectal sphincter tone or the
bulbocavernosus reflex might be observed on examination.
Simultaneous alterations in bowel function (constipation) might also
suggest the possibility of a neurologic disorder.
 Treatment
Clinical practice guidelines exist for the evaluation and treatment of
patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (Figure 23–2). Following
evaluation as outlined above, patients should be offered various
forms of therapy for benign prostatic hyperplasia. Patients are
advised to consult with their primary care clinicians and make an
educated decision on the basis of the relative efficacy and side
effects of the treatment options (Table 23–5).
Patients with mild symptoms (AUA scores 0–7) should be
managed by watchful waiting only. Absolute surgical indications are
refractory urinary retention (failing at least one attempt at catheter
removal), large bladder diverticula, or any of the following sequelae
of benign prostatic hyperplasia: recurrent urinary tract infection,
recurrent gross hematuria, bladder stones, or chronic kidney
disease.
A. Watchful Waiting
The risk of progression or complications is uncertain. However, in
men with symptomatic disease, it is clear that progression is not
inevitable and that some men undergo spontaneous improvement or
resolution of their symptoms.
Retrospective studies on the natural history of benign prostatic
hyperplasia are inherently subject to bias, relating in part to patient
selection and also to the type and extent of follow-up. Very few
prospective studies addressing the natural history have been
reported. One small series demonstrated that approximately 10% of
symptomatic men may progress to urinary retention while 50% of
patients demonstrate marked improvement or resolution of
symptoms. A large randomized study compared finasteride with
placebo in men with moderate to severely symptomatic disease and
enlarged prostates on DRE. Patients in the placebo arm
demonstrated a 7% risk of developing urinary retention over 4
years.
Men with moderate or severe symptoms can also be observed if
they so choose. The optimal interval for follow-up is not defined,
nor are the specific end points for intervention.
B. Medical Therapy
1. α-Blockers—α-Blockers can be classified according to their
receptor selectivity as well as their half-life (Table 23–6).
Prazosin is effective; however, it requires dose titration and twice
daily dosing. Typical side effects include orthostatic hypotension,
dizziness, tiredness, retrograde ejaculation, rhinitis, and headache.
Long-acting α-blockers allow for once-a-day dosing, but dose
titration is still necessary because side effects similar to those seen
with prazosin may occur. Terazosin improves symptoms and in
numerous studies is superior to placebo or finasteride. Terazosin is
started at a dosage of 1 mg orally daily for 3 days, increased to 2
mg orally daily for 11 days, then 5 mg orally daily. Additional dose
escalation to 10 mg orally daily can be performed if necessary.
Doxazosin is started at a dosage of 1 mg orally daily for 7 days,
increased to 2 mg orally daily for 7 days, then 4 mg orally daily.
Additional dose escalation to 8 mg orally daily can be performed if
necessary. Alfuzosin is a long-acting α-blocker; its dose is 10 mg
orally once daily and does not require titration.
Figure 23–2. Benign prostatic hyperplasia decision diagram.
DRE, digital rectal examination; PSA, prostate-specific antigen;
BPH, benign prostatic hyperplasia; TUIP, transurethral incision of
the prostate; TURP, transurethral resection of the prostate.
 
 
Table 23–5. Balance sheet for benign prostatic hyperplasia
treatment outcomes.1
 
1 190% confidence interval.
2 Most of the data reviewed for finasteride are derived from three trials that
have required an enlarged prostate for entry. The chance of improvement
in men with symptoms yet minimally enlarged prostates may be much
less, as noted from the VA Cooperative Trial. TUIP, transurethral incision of
the prostate; TURP, transurethral resection of the prostate.
 
Table 23–6. α-Blockade for benign prostatic hyperplasia.
 
α1a-Receptors are localized to the prostate and bladder neck.
Selective blockade of these receptors results in fewer systemic side
effects than α-blocker therapy (orthostatic hypotension, dizziness,
tiredness, rhinitis, and headache), thus obviating the need for dose
titration. The typical dose of tamsulosin is 0.4 mg orally daily taken
30 minutes after a meal. Several randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials have been performed comparing terazosin,
doxazosin, tamsulosin, and alfuzosin with placebo. All agents have
demonstrated safety and efficacy.
2. 5α-Reductase inhibitors—Finasteride is a 5α-reductase
inhibitor that blocks the conversion of testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone. This drug impacts upon the epithelial
component of the prostate, resulting in reduction in size of the gland
and improvement in symptoms. Six months of therapy is required
for maximum effects on prostate size (20% reduction) and
symptomatic improvement.
Several randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
been performed comparing finasteride with placebo. Efficacy,
safety, and durability are well established. However, symptomatic
improvement is seen only in men with enlarged prostates (>40 mL
by ultrasonographic examination). Side effects include decreased
libido, decrease in volume of ejaculate, and erectile dysfunction.
Serum PSA is reduced by approximately 50% in patients receiving
finasteride therapy. Therefore, in order to compare with pre-
finasteride levels, the serum PSA of a patient taking finasteride
should be doubled.
A report suggests that finasteride therapy may decrease the
incidence of urinary retention and the need for operative treatment
in men with enlarged prostates and moderate to severe symptoms.
The larger the prostate over 40 mL, the greater the relative-risk
reduction. However, optimal identification of appropriate patients
for prophylactic therapy remains to be determined. Dutasteride is a
dual 5α-reductase inhibitor that appears to be similar to finasteride
in its effectiveness; its dose is 0.5 mg orally daily.
Both finasteride and dutasteride have been shown to be effective
chemopreventive agents for prostate cancer in large, randomized
clinical trials. The 25% risk reduction was observed in men with
both low and high risk for prostate cancer. However, despite the
strength of the evidence for 5α−reductase inhibitors in reducing the
risk of prostate cancer, an FDA advisory committee recommended
against labeling these agents for prostate cancer chemoprevention,
citing the potential increased risk of high-grade tumors in these
studies, isolated risk reduction in low-grade tumors, and inability to
apply the findings to the general population.
3. Combination therapy—The four-arm Veterans Administration
Cooperative Trial compared placebo, finasteride alone, terazosin
alone, and combination of finasteride and terazosin. Over 1200
patients participated, and significant decreases in symptom scores
and increases in urinary flow rates were seen only in the arms
containing terazosin. However, enlarged prostates were not an entry
criterion; in fact, prostate size in this study was much smaller than in
previous controlled trials using finasteride (32 versus 52 mL). Other
randomized, placebo-controlled trials comparing finasteride with
placebo in men with lower urinary tract symptoms and large
prostates showed finasteride to be beneficial for reducing
symptoms, increasing urinary flow rate, and reducing the risk of
complications due to benign prostatic hyperplasia as well as
reducing the number of men who required surgery for benign
prostatic hyperplasia. The Medical Therapy of Prostatic Symptoms
(MTOPs) trial is a large, randomized, placebo-controlled trial
comparing finasteride, doxazosin, the combination of the two, and
placebo in 3047 men observed for a mean of 4.5 years. Long-term
combination therapy with doxazosin and finasteride was safe and
reduced the risk of overall clinical progression of benign prostatic
hyperplasia significantly more than did treatment with either drug
alone. Combination therapy and finasteride alone reduced the long-
term risk of acute urinary retention and the need for invasive
therapy. Combination therapy had the risks of additional side effects
and the cost of two medications.
4. Phytotherapy—Phytotherapy is the use of plants or plant
extracts for medicinal purposes. Its use in benign prostatic
hyperplasia has been popular in Europe for years, and its use in the
United States is growing as a result of patient-driven enthusiasm.
Several plant extracts have been popularized, including the saw
palmetto berry, the bark of Pygeum africanum, the roots of
Echinacea purpurea and Hypoxis rooperi, pollen extract, and the
leaves of the trembling poplar. The mechanisms of action of these
agents are unknown. A 2006 prospective, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial revealed no improvement in
symptoms, urinary flow rate, or quality of life for men with benign
prostatic hyperplasia with saw palmetto treatment compared with
placebo.
C. Conventional Surgical Therapy
1. Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)—Ninety-
five percent of simple prostatectomies can be performed
endoscopically. Most of these procedures are performed under a
spinal anesthetic and require a 1- to 2-day hospital stay. Symptom
scores and flow rate improvement are superior following TURP
relative to any minimally invasive therapy; however, the length of the
hospital stay is greater. Much controversy revolves around possible
higher rates of morbidity and mortality associated with TURP in
comparison with open surgery, but the higher rates observed in one
study probably related to more significant comorbidities in the
TURP patients compared with the patients who received open
surgical treatment. Several other studies could not confirm the
difference in mortality when controlling for age and comorbidities.
The risks of TURP include retrograde ejaculation (75%), erectile
dysfunction (5–10%), and urinary incontinence (< 1%).
Complications include bleeding, urethral stricture or bladder neck
contracture, perforation of the prostate capsule with extravasation,
and, if severe, transurethral resection syndrome, a hypervolemic,
hyponatremic state resulting from absorption of the hypotonic
irrigating solution. Clinical manifestations of the syndrome include
nausea, vomiting, confusion, hypertension, bradycardia, and visual
disturbances. The risk of transurethral resection syndrome increases
with resection times over 90 minutes. Treatment includes diuresis
and, in severe cases, hypertonic saline administration (see
Hyponatremia, Chapter 21).
2. Transurethral incision of the prostate (TUIP)—Men with
moderate to severe symptoms and small prostates often have
posterior commissure hyperplasia or an “elevated bladder neck.”
These patients will often benefit from incision of the prostate. The
procedure is more rapid and less morbid than TURP. Outcomes in
well-selected patients are comparable, though a lower rate of
retrograde ejaculation has been reported (25%).
3. Open simple prostatectomy—When the prostate is too large
to remove endoscopically, open enucleation is necessary. What size
is “too large” depends upon the surgeon's experience with TURP.
Glands over 100 g are usually considered for open enucleation. In
addition to size, other relative indications for open prostatectomy
include concomitant bladder diverticulum or bladder stone and
whether dorsal lithotomy positioning is or is not possible.
Open prostatectomies can be performed with either a suprapubic
or retropubic approach. Simple suprapubic prostatectomy is
performed transvesically and is the operation of choice if there is
concomitant bladder pathology. After the adenoma is removed,
both a urethral and a suprapubic catheter are inserted prior to
closure.
In simple retropubic prostatectomy, the bladder is not entered
but rather a transverse incision is made in the surgical capsule of the
prostate and the adenoma is enucleated as described above; only a
urethral catheter is needed at the end of the case.
D. Minimally Invasive Therapy
1. Laser therapy—Several coagulation necrosis techniques have
been utilized. Transurethral laser-induced prostatectomy (TULIP) is
performed under transrectal ultrasound guidance. The instrument is
placed in the urethra and transrectal ultrasound is used to direct the
device as it is slowly pulled from the bladder neck to the apex. The
depth of treatment is monitored with ultrasound.
Most urologists prefer to use visually directed laser techniques.
Visual coagulative necrosis is performed under cystoscopic control,
and the laser fiber is pulled through the prostate at several
designated areas depending upon the size and configuration of the
gland. Four-quadrant and sextant approaches have been described
for lateral lobes, with additional treatments directed at enlarged
median lobes. Coagulative techniques do not create an immediate
visual defect in the prostatic urethra—tissue is sloughed over the
course of several weeks up to 3 months following the procedure.
Visual contact ablative techniques take longer in the operating
room because the fiber is placed in direct contact with the prostate
tissue, which is vaporized. Photovaporization of the prostate (PVP),
an alternative laser technique, uses a high-power KTP laser. An
immediate defect is obtained in the prostatic urethra, similar to that
seen during TURP.
Interstitial laser therapy places fibers directly into the prostate,
usually under cystoscopic control. Irritative voiding symptoms may
be less in these patients as the urethral mucosa is spared and
prostate tissue is resorbed by the body rather than sloughed.
Advantages to laser surgery include minimal blood loss, rare
occurrence of transurethral resection syndrome, the ability to treat
patients while on anticoagulation therapy, and outpatient surgery.
Disadvantages are the lack of tissue for pathologic examination, the
longer postoperative catheterization time, the more frequent irritative
voiding complaints, and the expense of laser fibers and generators.
Large multicenter, randomized studies with long-term follow-up
are needed in comparing laser prostate surgery with TURP and
other forms of minimally invasive surgery.
2. Transurethral needle ablation of the prostate (TUNA)
—This procedure uses a specially designed urethral catheter that is
passed into the urethra. Interstitial radio-frequency needles are then
deployed from the tip of the catheter, piercing the mucosa of the
prostatic urethra. Radiofrequencies are then used to heat the tissue,
resulting in coagulative necrosis. Bladder neck and median lobe
enlargement are not well treated by TUNA. Subjective and
objective improvement in voiding occurs. In randomized trials
comparing TUNA to TURP, similar improvement was seen when
comparing life scores, peak urinary flow rates, and postvoid
residual urine.
3. Transurethral electrovaporization of the prostate—This
technique uses the standard resectoscope. High current densities
result in heat vaporization of tissue, creating a cavity in the prostatic
urethra. Because the device requires slower sweeping speeds over
the prostatic urethra and the depth of vaporization is approximately
one-third of a standard loop, this procedure usually takes longer
than a standard TURP. Long-term comparative data are needed.
4. Hyperthermia—Microwave hyperthermia is most commonly
delivered with a transurethral catheter. Some devices cool the
urethral mucosa to decrease the risk of injury. However, if
temperatures do not go above 45°C, cooling is unnecessary.
Symptom score and flow rate improvement are obtained, but (as
with laser surgery) large randomized studies with long-term follow-
up are needed to assess durability and cost-effectiveness.
 When to Refer
•  Progression to urinary retention.
•  Patient dissatisfaction with medical therapy.
•  Need for surgical intervention or further evaluation
(cystoscopy).
Andriole GL et al; REDUCE Study Group. Effect of dutasteride
on the risk of prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr
1;362(13):1192–202. [PMID: 20357281]
 
AUA Practice Guidelines Committee. AUA guideline on
management of benign prostatic hyperplasia (2003). Chapter 1:
Diagnosis and treatment recommendations. J Urol. 2003
Aug;170(2 Pt 1): 530–47. [PMID: 12853821]
 
Edwards JL. Diagnosis and management of benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Am Fam Physician. 2008 May 15;77(10):1403–10.
[PMID: 18533373]
 
Kaplan SA. Update on the American urological association
guidelines for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Rev
Urol. 2006;8(Suppl 4):S10–7. [PMID: 17215996]
 
McConnell JD et al; Medical Therapy of Prostatic Symptoms
(MTOPS) Research Group. The long-term effect of doxazosin,
finasteride, and combination therapy on the clinical progression of
benign prostatic hyperplasia. N Engl J Med. 2003 Dec
18;349(25):2387–98. [PMID: 14681504]
 
Roehrborn CG. BPH progression: concept and key learning from
MTOPS, ALTESS, COMBAT, and ALF-ONCE. BJU Int. 2008
Mar;101(Suppl 3):17–21. [PMID: 18307681]
 
Selius BA et al. Urinary retention in adults: diagnosis and initial
management. Am Fam Physician. 2008 Mar 1;77(5):643–50.
[PMID: 18350762]
 
Thompson IM et al. Chemoprevention of prostate cancer. J Urol.
2009 Aug;182(2):499–507. [PMID: 19524966]
 
 
 
Nervous System
Disorders
Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP
Geoffrey A. Kerchner, MD, PhD
HEADACHE
Headache is such a common complaint and can occur for so many
different reasons that its proper evaluation may be difficult. New,
severe, or acute headaches are more likely than chronic headaches
to relate to an intracranial disorder; the approach to such headaches
is discussed in Chapter 2. Chronic headaches may be primary or
secondary to another disorder. Common primary headache
syndromes include migraine, tension-type headache, and cluster
headache. Important secondary causes to consider include
intracranial lesions, head injury, cervical spondylosis, dental or
ocular disease, temporomandibular joint dysfunction, sinusitis,
hypertension, depression, and a wide variety of general medical
disorders. Although underlying structural lesions are not present in
most patients presenting with headache, it is nevertheless important
to bear this possibility in mind. About one-third of patients with
brain tumors, for example, present with a primary complaint of
headache.
The intensity, quality, and site of pain—and especially the
duration of the headache and the presence of associated neurologic
symptoms—may provide clues to the underlying cause. Migraine
headaches are often described as pulsating or throbbing; a sense of
tightness or pressure is common with tension headache. Sharp
lancinating pain suggests a neuritic cause; ocular or periorbital
icepick-like pains occur with migraine or cluster headache; and a
dull or steady headache is typical of an intracranial mass lesion.
Ocular or periocular pain suggests an ophthalmologic disorder;
band-like pain is common with tension headaches; and lateralized
headache is common with migraine or cluster headache. In patients
with sinusitis, there may be tenderness of overlying skin and bone.
With intracranial mass lesions, headache may be focal or
generalized; in patients with trigeminal or glossopharyngeal
neuralgia, the pain is localized to one of the divisions of the
trigeminal nerve or to the pharynx and external auditory meatus,
respectively.
Inquiry should be made of precipitating factors. Recent sinusitis,
dental surgery, head injury, or symptoms suggestive of a systemic
viral infection may suggest the underlying cause. Migraine may be
exacerbated by emotional stress, fatigue, foods containing nitrite or
tyramine, or the menstrual period. Alcohol may precipitate cluster
headache. Temporomandibular joint dysfunction causes headache
or facial pain that comes on with chewing; trigeminal or
glossopharyngeal neuralgia may also be precipitated by chewing,
and masticatory claudication sometimes occurs with giant cell
arteritis. Cough-induced headache occurs with structural lesions of
the posterior fossa, but in many instances no specific cause can be
found.
The timing of symptoms is important. Headaches are typically
worse on awakening in patients with an intracranial mass or sleep
apnea. Cluster headaches tend to occur at the same time each day
or night. Tension headaches are worse with stress or at the end of
the day.
Associated symptoms may also be helpful. Nausea; sensitivity to
light, sound, and exertion; and a proclivity to retreat to a dark, quiet
room typify migraine. Anxiety, agitation, and even suicidality may
accompany cluster headache. Other accompanying symptoms may
point to specific disorders.
A progressive headache disorder, new onset of headache in
middle or later life, headaches that disturb sleep or are related to
exertion, and headaches that are associated with neurologic
symptoms or a focal neurologic deficit usually require cranial MRI
or CT scan to exclude an intracranial mass lesion. Signs of
meningeal irritation and impairment of consciousness also indicate
the need for further investigation (cranial CT scan or MRI and
examination of the cerebrospinal fluid) to exclude subarachnoid
hemorrhage or meningeal infection. The diagnosis and treatment of
primary neurologic disorders associated with headache are
considered separately under these disorders.
1. Migraine
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Headache, usually pulsatile.
 Pain is typically, but not always, unilateral.
 Nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and phonophobia are common
accompaniments.
 An aura of transient neurologic symptoms (commonly visual) may
precede head pain.
 Commonly, head pain occurs with no aura.
 
General Considerations
The pathophysiology of migraine probably relates to neurovascular
dysfunction. Headache results from the dilatation of blood vessels
innervated by the trigeminal nerve caused by release of
neuropeptides from parasympathetic nerve fibers approximating
these vessels. The probable underlying mechanism is activation of
the trigeminal nucleus caudalis, nucleus tractus solitarius, and dorsal
raphe nucleus. Imaging studies have revealed changes in brainstem
regions involved in sensory modulation, suggesting that migraine
relates to a failure of normal sensory processing. Before or
simultaneous with symptom onset, regional cerebral blood flow is
decreased in the cortex corresponding to the clinically affected area;
after one to several hours, hyperemia occurs in this same region.
Cortical spreading depression of Leão has been implicated.
 Clinical Findings
Classic migrainous headache is a lateralized throbbing headache that
occurs episodically following its onset in adolescence or early adult
life. In many cases, however, the headaches do not conform to this
pattern, although their associated features and response to
antimigrainous preparations nevertheless suggest that they have a
similar basis. In this broader sense, migrainous headaches may be
lateralized or generalized, may be dull or throbbing, and are
sometimes 
associated 
with 
anorexia, 
nausea, 
vomiting,
photophobia, phonophobia, osmophobia, cognitive impairment, and
blurring of vision. They usually build up gradually and may last for
several hours or longer. Focal disturbances of neurologic function
may precede or accompany the headaches and have been
attributed to constriction of branches of the internal carotid artery.
Visual disturbances occur commonly and may consist of field
defects; of luminous visual hallucinations such as stars, sparks,
unformed light flashes (photopsia), geometric patterns, or zigzags of
light; or of some combination of field defects and luminous
hallucinations (scintillating scotomas). Other focal disturbances such
as aphasia or numbness, paresthesias, clumsiness, dysarthria,
dysequilibrium, or weakness in a circumscribed distribution may
also occur.
In rare instances, the neurologic or somatic disturbance
accompanying typical migrainous headaches becomes the sole
manifestation of an attack (“migraine equivalent”). Very rarely, the
patient may be left with a permanent neurologic deficit following a
migrainous attack.
Patients often give a family history of migraine. Attacks may be
triggered by emotional or physical stress, lack or excess of sleep,
missed meals, specific foods (eg, chocolate), alcoholic beverages,
bright lights, loud noise, menstruation, or use of oral contraceptives.
An uncommon variant is basilar artery migraine, in which
blindness or visual disturbances throughout both visual fields are
initially accompanied or followed by dysarthria, dysequilibrium,
tinnitus, and perioral and distal paresthesias and are sometimes
followed by transient loss or impairment of consciousness or by a
confusional state. This, in turn, is followed by a throbbing (usually
occipital) headache, often with nausea and vomiting.
In ophthalmoplegic migraine, lateralized pain—often about the
eye—is accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and diplopia due to
transient external ophthalmoplegia. The ophthalmoplegia is due to
third nerve palsy, sometimes with accompanying sixth nerve
involvement, and may outlast the orbital pain by several days or
even weeks. The ophthalmic division of the fifth nerve has also been
affected in some patients. Ophthalmoplegic migraine is rare; more
common causes of a painful ophthalmoplegia are internal carotid
artery aneurysms and diabetes.
Migraine often exhibits a complex, polygenic pattern of
inheritance. Sometimes, an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern
is apparent, as in familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), in which
attacks of lateralized weakness represent the aura. Mutations have
been identified in three associated genes: ATP1A2, CACNA1A,
and SCN1A.
 Treatment
Management of migraine consists of avoidance of any precipitating
factors, together with prophylactic or symptomatic pharmacologic
treatment if necessary.
A. Symptomatic Therapy
During acute attacks, many patients find it helpful to rest in a quiet,
darkened room until symptoms subside. A simple analgesic (eg,
aspirin, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or naproxen) taken right away
often provides relief, but treatment with prescription therapy is
sometimes necessary. To prevent medication overuse, use of simple
analgesics should be limited to 15 days or less per month, and
combination analgesics should be limited to no more than 10 days
per month.
Cafergot, a combination of ergotamine tartrate (1 mg) and
caffeine (100 mg), is often particularly helpful; one or two tablets
are taken at the onset of headache or warning symptoms, followed
by one tablet every 30 minutes, if necessary, up to six tablets per
attack and no more than 10 days per month. Because of impaired
absorption or vomiting during acute attacks, oral medication
sometimes fails to help. Cafergot given rectally as suppositories
(one-half to one suppository containing 2 mg of ergotamine) or
dihydroergotamine mesylate (0.5–1 mg intravenously or 1–2 mg
subcutaneously or intramuscularly) may be useful in such cases.
Ergotamine-containing preparations should be avoided in pregnancy
and when cardiovascular disease or risk factors are present.
Prochlorperazine, administered rectally (25 mg suppository) or
intravenously or orally (5–10 mg) can be an effective alternative, as
can the various butalbital-containing combination analgesics
available.
Sumatriptan, which has a high affinity for 5-HT1 receptors, is a
rapidly effective agent for aborting attacks when given
subcutaneously by an autoinjection device (4–6 mg once
subcutaneously, may repeat once after 2 hours if needed; maximum
dose 12 mg/24 h). Nasal and oral preparations are available but
may be less effective due to slower absorption. Zolmitriptan,
another selective 5-HT1 receptor agonist, has high bioavailability
after oral administration and is also effective for the immediate
treatment of migraine. The optimal initial oral dose is 5 mg, and
relief usually occurs within 1 hour; may repeat once after 2 hours. It
is also available in a nasal formulation, which has a rapid onset of
action; the dose is 5 mg in one nostril once and it may be repeated
once after 2 hours. The maximum dose for both formulations is 10
mg/24 h. A number of other triptans are available, including
rizatriptan (5–10 mg orally at onset, may repeat every 2 hours twice
[maximum dose 30 mg/24 h]); naratriptan (1–2.5 mg orally at
onset, may repeat once after 4 hours [maximum dose 5 mg/24 h]);
almotriptan (6.25–12.5 mg orally at onset, may repeat dose once
after 2 hours [maximum dose 25 mg/24 h]); frovatriptan (2.5 mg
orally at onset, may repeat after 2 hours once [maximum dose 7.5
mg/24]); and eletriptan (20–40 mg orally at onset; may repeat after
2 hours once [maximum dose 80 mg/24 h]). Eletriptan is useful for
immediate therapy and frovatriptan, which has a longer half-life,
may be worthwhile for patients with prolonged attacks.
Triptans may cause nausea and vomiting. They should probably
be avoided in women who are pregnant, in patients with hemiplegic
or basilar migraine, and in patients with risk factors for stroke (such
as hypertension, prior stroke or transient ischemic attack, diabetes
mellitus, 
hypercholesterolemia, 
obesity). 
Triptans 
are
contraindicated in patients with coronary or peripheral vascular
disease. Patients often experience greater benefit when the triptan is
combined with naproxen (500 mg).
The neuroleptic droperidol is also helpful in aborting acute
attacks, particularly in an emergency setting in opioid-tolerant
patients. Intravenous metoclopramide and prochlorperazine are
effective. Opioid analgesics are sometimes required when other
therapies fail. Intravenous propofol in subanesthetic doses may help
in intractable cases.
B. Preventive Therapy
Preventive treatment may be necessary if migraine headaches occur
more frequently than two or three times a month or significant
disability is associated with attacks. Some of the more common
drugs used for this purpose are listed in Table 24–1. Their mode of
action is unclear but may involve alteration of central
neurotransmission. Several drugs may have to be tried in turn before
the headaches are brought under control. Once a drug has been
found to help, it should be continued for several months. If the
patient remains headache-free, the dose may be tapered and the
drug eventually withdrawn. Botulinum toxin type A was approved
by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for migraine
prevention in late 2010, despite conflicting results regarding its
efficacy among randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Although
acupuncture has been widely used in the prophylaxis of migraine, a
randomized controlled trial failed to show any difference between it
and sham acupuncture.
 
Table 24–1. Prophylactic treatment o
 
1Gabapentin and possibly other antiepileptics have also been used
successfully.
2Avoid during pregnancy.
3Not FDA-approved for this indication.
4Other calcium channel antagonists (eg, nimodipine, nicardipine, and
diltiazem) may also help.
5Depression is commonly comorbid with migraine disorder and may
warrant separate treatment.
6Other tricyclic antidepressants (eg, nortriptyline and imipramine) may
similarly help.
2. Tension-type Headache
This is the most common type of primary headache disorder.
Patients frequently complain of pericranial tenderness, poor
concentration, and other nonspecific symptoms, in addition to
constant daily headaches that are often vise-like or tight in quality
but are not pulsatile. Headaches may be exacerbated by emotional
stress, fatigue, noise, or glare. The headaches are usually
generalized, may be most intense about the neck or back of the
head, and are not associated with focal neurologic symptoms. There
is diagnostic overlap with migraine.
The therapeutic approach is similar to that in migraine. Treatment
of comorbid anxiety or depression is important. Techniques to
induce relaxation are sometimes useful and include massage, hot
baths, and biofeedback.
3. Cluster Headache
Cluster headache affects predominantly middle-aged men. The
pathophysiology is unclear but may relate to activation of cells in the
ipsilateral hypothalamus, triggering the trigeminal autonomic vascular
system. There is often no family history of headache or migraine.
Episodes of severe unilateral periorbital pain occur daily for several
weeks and are often accompanied by one or more of the following:
ipsilateral nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, lacrimation, redness of the
eye, and Horner syndrome (ptosis of the eyelid, meiosis or
constriction of the pupil, and anhidrosis or reduced sweat
secretion). During attacks, patients are often restless and agitated.
Episodes often occur at night, awaken the patient, and last for
between 15 minutes and 3 hours. Spontaneous remission then
occurs, and the patient remains well for weeks or months before
another bout of closely spaced attacks occurs. Bouts may last for 4
to 8 weeks and may occur up to several times per year. During a
bout, many patients report that alcohol triggers an attack; others
report that stress, glare, or ingestion of specific foods occasionally
precipitates attacks. In occasional patients, remission does not
occur. This variant has been referred to as chronic cluster
headache. Hemicrania continua is a separate primary headache
syndrome with unilateral head pain and associated autonomic
symptoms; unlike cluster headache, the pain is continuous without
pain-free periods, and it completely resolves with indomethacin.
Examination reveals no abnormality apart from Horner syndrome
that either occurs transiently during an attack or, in longstanding
cases, remains as a residual deficit between attacks.
Treatment of an individual attack with oral drugs is generally
unsatisfactory, but subcutaneous (6 mg dose) or intranasal (20-
mg/spray) sumatriptan or inhalation of 100% oxygen (12–15 L/min
for 15 minutes via a nonrebreather mask) may be effective.
Zolmitriptan (5- and 10-mg nasal spray) is also effective.
Dihydroergotamine (0.5–1 mg intramuscularly or intravenously) is
sometimes used. Viscous lidocaine (1 mg of 4–6% solution)
intranasally is sometimes effective.
Various prophylactic agents that have been found to be effective
in individual patients include civamide (not available in the United
States), lithium carbonate (monitored by plasma lithium
determination), verapamil (240–960 mg daily), topiramate (100–
400 mg daily), valproate (750–1500 mg daily), and suboccipital
corticosteroid injection about the greater occipital nerve. As there is
often a delay before these medications are effective, transitional
therapy is often used. Ergotamine tartrate is effective and can be
given as rectal suppositories (0.5–1 mg at night or twice daily), by
mouth (2 mg daily), or by subcutaneous injection (0.25 mg three
times daily for 5 days per week). Other options include prednisone
(60 mg daily for 5 days followed by gradual withdrawal), or
dihydroergotamine (9.25 mg intravenously over several days or 0.5
mg intramuscularly twice daily).
4. Posttraumatic Headache
A variety of nonspecific symptoms may follow closed head injury,
regardless of whether consciousness is lost. Headache is often a
conspicuous feature.
The headache itself usually appears within a day or so following
injury, may worsen over the ensuing weeks, and then gradually
subsides. It is usually a constant dull ache, with superimposed
throbbing that may be localized, lateralized, or generalized. It is
sometimes accompanied by nausea, vomiting, or scintillating
scotomas. Headaches occurring more than 1–2 weeks after the
inciting event are probably not directly attributable to the head
injury.
Dysequilibrium, sometimes with a rotatory component, may also
occur and is often enhanced by postural change or head movement.
Impaired memory, poor concentration, emotional instability, and
increased irritability are other common complaints and occasionally
are the sole manifestations of the syndrome. The duration of
symptoms relates in part to the severity of the original injury, but
even trivial injuries are sometimes followed by symptoms that
persist for months.
Special 
investigations 
are 
usually 
not 
helpful. 
The
electroencephalogram may show minor nonspecific changes, while
the electronystagmogram sometimes suggests either peripheral or
central vestibulopathy. CT scans or MRI of the head usually show
no abnormal findings.
Treatment is difficult, but optimistic encouragement and
graduated rehabilitation, depending on the occupational
circumstances, are advised as symptoms often resolve
spontaneously within several months. Headaches often respond to
simple analgesics, but severe headaches may necessitate preventive
treatment as outlined for migraine.
5. Primary Cough Headache
Severe head pain may be produced by coughing (and by straining,
sneezing, and laughing) but, fortunately, usually lasts for only a few
minutes or less. The pathophysiologic basis of the complaint is not
known, and often there is no underlying structural lesion. However,
intracranial lesions, usually in the posterior fossa (eg, Arnold-Chiari
malformation), are present in about 10% of cases, and brain tumors
or other space-occupying lesions may present in this way.
Accordingly, CT scanning or MRI should be undertaken in all
patients and repeated annually for several years, since a small
structural lesion may not show up initially.
The disorder is usually self-limited, although it may persist for
several years. For unknown reasons, symptoms sometimes clear
completely after lumbar puncture. Indomethacin (75–150 mg daily
orally) may provide relief. Similar activity-triggered headache
syndromes include primary exertional headache and primary
headache associated with sexual activity.
6. Headache Due to Giant Cell (Temporal or Cranial)
Arteritis
The superficial temporal, vertebral, ophthalmic, and posteriorciliary
arteries are often the most severely affected pathologically. Most
patients are elderly. The major symptom is lateralized headache,
often associated with or preceded by myalgia, malaise, anorexia,
weight loss, and other nonspecific complaints. Loss of vision is the
most feared manifestation and occurs quite commonly. Clinical
examination often reveals tenderness of the scalp and over the
temporal arteries. Further details, including approaches to
treatment, are given in Chapter 20.
7. Headache Due to Intracranial Mass Lesions
Intracranial mass lesions of all types may cause headache owing to
displacement of vascular structures and other pain-sensitive tissues.
Posterior fossa tumors often cause occipital pain, and supratentorial
lesions lead to bifrontal headache, but such findings are too
inconsistent to be of value in attempts at localizing a pathologic
process. The headaches are nonspecific in character and may vary
in severity from mild to severe. They may be worsened by exertion
or postural change and may be associated with nausea and
vomiting, but this is true of migraine also. Headaches are also a
feature of pseudotumor cerebri (idiopathic intracranial hypertension)
(see below). Signs of focal or diffuse cerebral dysfunction or of
increased intracranial pressure will indicate the need for further
investigation. Similarly, a progressive headache disorder or the new
onset of headaches in middle or later life merits investigation if no
cause is apparent.
8. Medication Overuse (Analgesic Rebound) Headache
In approximately half of all patients with chronic daily headaches,
medication overuse is responsible. They present with chronic pain
or with complaints of severe headache unresponsive to medication.
Early initiation of a migraine preventive therapy (see above) permits
withdrawal of analgesics and eventual relief of headache.
9. Headache Due to Other Neurologic Causes
Cerebrovascular disease may be associated with headache, but the
mechanism is unclear. Headache may occur with internal carotid
artery occlusion or carotid dissection and after carotid
endarterectomy. Diagnosis is facilitated by the clinical
accompaniments and the circumstances in which the headache
developed.
Acute severe headache accompanies subarachnoid hemorrhage
and meningeal infections; accompanying signs of impairment of
consciousness and sign of meningeal irritation indicate the need for
further investigations.
Dull or throbbing headache is a frequent sequela of lumbar
puncture and may last for several days. It is aggravated by the erect
posture and alleviated by recumbency. The exact mechanism is
unclear, but it is commonly attributed to leakage of cerebrospinal
fluid through the dural puncture site. Its incidence may be reduced if
a small-diameter needle is used for the spinal tap, and perhaps also
if the patient lies prone or supine after the procedure.
 When to Refer
 
•    Acute onset of “worst headache in my life.”
•    Increasing headache unresponsive to simple measures.
•    History of trauma, hypertension, fever, visual changes.
•    Presence of neurologic signs or of scalp tenderness.
 When to Admit
 
•    Suspected subarachnoid hemorrhage or structural
intracranial lesion.
•    Depends on underlying cause.
Ailani J et al. The role of nerve blocks and botulinum toxin
injections in the management of cluster headaches. Curr Pain
Headache Rep. 2009 Apr;13(2):164–7. [PMID: 19272284]
 
Broner SW et al. Epidemiology of cluster headache. Curr Pain
Headache Rep. 2009 Apr;13(2):141–6. [PMID: 19272280]
 
Dodick DW et al. Topiramate versus amitriptyline in migraine
prevention: a 26-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
double-dummy, parallel-group noninferiority trial in adult
migraineurs. Clin Ther. 2009 Mar;31(3):542–59. [PMID:
19393844]
 
Fernández-de-las-Peñas C et al. Chronic tension-type headache:
what is new? Curr Opin Neurol. 2009 Jun;22(3):254–61. [PMID:
19300250]
 
Formisano R et al. Post-traumatic headache: facts and doubts. J
Headache Pain. 2009 Jun;10(3):145–52. [PMID: 19294482]
 
Grover PJ et al. Deep brain stimulation for cluster headache. J Clin
Neurosci. 2009 Jul;16(7):861–6. [PMID: 19398342]
 
Hagen K et al. Management of medication overuse headache: 1-
year randomized multicentre open-label trial. Cephalalgia. 2009
Feb;29(2):221–32. [PMID: 18823363]
 
Linde K et al. Acupuncture for migraine prophylaxis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):CD001218. [PMID:
19160193]
 
Linde K et al. Acupuncture for tension-type headache. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):CD007587. [PMID:
19160338]
 
Mett A et al. Acute migraine therapy: recent evidence from
randomized comparative trials. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008 Jun;
21(3):331–7. [PMID: 18451718]
 
Shuhendler AJ et al. Efficacy of botulinum toxin type A for the
prophylaxis of episodic migraine headaches: a meta-analysis of
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials.
Pharmacotherapy. 2009 Jul;29(7):784–91. [PMID: 19558252]
 
Wang X et al. Giant cell arteritis. Rheumatol Int. 2008 Nov;29(1):
1–7. [PMID: 18716781]
 
FACIAL PAIN
1. Trigeminal Neuralgia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Brief episodes of stabbing facial pain.
 Pain is in the territory of the second and third division of the
trigeminal nerve.
 Pain exacerbated by touch.
 
 General Considerations
Trigeminal neuralgia (“tic douloureux”) is most common in middle
and later life. It affects women more frequently than men.
 Clinical Findings
Momentary episodes of sudden lancinating facial pain occur and
commonly arise near one side of the mouth and shoot toward the
ear, eye, or nostril on that side. The pain may be triggered or
precipitated by such factors as touch, movement, drafts, and eating.
Indeed, in order to lessen the likelihood of triggering further attacks,
many patients try to hold the face still while talking. Spontaneous
remissions for several months or longer may occur. As the disorder
progresses, however, the episodes of pain become more frequent,
remissions become shorter and less common, and a dull ache may
persist between the episodes of stabbing pain. Symptoms remain
confined to the distribution of the trigeminal nerve (usually the
second or third division) on one side only.
 Differential Diagnosis
The characteristic features of the pain in trigeminal neuralgia usually
distinguish it from other causes of facial pain. Neurologic
examination shows no abnormality except in a few patients in whom
trigeminal neuralgia is symptomatic of some underlying lesion, such
as multiple sclerosis or a brainstem neoplasm, in which case the
finding will depend on the nature and site of the lesion. Similarly, CT
scans and radiologic contrast studies are often normal in patients
with classic trigeminal neuralgia.
In a young patient presenting with trigeminal neuralgia, multiple
sclerosis must be suspected even if there are no other neurologic
signs. In such circumstances, findings on evoked potential testing
and examination of cerebrospinal fluid may be corroborative. When
the facial pain is due to a posterior fossa tumor, CT scanning and
MRI generally reveal the lesion.
 Treatment
The drugs most helpful for treatment are oxcarbazepine (although
not approved by the FDA for this indication) or carbamazepine,
with monitoring by serial blood counts and liver function tests. If
these medications are ineffective or cannot be tolerated, phenytoin
should be tried. (Doses and side effects of these drugs are shown in
Table 24–3). Baclofen (10–20 mg three or four times daily) or
lamotrigine (400 mg orally daily) may also be helpful, either alone or
in combination with one of these other agents. Gabapentin may also
relieve pain, especially in patients who do not respond to
conventional medical therapy and those with multiple sclerosis.
Depending on response and tolerance, up to 2400 mg daily orally is
given in divided doses.
In the past, alcohol injection of the affected nerve, rhizotomy, or
tractotomy was recommended if pharmacologic treatment was
unsuccessful. More recently, however, posterior fossa exploration
has frequently revealed some structural cause for the neuralgia
(despite normal findings on CT scans, MRI, or arteriograms), such
as an anomalous artery or vein impinging on the trigeminal nerve
root. In such cases, simple decompression and separation of the
anomalous vessel from the nerve root produce lasting relief of
symptoms. In elderly patients with a limited life expectancy,
radiofrequency rhizotomy is sometimes preferred because it is easy
to perform, has few complications, and provides symptomatic relief
for a period of time. Gamma radiosurgery to the trigeminal root is
another noninvasive approach that appears to be successful in most
patients, with essentially no side effects other than facial
paresthesias in a few instances; up to one-third of patients achieved
a pain-free state without need for medication after the procedure.
Surgical exploration generally reveals no abnormality and is
inappropriate in patients with trigeminal neuralgia due to multiple
sclerosis.
Gronseth G et al. Practice Parameter: the diagnostic evaluation and
treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (an evidence-based review).
Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology and the European Federation of
Neurological Societies. Neurology. 2008 Oct 7;71(15):1183–90.
[PMID: 18716236]
 
Riesenburger RI et al. Outcomes following single-treatment gamma
knife surgery for trigeminal neuralgia with a minimum 3-year
follow-up. J Neurosurg. 2010 Apr;112(4):766–71. [PMID:
19780644]
 
2. Atypical Facial Pain
Facial pain without the typical features of trigeminal neuralgia is
generally a constant, often burning pain that may have a restricted
distribution at its onset but soon spreads to the rest of the face on
the affected side and sometimes involves the other side, the neck, or
the back of the head as well. The disorder is especially common in
middle-aged women, many of them depressed, but it is not clear
whether depression is the cause of or a reaction to the pain. Simple
analgesics should be given a trial, as should tricyclic antidepressants,
carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin; the response is often
disappointing. Opioid analgesics pose a danger of addiction in
patients with this disorder. Attempts at surgical treatment are not
indicated.
Cornelissen P et al. Evidence-based interventional pain medicine
according to clinical diagnoses. 3. Persistent idiopathic facial pain.
Pain Pract. 2009 Nov–Dec;9(6):443–8. [PMID: 19874535]
 
3. Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is an uncommon disorder in which pain
similar in quality to that in trigeminal neuralgia occurs in the throat,
about the tonsillar fossa, and sometimes deep in the ear and at the
back of the tongue. The pain may be precipitated by swallowing,
chewing, talking, or yawning and is sometimes accompanied by
syncope. In most instances, no underlying structural abnormality is
present; multiple sclerosis is sometimes responsible. Oxcarbazepine
and carbamazepine (see Table 24–3) are the treatments of choice
and should be tried before any surgical procedures are considered.
Microvascular decompression is generally preferred over
destructive surgical procedures such as partial rhizotomy in
medically refractory cases and is often effective without causing
severe complications.
4. Postherpetic Neuralgia
Herpes zoster (shingles) is due to reactivation of a latent varicella-
zoster virus infection in a sensory nerve ganglion. Postherpetic
neuralgia develops in about 15% of patients who have shingles. This
complication seems especially likely to occur in elderly or
immunocompromised persons, when the rash is severe, and when
the first division of the trigeminal nerve is affected. It also relates to
the duration of the rash before medical consultation. A history of
shingles and the presence of cutaneous scarring resulting from
shingles aid in the diagnosis. Severe pain with shingles correlates
with the intensity of postherpetic symptoms.
The incidence of postherpetic neuralgia may be reduced by the
treatment of shingles with oral acyclovir or famciclovir, but this is
disputed; systemic corticosteroids do not help. Zoster vaccine
markedly reduces morbidity from herpes zoster and postherpetic
neuralgia among older adults. Management of the established
complication is essentially medical. If simple analgesics fail to help, a
trial of a tricyclic antidepressant (eg, amitriptyline, up to 100–150
mg daily orally) is often effective. Other patients respond to
carbamazepine (up to 1200 mg daily orally), phenytoin (300 mg
daily orally), gabapentin (up to 3600 mg daily orally), or pregabalin
(up to 300 mg/daily orally). A combination of gabapentin and
morphine taken orally may provide better analgesia at lower doses
of each agent than either taken alone. Topical application of
capsaicin cream (eg, Zostrix, 0.025%) is sometimes helpful,
perhaps because of depletion of pain-mediating peptides from
peripheral sensory neurons, and topical lidocaine (5%) is also
worthy of trial. The administration of live-attenuated zoster vaccine
to patients over the age of 60 years is important in preventing the
occurrence of herpes zoster and thus of postherpetic neuralgia.
He L et al. Corticosteroids for preventing postherpetic neuralgia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Jan 23; (1):CD005582.
[PMID: 18254083]
 
Johnson RW. Herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia. Expert
Rev Vaccines. 2010 Mar;9(3 Suppl):21–6. [PMID: 20192714]
 
Li Q et al. Antiviral treatment for preventing postherpetic neuralgia.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr 15; (2): CD006866.
[PMID: 19370655]
 
Oxman MN et al. Vaccination against herpes zoster and
postherpetic neuralgia. J Infect Dis. 2008 Mar 1;197(Suppl
2):S228–36. [PMID: 18419402]
 
5. Facial Pain Due to Other Causes
Facial pain may be caused by temporomandibular joint dysfunction
in patients with malocclusion, abnormal bite, or faulty dentures.
There may be tenderness of the masticatory muscles, and an
association between pain onset and jaw movement is sometimes
noted. This pattern differs from that of jaw (masticatory)
claudication, a symptom of giant cell arteritis, in which pain
develops progressively with mastication. Treatment of the
underlying joint dysfunction relieves symptoms.
A relationship of facial pain to chewing or temperature changes
may suggest a dental disturbance. The cause is sometimes not
obvious, and diagnosis requires careful dental examination and
radiographs. Sinusitis and ear infections causing facial pain are
usually recognized by the history of respiratory tract infection, fever
and, in some instances, nasal or aural discharge. There may be
localized tenderness. Radiologic evidence of sinus infection or
mastoiditis is confirmatory.
Glaucoma is an important ocular cause of facial pain, usually
localized to the periorbital region.
On occasion, pain in the jaw may be the principal manifestation
of angina pectoris. Precipitation by exertion and radiation to more
typical areas establish the cardiac origin.
 When to Refer
 
•    Worsening pain unresponsive to simple measures.
•    Continuing pain of uncertain cause.
•    For consideration of surgical treatment (trigeminal or
glossopharyngeal neuralgia).
EPILEPSY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Recurrent seizures.
 Characteristic electroencephalographic changes accompany
seizures.
 Mental status abnormalities or focal neurologic symptoms may
persist for hours postictally.
 
 General Considerations
The term “epilepsy” denotes any disorder characterized by
recurrent unprovoked seizures. A seizure is a transient disturbance
of cerebral function due to an abnormal paroxysmal neuronal
discharge in the brain. Epilepsy is common, affecting approximately
0.5% of the population in the United States.
Etiology
According to the new International League Against Epilepsy
classification system, the many etiologies of seizures can be grouped
into three categories.
A. Genetic Epilepsy
This category encompasses a broad range of disorders, for which
the age at onset ranges from the neonatal period to adolescence or
even later in life. Monogenic disorders tend to exhibit an autosomal
dominant pattern of inheritance, and where the mutation is known,
the responsible gene often encodes a neuronal ion channel.
B. Structural/Metabolic Epilepsy
There are many causes for recurrent seizures.
1. Pediatric age groups—Congenital abnormalities and perinatal
injuries may result in seizures presenting in infancy or childhood.
2. Metabolic disorders—Withdrawal from alcohol or drugs is a
common cause of recurrent seizures, and other metabolic disorders
(such as uremia and hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia) may also be
responsible. Since these seizures are provoked by a readily
reversible cause, this would not be considered epilepsy.
3. Trauma—Trauma is an important cause of seizures at any age,
but especially in young adults. Posttraumatic epilepsy is more likely
to develop if the dura mater was penetrated and generally becomes
manifest within 2 years following the injury. However, seizures
developing in the first week after head injury do not necessarily
imply that future attacks will occur. There is no clear evidence that
prophylactic anticonvulsant drug treatment reduces the incidence of
posttraumatic epilepsy.
4. Tumors and other space-occupying lesions—Neoplasms
may lead to seizures at any age, but they are an especially important
cause of seizures in middle and later life, when the incidence of
neoplastic disease increases. The seizures are commonly the initial
symptoms of the tumor and often are focal in character. They are
most likely to occur with structural lesions involving the frontal,
parietal, or temporal regions. Tumors must be excluded by imaging
studies (MRI preferred over CT) in all patients with onset of
seizures after 30 years of age, focal seizures or signs, or a
progressive seizure disorder.
5. Vascular diseases—Vascular diseases become increasingly
frequent causes of seizures with advancing age and are the most
common cause of seizures with onset at age 60 years or older.
6. Degenerative disorders—Alzheimer disease and other
degenerative disorders are a cause of seizures in later life.
7. Infectious diseases—Infectious diseases must be considered in
all age groups as potentially reversible causes of seizures. Seizures
may occur with an acute infective or inflammatory illness, such as
bacterial meningitis or herpes encephalitis, or in patients with more
longstanding or chronic disorders, such as neurosyphilis or cerebral
cysticercosis. In patients with AIDS, they may result from central
nervous system toxoplasmosis, cryptococcal meningitis, secondary
viral encephalitis, or other infective complications. Seizures are a
common sequela of supratentorial brain abscess, developing most
frequently in the first year after treatment.
C. Unknown
In many cases, the cause of epilepsy cannot be determined.
 Classification of Seizures
The International League Against Epilepsy recently revised its
widely used system of seizure classification. Seizures are divided
into those affecting only part of the brain (focal seizures) and those
that are generalized (Table 24–2).
A. Focal Seizures
The initial clinical and electroencephalographic manifestations of
partial seizures indicate that only a restricted part of one cerebral
hemisphere has been activated. The ictal manifestations depend on
the area of the brain involved. Focal seizures sometimes involve
impairment of consciousness and may evolve to convulsive seizures,
in a process previously called secondary generalization.
1. Without impairment of consciousness—Seizures may be
manifested by focal motor symptoms (convulsive jerking) or
somatosensory symptoms (eg, paresthesias or tingling) that spread
(or “march”) to different parts of the limb or body depending on
their cortical representation; such seizures were previously
described as “simple partial” seizures. In other instances, special
sensory symptoms (eg, light flashes or buzzing) indicate involvement
of visual, auditory, olfactory, or gustatory regions of the brain, or
there may be autonomic symptoms or signs (eg, abnormal epigastric
sensations, sweating, flushing, pupillary dilation). The sole
manifestations of some seizures are phenomena such as dysphasia,
dysmnesic symptoms (eg, déjà vu, jamais vu), affective
disturbances, illusions, or structured hallucinations, but such
symptoms are usually accompanied by impairment of
consciousness.
2. With impairment of consciousness—Impaired consciousness
or responsiveness may be preceded, accompanied, or followed by
the various symptoms mentioned above, and automatisms may
occur. Such seizures were previously called “complex partial”
seizures.
B. Generalized Seizures
There are several different varieties of generalized seizures, as
outlined below. In some circumstances, seizures cannot be classified
because of incomplete information or because they do not fit into
any category.
1. Absence seizures—These are characterized by impairment of
consciousness, sometimes with mild clonic, tonic, or atonic
components (ie, reduction or loss of postural tone), autonomic
components (eg, enuresis), or accompanying automatisms. Onset
and termination of attacks are abrupt. If attacks occur during
conversation, the patient may miss a few words or may break off in
mid sentence for a few seconds. The impairment of external
awareness is so brief that the patient is unaware of it. Absence
(“petit mal”) seizures almost always begin in childhood and
frequently cease by the age of 20 years, although occasionally they
are then replaced by other forms of generalized seizure.
Electroencephalographically, such attacks are associated with
bursts of bilaterally synchronous and symmetric 3-Hz spike-and-
wave activity. A normal background in the electroencephalogram
and normal or above-normal intelligence imply a good prognosis for
the ultimate cessation of these seizures.
 
Table 24–2. seizur
 
2. Atypical absence seizures—There may be more marked
changes in tone, or attacks may have a more gradual onset and
termination than in typical absence seizures. They commonly occur
in patients with multiple seizure types, may be accompanied by
developmental delay or mental retardation, and are associated with
slower spike-wave discharges than those in typical absence attacks.
3. Myoclonic seizures—Myoclonic seizures consist of single or
multiple myoclonic jerks.
4. Tonic-clonic (“grand mal”) seizures—In these seizures, which
are characterized by sudden loss of consciousness, the patient
becomes rigid and falls to the ground, and respiration is arrested.
This tonic phase, which usually lasts for < 1 minute, is followed by a
clonic phase in which there is jerking of the body musculature that
may last for 2 or 3 minutes and is then followed by a stage of flaccid
coma. During the seizure, the tongue or lips may be bitten, urinary
or fecal incontinence may occur, and the patient may be injured.
Immediately after the seizure, the patient may recover
consciousness, drift into sleep, have a further convulsion without
recovery of consciousness between the attacks (status
epilepticus), or after recovering consciousness have a further
convulsion (serial seizures). In other cases, patients will behave in
an abnormal fashion in the immediate postictal period, without
subsequent awareness or memory of events (postepileptic
automatism). Headache, disorientation, confusion, drowsiness,
nausea, soreness of the muscles, or some combination of these
symptoms commonly occurs postictally.
5. Tonic, clonic, or atonic seizures—Loss of consciousness may
occur with either the tonic or clonic accompaniments described
above, especially in children. Atonic seizures (epileptic drop
attacks) have also been described.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Nonspecific changes such as headache, mood alterations, lethargy,
and myoclonic jerking alert some patients to an impending seizure
hours before it occurs. These prodromal symptoms are distinct from
the aura; the aura that may precede a generalized seizure by a few
seconds or minutes is itself a part of the attack and it arises locally
from a restricted part of the brain.
In most patients, seizures occur unpredictably at any time and
without any relationship to posture or ongoing activities.
Occasionally, however, they occur at a particular time (eg, during
sleep) or in relation to external precipitants such as lack of sleep,
missed meals, emotional stress, menstruation, alcohol ingestion (or
alcohol withdrawal; see below), or use of certain drugs. Fever and
nonspecific infections may also precipitate seizures in epileptic
patients. In a few patients, seizures are provoked by specific stimuli
such as flashing lights or a flickering television set (photo-sensitive
epilepsy), music, or reading.
Clinical examination between seizures shows no abnormality in
patients with idiopathic epilepsy, but in the immediate postictal
period, extensor plantar responses may be seen. The presence of
lateralized or focal signs postictally suggests that seizures may have
a focal origin. In patients with symptomatic epilepsy, the findings on
examination will reflect the underlying cause.
B. Imaging
MRI is indicated for patients with focal neurologic symptoms or
signs, focal seizures, or electroencephalographic findings of a focal
disturbance; some clinicians routinely order MRI for all patients with
new-onset seizure disorders. CT is generally less sensitive than MRI
to small structural brain abnormalities but may be used when MRI is
contraindicated (eg, in a patient with a metallic implant). Such
studies should be performed in patients with clinical evidence of a
progressive disorder and in those with new onset of seizures after
the age of 20 years because of the possibility of an underlying
neoplasm.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
Initial investigations should include hematologic and biochemical
screening tests (eg, complete blood count, serum glucose,
electrolytes, creatinine, calcium, magnesium, and liver function
tests). The hematologic and biochemical screening tests are
important both to exclude various causes of seizures and to provide
a baseline for subsequent monitoring of long-term effects of
treatment. A lumbar puncture may be necessary when any sign of
infection is present or in the evaluation of new-onset seizures in the
acute setting.
Electroencephalography may support the clinical diagnosis of
epilepsy (by demonstrating paroxysmal abnormalities containing
spikes or sharp waves), may provide a guide to prognosis, and may
help classify the seizure disorder. Classification of the disorder is
important for determining the most appropriate anticonvulsant drug
with which to start treatment. For example, absence and focal
seizures with impairment of consciousness may be difficult to
distinguish clinically, but the electroencephalographic findings and
treatment of choice differ in these two conditions. Finally, by
localizing the epileptogenic source, the electroencephalographic
findings are important in evaluating candidates for surgical treatment.
 Differential Diagnosis
The distinction between the various disorders likely to be confused
with generalized seizures is usually made on the basis of the history.
The importance of obtaining an eyewitness account of the attacks
cannot be overemphasized.
A. Differential Diagnosis of Focal Seizures
1. Transient ischemic attacks—These attacks are distinguished
from seizures by their longer duration, lack of spread, and
symptoms. Level of consciousness, which is unaltered, does not
distinguish them. There is a loss of motor or sensory function (eg,
weakness or numbness) with transient ischemic attacks, whereas
positive symptoms (eg, convulsive jerking or paresthesias)
characterize seizures.
2. Rage attacks—Rage attacks are usually situational and lead to
goal-directed aggressive behavior.
3. Panic attacks—These may be hard to distinguish from focal
seizures unless there is evidence of an anxiety disorder between
attacks and the attacks have a clear relationship to external
circumstances.
B. Differential Diagnosis of Generalized Seizures
1. Syncope—Syncopal episodes usually occur in relation to
postural change, emotional stress, instrumentation, pain, or straining.
They are typically preceded by pallor, sweating, nausea, and
malaise and lead to loss of consciousness accompanied by
flaccidity; recovery occurs rapidly with recumbency, and there is no
postictal headache or confusion. In some instances, however, motor
accompaniments may simulate a seizure. Serum creatine kinase
measured about 3 hours after the event is generally normal after
syncopal episodes but markedly elevated after tonic-clonic seizures.
2. Cardiac disease—Cerebral hypoperfusion due to a disturbance
of cardiac rhythm should be suspected in patients with known
cardiac or vascular disease or in elderly patients who present with
episodic loss of consciousness. Prodromal symptoms are typically
absent. Repeated Holter monitoring may be necessary to establish
the diagnosis; monitoring initiated by the patient (“event monitor”)
may be valuable if the disturbances of consciousness are rare. A
relationship of attacks to physical activity and the finding of a
systolic murmur are suggestive of aortic stenosis.
3. Brainstem ischemia—Loss of consciousness is preceded or
accompanied by other brainstem signs. Basilar artery migraine and
vertebrobasilar vascular disease are discussed elsewhere in this
chapter.
4. Psychogenic nonepileptic seizure (PNES)—Simulating an
epileptic seizure, a PNES may occur due to a conversion disorder
or malingering. Many patients also have true seizures or a family
history of epilepsy. Although a PNES tends to occur at times of
emotional stress, this may also be the case with true seizures.
Clinically, the attacks superficially resemble tonic-clonic seizures,
but there may be obvious preparation before a PNES occurs.
Moreover, there is usually no tonic phase; instead, there may be an
asynchronous thrashing of the limbs, which increases if restraints are
imposed and rarely leads to injury. Consciousness may be normal
or “lost,” but in the latter context the occurrence of goal-directed
behavior or of shouting, swearing, etc, indicates that it is feigned.
Postictally, there are no changes in behavior or neurologic findings.
Often, clinical observation is insufficient to discriminate epileptic
from nonepileptic seizures. Video electroencephalographic
monitoring may be quite helpful: epileptic seizures, especially those
involving altered consciousness, commonly involve scalp
electroencephalographic signs that coincide with a behavioral spell,
whereas a PNES does not. The serum level of prolactin has been
found to increase dramatically between 15 and 30 minutes after a
tonic-clonic convulsion in most patients, whereas it is unchanged
after a PNES. Serum creatine kinase levels also increase after a
convulsion but not a PNES.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
For patients with epilepsy, drug treatment is prescribed with the
goal of preventing further attacks and is usually continued until there
have been no seizures for at least 3 years. Epileptic patients should
be advised to avoid situations that could be dangerous or life-
threatening if further seizures should occur. Legislation may require
clinicians to report to the state authorities any patients with seizures
or other episodic disturbances of consciousness.
1. Choice of medication—Drug selection depends on seizure type
(Table 24–3). The dose of the selected drug is gradually increased
until seizures are controlled or side effects prevent further increases.
If seizures continue despite treatment at the maximal tolerated dose,
a second drug is added and the dose increased depending on
tolerance; the first drug is then gradually withdrawn. In treatment of
focal seizures, the success rate is higher with carbamazepine,
phenytoin, or valproic acid than with phenobarbital or primidone.
Gabapentin, topiramate, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, levetiracetam,
zonisamide, lacosamide, and tiagabine are newer antiepileptic drugs
used to treat focal seizures. Felbamate is also effective for such
seizures but, because it may cause aplastic anemia or fulminant
hepatic failure, should be used only in selected patients
unresponsive to other measures. For generalized or unclassified
seizures, valproate is better tolerated than topiramate and more
efficacious than lamotrigine and is thus preferred for many patients;
however, the teratogenic potential of valproate makes its use
undesirable in women of childbearing age. All antiepileptics are
potentially teratogenic, although the teratogenicity of the newer anti-
seizure medications is less clear. Nevertheless, antiepileptic
medication must be given to pregnant women with epilepsy to
prevent seizures, which can pose serious risk to the fetus from
trauma, hypoxia, or other factors. In most patients with seizures of a
single type, satisfactory control can be achieved with a single
anticonvulsant drug. Treatment with two drugs may further reduce
seizure frequency or severity but usually only at the cost of greater
toxicity. Treatment with more than two drugs is almost always
unhelpful unless the patient is having seizures of different types.
2. Monitoring—Monitoring serum drug levels has led to major
advances in the management of seizure disorders. Individual
differences in drug metabolism cause a given dose of a drug to
produce different blood concentrations in different patients, and this
will affect the therapeutic response. In general, the dose of an
antiepileptic agent is increased depending on the clinical response
regardless of the serum drug level. The trough drug level is then
measured to provide a reference point for the maximum tolerated
dose. Dosing should not be based simply on serum levels because
some patients require levels that exceed the therapeutic range
(“toxic levels”) but tolerate these without ill effect. Steady-state drug
levels in the blood should be measured after treatment is initiated,
dosage is changed, or another drug is added to the therapeutic
regimen and when seizures are poorly controlled. Dose adjustments
are then guided by the laboratory findings. The most common cause
of a lower concentration of drug than expected for the prescribed
dose is poor patient compliance. Compliance can be improved by
limiting to a minimum the number of daily doses. Recurrent seizures
or status epilepticus may result if drugs are taken erratically, and in
some circumstances noncompliant patients may be better off
without any medication.
All anticonvulsant drugs have side effects, and some of these are
shown in Table 24–3.
In most patients, a complete blood count should be performed at
least annually because of the risk of anemia or blood dyscrasia.
Treatment with certain drugs may require more frequent monitoring
or use of additional screening tests. For example, periodic tests of
hepatic function are necessary if valproic acid, carbamazepine, or
felbamate is used, and serial blood counts are important with
carbamazepine, ethosuximide, or felbamate. Detailed medication-
specific recommendations should be sought from a drug reference
source before prescribing, since baseline studies are often
necessary.
3. Discontinuance of medication—Only when adult patients have
been seizure-free for 2 years should withdrawal of medication be
considered. Unfortunately, there is no way of predicting which
patients can be managed successfully without treatment, although
seizure recurrence is more likely in patients who initially did not
respond to therapy, those with seizures having focal features or of
multiple types, and those with continuing electroencephalographic
abnormalities. Dose reduction should be gradual (over weeks or
months), and drugs should be withdrawn one at a time. If seizures
recur, treatment is reinstituted with the previously effective drug
regimen.
4. Surgical treatment—Patients with seizures refractory to
pharmacologic management may be candidates for operative
treatment. Surgical resection is most efficacious when there is a
single well-defined seizure focus, particularly in the temporal lobe.
Among well-chosen patients, up to 70% remain seizure-free after
extended follow-up. Using a different approach, a recent trial
showed benefits of bilateral deep brain stimulation of the anterior
thalamus for medically refractory focal-onset seizures.
 
Table 24–3. Drug treatment for seizures i
 
1Approved as adjunctive therapy for focal-onset seizures.
2Approved as adjunctive therapy for primary generalized tonic-clonic
seizures.
3Approved as initial monotherapy for focal-onset seizures.
4Approved as initial monotherapy for primary generalized tonic-clonic
seizures.
5Approved as monotherapy (after conversion from another drug) in focal-
onset seizures.
6Not to be used as a first-line drug; when used, blood counts should be
performed regularly (every 2-4 weeks). Should be used only in selected
patients because of risk of aplastic anemia and hepatic failure. It is
advisable to obtain written informed consent before use.
5. Vagal nerve stimulation—Treatment by chronic vagal nerve
stimulation for adults and adolescents with medically refractory focal
seizures is approved in the United States and provides an alternative
approach for patients who are not optimal candidates for surgical
treatment. The mechanism of therapeutic action is unknown.
Adverse effects consist mainly of transient hoarseness during
stimulus delivery.
B. Special Circumstances
1. Solitary seizures—In patients who have had only one seizure
or a flurry of seizures over a brief period of several hours,
investigation as outlined above should exclude an underlying cause
requiring specific treatment. An electroencephalogram should also
be obtained, preferably within 24 hours after the seizure, because
the findings may influence management—especially when focal
abnormalities are present. Prophylactic anticonvulsant drug
treatment is generally not required unless further attacks occur or
investigations reveal some underlying pathology. The risk of seizure
recurrence varies in different series between about 30% and 70%.
Epilepsy should not be diagnosed on the basis of a solitary seizure.
If seizures occur in the context of transient, nonrecurrent systemic
disorders such as acute cerebral anoxia, the diagnosis of epilepsy is
inaccurate, and long-term prophylactic anticonvulsant drug
treatment is unnecessary.
2. Alcohol withdrawal seizures—One or more generalized tonic-
clonic seizures may occur within 48 hours or so of withdrawal from
alcohol after a period of high or prolonged intake. Patients should
be hospitalized for at least 24 hours for observation and to follow
the severity of withdrawal symptoms. If the seizures have
consistently focal features, the possibility of an associated structural
abnormality, often traumatic in origin, must be considered. Head CT
scan or MRI should be performed in patients with new onset of
generalized seizures and whenever there are focal features.
Treatment with anticonvulsant drugs is generally not required for
alcohol withdrawal seizures, since they are self-limited.
Benzodiazepines (diazepam or lorazepam, dosed as needed to
reduce withdrawal symptoms and to avoid oversedation) are
effective and safe for preventing further seizures. Status epilepticus
may rarely follow alcohol withdrawal and is managed along
conventional lines (see below). Further attacks will not occur if the
patient abstains from alcohol.
3. Tonic-clonic status epilepticus—Poor compliance with the
anticonvulsant drug regimen is the most common cause; others
include alcohol withdrawal, intracranial infection or neoplasms,
metabolic disorders, and drug overdose. The mortality rate may be
as high as 20%, and among survivors the incidence of neurologic
and cognitive sequelae may be high. The prognosis relates to the
length of time between onset of status epilepticus and the start of
effective treatment.
Status epilepticus is a medical emergency. Initial
management includes maintenance of the airway and 50% dextrose
(25–50 mL) intravenously in case hypoglycemia is responsible. If
seizures continue, an intravenous bolus of lorazepam, 4 mg, is given
at a rate of 2 mg/min and repeated once after 10 minutes if
necessary; alternatively, 10 mg of diazepam is given intravenously
over the course of 2 minutes, and again after 10 minutes if
necessary. Diazepam can also be given rectally as a gel (0.2
mg/kg). These measures are usually effective in halting seizures for a
brief period. Respiratory depression and hypotension may
complicate the treatment of status epilepticus and are treated as in
other circumstances; this treatment may include intubation and
mechanical ventilation and admission to an intensive care unit.
Regardless of the response to lorazepam or diazepam, phenytoin
(18–20 mg/kg) is given intravenously at a rate of 50 mg/min; this
provides initiation of long-term seizure control. The drug is best
injected directly but can also be given in saline; it precipitates,
however, if injected into glucose-containing solutions. Because
arrhythmias may develop during rapid administration of phenytoin,
electrocardiographic monitoring is prudent. Hypotension may
complicate phenytoin administration, especially if diazepam has also
been given. In many countries, injectable phenytoin has been
replaced by fosphenytoin, which is rapidly and completely
converted to phenytoin following intravenous administration. No
dosing adjustments are necessary because fosphenytoin is
expressed in terms of phenytoin equivalents (PE); fosphenytoin is
less likely to cause reactions at the infusion site, can be given with all
common intravenous solutions, and may be administered at a faster
rate (150 mg PE/min). It is also more expensive.
If seizures continue, phenobarbital is then given in a loading dose
of 10–20 mg/kg intravenously by slow or intermittent injection (50
mg/min). Respiratory depression and hypotension are especially
common with this therapy. Alternatively or additionally, intravenous
valproate is used for status epilepticus (loading dose 25–30 mg/kg
over 15 min; then 100 mg/h); although valproate has not yet been
approved by the FDA for this indication, it has been used with
success.
If these measures fail, general anesthesia with ventilatory
assistance may be required. Intravenous midazolam may provide
control of refractory status epilepticus; the suggested loading dose is
0.2 mg/kg, followed by 0.05–0.2 mg/kg/h. Propofol (1–2 mg/kg as
an intravenous bolus, followed by infusion at 2–15 mg/kg/h
depending on response) may also be used, as may pentobarbital
(15 mg/kg intravenously, followed by 0.5–4 mg/kg/h).
After status epilepticus is controlled, an oral drug program for the
long-term management of seizures is started, and investigations into
the cause of the disorder are pursued.
4. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus—In some cases, status
epilepticus presents not with convulsions, but with a fluctuating
abnormal mental status, confusion, impaired responsiveness, and
automatism. Electroencephalography is helpful in establishing the
diagnosis. The treatment approach outlined above applies to any
type of status epilepticus, although intravenous anesthesia is usually
not necessary. The prognosis is a reflection of the underlying cause
rather than of continuing seizures.
 When to Refer
 
•    Behavioral episodes are of uncertain nature.
•    Seizures are difficult to control or have focal features.
•    There are accompanying neurologic signs.
•    There is a progressive neurologic disorder.
•    Status epilepticus.
 When to Admit
 
•    Status epilepticus.
•    For monitoring, when PNES are suspected.
•    If surgery is contemplated.
Anderson J et al. Anti-epileptic drugs: a guide for the non-
neurologist. Clin Med. 2010 Feb;10(1):54–8. [PMID: 20408309]
 
Bauer G et al. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus and coma.
Epilepsia. 2010 Feb;51(2):177–90. [PMID: 19744116]
 
Berg AT et al. Revised terminology and concepts for organization
of seizures and epilepsies: report of the ILAE Commission on
Classification and Terminology, 2005–2009. Epilepsia. 2010
Apr;51(4):676–85. [PMID: 20196795]
 
Brodie MJ et al. Epilepsy in later life. Lancet Neurol. 2009
Nov;8(11):1019–30. [PMID: 19800848]
 
Fisher R et al; SANTE Study Group. Electrical stimulation of the
anterior nucleus of thalamus for treatment of refractory epilepsy.
Epilepsia. 2010 May;51(5):899–908. [PMID: 20331461]
 
Harden CL et al. Practice parameter update: management issues
for women with epilepsy–focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based
review): teratogenesis and perinatal outcomes: report of the Quality
Standards Subcommittee and Therapeutics and Technology
Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology and American Epilepsy Society. Neurology. 2009 Jul
14;73(2):133–41. [PMID: 19398681]
 
Spencer S et al. Outcomes of epilepsy surgery in adults and
children. Lancet Neurol. 2008 Jun;7(6):525–37. [PMID:
18485316]
 
Stephen LJ et al. Selection of antiepileptic drugs in adults. Neurol
Clin. 2009 Nov;27(4):967–92. [PMID: 19853218]
 
DYSAUTONOMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Abnormalities of blood pressure or heart rate regulation,
sweating, intestinal motility, sphincter control, sexual function,
respiration, or ocular function, occurring in isolation or any
combination.
 
 General Considerations
Dysautonomia may occur as a result of central or peripheral
pathologic processes. It is manifested by a variety of symptoms that
may occur in isolation or in various combinations and relate to
abnormalities of blood pressure regulation, thermoregulatory
sweating, gastrointestinal function, sphincter control, sexual function,
respiration, and ocular function. Syncope, a symptom of
dysautonomia, is characterized by a transient loss of consciousness,
usually accompanied by hypotension and bradycardia. It may occur
in response to emotional stress, postural hypotension, vigorous
exercise in a hot environment, obstructed venous return to the heart,
acute pain or its anticipation, fluid loss, and a variety of other
circumstances.
A. Central Neurologic Causes
Disease at certain sites in the central nervous system, regardless of
its nature, may lead to dysautonomic symptoms. Postural
hypotension, which is usually the most troublesome and disabling
symptom, may result from spinal cord transection and other
myelopathies (eg, due to tumor or syringomyelia) above the T6 level
or from brainstem lesions such as syringobulbia and posterior fossa
tumors. Sphincter or sexual disturbances may result from cord
lesions below T6. Certain primary degenerative disorders are
responsible for dysautonomia occurring in isolation (pure
autonomic failure) or in association with more widespread
abnormalities (multisystem atrophy or Shy Drager syndrome)
that may include parkinsonian, pyramidal symptoms, and cerebellar
deficits.
B. Peripheral Neurologic Causes
A pure autonomic neuropathy may occur acutely or sub-acutely
after a viral infection or as a paraneoplastic disorder related usually
to small cell lung cancer, particularly in association with certain
antibodies, such as anti-Hu or those directed at neuronal nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors. Typically, presenting symptoms include
postural hypotension, impaired thermoregulatory sweating,
xerostomia or xerophthalmia, abnormal gastrointestinal motility,
dilated pupils, or acute urinary retention. Dysautonomia is often
conspicuous in patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome, manifesting
with marked hypotension or hypertension or cardiac arrhythmias
that may have a fatal outcome. It may also occur with diabetic,
uremic, amyloidotic, and various other metabolic or toxic
neuropathies; in association with leprosy or Chagas disease; and as
a feature of certain hereditary neuropathies with autosomal
dominant or recessive inheritance or an X-linked pattern.
Autonomic symptoms are prominent in the crises of hepatic
porphyria. Patients with botulism or the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic
syndrome may have constipation, urinary retention, and a sicca
syndrome as a result of impaired cholinergic function.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Dysautonomic symptoms include syncope, postural hypotension,
paroxysmal hypertension, persistent tachycardia without other
cause, facial flushing, hypohidrosis or hyperhidrosis, vomiting,
constipation, 
diarrhea, 
dysphagia, abdominal 
distention,
disturbances of micturition or defecation, erectile dysfunction,
apneic episodes, and declining night vision. In syncope, prodromal
malaise, nausea, headache, diaphoresis, pallor, visual disturbance,
loss of postural tone, and a sense of weakness and impending loss
of consciousness are followed by actual loss of consciousness.
Although the patient is usually flaccid, some motor activity is not
uncommon, and urinary (and rarely fecal) incontinence may also
occur, thereby simulating a seizure. Recovery is rapid once the
patient becomes recumbent, but headache, nausea, and fatigue are
common postictally.
B. Evaluation of the Patient
Clinical evaluation is important to exclude reversible, nonneurologic
causes of symptoms. Postural hypotension and syncope, for
example, may relate to a reduced cardiac output (eg, from aortic
stenosis or cardiomyopathy), paroxysmal cardiac dysrhythmias,
volume depletion, various medications, and endocrine and
metabolic disorders such as Addison disease, hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma, and carcinoid syndrome.
Testing of autonomic function helps establish the diagnosis of
dysautonomia, to exclude other causes of symptoms, to assess the
severity of involvement, and to guide prognostication. Such testing
includes evaluating the cardiovascular response to the Valsalva
maneuver, startle, mental stress, postural change, and deep
respiration, and the sudomotor (sweating) responses to warming or
a deep inspiratory gasp. Tilt-table testing may reproduce syncopal
or presyncopal symptoms. Pharmacologic studies to evaluate the
pupillary responses, radiologic studies of the bladder or
gastrointestinal tract, uroflowmetry and urethral pressure profiles,
and recording of nocturnal penile tumescence may also be
necessary in selected cases. Further investigation depends on the
presence of other associated neurologic abnormalities. In patients
with a peripheral cause, work-up for peripheral neuropathy may be
required as discussed below and should include testing for
ganglionic acetylcholine receptor antibody. For those with evidence
of a central lesion, imaging studies will exclude a treatable structural
cause.
 Treatment
The most disabling symptom of dysautonomia is usually postural
hypotension and syncope. Abrupt postural change, prolonged
recumbency, and other precipitants should be avoided. Medications
associated with postural hypotension should be discontinued or
reduced in dose. Treatment may include wearing waist-high elastic
hosiery, salt supplementation, sleeping in a semierect position
(which minimizes the natriuresis and diuresis that occur during
recumbency), 
and 
fludrocortisone 
(0.1–0.2 
mg 
daily).
Vasoconstrictor agents may be helpful and include midodrine (2.5–
10 mg three times daily) and ephedrine (15–30 mg three times
daily). Other agents that have been used occasionally or
experimentally are dihydroergotamine, yohimbine, pyridostigmine,
and clonidine; refractory cases may respond to erythropoietin
(epoetin alfa) or desmopressin. Patients must be monitored for
recumbent hypertension. Postprandial hypotension is helped by
caffeine. There is no satisfactory treatment for disturbances of
sweating, but an air-conditioned environment is helpful in avoiding
extreme swings in body temperature.
 When to Refer
 
•    When the diagnosis is uncertain.
•    When symptoms persist despite conventional treatment.
Klein CM. Evaluation and management of autonomic nervous
system disorders. Semin Neurol. 2008 Apr;28(2):195–204.
[PMID: 18351521]
 
Vaddadi G et al. Management strategies for recurrent vasovagal
syncope. Intern Med J. 2010 Aug;40(8):554–60. [PMID:
20718882]
 
SENSORY DISTURBANCES
Patients may complain of either lost or abnormal sensations. The
term “numbness” is often used by patients to denote loss of feeling,
but the word also has other meanings and the patient's intention
must be clarified. Abnormal spontaneous sensations are generally
called paresthesias, and unpleasant or painful sensations produced
by a stimulus that is usually painless are called dysesthesias.
Sensory symptoms may be due to disease located anywhere
along the peripheral or central sensory pathways. The character,
site, mode of onset, spread, and temporal profile of sensory
symptoms must be established and any precipitating or relieving
factors identified. These features—and the presence of any
associated symptoms—help identify the origin of sensory
disturbances, as do the physical signs as well. Sensory symptoms or
signs may conform to the territory of individual peripheral nerves or
nerve roots. Involvement of one side of the body—or of one limb in
its entirety—suggests a central lesion. Distal involvement of all four
extremities suggests polyneuropathy, a cervical cord or brainstem
lesion, or—when symptoms are transient—a metabolic disturbance
such as hyperventilation syndrome. Short-lived sensory complaints
may be indicative of sensory seizures or cerebral ischemic
phenomena as well as metabolic disturbances. In patients with cord
lesions, there may be a transverse sensory level. “Dissociated
sensory loss” is characterized by loss of some sensory modalities
with preservation of others. Such findings may be encountered in
patients with either peripheral or central disease and must therefore
be interpreted in the clinical context in which they are found.
The absence of sensory signs in patients with sensory symptoms
does not mean that symptoms have a nonorganic basis. Symptoms
are often troublesome before signs of sensory dysfunction have had
time to develop.
WEAKNESS & PARALYSIS
Loss of muscle power may result from central disease involving the
upper or lower motor neurons; from peripheral disease involving the
roots, plexus, or peripheral nerves; from disorders of neuromuscular
transmission; or from primary disorders of muscle. The clinical
findings help localize the lesion and thus reduce the number of
diagnostic possibilities.
Weakness due to upper motor neuron lesions is characterized by
selective involvement of certain muscle groups and is associated
with spasticity, increased tendon reflexes, and extensor plantar
responses. The site of upper motor neuron (pyramidal) involvement
may be indicated by the presence of other clinical signs or by the
distribution of the motor deficit. Lower motor neuron lesions lead to
muscle wasting as well as weakness, with flaccidity and loss of
tendon reflexes, but no change in the plantar responses unless the
neurons subserving them are directly involved. Fasciculations may
be evident over affected muscles. In distinguishing between a root,
plexus, or peripheral nerve lesion, the distribution of the motor
deficit and of any sensory changes is of particular importance. In
patients with disturbances of neuromuscular transmission, weakness
is patchy in distribution, often fluctuates over short periods of time,
and is not associated with sensory changes. In myopathic disorders,
weakness is usually most marked proximally in the limbs, is not
associated with sensory loss or sphincter disturbance, and is not
accompanied by muscle wasting or loss of tendon reflexes—at least
not until an advanced stage.
TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACKS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Focal neurologic deficit of acute onset.
 Clinical deficit resolves completely within 24 hours.
 Risk factors for vascular disease often present.
 
 General Considerations
Transient ischemic attacks are characterized by focal ischemic
cerebral neurologic deficits that last for < 24 hours (usually < 1–2
hours). About 30% of patients with stroke have a history of
transient ischemic attacks, and proper treatment of the attacks is an
important means of prevention. The incidence of stroke does not
relate to either the number or the duration of individual attacks but is
increased in patients with hypertension or diabetes. The risk of
stroke is highest in the month after a transient ischemic attack
(particularly in the first 48 hours) and progressively declines
thereafter.
 Etiology
An important cause of transient cerebral ischemia is embolization. In
many patients with these attacks, a source is readily apparent in the
heart or a major extracranial artery to the head, and emboli
sometimes are visible in the retinal arteries. Moreover, an embolic
phenomenon explains why separate attacks may affect different
parts of the territory supplied by the same major vessel. Cardiac
causes of embolic ischemic attacks include atrial fibrillation,
rheumatic heart disease, mitral valve disease, infective endocarditis,
atrial myxoma, and mural thrombi complicating myocardial
infarction. Atrial septal defects and patent foramen ovale may
permit emboli from the veins to reach the brain (“paradoxical
emboli”). An ulcerated plaque on a major artery to the brain may
serve as a source of emboli. In the anterior circulation,
atherosclerotic changes occur most commonly in the region of the
carotid bifurcation extracranially, and these changes may cause a
bruit. In some patients with transient ischemic attacks or strokes, an
acute or recent hemorrhage is found to have occurred into this
atherosclerotic plaque, and this finding may have pathologic
significance. Patients with AIDS have an increased risk of
developing transient ischemic deficits or strokes.
Less common abnormalities of blood vessels that may cause
transient ischemic attacks include fibromuscular dysplasia, which
affects particularly the cervical internal carotid artery;
atherosclerosis of the aortic arch; inflammatory arterial disorders
such as giant cell arteritis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
polyarteritis, and granulomatous angiitis; and meningovascular
syphilis. Hypotension may cause a reduction of cerebral blood flow
if a major extracranial artery to the brain is markedly stenosed, but
this is a rare cause of transient ischemic attack.
Hematologic causes of ischemic attacks include polycythemia,
sickle cell disease, and hyperviscosity syndromes. Severe anemia
may also lead to transient focal neurologic deficits in patients with
preexisting cerebral arterial disease.
The subclavian steal syndrome may lead to transient
vertebrobasilar ischemia. Symptoms develop when there is localized
stenosis or occlusion of one subclavian artery proximal to the
source of the vertebral artery, so that blood is “stolen” from this
artery. A bruit in the supraclavicular fossa, unequal radial pulses,
and a difference of 20 mm Hg or more between the systolic blood
pressures in the arms should suggest the diagnosis in patients with
vertebrobasilar transient ischemic attacks.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms of transient ischemic attacks vary markedly among
patients; however, the symptoms in a given individual tend to be
constant in type. Onset is abrupt and without warning, and recovery
usually occurs rapidly, often within a few minutes. The specific
symptoms depend on the arterial distribution affected, as outlined in
the subsequent section on stroke.
The natural history of attacks is variable. Some patients will have
a major stroke after only a few attacks, whereas others may have
frequent attacks for weeks or months without having a stroke. The
risk of stroke is high in the first 3 months after an attack, particularly
in the first month and especially within the first 48 hours. Attacks
may occur intermittently over a long period of time, or they may
stop spontaneously. In general, carotid ischemic attacks are more
liable than vertebrobasilar ischemic attacks to be followed by
stroke. The stroke risk is greater in patients older than 60 years, in
diabetics, or after transient ischemic attacks that last longer than 10
minutes and with symptoms or signs of weakness, speech
impairment, or gait disturbance.
B. Imaging
CT or MRI scan is indicated within 24 hours of symptom onset, in
part to exclude the possibility of a small cerebral hemorrhage or a
cerebral tumor masquerading as a transient ischemic attack; MRI
with diffusion-weighted sequences is particularly sensitive for
revealing acute or subacute infarction. Noninvasive imaging of the
cervical vasculature should also be performed. Carotid duplex
ultrasonography is useful for detecting significant stenosis of the
internal carotid artery, and MR or CT angiography permits broader
visualization of cervical and intracranial vasculature. When
noninvasive studies fail to reveal an etiology for transient ischemic
attacks, conventional cerebral arteriography may be indicated. This
technique is the gold standard for investigating the integrity of the
cervical and cerebral vasculature, and allows for angioplasty or
other interventions, if necessary.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
Clinical and laboratory evaluation must include assessment for
hypertension, heart disease, hematologic disorders, diabetes
mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and peripheral vascular disease. It should
include complete blood count, fasting blood glucose and serum
cholesterol and homocysteine determinations, serologic tests for
syphilis, and an ECG and chest radiograph. Echocardiography with
bubble contrast is performed if a cardiac source is likely, and blood
cultures are obtained if endocarditis is suspected. Holter monitoring
is indicated if a transient, paroxysmal disturbance of cardiac rhythm
is suspected.
 Differential Diagnosis
Focal seizures usually cause abnormal motor or sensory phenomena
such as clonic limb movements, paresthesias, or tingling, rather than
weakness or loss of feeling. Symptoms generally spread (“march”)
up the limb and may lead to a generalized tonic-clonic seizure.
Classic migraine is easily recognized by the visual premonitory
symptoms, followed by nausea, headache, and photophobia, but
less typical cases may be hard to distinguish. The patient's age and
medical history (including family history) may be helpful in this
regard. Patients with migraine commonly have a history of episodes
since adolescence and report that other family members have a
similar disorder.
Focal neurologic deficits may occur during periods of
hypoglycemia in diabetic patients receiving insulin or oral
hypoglycemic agent therapy.
 Treatment
Hospitalization should be considered for patients seen within 72
hours of the attack, when they are at increased risk for early
recurrence. One commonly used method to assess recurrence risk
is the ABCD2 score; points are assigned for each of the following
criteria: age 60 years or older (1 point), blood pressure ≥ 140/90
mm Hg (1 point), clinical symptoms of focal weakness (2 points) or
speech impairment without weakness (1 point), duration ≥ 60
minutes (2 points) or 10–59 minutes (1 point), or diabetes mellitus
(1 point). An ABCD2 score of 3 or more points has been suggested
as a threshold for hospital admission. Admission is also advisable
for patients with crescendo attacks, symptomatic carotid stenosis,
or known cardiac source of emboli or hypercoagulable state; such
hospitalization facilitates early intervention for any recurrence and
rapid institution of secondary prevention measures. When
arteriography reveals a surgically accessible high-grade stenosis
(70–99% in luminal diameter) on the side appropriate to carotid
ischemic attacks and there is relatively little atherosclerosis
elsewhere in the cerebrovascular system, operative treatment
(carotid thromboendarterectomy) or endovascular intervention
reduces the risk of ipsilateral carotid stroke, especially when
transient ischemic attacks are of recent onset (< 1 month). There is
a more moderate benefit for patients with 50–69% stenosis, and
surgery is not indicated for mild stenosis (< 50%); its benefits are
unclear with severe stenosis plus diffuse intracranial atherosclerotic
disease. In patients with carotid ischemic attacks who are poor
operative candidates (and thus have not undergone arteriography)
or who are found to have extensive vascular disease, medical
treatment should be instituted. Similarly, patients with
vertebrobasilar ischemic attacks are treated medically and are not
subjected to arteriography unless there is clinical evidence of
stenosis or occlusion in the carotid or subclavian arteries.
Medical treatment is aimed at preventing further attacks and
stroke. Cigarette smoking should be stopped, and cardiac sources
of embolization, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia,
arteritis, or hematologic disorders should be treated appropriately.
Weight reduction and regular physical activity should be encouraged
when appropriate.
A. Embolization from the Heart
Cardioembolism, especially in the setting of atrial fibrillation, is an
indication for anticoagulation as a preventive treatment for stroke. If
anticoagulants are indicated for the treatment of embolism from the
heart, they should be started immediately, provided that the area of
cerebral infarct is small and there is no contraindication to their use.
There is no advantage in delay, and the common fear of causing
hemorrhage into a previously infarcted area is misplaced, since there
is a far greater risk of further embolism to the cerebral circulation if
treatment is withheld. Treatment with warfarin sodium is introduced
in a daily dose of 5–15 mg orally, depending on the international
normalized ratio (INR). Warfarin is more effective than aspirin in
reducing the incidence of cardioembolic events, but when its use is
contraindicated, aspirin (325 mg daily orally) may be used in
patients with nonrheumatic atrial fibrillation to reduce the risk of
stroke. (See Chapter 14.)
B. Noncardioembolic Attacks
Treatment with low-dose aspirin (81 mg daily orally) significantly
reduces the frequency of transient ischemic attacks and the
incidence of stroke. For patients who continue to experience
transient ischemic attacks on low-dose aspirin, higher doses of
aspirin show no additional benefit. However, low-dose aspirin
combined with sustained-release dipyridamole (200 mg twice daily
orally) has been shown to be more effective in preventing stroke
than aspirin alone. Clopidogrel (75 mg daily orally) alone is
marginally more efficacious than aspirin alone; combining
clopidogrel with aspirin is not clearly better than clopidogrel alone
but does increase the risk of bleeding complications. Anticoagulant
drugs are not recommended, as they offer no benefit over
antiplatelet therapy, and the risk of serious hemorrhagic adverse
effects is greater.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred for urgent investigation and treatment
to prevent stroke.
 When to Admit
If seen within 72 hours of a transient ischemic attack, patients
should be considered for admission when they have an ABCD2
score of 3 points or more, when outpatient evaluation is impractical,
or when there are crescendo attacks or other concern for early
recurrence or stroke.
Easton JD et al. Definition and evaluation of transient ischemic
attack. Stroke. 2009 Jun;40(6):2276–93. [PMID: 19423857]
 
Ederle J et al. Endovascular treatment with angioplasty or stenting
versus endarterectomy in patients with carotid artery stenosis in the
Carotid and Vertebral Artery Transluminal Angioplasty Study
(CAVATAS): long-term follow-up of a randomized trial. Lancet
Neurol. 2009 Oct;8(10):898–907. [PMID: 19717345]
 
Giles MF et al. Risk of stroke early after transient ischaemic
attack: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol.
2007 Dec;6(12):1063–72. [PMID: 17993293]
 
Hankey GJ et al. Antithrombotic drugs for patients with ischaemic
stroke and transient ischaemic attack to prevent recurrent major
vascular events. Lancet Neurol. 2010 Mar;9(3): 273–84. [PMID:
20170841]
 
Rouhl RP et al. ESPRIT: is aspirin plus dipyridamole superior to
aspirin alone in TIA or minor stroke patients? Expert Rev
Neurother. 2008 Nov;8(11):1661–5. [PMID: 18986236]
 
Tsivgoulis G et al. Multicenter external validation of the ABCD2
score in triaging TIA patients. Neurology. 2010 Apr 27;74(17):
1351–7. [PMID: 20421579]
 
STROKE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of characteristic neurologic deficit.
 Patient often has history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
valvular heart disease, or atherosclerosis.
 Distinctive neurologic signs reflect the region of the brain
involved.
 
 General Considerations
In the United States, stroke remains the third leading cause of
death, despite a general decline in the incidence of stroke in the last
30 years. The precise reasons for this decline are uncertain, but
increased awareness of risk factors (hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
hyperlipidemia, cigarette smoking, cardiac disease, AIDS,
recreational drug abuse, heavy alcohol consumption, family history
of stroke) and improved prophylactic measures and surveillance of
those at increased risk have been contributory. Elevation of the
blood homocysteine level is also a risk factor for stroke, but it is
unclear whether this risk is reduced by treatment to lower the level.
A previous stroke makes individual patients more susceptible to
additional strokes.
For years, strokes have been subdivided pathologically into
infarcts (thrombotic or embolic) and hemorrhages, and clinical
criteria for distinguishing between these possibilities have been
emphasized. However, it is often difficult to determine on clinical
grounds the pathologic basis for stroke (Table 24–4).
1. Lacunar Infarction
Lacunar infarcts are small lesions (usually < 5 mm in diameter) that
occur in the distribution of short penetrating arterioles in the basal
ganglia, pons, cerebellum, internal capsule, thalamus and, less
commonly, the deep cerebral white matter. Lacunar infarcts are
associated with poorly controlled hypertension or diabetes and have
been found in several clinical syndromes, including contralateral
pure motor or pure sensory deficit, ipsilateral ataxia with crural
paresis, and dysarthria with clumsiness of the hand. The neurologic
deficit may progress over 24–36 hours before stabilizing.
Lacunar infarcts are sometimes visible on CT scans as small,
punched-out, hypodense areas, but in other patients no abnormality
is seen. In some instances, patients with a clinical syndrome
suggestive of lacunar infarction are found on CT scanning to have a
severe hemispheric infarct. Diffusion-weighted MRI is sensitive to
acute lesions, which later evolve into areas of T2 hyperintensity and
eventually into small, punched-out, cerebrospinal fluid–filled spaces.
Early mortality and risk of stroke recurrence is higher for patients
with nonlacunar than lacunar infarcts. The prognosis for recovery
from the deficit produced by a lacunar infarct is usually good, with
partial or complete resolution occurring over the following 4–6
weeks in many instances.
Donnan GA et al. Lacunes and lacunar syndromes. Handb Clin
Neurol. 2008;93:559–75. [PMID: 18804668]
 
2. Cerebral Infarction
Thrombotic or embolic occlusion of a major vessel leads to cerebral
infarction. Causes include the disorders predisposing to transient
ischemic attacks (see above) and atherosclerosis of cerebral
arteries. The resulting deficit depends on the particular vessel
involved and the extent of any collateral circulation. Cerebral
ischemia leads to release of excitatory and other neuropeptides that
may augment calcium flux into neurons, thereby leading to cell death
and increasing the neurologic deficit.
 
Table 24–4. features of the major strok
 
AVMs, arteriovenous malformations; CTA, computed tomography
angiography; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography.
Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Onset is usually abrupt, and there may then be very little
progression except that due to brain swelling. Clinical evaluation
should always include examination of the heart and auscultation over
the subclavian and carotid vessels to determine whether there are
any bruits.
1. Obstruction of carotid circulation—Occlusion of the
ophthalmic artery is probably symptomless in most cases because
of the rich orbital collaterals, but its transient embolic obstruction
can lead to amaurosis fugax—sudden and brief loss of vision in one
eye.
Occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery distal to its junction with
the anterior communicating artery causes weakness and cortical
sensory loss in the contralateral leg and sometimes mild weakness
of the arm, especially proximally. There may be a contralateral
grasp reflex, paratonic rigidity, and abulia (lack of initiative) or frank
confusion. Urinary incontinence is not uncommon, particularly if
behavioral disturbances are conspicuous. Bilateral anterior cerebral
infarction is especially likely to cause marked behavioral changes
and memory disturbances. Unilateral anterior cerebral artery
occlusion proximal to the junction with the anterior communicating
artery is generally well tolerated because of the collateral supply
from the other side.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion leads to contralateral
hemiplegia, hemisensory loss, and homonymous hemianopia (ie,
bilaterally symmetric loss of vision in half of the visual fields), with
the eyes deviated to the side of the lesion. If the dominant
hemisphere is involved, global aphasia is also present. It may be
impossible to distinguish this clinically from occlusion of the internal
carotid artery. With occlusion of either of these arteries, there may
also be considerable swelling of the hemisphere, leading to
drowsiness, stupor, and coma in extreme cases. Occlusions of
different branches of the middle cerebral artery cause more limited
findings. For example, involvement of the anterior main division
leads to a predominantly expressive dysphasia and to contralateral
paralysis and loss of sensations in the arm, the face and, to a lesser
extent, the leg. Posterior branch occlusion produces a receptive
(Wernicke) aphasia and a homonymous visual field defect. With
involvement of the nondominant hemisphere, speech and
comprehension are preserved, but there may be a left hemispatial
neglect syndrome or constructional and visuo-spatial deficits.
2. Obstruction of vertebrobasilar circulation—Occlusion of the
posterior cerebral artery may lead to a thalamic syndrome in
which contralateral hemisensory disturbance occurs, followed by
the development of spontaneous pain and hyperpathia. There is
often a macular-sparing homonymous hemianopia and sometimes a
mild, usually temporary, hemiparesis. Depending on the site of the
lesion and the collateral circulation, the severity of these deficits
varies and other deficits may also occur, including involuntary
movements and alexia. Occlusion of the main artery beyond the
origin of its penetrating branches may lead solely to a macular-
sparing hemianopia.
Vertebral artery occlusion distally, below the origin of the
anterior spinal and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries, may be
clinically silent because the circulation is maintained by the other
vertebral artery. If the remaining vertebral artery is congenitally
small or severely atherosclerotic, however, a deficit similar to that of
basilar artery occlusion is seen unless there is good collateral
circulation from the anterior circulation through the circle of Willis.
When the small paramedian arteries arising from the vertebral artery
are occluded, contralateral hemiplegia and sensory deficit occur in
association with an ipsilateral cranial nerve palsy at the level of the
lesion. An obstruction of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery
or an obstruction of the vertebral artery just before it branches to
this vessel leads to ipsilateral spinothalamic sensory loss involving
the face, ninth and tenth cranial nerve lesions, limb ataxia and
numbness, and Horner syndrome, combined with contralateral
spinothalamic sensory loss involving the limbs.
Occlusion of both vertebral arteries or the basilar artery
leads to coma with pinpoint pupils, flaccid quadriplegia and sensory
loss, and variable cranial nerve abnormalities. With partial basilar
artery occlusion, there may be diplopia, visual loss, vertigo,
dysarthria, ataxia, weakness or sensory disturbances in some or all
of the limbs, and discrete cranial nerve palsies. In patients with
hemiplegia of pontine origin, the eyes are often deviated to the
paralyzed side, whereas in patients with a hemispheric lesion, the
eyes commonly deviate from the hemiplegic side.
Occlusion of any of the major cerebellar arteries produces
vertigo, nausea, vomiting, nystagmus, ipsilateral limb ataxia, and
contralateral spinothalamic sensory loss in the limbs. If the superior
cerebellar artery is involved, the contralateral spinothalamic loss
also involves the face; with occlusion of the anterior inferior
cerebellar artery, there is ipsilateral spinothalamic sensory loss
involving the face, usually in conjunction with ipsilateral facial
weakness and deafness. Massive cerebellar infarction may lead to
coma, tonsillar herniation, and death.
3. Coma—Infarction in either the carotid or vertebro-basilar
territory may lead to loss of consciousness. For example, an infarct
involving one cerebral hemisphere may lead to such swelling that the
function of the other hemisphere or the rostral brainstem is disturbed
and coma results. Similarly, coma occurs with bilateral brainstem
infarction when this involves the reticular formation, and it occurs
with brainstem compression after cerebellar infarction.
B. Imaging
A CT scan of the head (without contrast) should be performed
immediately, before the administration of aspirin or other
antithrombotic agents, to exclude cerebral hemorrhage. CT is
relatively insensitive to acute ischemic stroke, and subsequent MRI
with diffusion-weighted sequences should be performed to define
the distribution and extent of infarction as well as to exclude tumor
or other differential considerations. Perfusion-weighted MRI
sequences can be useful for outlining any additional areas at risk for
infarction, thus guiding treatment decisions; specific guidelines are
still being determined. Imaging of the cervical vasculature is
indicated as part of a search to identify the source of the stroke.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
Investigations should include a complete blood count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, blood glucose determination, and serologic tests
for syphilis. Screening for antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus
anticoagulants and anticardiolipin antibodies); the factor V Leiden
mutation; abnormalities of protein C, protein S, or antithrombin; or
a prothrombin gene mutation is indicated if a hypercoagulable
disorder is suspected (eg, a young patient without apparent risk
factors for stroke). Similarly, elevated serum cholesterol and lipids
and serum homocysteine may indicate an increased risk of
thrombotic stroke. Electrocardiography or continuous cardiac
monitoring for at least 24 hours will help exclude a recent
myocardial infarction or a cardiac arrhythmia that might be serving
as a source of embolization. Blood cultures should be performed if
endocarditis is suspected, echocardiography (bubble contrast
study) if heart disease—especially valvular disease, left-to-right
shunting, or cardiac thrombus—is a concern, and Holter monitoring
if paroxysmal cardiac arrhythmia requires exclusion. Examination of
the cerebrospinal fluid is not always necessary but may be helpful if
cerebral vasculitis or another inflammatory or infectious cause of
stroke is suspected, but it should be delayed until after CT or MRI
to exclude any risk for herniation due to mass effect.
 Treatment
Prophylactic measures were considered earlier in discussing
transient ischemic attacks. The management of acute stroke should
be in a stroke care unit, when feasible. Intravenous thrombolytic
therapy with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA; 0.9
mg/kg to a maximum of 90 mg, with 10% given as a bolus over 1
minute and the remainder over 1 hour) is effective in reducing the
neurologic deficit in selected patients without CT evidence of
intracranial hemorrhage when administered as soon as possible, but
not more than 4.5 hours after the onset of ischemic symptoms.
Treatment within 3 hours has the strongest evidence for benefit (and
has FDA approval), but more recent data suggest that extending the
treatment window to 4.5 hours still results in reduced disability at 90
days. Based on those data and the recommendations of
professional societies, many emergency hospitals have adopted this
longer treatment window. Recent hemorrhage, increased risk of
hemorrhage (eg, treatment with anticoagulants), arterial puncture at
a noncompressible site, and systolic pressure > 185 mm Hg or
diastolic pressure > 110 mm Hg are among the contraindications to
this treatment. At some centers, endovascular intra-arterial rtPA
administration or mechanical removal of an embolus or clot from an
occluded cerebral artery using an intra-arterial mechanical
thrombolytic device is being done.
Early management of a completed stroke otherwise requires
general supportive measures. During the acute stage, there may be
marked brain swelling and edema, with symptoms and signs of
increasing intracranial pressure, an increasing neurologic deficit, or
herniation syndrome. Elevated intracranial pressure is managed by
head elevation and osmotic agents such as mannitol. Maintenance of
an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure helps prevent further
ischemia. Decompressive hemicraniectomy for malignant middle
cerebral artery infarctions may reduce mortality and improve
functional outcome in some instances. Attempts to lower the blood
pressure of hypertensive patients during the acute phase (ie, within 2
weeks) of a stroke should generally be avoided, as there is loss of
cerebral autoregulation, and lowering the blood pressure may
further compromise ischemic areas. However, if the systolic
pressure exceeds 220 mm Hg, it can be lowered using intravenous
labetalol or nicardipine with continuous monitoring to 170–200 mm
Hg and then, after 2 weeks, it can be reduced further to < 140/90
mm Hg.
In patients not eligible for thrombolytic therapy, and in whom
hemorrhage has been excluded by CT, the immediate administration
of aspirin 325 mg orally daily is indicated. Anticoagulant drugs
should be started in the setting of atrial fibrillation or other source of
cardioembolism. Treatment is with warfarin. The target is an INR of
2.0–3.0 for the prothrombin time. If the CT scan shows no
evidence of hemorrhage and the cerebrospinal fluid is clear,
anticoagulant treatment may be started without delay.
Physical therapy has an important role in the management of
patients with impaired motor function. Passive movements at an
early stage will help prevent contractures. As cooperation increases
and some recovery begins, active movements will improve strength
and coordination. In all cases, early mobilization and active
rehabilitation are important. Occupational therapy may improve
morale and motor skills, while speech therapy may be beneficial in
patients with expressive dysphasia or dysarthria. Because of the risk
for dysphagia following stroke, access to food and drink is typically
restricted until an appropriate swallowing evaluation. When there is
a severe and persisting motor deficit, a device such as a leg brace,
toe spring, frame, or cane may help the patient move about, and the
provision of other aids to daily living may improve the quality of life.
 Prognosis
The prognosis for survival after cerebral infarction is better than
after cerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage. The only proved
effective therapy for acute stroke requires initiation within 3–4.5
hours after stroke onset, and the prognosis therefore depends on
the time that elapses before arrival at the hospital. Patients receiving
such treatment with rtPA are at least 30% more likely to have
minimal or no disability at 3 months than those not treated by this
means. Loss of consciousness after a cerebral infarct implies a
poorer prognosis than otherwise. The extent of the infarct governs
the potential for rehabilitation. Patients who have had a cerebral
infarct are at risk for additional strokes and for myocardial infarcts.
Statin therapy to lower serum lipid levels may reduce this risk.
Antiplatelet therapy reduces the recurrence rate by 30% among
patients without a cardiac cause for the stroke who are not
candidates for carotid endarterectomy. Nevertheless, the cumulative
risk of recurrence of noncardioembolic stroke is still 3–7% annually.
Patients with massive strokes from which meaningful recovery is
unlikely should receive palliative care (see Chapter 5).
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
All patients should be hospitalized, preferably in a stroke care unit.
Amarenco P et al; SPARCL Investigators. Relative and cumulative
effects of lipid and blood pressure control in the Stroke Prevention
by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels trial. Stroke. 2009
Jul;40(7):2486–92. [PMID: 19461031]
 
Ederle J et al; CAVATAS collaborators. Long-term outcome of
endovascular treatment versus medical care for carotid artery
stenosis in patients not suitable for surgery and randomised in the
Carotid and Vertebral Artery Transluminal Angioplasty study
(CAVATAS). Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;28(1):1–7. [PMID:
19420915]
 
Hofmeijer J et al; HAMLET investigators. Surgical decompression
for space-occupying cerebral infarction (the Hemicraniectomy
After Middle Cerebral Artery infarction with Life-threatening
Edema Trial [HAMLET]): a multicentre, open, randomised trial.
Lancet Neurol. 2009 Apr;8(4):326–33. [PMID: 19269254]
 
Kloska SP et al. Acute stroke magnetic resonance imaging: current
status and future perspective. Neuroradiology. 2010
Mar;52(3):189–201. [PMID: 19967531]
 
Lansberg MG et al. Efficacy and safety of tissue plasminogen
activator 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic stroke: a meta-
analysis. Stroke. 2009 Jul;40(7):2438–41. [PMID: 19478213]
 
O'Donnell MJ et al. Risk factors for ischaemic and intracerebral
haemorrhagic stroke in 22 countries (the INTERSTROKE study):
a case-control study. Lancet. 2010 Jul 10;376(9735): 112–23.
[PMID: 20561675]
 
Reeves M et al. Sex differences in the use of intravenous rt-PA
thrombolysis treatment for acute ischemic stroke: a meta-analysis.
Stroke. 2009 May;40(5):1743–9. [PMID: 19228855]
 
Sacco RL et al. Aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole versus
clopidogrel for recurrent stroke. N Engl J Med. 2008 Sep
18;359(12):1238–51. [PMID: 18753638]
 
Sen S et al. IV vs. IA TPA in acute ischemic stroke with CT
angio-graphic evidence of major vessel occlusion: a feasibility
study. Neurocrit Care. 2009;11(1):76–81. [PMID: 19277904]
 
van der Worp HB et al. Clinical practice. Acute ischemic stroke.
N Engl J Med. 2007 Aug 9;357(6):572–9. [PMID: 17687132]
 
3. Intracerebral Hemorrhage
Spontaneous, nontraumatic intracerebral hemorrhage in patients
with no angiographic evidence of an associated vascular anomaly
(eg, aneurysm or angioma) is usually due to hypertension. The
pathologic basis for hemorrhage is probably the presence of
microaneurysms that develop on perforating vessels in hypertensive
patients. Hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage occurs most
frequently in the basal ganglia and less commonly in the pons,
thalamus, cerebellum, and cerebral white matter. Hemorrhage may
extend into the ventricular system or subarachnoid space, and signs
of meningeal irritation are then found. Hemorrhages usually occur
suddenly and without warning, often during activity. In the elderly,
cerebral amyloid angiopathy is another important and frequent
cause of hemorrhage, which is usually lobar in distribution,
sometimes recurrent, and associated with a better prognosis than
hypertensive hemorrrhage.
Other causes of nontraumatic intracerebral hemorrhage include
hematologic 
and 
bleeding 
disorders 
(eg, 
leukemia,
thrombocytopenia, hemophilia, or disseminated intravascular
coagulation), anticoagulant therapy, liver disease, high alcohol
intake, and primary or secondary brain tumors. There is also an
association with advancing age and male sex. Bleeding is primarily
into the subarachnoid space when it occurs from an intracranial
aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation (see below), but it may be
partly intraparenchymal as well. In some cases, no specific cause
for cerebral hemorrhage can be identified.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
With hemorrhage into the cerebral hemisphere, consciousness is
initially lost or impaired in about one-half of patients. Vomiting
occurs very frequently at the onset of bleeding, and headache is
sometimes present. Focal symptoms and signs then develop,
depending on the site of the hemorrhage. With hypertensive
hemorrhage, there is generally a rapidly evolving neurologic deficit
with hemiplegia or hemiparesis. A hemisensory disturbance is also
present with more deeply placed lesions. With lesions of the
putamen, loss of conjugate lateral gaze may be conspicuous. With
thalamic hemorrhage, there may be a loss of upward gaze,
downward or skew deviation of the eyes, lateral gaze palsies, and
pupillary inequalities.
Cerebellar hemorrhage may present with sudden onset of nausea
and vomiting, dysequilibrium, headache, and loss of consciousness
that may terminate fatally within 48 hours. Less commonly, the
onset is gradual and the course episodic or slowly progressive—
clinical features suggesting an expanding cerebellar lesion. In yet
other cases, however, the onset and course are intermediate, and
examination shows lateral conjugate gaze palsies to the side of the
lesion; small reactive pupils; contralateral hemiplegia; peripheral
facial weakness; ataxia of gait, limbs, or trunk; periodic respiration;
or some combination of these findings.
B. Imaging
CT scanning (without contrast) is important not only in confirming
that hemorrhage has occurred but also in determining the size and
site of the hematoma. It is superior to MRI for detecting intracranial
hemorrhage of < 48 hours duration. If the patient's condition
permits further intervention, CT angiography, MR angiography, or
cerebral angiography may be undertaken thereafter to determine
whether an aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation is present (see
below).
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
A complete blood count, platelet count, bleeding time, prothrombin
and partial thromboplastin times, and liver and kidney function tests
may reveal a predisposing cause for the hemorrhage. Lumbar
puncture is contraindicated because it may precipitate a herniation
syndrome in patients with a large hematoma, and CT scanning is
superior in detecting intracerebral hemorrhage.
 Treatment
Neurologic management is generally conservative and supportive,
regardless of whether the patient has a profound deficit with
associated brainstem compression, in which case the prognosis is
grim, or a more localized deficit not causing increased intracranial
pressure or brainstem involvement. Such therapy may include
ventilatory support, blood pressure regulation, seizure prophylaxis,
control of fever, osmotherapy, and nutritional supplementation.
Intracranial pressure may require monitoring. Ventricular drainage
may be required in patients with intraventricular hemorrhage and
acute hydrocephalus. Decompression may be helpful when a
superficial hematoma in cerebral white matter is exerting a mass
effect and causing incipient herniation. In patients with cerebellar
hemorrhage, prompt surgical evacuation of the hematoma is
appropriate, because spontaneous unpredictable deterioration may
otherwise lead to a fatal outcome and because operative treatment
may lead to complete resolution of the clinical deficit. The treatment
of underlying structural lesions or bleeding disorders depends on
their nature. Hemostatic therapy with recombinant activated factor
VII has not improved survival or functional outcome. There is no
specific treatment for cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
All patients should be hospitalized.
Gurol ME et al. Management of intracerebral hemorrhage. Curr
Atheroscler Rep. 2008 Aug;10(4):324–31. [PMID: 18606103]
 
Mayer SA et al. Efficacy and safety of recombinant activated
factor VII for acute intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med.
2008 May 15;358(20):2127–37. [PMID: 18480205]
 
Runchey S et al. Does this patient have a hemorrhagic stroke?:
clinical findings distinguishing hemorrhagic stroke from ischemic
stroke. JAMA. 2010 Jun 9;303(22):2280–6. [PMID: 20530782]
 
Sansing LH et al. Prior antiplatelet use does not affect hemorrhage
growth or outcome after ICH. Neurology. 2009 Apr
21;72(16):1397–402. [PMID: 19129506]
 
4. Spontaneous Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden severe headache.
 Signs of meningeal irritation usually present.
 Obtundation is common.
 Focal deficits frequently absent.
 
 General Considerations
Between 5% and 10% of strokes are due to subarachnoid
hemorrhage. Trauma is the most common cause of subarachnoid
hemorrhage, the prognosis of which depends on the severity of the
head injury. Spontaneous (nontraumatic) subarachnoid hemorrhage
frequently results from the rupture of an arterial saccular (“berry”)
aneurysm or from an arteriovenous malformation. Occasional
patients with aneurysms have headaches, sometimes accompanied
by nausea and neck stiffness, a few hours or days before massive
subarachnoid hemorrhage occurs. This has been attributed to
“warning leaks” of a small amount of blood from the aneurysm.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Subarachnoid hemorrhage has a characteristic clinical picture. Its
onset is with sudden headache of a severity never experienced
previously by the patient. This may be followed by nausea and
vomiting and by a loss or impairment of consciousness that can
either be transient or progress inexorably to deepening coma and
death. If consciousness is regained, the patient is often confused and
irritable and may show other symptoms of an altered mental status.
Neurologic examination generally reveals nuchal rigidity and other
signs of meningeal irritation, except in deeply comatose patients.
Aneurysms may cause a focal neurologic deficit by compressing
adjacent structures. However, most are asymptomatic or produce
only nonspecific symptoms until they rupture, at which time
subarachnoid hemorrhage results. A higher risk of subarachnoid
hemorrhage is associated with older age, female sex, “nonwhite”
ethnicity, hypertension, tobacco smoking, high alcohol consumption
(exceeding 150 g per week), previous symptoms, posterior
circulation aneurysms, and larger aneurysms. Focal neurologic signs
are usually absent but, when present, may relate either to a focal
intracerebral hematoma (from arteriovenous malformations) or to
ischemia in the territory of the vessel with a ruptured aneurysm.
B. Imaging
A CT scan (preferably with CT angiography) should be performed
immediately to confirm that hemorrhage has occurred and to search
for clues regarding its source. It is preferable to MRI because it is
faster and more sensitive in detecting hemorrhage in the first 24
hours. CT findings sometimes are normal in patients with suspected
hemorrhage, and the cerebrospinal fluid must then be examined for
the presence of blood or xanthochromia before the possibility of
subarachnoid hemorrhage is discounted.
Cerebral arteriography is undertaken to determine the source of
bleeding. In general, bilateral carotid and vertebral arteriography are
necessary because aneurysms are often multiple, while
arteriovenous malformations may be supplied from several sources.
The procedure allows an interventional radiologist to treat an
underlying aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation by various
techniques. If arteriograms show no abnormality, the examination
should be repeated after 2 weeks because vasospasm or thrombus
may have prevented detection of an aneurysm or other vascular
anomaly during the initial study. CT or MR angiography may also
be revealing but is less sensitive than conventional arteriography.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
The cerebrospinal fluid is bloodstained. Electrocardiographic
evidence of arrhythmias or myocardial ischemia has been well
described and probably relates to excessive sympathetic activity.
Peripheral leukocytosis and transient glycosuria are also common
findings.
 Treatment
All patients should be admitted to hospital and seen by a
neurologist. The measures outlined below in the section on stupor
and coma are applied to comatose patients. Conscious patients are
confined to bed, advised against any exertion or straining, treated
symptomatically for headache and anxiety, and given laxatives or
stool softeners. If there is severe hypertension, the blood pressure
can be lowered gradually, but not below a diastolic level of 100 mm
Hg. Phenytoin is generally prescribed routinely to prevent seizures.
If no cause for the hemorrhage can be identified, medical
management is continued for about 6 weeks and is followed by
gradual mobilization.
The major aim of treatment is to prevent further hemorrhage. The
risk of further hemorrhage from a ruptured aneurysm is greatest
within a few days of the first hemorrhage; approximately 20% of
patients will have further bleeding within 2 weeks and 40% within 6
months. Definitive treatment, ideally within 2 days of the
hemorrhage, requires surgical clipping of the aneurysm base or
endovascular treatment by interventional radiologists; the latter is
sometimes feasible even for inoperable aneurysms and has a lower
morbidity than surgery.
 Complications
Spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage may result in severe
complications, so monitoring is necessary, usually in an intensive
care unit. Hemiplegia or other focal deficit sometimes may follow
aneurysmal bleeding after a delay of 2–14 days due to focal arterial
spasm. The etiology of vasospasm is uncertain and likely
multifactorial, and it sometimes leads to significant cerebral ischemia
or infarction and may further aggravate any existing increase in
intracranial pressure. Transcranial Doppler ultrasound may be used
to screen noninvasively for vasospasm, but conventional
arteriography is required to document and treat vasospasm when
the clinical suspicion is high. Calcium channel-blocking agents have
helped reduce or reverse vasospasm experimentally, and
nimodipine has been shown to reduce, in neurologically normal
patients, the incidence of ischemic deficits from arterial spasm
without producing any side effects. The dose of nimodipine is 60 mg
every 4 hours orally for 21 days. After surgical obliteration of all
aneurysms, symptomatic vasospasm may also be treated by
intravascular volume expansion and induced hypertension;
transluminal balloon angioplasty of involved intracranial vessels is
also helpful. Aspirin provides no benefit. Results from a randomized
trial suggest that the prophylactic administration of intravenous
magnesium sulfate, sufficient to achieve serum levels of 4.9–6.1
mg/dL (2–2.5 mmol/L), reduced the risk of transcranial ultrasound-
detectable vasospasm and of vasospasm-induced cerebral
infarction but did not change overall clinical outcomes.
Acute hydrocephalus, which sometimes occurs due to
cerebrospinal fluid outflow disruption by the subarachnoid blood,
should be suspected if the patient deteriorates clinically and a repeat
CT scan should be done. Acute hydro-cephalus frequently causes
intracranial hypertension severe enough to require temporary, and
less commonly prolonged or permanent, intraventricular
cerebrospinal fluid shunting. Renal salt-wasting is another
complication of subarachnoid hemorrhage that may develop
abruptly during the first several days of hospitalization. The resulting
hyponatremia and cerebral edema may exacerbate intracranial
hypertension and may require carefully titrated treatment with oral
sodium chloride or intravenous hyperosmotic sodium solution. Daily
measurement of the serum sodium level allows for the early
detection of this complication.
Kronvall E et al. Nimodipine in aneurysmal subarachnoid
hemorrhage: a randomized study of intravenous or peroral
administration. J Neurosurg. 2009 Jan;110(1):58–63. [PMID:
18847340]
 
Rabinstein AA et al. Multidisciplinary management and emerging
therapeutic strategies in aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Lancet Neurol. 2010 May;9(5):504–19. [PMID: 20398858]
 
Wartenberg KE et al. Medical complications after subarachnoid
hemorrhage. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2010 Apr;21(2):325–38.
[PMID: 20380973]
 
Westermaier T et al. Prophylactic intravenous magnesium sulfate
for treatment of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a
randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical study. Crit Care Med.
2010 May;38(5):1284–90. [PMID: 20228677]
 
5. Intracranial Aneurysm
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage or focal deficit.
 Abnormal imaging studies.
 
 General Considerations
Saccular aneurysms (“berry” aneurysms) tend to occur at arterial
bifurcations, are frequently multiple (20% of cases), and are usually
asymptomatic. They may be associated with polycystic kidney
disease and coarctation of the aorta. Risk factors for aneurysm
formation include smoking, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia.
Most aneurysms are located on the anterior part of the circle of
Willis—particularly on the anterior or posterior communicating
arteries, at the bifurcation of the middle cerebral artery, and at the
bifurcation of the internal carotid artery. Mycotic aneurysms
resulting from septic embolism occur in more distal vessels and
often at the cortical surface. The most significant complication of
intracranial aneurysms is a subarachnoid hemorrhage, which is
discussed in the preceding section. A higher risk of subarachnoid
hemorrhage is associated with older age, female sex, “non-white”
ethnicity, hypertension, tobacco smoking, high alcohol consumption
(exceeding 150 g per week), previous symptoms, posterior
circulation aneurysms, and larger aneurysms.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Aneurysms may cause a focal neurologic deficit by compressing
adjacent structures. However, most are asymptomatic or produce
only nonspecific symptoms until they rupture, at which time
subarachnoid hemorrhage results. Its manifestations, complications,
and management were outlined in the preceding section.
B. Imaging
Definitive evaluation is by angiography (bilateral carotid and
vertebral studies), which generally indicates the size and site of the
lesion, sometimes reveals multiple aneurysms, and may show arterial
spasm if rupture has occurred. Visualization by CT or MR
angiography is not usually adequate if operative treatment is under
consideration because lesions may be multiple and small lesions are
sometimes missed.
 Treatment
The major aim of treatment is to prevent hemorrhages. Management
of ruptured aneurysms was described in the section on
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Symptomatic but unruptured aneurysms
merit prompt treatment, either surgically or by endovascular
techniques, whereas small asymptomatic ones discovered
incidentally are often monitored arteriographically and corrected
only if they increase in size to over 10 mm.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
 
•    All patients with a subarachnoid hemorrhage.
•    All patients for detailed imaging.
•    All patients undergoing surgical or endovascular
treatment.
Clarke M. Systematic review of reviews of risk factors for
intracranial aneurysms. Neuroradiology. 2008 Aug;50(8):653–64.
[PMID: 18560819]
 
Ducruet AF et al. Intracranial infectious aneurysms: a
comprehensive review. Neurosurg Rev. 2010 Jan;33(1):37–46.
[PMID: 19838745]
 
Kronvall E et al. Nimodipine in aneurysmal subarachnoid
hemorrhage: a randomized study of intravenous or peroral
administration. J Neurosurg. 2009 Jan;110(1):58–63. [PMID:
18847340]
 
Qureshi AI et al. Comparison of endovascular and surgical
treatments for intracranial aneurysms: an evidence-based review.
Lancet Neurol. 2007 Sep;6(9):816–25. [PMID: 17706565]
 
Raja PV et al. Microsurgical clipping and endovascular coiling of
intracranial aneurysms: a critical review of the literature.
Neurosurgery. 2008 Jun;62(6):1187–202. [PMID: 18824986]
 
6. Arteriovenous Malformations
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of subarachnoid and intracerebral hemorrhage.
 Distinctive neurologic signs reflect the region of the brain
involved.
 Signs of meningeal irritation in patients presenting with
subarachnoid hemorrhage.
 Seizures or focal deficits may occur.
 
 General Considerations
Arteriovenous malformations are congenital vascular malformations
that result from a localized maldevelopment of part of the primitive
vascular plexus and consist of abnormal arteriovenous
communications without intervening capillaries. They vary in size,
ranging from massive lesions that are fed by multiple vessels and
involve a large part of the brain to lesions so small that they are hard
to identify at arteriography, surgery, or autopsy. In approximately
10% of cases, there is an associated arterial aneurysm, while 1–2%
of patients presenting with aneurysms have associated arteriovenous
malformations. Clinical presentation may relate to hemorrhage from
the malformation or an associated aneurysm or may relate to
cerebral ischemia due to diversion of blood by the anomalous
arteriovenous shunt or due to venous stagnation. Regional
maldevelopment of the brain, compression or distortion of adjacent
cerebral tissue by enlarged anomalous vessels, and progressive
gliosis due to mechanical and ischemic factors may also be
contributory. 
In 
addition, 
communicating 
or 
obstructive
hydrocephalus may occur and lead to symptoms.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Supratentorial lesions—Most 
cerebral 
arteriovenous
malformations are supratentorial, usually lying in the territory of the
middle cerebral artery. Initial symptoms consist of hemorrhage in
30–60% of cases, recurrent seizures in 20–40%, headache in 5–
25%, and miscellaneous complaints (including focal deficits) in 10–
15%. Up to 70% of arteriovenous malformations bleed at some
point in their natural history, most commonly before the patient
reaches the age of 40 years. This tendency to bleed is unrelated to
the lesion site or to the patient's sex, but small arteriovenous
malformations are more likely to bleed than large ones.
Arteriovenous malformations that have bled once are more likely to
bleed again. Hemorrhage is commonly intracerebral as well as into
the subarachnoid space, and it has a fatal outcome in about 10% of
cases. Focal or generalized seizures may accompany or follow
hemorrhage, or they may be the initial presentation, especially with
frontal or parietal arteriovenous malformations. Headaches are
especially likely when the external carotid arteries are involved in
the malformation. These sometimes simulate migraine but more
commonly are nonspecific in character, with nothing about them to
suggest an underlying structural lesion.
In patients presenting with subarachnoid hemorrhage,
examination may reveal an abnormal mental status and signs of
meningeal irritation. Additional findings may help localize the lesion
and sometimes indicate that intracranial pressure is increased. A
cranial bruit always suggests the possibility of a cerebral
arteriovenous malformation, but bruits may also be found with
aneurysms, meningiomas, acquired arteriovenous fistulas, and
arteriovenous malformations involving the scalp, calvarium, or orbit.
Bruits are best heard over the ipsilateral eye or mastoid region and
are of some help in lateralization but of no help in localization.
Absence of a bruit in no way excludes the possibility of
arteriovenous malformation.
2. Infratentorial lesions—Brainstem arteriovenous malformations
are often clinically silent, but they may hemorrhage, cause
obstructive hydrocephalus, or lead to progressive or relapsing
brainstem deficits. Cerebellar arteriovenous malformations may also
be clinically inconspicuous but sometimes lead to cerebellar
hemorrhage.
B. Imaging
In patients presenting with suspected hemorrhage, CT scanning
indicates whether subarachnoid or intracerebral bleeding has
recently occurred, helps localize its source, and may reveal the
arteriovenous malformation. If the CT scan shows no evidence of
bleeding but subarachnoid hemorrhage is diagnosed clinically, the
cerebrospinal fluid should be examined.
When intracranial hemorrhage is confirmed but the source of
hemorrhage is not evident on the CT scan, arteriography is
necessary to exclude aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation. MR
and CT angiography are not sensitive enough for this purpose. Even
if the findings on CT scan suggest arteriovenous malformation,
arteriography is required to establish the nature of the lesion with
certainty and to determine its anatomic features so that treatment
can be planned. The examination must generally include bilateral
opacification of the internal and external carotid arteries and the
vertebral arteries. Arteriovenous malformations typically appear as
a tangled vascular mass with distended tortuous afferent and
efferent vessels, a rapid circulation time, and arteriovenous shunting.
In patients presenting without hemorrhage, CT scan or MRI
usually reveals the underlying abnormality, and MRI frequently also
shows evidence of old or recent hemorrhage that may have been
asymptomatic. The nature and detailed anatomy of any focal lesion
identified by these means are delineated by angiography, especially
if operative treatment is under consideration.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
Electroencephalography is usually indicated in patients presenting
with seizures and may show consistently focal or lateralized
abnormalities resulting from the underlying cerebral arteriovenous
malformation. This should be followed by CT scanning.
 Treatment
Surgical treatment to prevent further hemorrhage is justified in
patients with arteriovenous malformations that have bled, provided
that the lesion is accessible and the patient has a reasonable life
expectancy. Surgical treatment is also appropriate if intracranial
pressure is increased and to prevent further progression of a focal
neurologic deficit. In patients presenting solely with seizures,
anticonvulsant drug treatment is usually sufficient, and operative
treatment is unnecessary unless there are further developments.
Definitive operative treatment consists of excision of the
arteriovenous malformation if it is surgically accessible.
Arteriovenous malformations that are inoperable because of their
location are sometimes treated solely by embolization; although the
risk of hemorrhage is not reduced, neurologic deficits may be
stabilized or even reversed by this procedure. Two other techniques
for the treatment of intracerebral arteriovenous malformations are
injection of a vascular occlusive polymer through a flow-guided
micro-catheter and permanent occlusion of feeding vessels by
positioning detachable balloon catheters in the desired sites and then
inflating them with quickly solidifying contrast material. Stereotactic
radiosurgery with the gamma knife or related approaches is also
useful in the management of inoperable cerebral arteriovenous
malformations.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
 
•    All patients with a subarachnoid or cerebral
hemorrhage.
•    All patients for detailed imaging.
•    All patients undergoing surgical or endovascular
treatment.
Friedlander RM. Clinical practice. Arteriovenous malformations of
the brain. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jun 28;356(26):2704–12. [PMID:
17596605]
 
Ross J et al. Interventions for treating brain arteriovenous
malformations in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jul
7;7:CD003436. [PMID: 20614434]
 
7. Intracranial Venous Thrombosis
Intracranial venous thrombosis may occur in association with
intracranial or maxillofacial infections, hypercoagulable states,
polycythemia, sickle cell disease, and cyanotic congenital heart
disease and in pregnancy or during the puerperium. It is
characterized by headache, focal or generalized convulsions,
drowsiness, confusion, increased intracranial pressure, and focal
neurologic deficits—and sometimes by evidence of meningeal
irritation. The diagnosis is confirmed by CT scanning, MRI, MR
venography, or angiography.
Treatment includes anticonvulsant drugs if seizures have occurred
and antiedema agents (eg, dexamethasone, 4 mg four times daily
intravenously or intramuscularly and continued as necessary) or
other measures to reduce intracranial pressure. Anticoagulation with
dose-adjusted intravenous heparin or weight-adjusted subcutaneous
low-molecular-weight heparin, followed by oral warfarin
anticoagulation for 6 months reduces morbidity and mortality of
venous sinus thrombosis. Concomitant intracranial hemorrhage
related to the venous thrombosis does not contraindicate heparin
therapy. In cases refractory to heparin, endovascular techniques
including catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy (urokinase) and
thrombectomy, are sometimes helpful.
Bentley JN et al. From presentation to follow-up: diagnosis and
treatment of cerebral venous thrombosis. Neurosurg Focus. 2009
Nov;27(5):E4. [PMID: 19877795]
 
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
All patients should be hospitalized.
8. Spinal Cord Vascular Diseases
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of back or limb pain and neurologic deficit in limbs.
 Motor, sensory, or reflex changes in limbs depending on level of
lesion.
 Imaging studies distinguish between infarct and hematoma.
 
 Infarction of the Spinal Cord
Infarction of the spinal cord is rare. It typically occurs in the territory
of the anterior spinal artery because this vessel, which supplies the
anterior two-thirds of the cord, is itself supplied by only a limited
number of feeders. Infarction usually results from interrupted flow in
one or more of these feeders, eg, with aortic dissection,
aortography, polyarteritis, or severe hypotension, or after surgical
resection of the thoracic aorta. The paired posterior spinal arteries,
by contrast, are supplied by numerous arteries at different levels of
the cord. Spinal cord hypoperfusion may lead to a central cord
syndrome with distal weakness of lower motor neuron type and loss
of pain and temperature appreciation, with preserved posterior
column function.
Since the anterior spinal artery receives numerous feeders in the
cervical region, infarcts almost always occur caudally. Clinical
presentation is characterized by acute onset of flaccid, areflexive
paraplegia that evolves after a few days or weeks into a spastic
paraplegia with extensor plantar responses. There is an
accompanying dissociated sensory loss, with impairment of
appreciation of pain and temperature but preservation of sensations
of vibration and position. Treatment is symptomatic.
Novy J et al. Spinal cord ischemia: clinical and imaging patterns,
pathogenesis, and outcomes in 27 patients. Arch Neurol. 2006
Aug;63(8):1113–20. [PMID: 16908737]
 
 Epidural or Subdural Hemorrhage
Epidural or subdural hemorrhage may lead to sudden severe back
pain followed by an acute compressive myelopathy necessitating
urgent spinal MRI or myelography and surgical evacuation. It may
occur in patients with bleeding disorders or those who are taking
anticoagulant drugs, sometimes following trauma or lumbar
puncture. Epidural hemorrhage may also be related to a vascular
malformation or tumor deposit.
 Spinal Dural Arteriovenous Fistulae
Spinal dural arteriovenous fistulae are congenital lesions that present
with spinal subarachnoid hemorrhage or myeloradiculopathy. Since
most of these malformations are located in the thoracolumbar
region, they lead to motor and sensory disturbances in the legs and
to sphincter disorders. Pain in the legs or back is often severe.
Examination reveals an upper, lower, or mixed motor deficit in the
legs; sensory deficits are also present and are usually extensive,
although occasionally they are confined to radicular distribution.
Cervical spinal dural arteriovenous fistulae lead also to symptoms
and signs in the arms. Spinal MRI may not detect the spinal dural
arteriovenous fistulae, and negative findings do not exclude the
diagnosis. Myelography (performed with the patient prone and
supine) detects serpiginous filling defects due to enlarged vessels.
Selective spinal arteriography confirms the diagnosis. Most lesions
are extramedullary, are posterior to the cord (lying either
intradurally or extradurally), and can easily be treated by ligation of
feeding vessels and excision of the fistulous anomaly or by
embolization procedures. Delay in treatment may lead to increased
and irreversible disability or to death from recurrent subarachnoid
hemorrhage.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
All patients should be hospitalized.
Narvid J et al. Spinal dural arteriovenous fistulae: clinical features
and long-term results. Neurosurgery. 2008 Jan;62(1):159–67.
[PMID: 18300903]
 
INTRACRANIAL & SPINAL MASS LESIONS
1. Primary Intracranial Tumors
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Generalized or focal disturbance of cerebral function, or both.
 Increased intracranial pressure in some patients.
 Neuroradiologic evidence of space-occupying lesion.
 
 General Considerations
Half of all primary intracranial neoplasms (Table 24–5) are gliomas
and the remainder are meningiomas, pituitary adenomas (see
Chapter 26), neurofibromas, and other tumors. Certain tumors,
especially neurofibromas, hemangioblastomas, and retinoblastomas,
may have a familial basis, and congenital factors bear on the
development of craniopharyngiomas. Tumors may occur at any age,
but certain gliomas show particular age predilections (Table 24–5).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Intracranial tumors may lead to a generalized disturbance of
cerebral function and to symptoms and signs of increased
intracranial pressure. In consequence, there may be personality
changes, intellectual decline, emotional lability, seizures, headaches,
nausea, and malaise. If the pressure is increased in a particular
cranial compartment, brain tissue may herniate into a compartment
with lower pressure. The most familiar syndrome is herniation of the
temporal lobe uncus through the tentorial hiatus, which causes
compression of the third cranial nerve, mid-brain, and posterior
cerebral artery. The earliest sign of this is ipsilateral pupillary
dilation, followed by stupor, coma, decerebrate posturing, and
respiratory arrest. Another important herniation syndrome consists
of displacement of the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen
magnum, which causes medullary compression leading to apnea,
circulatory collapse, and death. Other herniation syndromes are less
common and of less clear clinical importance.
Intracranial tumors also lead to focal deficits depending on their
location.
1. Frontal lobe lesions—Tumors of the frontal lobe often lead to
progressive intellectual decline, slowing of mental activity,
personality changes, and contralateral grasp reflexes. They may lead
to expressive aphasia if the posterior part of the left inferior frontal
gyrus is involved. Anosmia may also occur as a consequence of
pressure on the olfactory nerve. Precentral lesions may cause focal
motor seizures or contralateral pyramidal deficits.
2. Temporal lobe lesions—Tumors of the uncinate region may be
manifested by seizures with olfactory or gustatory hallucinations,
motor phenomena such as licking or smacking of the lips, and some
impairment of external awareness without actual loss of
consciousness. 
Temporal 
lobe 
lesions 
also 
lead 
to
depersonalization, emotional changes, behavioral disturbances,
sensations of déjà vu or jamais vu, micropsia or macropsia (objects
appear smaller or larger than they are), visual field defects (crossed
upper quadrantanopia), and auditory illusions or hallucinations. Left-
sided lesions may lead to dysnomia and receptive aphasia, while
right-sided involvement sometimes disturbs the perception of
musical notes and melodies.
3. Parietal lobe lesions—Tumors in this location characteristically
cause contralateral disturbances of sensation and may cause
sensory seizures, sensory loss or inattention, or some combination
of these symptoms. The sensory loss is cortical in type and involves
postural sensibility and tactile discrimination, so that the appreciation
of shape, size, weight, and texture is impaired. Objects placed in the
hand may not be recognized (astereognosis). Extensive parietal lobe
lesions may produce contralateral hyperpathia and spontaneous
pain (thalamic syndrome). Involvement of the optic radiation leads
to a contralateral homonymous field defect that sometimes consists
solely of lower quadrantanopia. Lesions of the left angular gyrus
cause Gerstmann syndrome (a combination of alexia, agraphia,
acalculia, right-left confusion, and finger agnosia), whereas
involvement of the left submarginal gyrus causes ideational apraxia.
Anosognosia (the denial, neglect, or rejection of a paralyzed limb) is
seen in patients with lesions of the non-dominant (right) hemisphere.
Constructional apraxia and dressing apraxia may also occur with
right-sided lesions.
4. Occipital lobe lesions—Tumors of the occipital lobe
characteristically produce crossed homonymous hemianopia or a
partial field defect. With left-sided or bilateral lesions, there may be
visual agnosia both for objects and for colors, while irritative lesions
on either side can cause unformed visual hallucinations. Bilateral
occipital lobe involvement causes cortical blindness in which there is
preservation of pupillary responses to light and lack of awareness of
the defect by the patient. There may also be loss of color
perception, prosopagnosia (inability to identify a familiar face),
simultagnosia (inability to integrate and interpret a composite scene
as opposed to its individual elements), and Balint syndrome (failure
to turn the eyes to a particular point in space, despite preservation
of spontaneous and reflex eye movements). The denial of blindness
or a field defect constitutes Anton syndrome.
5. Brainstem and cerebellar lesions—Brainstem lesions lead to
cranial nerve palsies, ataxia, incoordination, nystagmus, and
pyramidal and sensory deficits in the limbs on one or both sides.
Intrinsic brainstem tumors, such as gliomas, tend to produce an
increase in intracranial pressure only late in their course. Cerebellar
tumors produce marked ataxia of the trunk if the vermis cerebelli is
involved and ipsilateral appendicular deficits (ataxia, incoordination
and hypotonia of the limbs) if the cerebellar hemispheres are
affected.
 
Table 24–5. Primary intracrania
 
6. False localizing signs—Tumors may lead to neurologic signs
other than by direct compression or infiltration, thereby leading to
errors of clinical localization. These false localizing signs include
third or sixth nerve palsy and bilateral extensor plantar responses
produced by herniation syndromes, and an extensor plantar
response occurring ipsilateral to a hemispheric tumor as a result of
compression of the opposite cerebral peduncle against the
tentorium.
B. Imaging
MRI with gadolinium enhancement is the preferred method to
detect the lesion and to define its location, shape, and size; the
extent to which normal anatomy is distorted; and the degree of any
associated cerebral edema or mass effect. CT scanning with
radiocontrast enhancement could be performed; however, it is less
helpful than MRI for small lesions or tumors in the posterior fossa.
The characteristic appearance of meningiomas on MRI or CT
scanning is virtually diagnostic, ie, a lesion in a typical site
(parasagittal and sylvian regions, olfactory groove, sphenoidal ridge,
tuberculum sellae) that appears as a homogeneous area of increased
density in noncontrast scans and enhances uniformly with contrast.
Newer neuroimaging techniques may help identify brain tumors by
increased blood perfusion (perfusion-weighted MRI, single photon-
emission computed tomography, positron-emission tomography)
and high metabolism or cell turnover (magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, positron-emission tomography), but non-neoplastic
diseases, such as stroke and inflammatory or infectious diseases,
are 
sometimes 
associated 
with 
hyperperfusion 
and
hypermetabolism. Diffusion-weighted MRI may also be helpful.
Arteriography may show stretching or displacement of normal
cerebral vessels by the tumor and the presence of tumor vascularity.
The presence of an avascular mass is a nonspecific finding that
could be due to tumor, hematoma, abscess, or any space-
occupying lesion. In patients with normal hormone levels and an
intrasellar mass, angiography is necessary to distinguish with
confidence between a pituitary adenoma and an arterial aneurysm.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
The electroencephalogram provides supporting information
concerning cerebral function and may show either a focal
disturbance due to the neoplasm or a more diffuse change reflecting
altered mental status. Lumbar puncture is rarely necessary; the
findings are seldom diagnostic, and the procedure carries the risk of
causing a herniation syndrome.
 Treatment
Treatment depends on the type and site of the tumor (Table 24–5)
and the condition of the patient. Some benign tumors, especially
meningiomas discovered incidentally during brain imaging for
another purpose, may be monitored with serial annual imaging. For
symptomatic tumors, complete surgical removal may be possible if
the tumor is extra-axial (eg, meningioma, acoustic neuroma) or is
not in a critical or inaccessible region of the brain (eg, cerebellar
hemangioblastoma). Surgery also permits the diagnosis to be
verified and may be beneficial in reducing intracranial pressure and
relieving symptoms even if the neoplasm cannot be completely
removed. Clinical deficits are sometimes due in part to obstructive
hydrocephalus, in which case simple surgical shunting procedures
often produce dramatic benefit. In patients with malignant gliomas,
radiation therapy increases median survival rates regardless of any
preceding surgery, and its combination with chemotherapy provides
additional benefit. Indications for irradiation in the treatment of
patients with other primary intracranial neoplasms depend on tumor
type and accessibility and the feasibility of complete surgical
removal. Temozolomide is a commonly used oral and intravenous
chemotherapeutic for gliomas, and there is an increasing trend to
use monoclonal antibodies as a component of therapy.
Corticosteroids help reduce cerebral edema and are usually started
before surgery. Herniation is treated with intravenous
dexamethasone (10–20 mg as a bolus, followed by 4 mg every 6
hours) and intravenous mannitol (20% solution given in a dose of
1.5 g/kg over about 30 minutes). Anticonvulsants are also
commonly administered in standard doses (see Table 24–3) but are
not indicated for prophylaxis in patients who have no history of
seizures. Long-term neurocognitive deficits may complicate
radiation therapy. For those patients whose disease deteriorates
despite treatment, palliative care is important (see Chapter 5).
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
 
•    All patients with increased intracranial pressure.
•    All patients requiring biopsy, surgical treatment, or
shunting procedures.
Berger MS et al. Surgery of intrinsic cerebral tumors.
Neurosurgery. 2007 Jul;61(1 Suppl):279–304. [PMID:
18813160]
 
Buckner JC et al. Central nervous system tumors. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2007 Oct;82(10):1271–86. [PMID: 17908533]
 
Colman H et al. Molecular predictors in glioblastoma. Arch
Neurol. 2008 July;65(7):877–83. [PMID: 18625854]
 
Daly FN et al. Supportive management of patients with brain
tumors. Expert Rev Neurother. 2007 Oct;7(10):1327–36. [PMID:
17939770]
 
Omuro AM et al. Pitfalls in the diagnosis of brain tumours. Lancet
Neurol. 2006 Nov;5(11):937–48. [PMID: 17052661]
 
Soffietti R et al. New developments in the treatment of malignant
gliomas. Expert Rev Neurother. 2007 Oct;7(10):1313–26.
[PMID: 17939769]
 
Tam Truong M. Current role of radiation therapy in the
management of malignant brain tumors. Hematol Oncol Clin North
Am. 2006 Apr;20(2):431–53. [PMID: 16730301]
 
2. Metastatic Intracranial Tumors
Cerebral Metastases
Metastatic brain tumors present in the same way as other cerebral
neoplasms, ie, with increased intracranial pressure, with focal or
diffuse disturbance of cerebral function, or with both of these
manifestations. Indeed, in patients with a single cerebral lesion, the
metastatic nature of the lesion may only become evident on
histopathologic examination. In other patients, there is evidence of
widespread metastatic disease, or an isolated cerebral metastasis
develops during treatment of the primary neoplasm.
The most common source of intracranial metastasis is carcinoma
of the lung; other primary sites are the breast, kidney, skin
(melanoma), and gastrointestinal tract. Most cerebral metastases
are located supratentorially. Laboratory and radiologic studies used
to evaluate patients with metastases are those described for primary
neoplasms. They include MRI and CT scanning performed both
with and without contrast material. Lumbar puncture is necessary
only in patients with suspected carcinomatous meningitis (see
below). In patients with verified cerebral metastasis from an
unknown primary, investigation is guided by symptoms and signs. In
women, mammography is indicated; in men under 50, germ cell
origin is sought since both have therapeutic implications.
In patients with only a single, surgically accessible cerebral
metastasis who are otherwise well (ie, a high level of functioning and
little or no evidence of extracranial disease), it may be possible to
remove the lesion and then treat with irradiation; the latter may also
be selected as the sole treatment. In patients with multiple
metastases or widespread systemic disease, the prognosis is poor;
stereotactic radiosurgery, whole-brain radiotherapy, or both, may
help in some instances, but in others treatment is palliative only.
Chang EL et al. Neurocognition in patients with brain metastases
treated with radiosurgery or radiosurgery plus whole-brain
irradiation: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009
Nov;10(11):1037–44. [PMID: 19801201]
 
Eichler AF et al. Brain metastases. Curr Treat Options Neurol.
2008 Jul;10(4):308–14. [PMID: 18579017]
 
Kanner AA et al. Surgical therapies in brain metastasis. Semin
Oncol. 2007 Jun;34(3):197–205. [PMID: 17560981]
 
Mintz A et al. Management of single brain metastasis: a practice
guideline. Curr Oncol. 2007 Aug;14(4):131–43. [PMID:
17710205]
 
Patil CG et al. Whole brain radiation therapy (WBRT) alone
versus WBRT and radiosurgery for the treatment of brain
metastases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jun
16;6:CD006121. [PMID: 20556764]
 
Leptomeningeal Metastases (Carcinomatous Meningitis)
The neoplasms metastasizing most commonly to the leptomeninges
are carcinoma of the breast, lymphomas, and leukemia.
Leptomeningeal metastases lead to multifocal neurologic deficits,
which may be associated with infiltration of cranial and spinal nerve
roots, direct invasion of the brain or spinal cord, obstructive
hydrocephalus, or some combination of these factors.
The diagnosis is confirmed by examination of the cerebrospinal
g
y
p
fluid. Findings may include elevated cerebrospinal fluid pressure,
pleocytosis, increased protein concentration, and decreased glucose
concentration. Cytologic studies may indicate that malignant cells
are present; if not, lumbar puncture should be repeated at least
twice to obtain further samples for analysis.
CT scans showing contrast enhancement in the basal cisterns or
showing hydrocephalus without any evidence of a mass lesion
support the diagnosis. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI frequently shows
enhancing foci in the leptomeninges. Myelography may show
deposits on multiple nerve roots.
Treatment is by irradiation to symptomatic areas, combined with
intrathecal methotrexate. The long-term prognosis is poor—only
about 10% of patients survive for 1 year—and palliative care is
therefore important (see Chapter 5).
3. Intracranial Mass Lesions in AIDS Patients
Primary cerebral lymphoma is a common complication in patients
with AIDS. This leads to disturbances in cognition or
consciousness, focal motor or sensory deficits, aphasia, seizures,
and cranial neuropathies. Similar clinical disturbances may result
from cerebral toxoplasmosis, which is also a common
complication in patients with AIDS (see Chapters 31 and 35).
Neither CT nor MRI findings distinguish these two disorders, and
serologic tests for toxoplasmosis are unreliable in AIDS patients.
Accordingly, for neurologically stable patients, a trial of treatment
for toxoplasmosis with sulfadiazine (100 mg/kg/d up to 8 g/d in four
divided doses orally daily) and pyrimethamine (75 mg orally daily
for 3 days, then 25 mg orally daily) is recommended for 3 weeks;
the imaging studies are then repeated, and if any lesion has
improved, the regimen is continued indefinitely. If any lesion does
not improve, cerebral biopsy is necessary. Primary cerebral
lymphoma is treated with whole-brain irradiation.
Cryptococcal meningitis is a common opportunistic infection in
AIDS patients. Clinically, it may resemble cerebral toxoplasmosis
or lymphoma, but cranial CT scans are usually normal. The
diagnosis is made on the basis of cerebrospinal fluid studies, with
positive India ink staining in 75–80% and cryptococcal antigen tests
in 95% of cases. Treatment is with amphotericin B plus flucytosine,
as set forth in Table 36–1, followed by fluconazole.
4. Primary & Metastatic Spinal Tumors
Approximately 10% of spinal tumors are intramedullary.
Ependymoma is the most common type of intramedullary tumor; the
remainder are other types of glioma. Extramedullary tumors may be
extradural or intradural in location. Among the primary
extramedullary tumors, neurofibromas and meningiomas are
relatively common, are benign, and may be intradural or extradural.
Carcinomatous metastases, lymphomatous or leukemic deposits,
and myeloma are usually extradural; in the case of metastases, the
prostate, breast, lung, and kidney are common primary sites.
Tumors may lead to spinal cord dysfunction by direct
compression, by ischemia secondary to arterial or venous
obstruction and, in the case of intramedullary lesions, by invasive
infiltration.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms usually develop insidiously. Pain is often conspicuous
with extradural lesions; is characteristically aggravated by coughing
or straining; may be radicular, localized to the back, or felt diffusely
in an extremity; and may be accompanied by motor deficits,
paresthesias, or numbness, especially in the legs. Bladder, bowel,
and sexual dysfunction may occur. When sphincter disturbances
occur, they are usually particularly disabling. Pain, however, often
precedes specific neurologic symptoms from epidural metastases.
Examination may reveal localized spinal tenderness. A segmental
lower motor neuron deficit or dermatomal sensory changes (or
both) are sometimes found at the level of the lesion, while an upper
motor neuron deficit and sensory disturbance are found below it.
B. Imaging
CT myelography or, preferably, MRI with contrast is used to
identify and localize the lesion. The combination of known tumor
elsewhere in the body, back pain, and either abnormal plain films of
the spine or neurologic signs of cord compression is an indication to
perform these studies on an urgent basis. Some clinicians proceed
to MRI or CT myelography based solely on new back pain in a
cancer patient.
C. Laboratory Findings
The cerebrospinal fluid is often xanthochromic and contains a
greatly increased protein concentration with normal cell content and
glucose concentration.
 Treatment
Intramedullary tumors are treated by decompression and surgical
excision (when feasible) and by irradiation. The prognosis depends
on the cause and severity of cord compression before it is relieved.
Treatment of epidural spinal metastases consists of irradiation,
irrespective of cell type. Dexamethasone is also given in a high
dosage (eg, 25 mg four times daily for 3 days orally or
intravenously, followed by rapid tapering of the dosage, depending
on response) to reduce cord swelling and relieve pain. Surgical
decompression is reserved for patients with tumors that are
unresponsive to irradiation or have previously been irradiated and
for cases in which there is some uncertainty about the diagnosis.
The long-term outlook is poor, but radiation treatment may at least
delay the onset of major disability.
Cole JS et al. Metastatic epidural spinal cord compression. Lancet
Neurol. 2008 May;7(5):459–66. [PMID: 18420159]
 
Grimm S et al. Adult primary spinal cord tumors. Expert Rev
Neurother. 2009 Oct;9(10):1487–95. [PMID: 19831838]
 
5. Brain Abscess
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms and signs of expanding intracranial mass.
 Signs of primary infection or congenital heart disease are
sometimes present.
 Fever may be absent.
 
 General Considerations
Brain abscess presents as an intracranial space-occupying lesion
and arises as a sequela of disease of the ear or nose, may be a
complication of infection elsewhere in the body, or may result from
infection introduced intracranially by trauma or surgical procedures.
The most common infective organisms are streptococci,
staphylococci, and anaerobes; mixed infections are not uncommon.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Headache, drowsiness, inattention, confusion, and seizures are early
symptoms, followed by signs of increasing intracranial pressure and
then a focal neurologic deficit. There may be little or no systemic
evidence of infection.
B. Imaging and Other Investigations
A CT scan of the head characteristically shows an area of contrast
enhancement surrounding a low-density core. Similar abnormalities
may be found in patients with metastatic neoplasms. MRI findings
often permit earlier recognition of focal cerebritis or an abscess.
Arteriography indicates the presence of a space-occupying lesion,
which appears as an avascular mass with displacement of normal
cerebral vessels. Stereotactic needle aspiration may enable a
specific etiologic organism to be identified. Examination of the
cerebrospinal fluid does not help in diagnosis and may precipitate a
herniation syndrome. Peripheral leukocytosis is sometimes present.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of intravenous antibiotics, combined with
surgical drainage (aspiration or excision) if necessary to reduce the
mass effect, or sometimes to establish the diagnosis. Abscesses
smaller than 2 cm can often be cured medically. Broad-spectrum
antibiotics, selected based on risk factors and likely organisms, are
used if the infecting organism is unknown (see Chapter 33). Initial
empiric antibiotic regimens typically include ceftriaxone (2 g
intravenously every 12 hours), metronidazole (15 mg/kg intravenous
loading dose, followed by 7.5 mg/kg intravenously every 6 hours),
and vancomycin (1 g intravenously every 12 hours). The regimen is
altered once culture and sensitivity data are available. Antimicrobial
treatment is usually continued parenterally for 6–8 weeks, followed
by orally for 2–3 months. The patient should be monitored by serial
CT scans or MRI every 2 weeks and at deterioration.
Dexamethasone (4–25 mg four times daily intravenously or orally,
depending on severity, followed by tapering of dose, depending on
response) may reduce any associated edema, but intravenous
mannitol is sometimes required.
Carpenter J et al. Retrospective analysis of 49 cases of brain
abscess and review of the literature. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect
Dis. 2007 Jan;26(1):1–11. [PMID: 17180609]
 
NONMETASTATIC NEUROLOGIC COMPLICATIONS
OF MALIGNANT DISEASE
A variety of nonmetastatic neurologic complications of malignant
disease 
(see Table 39–2) can be recognized. Metabolic
encephalopathy due to electrolyte abnormalities, infections, drug
overdose, or the failure of some vital organ may be reflected by
drowsiness, lethargy, restlessness, insomnia, agitation, confusion,
stupor, or coma. The mental changes are usually associated with
tremor, 
asterixis, 
and 
multifocal 
myoclonus. 
The
electroencephalogram is generally diffusely slowed. Laboratory
studies are necessary to detect the cause of the encephalopathy,
which must then be treated appropriately.
Immune suppression resulting from either the malignant disease or
its treatment (eg, by chemotherapy) predisposes patients to brain
abscess, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, meningitis,
herpes zoster infection, and other opportunistic infectious diseases.
Moreover, an overt or occult cerebrospinal fluid fistula, as occurs
with some tumors, may also increase the risk of infection. MRI or
CT scanning aids in the early recognition of a brain abscess, but
metastatic brain tumors may have a similar appearance. Examination
of the cerebrospinal fluid is essential in the evaluation of patients
with meningitis but is of no help in the diagnosis of brain abscess.
Cerebrovascular disorders that cause neurologic complications in
patients with systemic cancer include nonbacterial thrombotic
endocarditis and septic embolization. Cerebral, subarachnoid, or
subdural hemorrhages may occur in patients with myelogenous
leukemia and may be found in association with metastatic tumors,
especially malignant melanoma. Spinal subdural hemorrhage
sometimes occurs after lumbar puncture in patients with marked
thrombocytopenia.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation occurs most commonly in
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia or with some
adenocarcinomas and is characterized by a fluctuating
encephalopathy, often with associated seizures, that frequently
progresses to coma or death. There may be few accompanying
neurologic signs. Venous sinus thrombosis, which usually presents
with convulsions and headaches, may also occur in patients with
leukemia or lymphoma. Examination commonly reveals papilledema
and focal or diffuse neurologic signs. Anticonvulsants,
anticoagulants, and drugs to lower the intracranial pressure may be
of value.
Autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders occur when the immune
system reacts against neuronal antigens expressed by tumor cells.
The clinical manifestations depend on the autoantibody. Symptoms
may precede those due to the neoplasm itself. Several distinct
syndromes are common, including paraneoplastic cerebellar
degeneration, limbic encephalitis, encephalomyelitis, anti-NMDA
receptor-associated encephalitis, opsoclonus/myoclonus, sensory
neuronopathy, and dermatomyositis.
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration occurs most
commonly in association with carcinoma of the lung, but also in
breast and gynecologic cancers and Hodgkin lymphoma. Typically,
there is a pancerebellar syndrome causing dysarthria, nystagmus,
and ataxia of the trunk and limbs. The disorder is associated with
anti-Yo, -Tr, -voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC), and -Zic
antibodies. Treatment is of the underlying malignant disease. Limbic
encephalitis, characterized by impaired recent memory, disturbed
affect, hallucinations, and seizures, occurs in some patients with
tumors of the lungs, breast, thymus, and germ cells. Associated
antibodies include anti-Hu, -Ma2, -CV2/CRMP5, -voltage-gated
potassium channel (VGKC), -AMPA receptor, and -GABAB
receptor. A more generalized encephalomyelitis occurs with anti-
Hu, -CV2/CRMP5, -Ma2, and -amphiphysin antibodies in the
context of a similar spectrum of tumors. Anti-NMDA receptor-
associated encephalitis causes a characteristic syndrome of
severe psychiatric symptoms, dyskinesias, dysautonomia, and
hypoventilation, and is frequently associated with ovarian teratoma.
Opsoclonus/myoclonus, a syndrome of involuntary, erratic, and
conjugate saccadic eye movements and myoclonic movements of
the limbs, occurs in patients with lung, breast, and gynecologic
tumors, often without an identifiable antibody. Sensory
neuronopathy, typically caused by anti-Hu antibodies in small cell
lung cancer or other carcinomas, manifests itself with asymmetric,
multifocal sensory nerve root deficits leading to pain, numbness,
sensory ataxia, and sometimes hearing loss. Dermatomyositis (see
Chapter 20) or the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
(discussed below) may be seen in patients with underlying
carcinoma. Identification of an antibody is not always possible in a
suspected autoimmune paraneoplastic condition, and a search for
an underlying neoplasm should not be deterred. Treatment of the
neoplasm takes priority and offers the best hope for stabilization or
improvement of the neurologic symptoms, which often are not
completely reversible. Specific treatment of the antibody-mediated
symptoms by intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration,
plasmapheresis, corticosteroids, or other immunosuppressive
regimens, is frequently attempted despite limited efficacy.
Encephalitides involving antibodies directed against neuronal cell
surface antigens, such as VGKC or AMPA, NMDA, or GABAB
receptors, can occur either as paraneoplastic phenomena or in
isolation, and typically respond well to immunotherapy.
Dalmau J et al. Paraneoplastic syndromes of the CNS. Lancet
Neurol. 2008 Apr;7(4):327–40. [PMID: 18339348]
 
Rosenfeld MR et al. Update on paraneoplastic and autoimmune
disorders of the central nervous system. Semin Neurol. 2010
Jul;30(3):320–31. [PMID: 20577938]
 
PSEUDOTUMOR CEREBRI (Benign Intracranial
Hypertension)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Headache, worse on straining.
 Visual obscurations or diplopia may occur.
 Examination reveals papilledema.
 Abducens palsy is commonly present.
 
 General Considerations
There are many causes of pseudotumor cerebri. Thrombosis of the
transverse venous sinus as a noninfectious complication of otitis
media or chronic mastoiditis is one cause, and sagittal sinus
thrombosis may lead to a clinically similar picture. Other causes
include chronic pulmonary disease, systemic lupus erythematosus,
uremia, endocrine disturbances such as hypoparathyroidism,
hypothyroidism, or Addison disease, vitamin A toxicity, and the use
of tetracycline or oral contraceptives. Cases have also followed
withdrawal of corticosteroids after long-term use. In most instances,
however, no specific cause can be found, and the disorder remits
spontaneously after several months. This idiopathic variety—known
as idiopathic intracranial hypertension—occurs most commonly
among overweight women aged 20–44. In all cases, screening for a
space-occupying lesion of the brain is important.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms consist of headache, diplopia, and other visual
disturbances due to papilledema and abducens nerve dysfunction.
Pulse-synchronous tinnitus may also occur. Examination reveals the
papilledema and some enlargement of the blind spots, but patients
otherwise look well.
B. Imaging
Investigations reveal no evidence of a space-occupying lesion. CT
scan shows small or normal ventricles. MR venography is helpful in
screening for thrombosis of the intracranial venous sinuses.
C. Laboratory Findings
Lumbar puncture confirms the presence of intracranial hypertension,
but the cerebrospinal fluid is normal. Laboratory studies help
exclude some of the other causes mentioned earlier.
 Treatment
Untreated intracranial hypertension sometimes leads to secondary
optic atrophy and permanent visual loss. Acetazolamide (250–500
mg orally three times daily, increasing slowly to a maintenance dose
of 1000–2000 mg daily, divided two to four times daily) reduces
formation of cerebrospinal fluid and can be used to start treatment.
Like acetazolamide, the antiepileptic drug topiramate (Table 24–3)
is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor and was shown to be similarly
effective in an open label study; topiramate has the added benefit of
causing weight loss. Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, 60–80 mg
daily) may also be necessary. Obese patients should be advised to
lose weight. Repeated lumbar puncture to lower the intracranial
pressure by removal of cerebrospinal fluid is effective as a
temporizing measure, but pharmacologic approaches to treatment
provide better long-term relief. Treatment is monitored by checking
visual acuity and visual fields, funduscopic appearance, and
pressure of the cerebrospinal fluid. The disorder may worsen after a
period of stability, indicating the need for long-term follow-up.
If medical treatment fails to control the intracranial pressure,
surgical placement of a lumboperitoneal or other shunt or optic
nerve sheath fenestration should be undertaken to preserve vision.
In addition to the above measures, any specific cause of
intracranial hypertension requires appropriate treatment. Thus,
hormone therapy should be initiated if there is an underlying
endocrine disturbance. Discontinuing the use of tetracycline, oral
contraceptives, or vitamin A will allow for resolution of intracranial
hypertension due to these agents. If corticosteroid withdrawal is
responsible, the medication should be reintroduced and then
tapered more gradually.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
All patients requiring shunt placement or optic nerve sheath
fenestration should be hospitalized.
Celebisoy N et al. Treatment of idiopathic intracranial
hypertension: topiramate vs acetazolamide, an open-label study.
Acta Neurol Scand. 2007 Nov;116(5):322–7. [PMID:
17922725]
 
Dhungana S et al. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Acta Neurol
Scand. 2010 Feb;121(2):71–82. [PMID: 19930211]
 
Shah VA et al. Long-term follow-up of idiopathic intracranial
hypertension: the Iowa experience. Neurology. 2008 Feb
19;70(8):634–40. [PMID: 18285538]
 
SELECTED NEUROCUTANEOUS DISEASES
Because the nervous system develops from the epithelial layer of the
embryo, a number of congenital diseases include both neurologic
and cutaneous manifestations. Among these disorders, three are
discussed below, and von Hippel–Lindau disease is discussed in
Chapter 26.
1. Tuberous Sclerosis
Tuberous sclerosis may occur sporadically or on a familial basis
with autosomal dominant inheritance. The disease is caused by
mutations that inactivate either the TSC1 (hamartin) gene on
chromosome 9 or the TSC2 (tuberin) gene on chromosome 16,
resulting in impaired tumor suppression in multiple tissues.
Neurologic presentation is with seizures and progressive
psychomotor retardation beginning in early childhood. The
cutaneous abnormality, adenoma sebaceum, becomes manifest
usually between 5 and 10 years of age and typically consists of
reddened nodules on the face (cheeks, nasolabial folds, sides of the
nose, and chin) and sometimes on the forehead and neck. Other
typical cutaneous lesions include subungual fibromas, shagreen
patches (leathery plaques of subepidermal fibrosis, situated usually
on the trunk), and leaf-shaped hypopigmented spots. Associated
abnormalities include retinal lesions and tumors, benign
rhabdomyomas of the heart, lung cysts, benign tumors in the
viscera, and bone cysts.
The disease is slowly progressive and leads to increasing mental
deterioration. There is no specific treatment, but anticonvulsant
drugs may help in controlling seizures.
Curatolo P et al. Tuberous sclerosis. Lancet. 2008 Aug
23;372(9639): 657–68. [PMID: 18722871]
 
2. Neurofibromatosis
Neurofibromatosis may occur either sporadically or on a familial
basis with autosomal dominant inheritance. Two distinct forms are
recognized: Type 1 (Recklinghausen disease) is characterized by
multiple hyperpigmented macules and neurofibromas, and results
from mutations in the NF1 gene on chromosome 17. Type 2 is
characterized by eighth nerve tumors, often accompanied by
other intracranial or intraspinal tumors, and is associated with
mutations in the NF2 (merlin) gene on chromosome 22.
Neurologic presentation is usually with symptoms and signs of
tumor. Multiple neurofibromas characteristically are present and
may involve spinal or cranial nerves, especially the eighth nerve
(Figure 24–1). Examination of the superficial cutaneous nerves
usually reveals palpable mobile nodules. In some cases, there is an
associated marked over-growth of subcutaneous tissues (plexiform
neuromas), sometimes with an underlying bony abnormality.
Associated cutaneous lesions include axillary freckling and patches
of cutaneous pigmentation (café au lait spots). Malignant
degeneration of neurofibromas occasionally occurs and may lead to
peripheral sarcomas. Meningiomas, gliomas (especially optic nerve
gliomas), bone cysts, pheochromocytomas, scoliosis, and
obstructive hydrocephalus may also occur.
Asthagiri AR et al. Neurofibromatosis type 2. Lancet. 2009 Jun
6;373(9679):1974–86. [PMID: 19476995]
 
Gerber PA et al. Neurofibromatosis. Eur J Med Res. 2009 Mar
17;14(3):102–5. [PMID: 19380279]
 
3. Sturge-Weber Syndrome
Sturge-Weber syndrome consists of a congenital, usually unilateral,
cutaneous capillary angioma involving the upper face,
leptomeningeal angiomatosis and, in many patients, choroidal
angioma. It has no sex predilection and usually occurs sporadically.
The cutaneous angioma sometimes has a more extensive distribution
over the head and neck and is often quite disfiguring, especially if
there is associated overgrowth of connective tissue. Focal or
generalized seizures are the usual neurologic presentation and may
commence at any age. There may be contralateral homonymous
hemianopia, hemiparesis and hemisensory disturbance, ipsilateral
glaucoma, and mental subnormality. Skull radiographs taken after
the first 2 years of life usually reveal gyriform (“tramline”)
intracranial calcification, especially in the parieto-occipital region,
due to mineral deposition in the cortex beneath the intracranial
angioma.
Figure 24–1. Neurofibromatosis. (Courtesy of Jack Resnick, Sr,
MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux
EJ, Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family
Medicine. McGraw-Hill
 
Treatment is aimed at controlling seizures pharmacologically, but
surgical treatment may be necessary. Ophthalmologic advice should
be sought concerning the management of choroidal angioma and of
increased intraocular pressure.
Pascual-Castroviejo I et al. Sturge-Weber syndrome: study of 55
patients. Can J Neurol Sci. 2008 Jul;35(3):301–7. [PMID:
18714797]
 
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
1. Benign Essential (Familial) Tremor
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Postural tremor of hands, head, or voice.
 Family history common.
 May improve temporarily with alcohol.
 No abnormal findings other than tremor.
 
 General Considerations
The cause of benign essential tremor is uncertain, but it is sometimes
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Responsible genes have
been identified at 3q13, 2p22-p25, and 6p23.
 Clinical Findings
Tremor may begin at any age and is enhanced by emotional stress.
The tremor usually involves one or both hands, the head, or the
hands and head, while the legs tend to be spared. Examination
reveals no other abnormalities. Ingestion of a small quantity of
alcohol commonly provides remarkable but short-lived relief by an
unknown mechanism.
Although the tremor may become more conspicuous with time, it
generally leads to little disability. Occasionally, it interferes with
manual skills and leads to impairment of handwriting. Speech may
also be affected if the laryngeal muscles are involved.
Treatment
Treatment is often unnecessary. When it is required because of
disability, propranolol may be helpful but will need to be continued
indefinitely in doses of 60–240 mg daily orally. However,
intermittent therapy is sometimes useful in patients whose tremor
becomes exacerbated in specific predictable situations. Primidone
may be helpful when propranolol is ineffective, but patients with
essential tremor are often very sensitive to it. Therefore, the starting
dose is 50 mg daily orally, and the daily dose is increased by 50 mg
every 2 weeks depending on the patient's response; a maintenance
dose of 125 mg three times daily orally is commonly effective.
Occasional patients do not respond to these measures but are
helped by alprazolam (up to 3 mg daily in divided doses),
topiramate (titrated up to a dose of 400 mg daily orally in divided
doses over about 8 weeks), gabapentin (1800 mg daily orally in
divided doses), mirtazapine (15 or 30 mg at night orally), or
clozapine (30–50 mg twice daily orally). Other antiepileptic agents
including levetiracetam and zonisamide are reportedly sometimes
effective. Botulinum toxin A may reduce tremor, but adverse effects
include dose-dependent weakness of the injected muscles.
Pregabalin was recently shown to be ineffective.
Disabling tremor unresponsive to medical treatment may be
helped by contralateral thalamotomy. Unilateral high-frequency
thalamic stimulation is an alternative approach that is equally
effective, is associated with only mild and transient side effects, and
is therefore preferred. Bilateral thalamotomy has significant
morbidity, whereas the risks of bilateral stimulation are appreciably
lower.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
Patients requiring surgical treatment (deep brain stimulator
placement) should be hospitalized.
Deng H et al. Genetics of essential tremor. Brain. 2007 Jun;130
(Pt 6):1456–64. [PMID: 17353225]
 
Elble RJ et al. An update on essential tremor. Curr Neurol
Neurosci Rep. 2009 Jul;9(4):273–7. [PMID: 19515278]
 
2. Parkinsonism
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Any combination of tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and
progressive postural instability.
 Cognitive impairment is sometimes prominent.
 
 General Considerations
Parkinsonism is a relatively common disorder that occurs in all
ethnic groups, with an approximately equal sex distribution. The
most common variety, idiopathic Parkinson disease, begins most
often between 45 and 65 years of age and is a progressive disease.
 Etiology
Parkinsonism may rarely occur on a familial basis, and the
parkinsonian phenotype may result from mutations of several
different genes (alpha-synuclein, parkin, LRRK2, DJ1, and
PINK1). Mutations in LRRK2 also account for some cases of
apparently 
sporadic 
Parkinson 
disease. 
Postencephalitic
parkinsonism is becoming increasingly rare. Exposure to certain
toxins (eg, manganese dust, carbon disulfide) and severe carbon
monoxide poisoning may lead to parkinsonism. Typical
parkinsonism has occurred in individuals who have taken 1-methyl-
4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) for recreational
purposes. This compound is converted in the body to a neurotoxin
that selectively destroys dopaminergic neurons in the substantia
nigra. Reversible parkinsonism may develop in patients receiving
neuroleptic drugs (see Chapter 25), reserpine, or metoclopr-amide.
Only rarely is hemiparkinsonism the presenting feature of a
progressive space-occupying lesion.
In idiopathic parkinsonism, dopamine depletion due to
degeneration of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal system leads to an
imbalance 
of 
dopamine 
and 
acetylcholine, 
which 
are
neurotransmitters normally present in the corpus striatum. Treatment
is directed at redressing this imbalance by blocking the effect of
acetylcholine with anticholinergic drugs or by the administration of
levodopa, the precursor of dopamine. The serum urate level may be
a prognostic indicator—the rate of progression declines as the urate
level increases.
 Clinical Findings
Tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability are the
cardinal features of parkinsonism and may be present in any
combination. There may also be a mild decline in intellectual
function. The tremor of about four to six cycles per second is most
conspicuous at rest, is enhanced by emotional stress, and is often
less severe during voluntary activity. Although it may ultimately be
present in all limbs, the tremor is commonly confined to one limb or
to the limbs on one side for months or years before it becomes
more generalized. In some patients, tremor is absent.
Rigidity (an increase in resistance to passive movement) is
responsible for the characteristically flexed posture seen in many
patients, but the most disabling symptoms of parkinsonism are due
to bradykinesia, manifested as a slowness of voluntary movement
and a reduction in automatic movements such as swinging of the
arms while walking. Curiously, however, effective voluntary activity
may briefly be regained during an emergency (eg, the patient is able
to leap aside to avoid an oncoming motor vehicle).
Clinical diagnosis of the well-developed syndrome is usually
simple. The patient has a relatively immobile face with widened
palpebral fissures, infrequent blinking, and a certain fixity of facial
expression. Seborrhea of the scalp and face is common. There is
often mild blepharoclonus, and a tremor may be present about the
mouth and lips. Repetitive tapping (about twice per second) over
the bridge of the nose produces a sustained blink response
(Myerson sign). Other findings may include saliva drooling from the
mouth, perhaps due to impairment of swallowing; soft and poorly
modulated voice; a variable rest tremor and rigidity in some or all of
the limbs; slowness of voluntary movements; impairment of fine or
rapidly alternating movements; and micrographia. There is typically
no muscle weakness (provided that sufficient time is allowed for
power to be developed) and no alteration in the tendon reflexes or
plantar responses. It is difficult for the patient to arise from a sitting
position and begin walking. The gait itself is characterized by small
shuffling steps and a loss of the normal automatic arm swing; there
may be unsteadiness on turning, difficulty in stopping, and a
tendency to fall.
 Differential Diagnosis
Diagnostic problems may occur in mild cases, especially if tremor is
minimal or absent. For example, mild hypokinesia or slight tremor is
commonly attributed to old age. Depression, with its associated
expressionless face, poorly modulated voice, and reduction in
voluntary activity, can be difficult to distinguish from mild
parkinsonism, especially since the two disorders may coexist; in
some cases, a trial of antidepressant drug therapy is necessary. The
family history, the character of the tremor, and lack of other
neurologic signs should distinguish essential tremor from
parkinsonism. Wilson disease can be distinguished by its early age
at onset, the presence of other abnormal movements, Kayser-
Fleischer rings, and chronic hepatitis, and by increased
concentrations of copper in the tissues. Huntington disease
presenting with rigidity and bradykinesia may be mistaken for
parkinsonism unless the family history and accompanying dementia
are recognized. In multisystem atrophy (previously called the
Shy-Drager syndrome), autonomic insufficiency (leading to
postural hypotension, anhidrosis, disturbances of sphincter control,
erectile dysfunction, etc) may be accompanied by parkinsonism,
pyramidal deficits, lower motor neuron signs, or cerebellar
dysfunction. In progressive supranuclear palsy, bradykinesia
and rigidity are accompanied by a supranuclear disorder of eye
movements, pseudobulbar palsy, pseudo-emotional lability
(pseudobulbar affect), and axial dystonia. Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease may be accompanied by features of parkinsonism, but
dementia is usual, myoclonic jerking is common, ataxia and
pyramidal 
signs 
may 
be 
conspicuous, 
and 
the
electroencephalographic findings are usually characteristic. In
corticobasal 
degeneration, 
asymmetric 
parkinsonism 
is
accompanied by conspicuous signs of cortical dysfunction (eg,
apraxia, sensory inattention, dementia, aphasia).
 Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic. Recent studies, however, suggest that
rasagiline, 1 mg daily orally, may slow progression of Parkinson
disease (see Selective monoamine oxidase inhibitors below), and
trials of several other putative neuroprotective agents are in
progress, as are various trials of gene therapy.
A. Medical Measures
Drug treatment is not required early in the course of Parkinson
disease, but the nature of the disorder and the availability of medical
treatment for use when necessary should be discussed with the
patient.
1. Amantadine—Patients with mild symptoms but no disability
may be helped by amantadine. This drug improves all of the clinical
features of parkinsonism, but its mode of action is unclear. Side
effects include restlessness, confusion, depression, skin rashes,
edema, nausea, constipation, anorexia, postural hypotension, and
disturbances of cardiac rhythm. However, these are relatively
uncommon with the usual dose (100 mg twice daily orally). It also
ameliorates dyskinesias resulting from chronic levodopa therapy.
2. Anticholinergic drugs—Anticholinergics are more helpful in
alleviating tremor and rigidity than bradykinesia. Treatment is started
with a small dose (Table 24–6) and gradually increased until benefit
occurs or side effects limit further increments. If treatment is
ineffective, the drug is gradually withdrawn and another preparation
then tried.
Common side effects include dryness of the mouth, nausea,
constipation, palpitations, cardiac arrhythmias, urinary retention,
confusion, agitation, restlessness, drowsiness, mydriasis, increased
intraocular pressure, and defective accommodation.
Anticholinergic drugs are contraindicated in patients with
prostatic hyperplasia, narrow-angle glaucoma, or obstructive
gastrointestinal disease and are often tolerated poorly by the elderly.
They are best avoided whenever cognitive impairment or a
predisposition to delirium exists.
3. Levodopa—Levodopa, which is converted in the body to
dopamine, improves all of the major features of parkinsonism,
including bradykinesia, but does not stop progression of the
disorder. The most common early side effects of levodopa are
nausea, vomiting, and hypotension, but cardiac arrhythmias may
also occur. Dyskinesias, restlessness, confusion, and other
behavioral changes tend to occur somewhat later and become more
common with time. Levodopa-induced dyskinesias may take any
conceivable form, including chorea, athetosis, dystonia, tremor, tics,
and myoclonus. An even later complication is the “on-off
phenomenon,” in which abrupt but transient fluctuations in the
severity of parkinsonism occur unpredictably but frequently during
the day. The “off” period of marked bradykinesia has been shown
to relate in some instances to falling plasma levels of levodopa.
During the “on” phase, dyskinesias are often conspicuous but
mobility is increased.
Table 24–6. some anticholinergic antiparkinsonia
 
 
 
Drug
Usual Daily Dose
Benztropine mesylate (Cogentin) 1–6 mg
Biperiden (Akineton)
2–12 mg
Orphenadrine (Disipal, Norflex)
150–400 mg
Procyclidine (Kemadrin)
7.5–30 mg
Trihexyphenidyl (Artane)
6–20 mg
Modified, with permission, from Aminoff MJ. Pharmacologic management
of parkinsonism and other movement disorders. In: Basic & Clinical
Pharmacology, 11th ed. Katzung BG (editor). McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Carbidopa, which inhibits the enzyme responsible for the
breakdown of levodopa to dopamine, does not cross the blood-
brain barrier. When levodopa is given in combination with
carbidopa, the extracerebral breakdown of levodopa is diminished.
This reduces the amount of levodopa required daily for beneficial
effects, and it lowers the incidence of nausea, vomiting,
hypotension, and cardiac irregularities. Such a combination does not
prevent the development of the “on-off phenomenon,” and the
incidence of other side effects (dyskinesias or psychiatric
complications) may actually be increased.
Sinemet, a commercially available preparation that contains
carbidopa and levodopa in a fixed ratio (1:10 or 1:4), is generally
used. Treatment is started with a small dose—eg, one tablet of
Sinemet 25/100 (containing 25 mg of carbidopa and 100 mg of
levodopa) three times daily—and gradually increased depending on
the response. Sinemet CR is a controlled-release formulation
(containing 25 or 50 mg of carbidopa and 100 or 200 mg of
levodopa). It is sometimes helpful in reducing fluctuations in clinical
response to treatment and in reducing the frequency with which
medication must be taken. The commercially available combination
of levodopa with both carbidopa and entacapone (Stalevo) may
also be helpful in this context and is discussed in the following
section on COMT inhibitors. Response fluctuations are also
reduced by keeping the daily intake of protein at the recommended
minimum and taking the main protein meal as the last meal of the
day.
The dyskinesias and behavioral side effects of levodopa are
dose-related, but reduction in dose may eliminate any therapeutic
benefit. Levodopa-induced dyskinesias may also respond to
amantadine.
Levodopa therapy is contraindicated in patients with psychotic
illness or narrow-angle glaucoma. It should not be given to patients
taking monoamine oxidase A inhibitors or within 2 weeks of their
withdrawal, because hypertensive crises may result. Levodopa
should be used with care in patients with suspected malignant
melanomas or with active peptic ulcers because of concerns that it
may exacerbate these disorders.
4. Dopamine agonists—Dopamine agonists act directly on
dopamine receptors, and their use in parkinsonism is associated
with a lower incidence of the response fluctuations and dyskinesias
that occur with long-term levodopa therapy. They were previously
reserved for patients who had either become refractory to levodopa
or developed the “on-off phenomenon.” However, they are now
best given either before the introduction of levodopa or with a low
dose of Sinemet 25/100 (carbidopa 25 mg and levodopa 100 mg),
one tablet three times daily when dopaminergic therapy is first
introduced; the dose of Sinemet is kept constant, while the dose of
the agonist is gradually increased. Bromocriptine, an ergot
derivative is not widely used in the United States because of side
effects, including anorexia; nausea; vomiting; constipation; postural
hypotension; digital vasospasm; cardiac arrhythmias; various
dyskinesias and mental disturbances; headache; nasal congestion;
erythromelalgia; pulmonary infiltrates; and pericardial, pleural, or
pulmonary fibrosis. In 2007, the manufacturer of pergolide, another
ergot derivative and dopamine agonist, withdrew the drug from the
US market after two studies showed that serious cardiac valvular
abnormalities developed in some patients while taking the drug.
Pramipexole and ropinirole are two newer dopamine agonists
that are not ergot derivatives. They are effective in early Parkinson
disease as well as in advanced stages of the disease. In each case,
the daily dose is built up gradually. Pramipexole is started at a
dosage of 0.125 mg three times daily orally, and the dose is
doubled after 1 week and again after another week; the daily dose
is then increased by 0.75 mg at weekly intervals depending on
response and tolerance. Most patients require between 0.5 and 1.5
mg three times daily orally. Ropinirole is begun in a dosage of 0.25
mg three times daily orally, and the total daily dose is increased at
weekly intervals by 0.75 mg until the fourth week and by 1.5 mg
thereafter. Most patients require between 2 and 8 mg three times
daily for benefit. Adverse effects include fatigue, somnolence,
nausea, peripheral edema, dyskinesias, confusion, and postural
hypotension. Less commonly, an irresistible urge to sleep may
occur, sometimes in inappropriate and hazardous circumstances.
Impulse control disorders involving gambling, shopping, or sexual
activity have also been related to use of dopamine agonists.
5. Selective monoamine oxidase inhibitors—Rasagiline, a
selective monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, has a clear symptomatic
benefit in a daily oral dose of 1 mg, taken in the morning; it may also
be used for adjunctive therapy in patients with response fluctuations
to levodopa. Selegiline (5 mg orally with breakfast and lunch) is
another monoamine oxidase B inhibitor that is sometimes used as
adjunctive treatment for parkinsonism. By inhibiting the metabolic
breakdown of dopamine, these drugs may improve fluctuations or
declining response to levodopa. Although it is sometimes advised
that tyramine-rich foods be avoided when either rasagiline or
selegiline is taken because of the theoretical possibility of a
hypertensive (“cheese”) effect, there is no clinical evidence to
support the need for such dietary precautions when they are taken
at the recommended dosage.
Recent studies have suggested (but failed to show conclusively)
that rasagiline slows the progression of Parkinson disease, and this
remains an important consideration for patients who are young or
have mild disease.
6. 
COMT 
inhibitors—Catecholamine-O-methyltransferase
inhibitors reduce the metabolism of levodopa to 3-O- methyldopa
and thereby alter the plasma pharmacokinetics of levodopa, leading
to more sustained plasma levels and more constant dopaminergic
stimulation of the brain. Two such agents, tolcapone and
entacapone, are currently available and may be used as an adjunct
to levodopacarbidopa in patients with response fluctuations or an
otherwise inadequate response. Treatment results in reduced
response fluctuations, with a greater period of responsiveness to
administered levodopa; however, the use of these agents does not
delay the eventual development of levodopa-induced dyskinesias.
Tolcapone is given in a dosage of 100 mg or 200 mg three times
daily orally, and entacapone is given as 200 mg with each dose of
Sinemet (levodopa-carbidopa). With either preparation, the dose of
Sinemet taken concurrently may have to be reduced by up to one-
third to avoid side effects such as dyskinesias, confusion,
hypotension, and syncope. Diarrhea is sometimes troublesome.
Because rare cases of fulminant hepatic failure have followed its
use, tolcapone should be avoided in patients with preexisting liver
disease. Serial liver function tests should be performed at 2-week
intervals for the first year and at longer intervals thereafter in patients
receiving the drug—as recommended by the manufacturer.
Hepatotoxicity has not been reported with entacapone, which is
therefore the preferred agent, and serial liver function tests are not
required.
Stalevo is the commercial preparation of levodopa combined
with both carbidopa and entacapone. It is best used in patients
already stabilized on equivalent doses of carbidopa/levodopa and
entacapone. It is priced at or below the price of the individual
ingredients (ie, carbidopa/levodopa and entacapone) and has the
added convenience of requiring fewer tablets to be taken daily. It is
available in three strengths: Stalevo 50 (12.5 mg of carbidopa, 50
mg of levodopa, and 200 mg of entacapone), Stalevo 100 (25 mg
of carbidopa, 100 mg of levodopa, and 200 mg of entacapone),
and Stalevo 150 (37.5 mg of carbidopa, 150 mg of levodopa, and
200 mg of entacapone).
7. Atypical antipsychotics—Confusion and psychotic symptoms
may occur as a side effect of dopaminergic therapy or as a part of
the underlying illness. They often respond to atypical antipsychotic
agents, which have few extrapyramidal side effects and do not
block the effects of dopaminergic medication. Olanzapine,
quetiapine, and risperidone may be tried, but the most effective of
these agents is clozapine, a dibenzodiazepine derivative. Clozapine
may rarely cause marrow suppression, and weekly blood counts
are therefore necessary for patients taking it. The patient is started
on 6.25 mg at bedtime and the dosage increased to 25–100 mg/d
as needed. In low doses, it may also improve iatrogenic
dyskinesias.
B. General Measures
Physical therapy or speech therapy helps many patients. Cognitive
impairment and psychiatric symptoms may be helped by a
cholinesterase inhibitor, such as rivastigmine (3–12 mg orally daily
or 4.6 or 9.5 mg/24 hours transdermally daily). The quality of life
can often be improved by the provision of simple aids to daily living,
eg, rails or banisters placed strategically about the home, special
table cutlery with large handles, nonslip rubber table mats, and
devices to amplify the voice.
C. Surgical Measures
Thalamotomy or pallidotomy may help patients who become
unresponsive to medical treatment or have intolerable side effects
from antiparkinsonian agents, especially if they have no evidence of
diffuse vascular disease or significant cognitive decline. Ablative
surgery should generally be confined to one side because the
morbidity is considerably greater after bilateral procedures.
Because of their morbidity, ablative procedures have generally been
supplanted by deep brain stimulation.
D. Brain Stimulation
High-frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nuclei or globus
pallidus internus may benefit all the major features of the disease.
Electrical stimulation of the brain has the advantage over ablative
procedures of being reversible and of causing minimal or no damage
to the brain, and is therefore the preferred surgical approach to
treatment. There is no evidence that the natural history of Parkinson
disease is affected. Deep brain stimulation is reserved for patients
without cognitive impairment or psychiatric disorder who have a
good response to levodopa but in whom dyskinesias or response
fluctuations are problematic. It frequently takes 3–6 months after
surgery to adjust stimulator programming and to achieve optimal
results. Side effects include depression, apathy, impulsivity,
executive dysfunction, and decreased verbal fluency in a subset of
patients.
E. Gene Therapy
Injections of adeno-associated viruses encoding various human
genes have been made into the subthalamic nucleus or putamen in
various phase I and phase II trials of gene therapy to improve the
symptoms or to slow the course of Parkinson disease. These trials
are currently ongoing but the procedure appears to be safe. The
benefits remain to be established.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
Patients requiring surgical treatment should be admitted.
Follett KA et al; CSP 468 Study Group. Pallidal versus
subthalamic deep-brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease. N Engl
J Med. 2010 Jun 3;362(22):2077–91. [PMID: 20519680]
 
Forsayeth J et al. Gene therapy for Parkinson's disease: where are
we now and where are we going? Expert Rev Neurother. 2010
Dec;10(12):1839–45. [PMID: 21091315]
 
Gottwald MD, Aminoff MJ. New frontiers in the pharmacological
management of Parkinson's disease. Drugs Today (Barc). 2008
Jul;44(7):531–45. [PMID: 18806903]
 
Lees AJ et al. Parkinson's disease. Lancet. 2009 Jun
13;373(9680): 2055–66. [PMID: 19524782]
 
Olanow CW et al. A double-blind, delayed-start trial of rasagiline
in Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 24;
361(13):1268–78. [PMID: 19776408]
 
Stocchi F et al. Initiating levodopa/carbidopa therapy with and
without entacapone in early Parkinson disease: the STRIDE-PD
study. Ann Neurol. 2010 Jul;68(1):18–27. [PMID: 20582993]
 
Weaver FM et al. Bilateral deep brain stimulation vs best medical
therapy for patients with advanced Parkinson disease: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009 Jan 7;301(1):63–73.
[PMID: 19126811]
 
Williams A et al. Deep brain stimulation plus best medical therapy
versus best medical therapy alone for advanced Parkinson's
disease (PD SURG trial): a randomised, open-label trial. Lancet
Neurol. 2010 Jun;9(6):581–91. [PMID: 20434403]
 
3. Huntington Disease
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Gradual onset and progression of chorea and dementia or
behavioral change.
 Family history of the disorder.
 Responsible gene identified on chromosome 4.
 
 General Considerations
Huntington disease is characterized by chorea and dementia. It is
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and occurs throughout
the world, in all ethnic groups, with a prevalence rate of about 5 per
100,000. There is an expanded and unstable CAG trinucleotide
repeat in the huntingtin gene at 4p16.3; longer repeat lengths
correspond to an earlier age of onset and faster disease
progression.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Clinical onset is usually between 30 and 50 years of age. The
disease is progressive and usually leads to a fatal outcome within
15–20 years. The initial symptoms may consist of either abnormal
movements or intellectual changes, but ultimately both occur. The
earliest mental changes are often behavioral, with irritability,
moodiness, antisocial behavior, or a psychiatric disturbance, but a
more obvious dementia subsequently develops. The dyskinesia may
initially be no more than an apparent fidgetiness or restlessness, but
eventually choreiform movements and some dystonic posturing
occur. Progressive rigidity and akinesia (rather than chorea)
sometimes occur in association with dementia, especially in cases
with childhood onset.
B. Imaging
CT scanning or MRI usually demonstrates cerebral atrophy and
atrophy of the caudate nucleus in established cases. Positron
emission tomography (PET) has shown reduced striatal metabolic
rate.
 Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis is established with a widely available genetic test,
although such testing should be pursued under the guidance of a
licensed genetic counselor. Chorea developing with no family
history of choreoathetosis should not be attributed to Huntington
disease, at least not until other causes of chorea have been excluded
clinically and by appropriate laboratory studies. Nongenetic causes
of chorea include stroke, systemic lupus erythematosus and related
disorders, paraneoplastic syndromes, infection with HIV, and
various medications. In younger patients, self-limiting Sydenham
chorea develops after group A streptococcal infections on rare
occasions. If a patient presents solely with progressive intellectual
failure, it may not be possible to distinguish Huntington disease from
other causes of dementia unless there is a characteristic family
history or a dyskinesia develops.
Huntington disease–like (HDL) disorders resemble
Huntington disease but the CAG trinucleotide repeat number of the
huntingtin gene is normal. There are autosomal dominant (HDL1, a
familial prion disease involving a mutation in the PRNP gene on
chromosome 20; and HDL2, a triplet repeat disease involving the
gene for junctophilin-3 on chromosome 16) and recessive forms
(HDL3, 4p15.3).
A clinically similar autosomal dominant disorder (dentatorubral-
pallidoluysian atrophy), manifested by chorea, dementia, ataxia,
and myoclonic epilepsy, is uncommon except in persons of
Japanese ancestry. It is due to a mutation in the ATN1 gene
mapping to 12p13.31. Treatment is as for Huntington disease.
 Treatment
There is no cure for Huntington disease; progression cannot be
halted; and treatment is purely symptomatic. The reported
biochemical changes suggest a relative underactivity of neurons
containing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and acetylcholine or
a relative overactivity of dopaminergic neurons. Tetrabenazine, a
drug that interferes with the vesicular storage of biogenic amines, is
widely used to treat the dyskinesia. The starting dose is 12.5 mg
twice or three times daily orally, increasing by 12.5 mg every 5 days
depending on response and tolerance; the usual maintenance dose is
25 mg three times daily. Side effects include depression, postural
hypotension, drowsiness, and parkinsonian features; tetrabenazine
should not be given within 14 days of taking monoamine oxidase
inhibitors and is not indicated for the treatment of levodopa-induced
dyskinesias. Reserpine is similar in depleting central monoamines
but has more peripheral effects and a worse side-effect profile,
making its use problematic in Huntington disease; if utilized, the
dose is built up gradually to between 2 mg and 5 mg orally daily,
depending on the response. Treatment with drugs blocking
dopamine receptors, such as phenothiazines or haloperidol, may
control the dyskinesia and any behavioral disturbances. Haloperidol
treatment is usually begun with a dose of 1 mg once or twice daily
orally, which is then increased every 3 or 4 days depending on the
response; alternatively, atypical antipsychotic agents such as
quetiapine (increasing from 25 mg daily orally up to 100 mg twice
daily orally as tolerated) may be tried. Amantadine in a dose of 200
mg to 400 mg daily orally is sometimes helpful for chorea.
Behavioral disturbances may respond to clozapine. Attempts to
compensate for the relative GABA deficiency by enhancing central
GABA activity or to compensate for the relative cholinergic
underactivity by giving choline chloride have not been
therapeutically helpful. Neuroprotective strategies are being
explored.
Offspring should be offered genetic counseling. Genetic testing
permits presymptomatic detection and definitive diagnosis of the
disease.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
Adam OR et al. Symptomatic treatment of Huntington disease.
Neurotherapeutics. 2008 Apr;5(2):181–97. [PMID: 18394562]
 
Biglan KM et al. Motor abnormalities in premanifest persons with
Huntington's disease: the PREDICT-HD study. Mov Disord. 2009
Sep 15;24(12):1763–72. [PMID: 19562761]
 
Frank S. Tetrabenazine as anti-chorea therapy in Huntington
disease: an open-label continuation study. Huntington Study
Group/TETRA-HD Investigators. BMC Neurol. 2009 Dec
18;9:62. [PMID: 20021666]
 
Kieburtz K et al; Huntington Disease Study Group DIMOND
Investigators. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of
latrepirdine in Huntington disease. Arch Neurol. 2010 Feb;
67(2):154–60. [PMID: 20142523]
 
Roze E et al. Pathophysiology of Huntington's disease: from
huntingtin functions to potential treatments. Curr Opin Neurol.
2008 Aug;21(4):497–503. [PMID: 18607213]
 
4. Idiopathic Torsion Dystonia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Dystonic movements and postures.
 Normal birth and developmental history. No other neurologic
signs.
 Investigations (including CT scan or MRI) reveal no cause of
dystonia.
 
 General Considerations
Idiopathic torsion dystonia may occur sporadically or on a
hereditary basis, with autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive,
and X-linked recessive modes of transmission. One responsible
gene is located at 9q34 (and has been named DYT1) and involves a
unique mutation consisting of a GAG deletion in the major
dominantly inherited disorder, and maps to the long arm of the X
chromosome in the X-linked recessive form; the responsible gene in
the autosomal recessive disorder is unknown. Symptoms may begin
in childhood or later and persist throughout life.
 Clinical Findings
The disorder is characterized by the onset of abnormal movements
and postures in a patient with a normal birth and developmental
history, no relevant past medical illness, and no other neurologic
signs. Investigations (including CT scan) reveal no cause for the
abnormal movements. Dystonic movements of the head and neck
may take the form of torticollis, blepharospasm, facial grimacing, or
forced opening or closing of the mouth. The limbs may also adopt
abnormal but characteristic postures. The age at onset influences
both the clinical findings and the prognosis. With onset in childhood,
there is usually a family history of the disorder, symptoms commonly
commence in the legs, and progression is likely until there is severe
disability from generalized dystonia. In contrast, when onset is later,
a positive family history is unlikely, initial symptoms are often in the
arms or axial structures, and severe disability does not usually
occur, although generalized dystonia may ultimately develop in some
patients. If all cases are considered together, about one-third of
patients eventually become so severely disabled that they are
confined to chair or bed, while another one-third are affected only
mildly.
 Differential Diagnosis
Before a diagnosis of idiopathic torsion dystonia is made, it is
imperative to exclude other causes of dystonia. Perinatal anoxia,
birth trauma, and kernicterus are common causes of dystonia, but
abnormal movements usually then develop before the age of 5, the
early development of the patient is usually abnormal, and a history
of seizures is not unusual. Moreover, examination may reveal signs
of mental retardation or pyramidal deficit in addition to the
movement disorder. Dystonic posturing may also occur in Wilson
disease, Huntington disease, or parkinsonism; as a sequela of
encephalitis lethargica or previous neuroleptic drug therapy; and in
certain other disorders. In these cases, diagnosis is based on the
history and accompanying clinical manifestations.
 Treatment
Idiopathic torsion dystonia usually responds poorly to drugs.
Levodopa, diazepam, baclofen, carbamazepine, amantadine, or
anticholinergic medication (in high dosage) is occasionally helpful; if
not, a trial of treatment with tetrabenazine, phenothiazines, or
haloperidol may be worthwhile. In each case, the dose has to be
individualized, depending on response and tolerance. However, the
doses of these latter drugs that are required for benefit lead usually
to mild parkinsonism. Pallidal deep brain stimulation is helpful for
medically refractory dystonia and has a lower morbidity than
stereotactic thalamotomy, which is sometimes helpful in patients
with predominantly unilateral limb dystonia. Potential adverse events
of deep brain stimulation include cerebral infection or hemorrhage,
broken leads, affective changes, and dysarthria.
A distinct variety of dominantly inherited dystonia, caused by a
mutation in the gene for GTP cyclohydrolase I on chromosome
14q, is remarkably responsive to levodopa.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
Patients requiring surgical treatment should be admitted.
Ostrem JL et al. Treatment of dystonia with deep brain stimulation.
Neurotherapeutics. 2008 Apr;5(2):320–30. [PMID: 18394573]
 
Tarsy D et al. Dystonia. N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug 24;355(8):818–
29. [PMID: 16928997]
 
5. Focal Torsion Dystonia
A number of the dystonic manifestations that occur in idiopathic
torsion dystonia may also occur as isolated phenomena. They are
best regarded as focal dystonias that either occur as formes frustes
of idiopathic torsion dystonia in patients with a positive family
history or represent a focal manifestation of the adult-onset form of
that disorder when there is no family history. Mapping of
responsible genes to chromosome 8 (DYT6) and chromosome 18
(DYT7) has been reported in some instances of cervical or cranial
dystonia. Medical treatment is generally unsatisfactory. A trial of the
drugs used in idiopathic torsion dystonia is worthwhile, however,
since a few patients do show some response. In addition, with
restricted dystonias such as blepharospasm or torticollis, local
injection of botulinum A toxin into the overactive muscles may
produce worthwhile benefit for several weeks or months and can be
repeated as needed.
Both blepharospasm and oromandibular dystonia may occur as
an isolated focal dystonia. The former is characterized by
spontaneous involuntary forced closure of the eyelids for a variable
interval. Oromandibular dystonia is manifested by involuntary
contraction of the muscles about the mouth causing, for example,
involuntary opening or closing of the mouth, roving or protruding
tongue movements, and retraction of the platysma.
Spasmodic torticollis, usually with onset between 25 and 50
years of age, is characterized by a tendency for the neck to twist to
one side. This initially occurs episodically, but eventually the neck is
held to the side. Spontaneous resolution may occur in the first year
or so. The disorder is otherwise usually lifelong. Selective section of
the spinal accessory nerve and the upper cervical nerve roots is
sometimes helpful if medical treatment is unsuccessful. Local
injection of botulinum A toxin provides benefit in most cases.
Writer's cramp is characterized by dystonic posturing of the hand
and forearm when the hand is used for writing and sometimes when
it is used for other tasks, eg, playing the piano or using a
screwdriver or eating utensils. Drug treatment is usually
unrewarding, and patients are often best advised to learn to use the
other hand for activities requiring manual dexterity. Injections of
botulinum A toxin are helpful in some instances.
6. Myoclonus
Occasional myoclonic jerks may occur in anyone, especially when
drifting into sleep. General or multifocal myoclonus is common in
patients with idiopathic epilepsy and is especially prominent in
certain hereditary disorders characterized by seizures and
progressive intellectual decline, such as the lipid storage diseases. It
is also a feature of various rare degenerative disorders, notably
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, and is common in subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Generalized
myoclonic jerking may accompany uremic and other metabolic
encephalopathies, result from therapy with levodopa or cyclic
antidepressants, occur in alcohol or drug withdrawal states, or
follow anoxic brain damage. It also occurs on a hereditary or
sporadic basis as an isolated phenomenon in otherwise healthy
subjects.
Segmental myoclonus is a rare manifestation of a focal spinal
cord lesion. It may also be the clinical expression of epilepsia
partialis continua, a disorder in which a repetitive focal epileptic
discharge arises in the contralateral sensorimotor cortex, sometimes
from an underlying structural lesion. An electroencephalogram is
often helpful in clarifying the epileptic nature of the disorder, and CT
or MRI scan may reveal the causal lesion.
Myoclonus may respond to certain anticonvulsant drugs,
especially valproic acid, or to one of the benzodiazepines,
particularly clonazepam (see Table 24–3). It may also respond to
piracetam (up to 16.8 g daily). Myoclonus following anoxic brain
damage is often responsive to oxitriptan (5-hydroxytryptophan), an
investigational agent that is the precursor of serotonin, and
sometimes to clonazepam. Oxitriptan is given in gradually increasing
doses up to 1–1.5 mg daily. In patients with segmental myoclonus,
a localized lesion should be searched for and treated appropriately.
Chang VC et al. Myoclonus. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2008
May;10(3):222–9. [PMID: 18579026]
 
7. Wilson Disease
In this metabolic disorder, abnormal movement and posture may
occur with or without coexisting signs of liver involvement.
Psychiatric and neuropsychological manifestations are common.
Wilson disease is discussed in Chapter 16.
Lorincz MT. Neurologic Wilson's disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci.
2010 Jan;1184:173–87. [PMID: 20146697]
 
8. Drug-Induced Abnormal Movements
Phenothiazines, butyrophenones, and metoclopramide may produce
a wide variety of abnormal movements, including parkinsonism,
akathisia (ie, motor restlessness), acute dystonia, chorea, and
tardive dyskinesias or dystonia; several of these are also produced
by aripiprazole. These complications are discussed in Chapter 25.
Chorea may also develop in patients receiving levodopa,
bromocriptine, anticholinergic drugs, phenytoin, carbamazepine,
lithium, amphetamines, or oral contraceptives, and it resolves with
withdrawal of the offending substance. Similarly, dystonia may be
produced by levodopa, bromocriptine, lithium, or carbamazepine;
and parkinsonism by reserpine and tetrabenazine. Postural tremor
may occur with a variety of drugs, including epinephrine,
isoproterenol, theophylline, caffeine, lithium, thyroid hormone,
tricyclic antidepressants, and valproic acid.
9. Restless Legs Syndrome
This disorder may occur as a primary (idiopathic) disorder or in
relation to pregnancy, iron deficiency anemia, peripheral neuropathy
(especially uremic or diabetic), or periodic leg movements of sleep.
It may have a hereditary basis, and several genetic loci have been
associated with the disorder (12q12-q21, 14q13-q21, 9p24-p22,
2q33, 20p13, 6p21, and 2p14-p13). Restlessness and curious
sensory disturbances lead to an irresistible urge to move the limbs,
especially during periods of relaxation. Disturbed nocturnal sleep
and excessive daytime somnolence may result. Therapy is with
nonergot dopamine agonists, such as pramipexole (0.125–0.5 mg
once daily or ropinirole (0.25–4 mg once daily) 2 to 3 hours before
bedtime, or with benzodiazepines, such as clonazepam. Gabapentin
may also provide symptom relief and is taken once or twice daily (in
the evening and before sleep), starting with 300 mg daily; the dose
is built up depending on response and tolerance (to approximately
1800 mg daily); pregabalin, a related drug, is also effective at 150–
300 mg orally daily, divided twice to three times daily. Levodopa is
helpful but may lead to an augmentation of symptoms, so that its use
is generally reserved for those who do not respond to other
measures. In some instances, opioids are required to control
symptoms.
Ferini-Strambi L et al. Effect of pramipexole on RLS symptoms
and sleep: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Sleep Med. 2008 Dec;9(8):874–81. [PMID: 18952497]
 
Garcia-Borreguero D et al. Treatment of restless legs syndrome
with pregabalin: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Neurology. 2010 Jun 8;74(23):1897–904. [PMID: 20427750]
 
Kushida CA. Clinical presentation, diagnosis, and quality of life
issues in restless legs syndrome. Am J Med. 2007 Jan;120 (1
Suppl 1):S4–S12. [PMID: 17198769]
 
Trenkwalder C. Treatment of restless legs syndrome: an evidence-
based review and implications for clinical practice. Mov Disord.
2008 Dec 15;23(16):2267–302. [PMID: 18925578]
 
10. Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Multiple motor and phonic tics.
 Symptoms begin before age 21 years.
 Tics occur frequently for at least 1 year.
 Tics vary in number, frequency, and nature over time.
 
 Clinical Findings
Motor tics are the initial manifestation in 80% of cases and most
commonly involve the face, whereas in the remaining 20%, the initial
symptoms are phonic tics; ultimately a combination of different
motor and phonic tics develop in all patients. These are noted first in
childhood, generally between the ages of 2 and 15. Motor tics
occur especially about the face, head, and shoulders (eg, sniffing,
blinking, frowning, shoulder shrugging, head thrusting, etc). Phonic
tics commonly consist of grunts, barks, hisses, throat-clearing,
coughs, etc, but sometimes also of verbal utterances including
coprolalia (obscene speech). There may also be echolalia
(repetition of the speech of others), echopraxia (imitation of others’
movements), and palilalia (repetition of words or phrases). Some
tics may be self-mutilating in nature, such as nail-biting, hair-pulling,
or biting of the lips or tongue. The disorder is chronic, but the
course may be punctuated by relapses and remissions. Obsessive-
compulsive behaviors are commonly associated and may be more
disabling than the tics themselves. A family history is sometimes
obtained, and a mutation in the histidine decarboxylase gene on
chromosome 15 was recently reported in one family with an
autosomal dominant form of the disease. Prior reports of a linkage
to chromosome 13q have been called into question.
Examination usually reveals no abnormalities other than the tics.
In addition to obsessive-compulsive behavior disorders, psychiatric
disturbances may occur because of the associated cosmetic and
social embarrassment. The diagnosis of the disorder is often
delayed for years, the tics being interpreted as psychiatric illness or
some other form of abnormal movement. Patients are thus often
subjected to unnecessary treatment before the disorder is
recognized. The tic-like character of the abnormal movements and
the absence of other neurologic signs should differentiate this
disorder from other movement disorders presenting in childhood.
Wilson disease, however, can simulate the condition and should be
excluded.
 Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic and may need to be continued
indefinitely. Cognitive behavioral therapy or other forms of
behavioral intervention can be effective alone or in combination with
pharmacotherapy. α-Adrenergic agonists, such as clonidine (start
0.05 mg orally at bedtime, titrating to 0.3–0.4 mg orally daily,
divided three to four times per day) or guanfacine (start 0.5 mg
orally at bedtime, titrating to a maximum of 3–4 mg orally daily,
divided twice daily) are first-line therapies because of a favorable
side-effect profile compared with typical antipsychotics, which are
the only FDA-approved therapies for the disorder. Topiramate has
shown promise in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, and the
use of tetrabenazine has been described but not rigorously tested.
Atypical antipsychotics, including risperidone and aripiprazole, have
shown possible efficacy and may be tried before the typical
antipsychotic agents. When a typical antipsychotic is required in
cases of severe tics, haloperidol is generally regarded as the drug of
choice. It is started in a low dose (0.25 mg daily orally) that is
gradually increased (by 0.25 mg every 4 or 5 days) until there is
maximum benefit with a minimum of side effects or until side effects
limit further increments. A total daily oral dose of between 2 mg and
8 mg is usually optimal, but higher doses are sometimes necessary.
Fluphenazine (2–15 mg orally daily) or pimozide (1–10 mg orally
daily) are alternatives. Typical antipsychotics can cause significant
weight gain and carry a risk of tardive dyskinesias and other long-
term, potentially irreversible motor side effects.
Injection of botulinum toxin type A at the site of the most
distressing tics is sometimes worthwhile. Bilateral high-frequency
deep brain stimulation at various sites has been helpful in some,
otherwise intractable, cases.
 When to Refer
All patients with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome should be referred.
 When to Admit
Patients undergoing surgical (deep brain stimulation) treatment
should be admitted.
Jankovic J et al. A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study of topiramate in the treatment of Tourette syndrome. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010 Jan;81(1):70–3. [PMID:
19726418]
 
Welter ML et al. Internal pallidal and thalamic stimulation in
patients with Tourette syndrome. Arch Neurol. 2008 Jul;65(7):
952–7. [PMID: 18625864]
 
DEMENTIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Progressive intellectual decline.
 Not due to delirium or psychiatric disease.
 Age is the main risk factor, followed by family history and
vascular disease risk factors.
 
 General Considerations
Dementia is a progressive decline in intellectual function that is
severe enough to compromise social or occupational functioning.
“Mild cognitive impairment” describes a decline that has not
resulted in a change in the level of function. Although a few patients
identify a precipitating event, most experience an insidious onset and
gradual progression of symptoms.
Dementia typically begins after age 60, and the prevalence
doubles approximately every 5 years thereafter; in persons aged 85
and older, around half have dementia. In most, the cause of
dementia 
is 
acquired, 
either 
as 
a 
sporadic 
primary
neurodegenerative disease or as the result of another disorder, such
as stroke. Other risk factors for dementia include family history,
diabetes mellitus and other vascular disease risk factors, and a
history of significant head injury. Dementia is more prevalent among
women, but this is accounted for by their longer life expectancy.
Education and ongoing intellectual stimulation may be protective,
perhaps by promoting a “cognitive reserve,” an improved capacity
to compensate for insidious neuro-degeneration.
Dementia is distinct from delirium and psychiatric disease.
Delirium is an acute confusional state that often occurs in response
to an identifiable trigger, such as drug or alcohol intoxication or
withdrawal (eg, Wernicke encephalopathy, described below);
medication side effects (especially drugs with anticholinergic
properties, antihistamines, benzodiazepines, sleeping aids, opioids,
neuroleptics, corticosteroids, and other sedative or psychotropic
agents), infection (consider occult urinary tract infection or
pneumonia in elderly patients), metabolic disturbance (including an
electrolyte abnormality; hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia; or a
nutritional, endocrine, renal, or hepatic disorder), sleep deprivation,
or other neurologic disease (seizure, including a postictal state, or
stroke). A delirium typically involves fluctuating level of arousal,
including drowsiness or agitation, and it improves after removal or
treatment of the precipitating factor. Patients with dementia are
especially susceptible to episodes of delirium, but recognition of the
dementia is not possible until the delirium lifts. For this reason,
dementia is typically diagnosed in outpatients who are otherwise
medically stable, rather than in acutely ill patients in the hospital.
Psychiatric disease sometimes leads to complaints of impaired
cognition. Impaired attention is usually to blame, and in some
patients with depression or anxiety, poor focus and concentration
may even be a primary complaint. The symptoms should improve
with appropriate psychiatric treatment. Mood disorders are
commonly seen in patients with neurodegenerative disease and in
some cases are an early symptom. There is some evidence that a
persistent, untreated mood disorder may predispose to the
development of an age-related dementia, and psychiatric symptoms
can clearly exacerbate cognitive impairment in patients who already
have dementia; therefore, suspicion of dementia should not distract
from appropriate screening for and treatment of depression or
anxiety.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Physicians should be aware that a patient's insight into a cognitive
change may be vague or absent, and collateral history is essential to
a proper evaluation. As patients age, primary care clinicians should
inquire periodically about the presence of any cognitive symptoms.
Symptoms depend on the area of the brain affected. Short-term
memory loss, involving the repeating of questions or stories and a
diminished ability to recall the details of recent conversations or
events, frequently results from pathologic changes in the
hippocampus. Word-finding difficulty often involves difficulty
recalling the names of people, places, or objects, with low-
frequency words affected first, eventually resulting in speech laden
with pronouns and circumlocutions. This problem is thought to arise
from pathology at the temporoparietal junction of the left
hemisphere. Problems with articulation, fluency, comprehension, or
word meaning are anatomically distinct and less common.
Visuospatial dysfunction may result in poor navigation and getting
lost in familiar places, impaired recognition of previously familiar
faces and buildings, or trouble discerning an object against a
background. The right parietal lobe is one of the brain areas
implicated in such symptoms. Executive dysfunction may manifest
by easy distractibility, impulsivity, mental inflexibility, concrete
thought, slowed processing speed, poor planning and organization,
or impaired judgment. Localization may vary and could include the
frontal lobes or subcortical areas like the basal ganglia or cerebral
white matter. Apathy or indifference, separate from depression, is
common and may have a similar anatomy as executive dysfunction.
Apraxia, or the loss of learned motor behaviors, may result from
dysfunction of the frontal or parietal lobes, especially the left parietal
lobe.
The time of symptom onset must be established, but subtle, early
symptoms are often apparent only in retrospect. Another event,
such as an illness or hospitalization, may lead to a new recognition
of existing symptoms. Symptoms often accumulate over time, and
the nature of the earliest symptom is most helpful in forming the
differential diagnosis. The history should establish risk factors for
dementia, including family history, other chronic illnesses, and
vascular disease risk factors. Finally, it is important to document the
patient's current capacity to perform basic and instrumental activities
of daily living (see Chapter 4) and to note the extent of decline from
the premorbid level of function. Indeed, it is this functional
assessment that defines the presence and severity of a dementia.
The physical examination is important to identify any occult
medical illness. In addition, eye movement abnormalities,
parkinsonism (see above), or other motor abnormalities may help
identify an underlying neurologic condition. The workup should
prioritize the exclusion of conditions that are reversible or require
separate therapy. Screening for depression is necessary, along with
imaging and laboratory workup, as indicated below.
B. Neuropsychological Assessment
Brief quantification of cognitive impairment is indicated in a patient
complaining of cognitive symptoms. The Folstein Mini Mental State
Exam (MMSE) is commonly used, and can be administered in
approximately 5 minutes. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment takes
slightly longer and may be slightly more sensitive. These tests are
useful because they are objective and widely used, but both have
important limitations: they are insensitive to mild cognitive
impairment, they may be biased negatively by the presence of
language or attention problems, and they do not correlate with
functional capacity.
An evaluation by a trained neuropsychologist or psychometrician
may be appropriate. The goal of such testing is to enhance
localization by defining the cognitive domains that are impaired as
well as to quantify the degree of impairment. There is no standard
battery of tests, but a variety of metrics are commonly used to
assess all of the symptom types highlighted above. Assessments are
most accurate when a patient is well-rested, comfortable, and
otherwise medically stable.
In an asymptomatic patient, there is no screening guideline.
Because occult cognitive impairment can lead to morbidity through
isolation and poor attentiveness to basic needs (for instance, in an
elderly individual living alone), periodic screening is prudent for
patients in their 70s and older: Ask the patient to repeat three
simple nouns (not referring to objects in the room), then to draw a
clock face with numbers in the correct place and the hands
indicating a time of 11:10, and finally to recall the three nouns; recall
of fewer than three words or any abnormality in the clock drawing
may signify the need to continue with the full MMSE and to pursue
further questioning and workup.
C. Imaging
Brain imaging is indicated in any patient with a new, progressive
cognitive complaint. The goal is to exclude occult cerebrovascular
disease, tumor, or other identifiable structural abnormality, rather
than to provide positive evidence of a neurodegenerative disease.
Global or focal brain atrophy may be worse than expected for age
and could suggest a particular neurodegenerative process, but such
findings are rarely specific. MRI is preferred, but CT scan will
suffice; no contrast is necessary. If MRI is obtained, then diffusion-
weighted sequences may be helpful if acute stroke or prion disease
is a consideration.
Positron-emission tomography (PET) with fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) may identify particular brain structures that are
hypometabolic and thus likely to harbor pathology. PET imaging
does not confirm or exclude any specific cause of dementia but may
be useful as an element of the workup in specific clinical
circumstances, such as discriminating between Alzheimer disease
and frontotemporal dementia in a patient with some symptoms of
each. PET imaging with a radiolabeled ligand for β-amyloid, one of
the pathologic proteins in Alzheimer disease, is nearing FDA
approval and may soon be available. This technique may be quite
helpful in diagnosing Alzheimer disease in younger patients.
However, after age 60 or 70, amyloid plaques can accumulate in
the absence of cognitive impairment; thus, the specificity of a
positive amyloid scan diminishes with age. Single photon-emission
computed tomography offers similar information as FDG-PET but is
less sensitive.
D. Laboratory Findings
Serum levels of vitamin B12, free T4, and thyroid-stimulating
hormone should be measured for any patient with cognitive
symptoms. A serum rapid plasma regain (RPR) used to be obtained
routinely, but now is done only if there is a risk factor or suspicion
for a remote, untreated syphilis infection. Other testing should be
driven by clinical suspicion, and often includes a complete blood
count, serum electrolytes, glucose, and lipid profile. Also prudent is
age-appropriate cancer screening.
Other tests are available if Alzheimer disease is a consideration:
ApoE genotyping is clinically available, and the presence of one or
two ApoE ε4 alleles indicates an increased risk of Alzheimer
disease. Importantly, the gene does not cause Alzheimer disease;
familial Alzheimer disease is rare and is caused by mutations in the
amyloid precursor protein or presenilin genes. Finding an ApoE ε4
allele in a young patient with dementia might raise the index of
suspicion for Alzheimer disease. Obtaining a genotype in an elderly
patient is unlikely to be helpful, and doing so in an asymptomatic
patient as a marker of risk for Alzheimer disease is inappropriate
until a preventive therapy becomes available. Spinal fluid protein
measurements are also now clinically available. Levels of β-amyloid
decrease and tau protein increase in Alzheimer disease, but the
sensitivity and specificity at discriminating from other causes of
dementia is uncertain.
 Differential Diagnosis
In elderly patients with gradually progressive cognitive symptoms
and no other complaint or sign, a neurodegenerative disease is
likely. Decline beginning before age 60, rapid progression,
fluctuating course, unintended weight loss, systemic complaints, or
other unexplained symptoms or signs raise suspicion for another
process. In this case, the differential is broad and includes infection
or inflammatory disease (consider a lumbar puncture to screen for
cells or antibodies in the spinal fluid), neoplasm or a paraneo-plastic
condition, endocrine or metabolic disease, drugs or toxins, or other
conditions.
Alzheimer disease is the most common age-related
neurodegenerative illness, responsible for most of the increasing
incidence of dementia after age 60. Its pathogenesis is not fully
understood, but involves the accumulation of β-amyloid-laden senile
plaques in the parietal and frontal lobes, followed by tangled
aggregates of hyperphosphorylated tau protein in the entorhinal
cortex, hippocampus, and elsewhere. Loss of synaptic function,
neuronal death, and brain atrophy follow. Typically, short-term
memory impairment is the first symptom; visuospatial and executive
dysfunction and anomia often develop. Apathy and depression
frequently occur, and behavioral problems may arise as the disease
progresses. Motor manifestations, including myoclonus, are
uncommon until late in the illness. Less commonly, Alzheimer
disease can present as a pure language or visuospatial disorder
before amnesia and other symptoms accumulate.
Vascular dementia is the next most common cause of age-
related dementia. Most elderly patients with vascular dementia have
a stepwise accumulation of cognitive symptoms associated with
multiple strokes. They also have a superimposed, gradually
progressive decline, and neuropathologic hallmarks of Alzheimer
disease or other neuro-degenerative conditions are often present at
autopsy. The cerebrovascular disease may confer risk for these
other pathogenic processes.
Dementia with Lewy Bodies is also common. On a spectrum
with Parkinson disease, it involves the same neuropathologic finding,
the accumulation of α-synuclein-containing neuronal inclusions.
Classic findings of Parkinson disease may occur along with or after
the first cognitive symptoms, which include executive and
visuospatial dysfunction. Well-formed visual hallucinations are
classic, and other psychiatric features include anxiety, impulsivity,
and delusions. A marked predisposition to episodic delirium gives
rise to a fluctuating course. Treatment is problematic: neuroleptics
(to treat the hallucinations) exacerbate the movement disorder, and
dopaminergics exacerbate the psychiatric symptoms. Cholinesterase
inhibitors (see below) are the mainstay of therapy and can stabilize
the fluctuations.
Frontotemporal dementia is a group of diseases that result in
focal and asymmetric atrophy of the frontal and anterior temporal
lobes. The peak incidence of frontotemporal dementia is in the sixth
decade, when it is about as common as Alzheimer disease. Family
history is an especially important risk factor for frontotemporal
dementia, and polymorphisms and mutations have been found in
genes for tau, progranulin, and other proteins. Behavioral-variant
frontotemporal dementia presents with an early and profound
personality change, characterized by loss of empathy and social
comportment, disinhibition, apathy, and loss of insight. Patients
favor sweet and fatty foods, ignore personal hygiene, and become
impulsive, careless, and increasingly ritualistic; eventually, inertia
replaces goal-directed behavior. Neuropsychological features
include executive dysfunction and loss of abstract thought, with
relative preservation of memory and visuospatial function. Atrophy
occurs especially in the right frontal lobe and insula, where neurons
harbor aggregates of tau, TDP-43, or FUS (fused in sarcoma
protein). Semantic dementia involves atrophy of the temporal
poles, causing patients to exhibit word-finding deficits along with
diminished word comprehension and lack of object and category
knowledge. Poor face recognition and rigid, ritualistic behaviors are
common. TDP-43 aggregation is the most common neuropathologic
finding. Progressive non-fluent aphasia, involving left frontal
atrophy, presents with speech that is effortful and hampered by
dysarthria, sound distortions, phonemic errors, and poor grammar.
Focal extrapyramidal signs and apraxia of the right arm and leg are
frequent. Tau aggregates are frequently found at autopsy, and the
disorder is clinically and pathologically on a spectrum with
corticobasal degeneration.
Normal pressure hydrocephalus is a difficult diagnosis to
establish. Symptoms include gait apraxia (sometimes described as a
“magnetic” gait, as if the feet are stuck to the floor), urinary
incontinence, and dementia. CT scanning or MRI of the brain
reveals ventricles that are enlarged in obvious disproportion to
sulcal widening and overall brain atrophy. When drainage of a large
volume (30–50 mL) of cerebrospinal fluid by lumbar puncture
results in objective improvement of gait (such as in the time to walk
20 feet), then consideration is often given to the placement of a
lumboperitoneal shunt. Unfortunately, gait disorders, incontinence,
and cognitive dysfunction often occur together nonspecifically in
elderly patients, and distinguishing normal pressure hydrocephalus
from cerebral atrophy is not straightforward. Because of the surgical
risks associated with shunt placement, as well as a strong risk for
future shunt malfunction requiring further surgical intervention, the
procedure should be avoided except in clear-cut cases. In general,
it is the gait apraxia that is most likely to improve after surgery; the
cognitive impairment is least likely to respond.
 Treatment
A. Nonpharmacologic Approaches
Aerobic exercise (45 minutes most days of the week) and frequent
mental stimulation may reduce the rate of functional decline and
decrease the demented patient's caregiving needs, and these
interventions may reduce the risk of dementia in normal individuals.
The most efficacious manner of mental stimulation is a matter of
debate: maintaining as active a role in the family and community as
practically possible is most likely to be of benefit, emphasizing
activities at which the patient feels confident. Patients with
neurodegenerative diseases have a limited capacity to regain lost
skills; for instance, memory drills in a patient with Alzheimer disease
are more likely to lead to frustration than benefit and studies show
that computerized cognitive training does not improve cognition or
function in demented patients.
B. Cognitive Symptoms
Cholinesterase inhibitors are first-line therapy for Alzheimer
disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. They provide mild,
symptomatic treatment for cognitive dysfunction and may prolong
the capacity for independence. However, they do not prevent
disease progression. Commonly used medications include donepezil
(start at 5 mg orally daily for 4 weeks, then increase to 10 mg daily;
a 23 mg daily dose is newly approved for moderate to severe
Alzheimer disease, although its additional efficacy over the 10-mg
dose is modest); rivastigmine (start at 1.5 mg orally twice daily, then
increasing every 2 weeks by 1.5 mg twice daily to a goal of 3–6 mg
twice daily); and galantamine (start at 4 mg orally twice daily, then
increasing every 4 weeks by 4 mg twice daily to a goal of 8–12 mg
twice daily). Cholinesterase inhibitors are not given for
frontotemporal dementia because they may worsen behavioral
symptoms.
Memantine (start at 5 mg orally daily, then increase by 5 mg per
week up to a target of 10 mg twice daily) is approved for the
treatment of moderate to severe Alzheimer disease. In
frontotemporal dementia, some open-label studies support its use,
and blinded, placebo-controlled trials are underway.
Disease-modifying drugs are not yet available for Alzheimer
disease. Active and passive immunotherapy directed against β-
amyloid is currently being explored. Such treatment appears to
increase the risk for meningeal inflammation or brain edema,
especially in patients with an ApoE ε4 allele, and it remains to be
seen whether a counter-balancing benefit exists; phase III trials are
ongoing.
C. Mood and Behavioral Disturbances
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are generally safe and
well-tolerated in elderly, cognitively impaired patients, and they are
usually efficacious for the treatment of depression and anxiety.
However, paroxetine should be avoided because it has
anticholinergic effects. Other antidepressant agents, such as
buproprion or venlafaxine, are probably as safe and effective as
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
Insomnia is common, and trazodone (25–50 mg orally at bedtime
as needed) can be safe and effective. Over-the-counter
antihistamine 
hypnotics 
must 
be 
avoided, 
along 
with
benzodiazepines, because of their tendency to worsen cognition and
precipitate delirium. Other prescription hypnotics such as zolpidem
may result in similar adverse reactions.
For agitation, impulsivity, and other behaviors that interfere with
safe caregiving, causes of delirium (detailed above) should first be
considered. When no reversible trigger is identified, treatment
should be approached in a staged manner. Behavioral interventions,
such as reorientation and distraction from anxiety-provoking stimuli,
are first-line. Ensure that the patient is kept active during the day
with both physical exercise and mentally stimulating activities, and
that there is adequate sleep at night. Reassess the level of
caregiving, and consider increasing the time spent directly with an
attendant. Next, ensure that appropriate pharmacologic treatment of
cognition and mood is maximized. Finally, as a last resort, when
other measures prove insufficient and the patient's behaviors raise
safety concerns, consider low doses of an atypical antipsychotic
medication, such as quetiapine (start 25 mg orally daily as needed,
increasing to two to three times daily as needed); even though
atypical agents cause extrapyramidal side effects less frequently than
typical antipsychotics, they should be used with particular caution in
a patient at risk for falls, especially if parkinsonian signs are already
present. Regularly scheduled dosing is not recommended, and if
implemented should be reassessed on a frequent basis (eg, weekly),
with attempts to taper off as tolerated. There is an FDA black box
warning against the use of all antipsychotic medications in demented
patients because of an association with death from cardiovascular
and infectious diseases, and other causes. Benzodiazepines, such as
lorazepam (0.5 mg as needed, up to one to two times daily) may be
used as an alternative, but they may sometimes worsen rather than
ameliorate agitation.
 Special Circumstances
A. Rapidly Progressive Dementia
When dementia develops quickly, with obvious decline over a few
weeks to a few months, the syndrome may be classified as a rapidly
progressive dementia. The differential diagnosis for typical
dementias is still relevant, but additional etiologies must be
considered, including prion disease; infections; toxins; neoplasms;
and 
autoimmune 
and 
inflammatory 
diseases, 
including
corticosteroid-responsive 
(Hashimoto) 
encephalopathy 
and
antibody-mediated paraneoplastic syndromes. Workup should
begin with brain MRI with contrast and diffusion-weighted imaging,
routine laboratory studies (serum vitamin B12, free T4, and thyroid-
stimulating hormone levels), serum RPR, HIV antibody, Lyme
serology, rheumatologic tests (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-
reactive protein, and antinuclear antibody), anti-thyroglobulin and
anti-thyroperoxidase antibody levels, paraneoplastic autoimmune
antibodies, and cerebrospinal fluid studies (cell count and
differential; protein and glucose levels; protein electrophoresis for
oligoclonal bands; IgG index [spinal-fluid-to-serum gamma-globulin
level] ratio; and VDRL). Depending on the clinical context, it may
be necessary to exclude Wilson disease (24-hour urine copper
level), heavy metal intoxication (24-hour urine heavy metal panel),
and infectious encephalitis (cerebrospinal fluid polymerase chain
reaction 
for 
Whipple 
disease, 
herpes 
simplex 
virus,
cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, and other viruses).
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is a relatively common cause of
rapidly progressive dementia (see Chapter 32). Family history is
important since mutations in PRNP, the gene for the prion protein,
account for around 15% of cases. Diffusion-weighted MRI is the
most helpful diagnostic tool, classically revealing cortical ribboning
(a gyral pattern of hyperintensity) as well as restricted diffusion in
the caudate and anterior putamen. Reflecting the high rate of
neuronal death, cerebrospinal fluid levels of the intraneuronal
proteins tau, 14-3-3, and neuron-specific enolase are often
elevated, although this finding is neither sensitive nor specific. An
electroencephalogram often shows periodic complexes.
B. Driving and Dementia
It is recommended that any patient with mild dementia or worse
should discontinue driving. Most states have laws regulating driving
among cognitively impaired individuals, and many require the
physician to report the patient's diagnosis to the public health
department or department of motor vehicles. There is no evidence
that driving classes help patients with neurodegenerative diseases.
 When to Refer
All patients with new, unexplained cognitive decline should be
referred.
 When to Admit
Dementia alone is not an indication for admission, but admission is
sometimes necessary when a superimposed delirium poses safety
risks at home.
Carr DB et al. The older adult driver with cognitive impairment:
“It's a very frustrating life”. JAMA. 2010 Apr 28;303(16):1632–
41. [PMID: 20424254]
 
Geschwind MD et al. Rapidly progressive dementia. Ann Neurol.
2008 Jul;64(1):97–108. [PMID: 18668637]
 
Kerchner GA et al. Bapineuzumab. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2010
Jul;10(7):1121–30. [PMID: 20497044]
 
Mayeux R. Clinical practice. Early Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Jun 10;362(23):2194–201. [PMID: 20558370]
 
Petersen RC et al. Mild cognitive impairment: ten years later. Arch
Neurol. 2009 Dec;66(12):1447–55. [PMID: 20008648]
 
Trojanowski JQ et al. Update on the biomarker core of the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative subjects. Alzheimer's
Dement. 2010 May;6(3):230–8. [PMID: 20451871]
 
Weisman D et al. Dementia with Lewy bodies. Semin Neurol.
2007 Feb;27(1):42–7. [PMID: 17226740]
 
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Episodic neurologic symptoms.
 Patient usually under 55 years of age at onset.
 Single pathologic lesion cannot explain clinical findings.
 Multiple foci best visualized by MRI.
 
 General Considerations
This common neurologic disorder, which probably has an
autoimmune basis, has its greatest incidence in young adults.
Epidemiologic studies indicate that multiple sclerosis is much more
common in persons of western European lineage who live in
temperate zones. No population with a high risk for multiple
sclerosis exists between latitudes 40° N and 40° S. A genetic
susceptibility to the disease is present, based on twin studies,
familial cases, and an association with specific HLA antigens (HLA-
DR2) and alleles of IL2RA (the interleukin-2 receptor α gene) and
IL7RA (the interleukin-7 receptor α gene). Pathologically, focal—
often perivenular—areas of demyelination with reactive gliosis are
found scattered in the white matter of brain and spinal cord and in
the optic nerves. Axonal damage also occurs.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The common initial presentation is weakness, numbness, tingling, or
unsteadiness in a limb; spastic paraparesis; retrobulbar optic
neuritis; diplopia; dysequilibrium; or a sphincter disturbance such as
urinary urgency or hesitancy. Symptoms may disappear after a few
days or weeks, although examination often reveals a residual deficit.
Several forms of the disease are recognized. In most patients,
there is an interval of months or years after the initial episode before
new symptoms develop or the original ones recur (relapsing-
remitting disease). Eventually, however, relapses and usually
incomplete remissions lead to increasing disability, with weakness,
spasticity, and ataxia of the limbs, impaired vision, and urinary
incontinence. The findings on examination at this stage commonly
include optic atrophy; nystagmus; dysarthria; and pyramidal,
sensory, or cerebellar deficits in some or all of the limbs. In some of
these patients, the clinical course changes so that a steady
deterioration occurs, unrelated to acute relapses (secondary
progressive disease). Less commonly, symptoms are steadily
progressive from their onset, and disability develops at a relatively
early stage (primary progressive disease). The diagnosis cannot
be made with confidence unless the total clinical picture indicates
involvement of different parts of the central nervous system at
different times. Fatigue is common in all forms of the disease.
A number of factors (eg, infection) may precipitate or trigger
exacerbations. Relapses are reduced in pregnancy but are more
likely during the 2 or 3 months following pregnancy, possibly
because of the increased demands and stresses that occur in the
postpartum period.
B. Imaging
MRI of the brain or cervical cord has a major role in demonstrating
the presence of multiple lesions. In T1-weighted images,
hypointense “black holes” probably represent areas of permanent
axonal damage; hyperintense lesions are also found. Gadolinium-
enhanced T1-weighted images may highlight areas of inflammation
with breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, which helps identify
newer lesions. T2-weighted images provide information about
disease burden or total number of lesions, which typically appear as
areas of high signal intensity. CT scans are less helpful than MRI.
In patients with myelopathy alone and in whom there is no clinical
or laboratory evidence of more widespread disease, MRI or
myelography may be necessary to exclude a congenital or acquired
surgically treatable lesion. The foramen magnum region must be
visualized to exclude the possibility of Arnold-Chiari malformation,
in which parts of the cerebellum and the lower brainstem are
displaced into the cervical canal and produce mixed pyramidal and
cerebellar deficits in the limbs.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
A definitive diagnosis can never be based solely on the laboratory
findings. If there is clinical evidence of only a single lesion in the
central nervous system, multiple sclerosis cannot properly be
diagnosed unless it can be shown that other regions are affected
subclinically. The electrocerebral responses evoked by monocular
visual stimulation with a checkerboard pattern stimulus, by monaural
click stimulation, and by electrical stimulation of a sensory or mixed
peripheral nerve have been used to detect subclinical involvement of
the visual, brainstem auditory, and somatosensory pathways,
respectively. Other disorders may also be characterized by
multifocal electrophysiologic abnormalities.
There may be mild lymphocytosis or a slightly increased protein
concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid, especially soon after an
acute relapse. Elevated IgG in cerebrospinal fluid and discrete
bands of IgG (oligoclonal bands) are present in many patients. The
presence of such bands is not specific, however, since they have
been found in a variety of inflammatory neurologic disorders and
occasionally in patients with vascular or neoplastic disorders of the
nervous system.
D. Diagnosis
Multiple sclerosis should not be diagnosed unless there is evidence
that two or more different regions of the central white matter have
been affected at different times. A diagnosis of clinically definite
disease can be made in patients with a relapsing-remitting course
and evidence on examination of at least two lesions involving
different regions of the central white matter. The diagnosis is
probable in patients with multifocal white matter disease but only
one clinical attack, or with a history of at least two clinical attacks
but signs of only a single lesion. Imaging may reveal involvement of
the nervous system at different times if a gadolinium-enhancing
lesion is present at least 3 months after an initial clinical event at a
different site than one corresponding to that event or if a new T2
lesion is found at any time compared with a baseline scan obtained
at least 30 days after the initial clinical event. Dissemination in space
requires three of the following: (1) at least one gadolinium-enhancing
lesion or nine T2 hyperintense lesions if there is no enhancing lesion;
(2) one or more infratentorial (or spinal cord) lesions; (3) one or
more juxtacortical lesions; and (4) at least three periventricular
lesions.
In patients with a single clinical event who do not satisfy criteria
for multiple sclerosis, a diagnosis of a clinically isolated
syndrome (CIS) is made. Such patients are at risk for developing
multiple sclerosis and are sometimes offered β-interferon or
glatiramer acetate therapy, which may delay progression to clinically
definite disease. Follow-up MRI should be considered 6–12
months later to assess for the presence of any new lesion.
 Treatment
At least partial recovery from acute exacerbations can reasonably
be expected, but further relapses may occur without warning, and
there is no means of preventing progression of the disorder. Some
disability is likely to result eventually, but about half of all patients
are without significant disability even 10 years after onset of
symptoms.
Recovery from acute relapses may be hastened by treatment with
corticosteroids, but the extent of recovery is unchanged.
Intravenous therapy is given first—typically methylprednisolone 1 g
daily for 3 days—followed by oral prednisone at 60–80 mg daily
for 1 week with a taper over the ensuing 2–3 weeks. Long-term
treatment with corticosteroids provides no benefit and does not
prevent further relapses.
In patients with relapsing-remitting or secondary progressive
disease, indefinite treatment with β-interferon (interferon β-1a 30
mcg intramuscularly once weekly, or 44 mcg subcutaneously three
times per week; or interferon β-1b 0.25 mg subcutaneously every
other day) or with subcutaneous administration of glatiramer acetate
(20 mg daily) reduces the frequency of exacerbations with equal
efficacy. Natalizumab, an alpha4 integrin antagonist that reduces the
development of brain lesions in experimental models, reduces the
relapse rate when given intravenously once monthly. However,
natalizumab treatment is associated with an increased risk of the
development of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Its use
is therefore restricted to patients with relapsing-remitting disease
who have not responded to other therapies or who have a
particularly aggressive initial disease course. It should be used alone
and not in combination with β-interferon, glatiramer acetate, or
other immune-modifying therapies. Fingolimod (0.5 mg orally daily)
has been approved by the FDA. Fingolimod reduces the relapse
rate in multiple sclerosis. Cladribine is still being investigated for this
indication. Several studies have suggested that immunosuppressive
therapy with cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, methotrexate, or
mitoxantrone may help arrest the course of secondary progressive
multiple sclerosis. The evidence of benefit is incomplete, however.
Plasmapheresis is sometimes helpful in patients with severe relapses
unresponsive to corticosteroids. Intravenous immunoglobulins
(IVIGs) may reduce the clinical attack rate in relapsing-remitting
disease, but the available studies are inadequate to permit treatment
recommendations. Statins may have immunomodulatory effects, and
their possible role in the treatment of multiple sclerosis is being
studied.
Symptomatic therapy for spasticity (see below), neurogenic
bladder, or fatigue may be required. Fatigue is especially common
in multiple sclerosis, and modafinil (200 mg orally every morning) is
an effective and FDA-approved therapy for this indication.
 When to Refer
All patients, but especially those with progressive disease despite
standard therapy, should be referred.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients requiring plasma exchange.
•    During severe relapses.
•    Patient unable to manage at home.
Cohen JA et al; TRANSFORMS Study Group. Oral fingolimod
or intramuscular interferon for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Feb 4;362(5):402–15. [PMID: 20089954]
 
Comi G et al; PreCISe study group. Effect of glatiramer acetate on
conversion to clinically definite multiple sclerosis in patients with
clinically isolated syndrome: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet. 2009 Oct 31;374(9700):1503–11.
[PMID: 19815268]
 
Giovannoni G et al; CLARITY Study Group. A placebo-
controlled trial of oral cladribine for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Feb 4;362(5):416–26. [PMID: 20089960]
 
Goodin DS et al. The use of natalizumab (Tysabri) for the
treatment of multiple sclerosis (an evidence-based review): report
of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2008 Sep
2;71(10):766–73. [PMID: 18765653]
 
Kappos L et al; FREEDOMS Study Group. A placebo-controlled
trial of oral fingolimod in relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Feb 4;362(5):387–401. [PMID: 20089952]
 
Lange R et al. Modafinil effects in multiple sclerosis patients with
fatigue. J Neurol. 2009 Apr;256(4):645–50. [PMID: 19367356]
 
Miller DH et al. Primary-progressive multiple sclerosis. Lancet
Neurol. 2007 Oct;6(10):903–12. [PMID: 17884680]
 
Naismith RT et al. Rituximab add-on therapy for breakthrough
relapsing multiple sclerosis: a 52-week phase II trial. Neurology.
2010 Jun 8;74(23):1860–7. [PMID: 20530322]
 
Reder AT et al; Investigators of the 16-Year Long-Term Follow-
Up Study. Cross-sectional study assessing long-term safety of
interferon-beta-1b for relapsing-remitting MS. Neurology. 2010
Jun 8;74(23):1877–85. [PMID: 20530324]
 
Sorensen PS et al. NORdic trial of oral Methylprednisolone as
add-on therapy to Interferon beta-1a for treatment of relapsing-
remitting Multiple Sclerosis (NORMIMS study): a randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2009 Jun;8(6):519–29.
[PMID: 19409854]
 
NEUROMYELITIS OPTICA
This disorder is characterized by optic neuritis and acute myelitis
with MRI changes that extend over at least three segments of the
spinal cord. An isolated myelitis or optic neuritis may also occur.
Previously known as Devic disease and once regarded as a variant
of multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica is associated with a
specific antibody marker (NMO-IgG) targeting the water channel
aquaporin-4. MRI of the brain typically does not show widespread
white matter involvement, but such changes do not exclude the
diagnosis. Treatment is by long-term immunosuppression. Rituximab
may help in reducing the risk of relapses and is undergoing clinical
trials; no standard dosing regimen is yet available.
Cree B. Neuromyelitis optica: diagnosis, pathogenesis, and
treatment. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2008 Sep;8(5):427–33.
[PMID: 18713580]
 
Jacob A et al. Treatment of neuromyelitis optica with rituximab:
retrospective analysis of 25 patients. Arch Neurol. 2008 Nov;
65(11):1443–8. [PMID: 18779415]
 
VITAMIN E DEFICIENCY
Vitamin E deficiency may produce a disorder somewhat similar to
Friedreich ataxia (see below). There is spinocerebellar degeneration
involving particularly the posterior columns of the spinal cord and
leading to limb ataxia, sensory loss, absent tendon reflexes, slurring
of speech and, in some cases, pigmentary retinal degeneration. The
disorder may occur as a consequence of malabsorption or on a
hereditary basis (eg, abetalipoproteinemia). Treatment is with α-
tocopheryl acetate as discussed in Chapter 29.
SPASTICITY
The term “spasticity” is commonly used for an upper motor neuron
deficit, but it properly refers to a velocity-dependent increase in
resistance to passive movement that affects different muscles to a
different extent, is not uniform in degree throughout the range of a
particular movement, and is commonly associated with other
features of pyramidal deficit. It is often a major complication of
stroke, cerebral or spinal injury, static perinatal encephalopathy,
and multiple sclerosis.
Physical therapy with appropriate stretching programs is
important during rehabilitation after the development of an upper
motor neuron lesion and in subsequent management of the patient.
The aim is to prevent joint and muscle contractures and perhaps to
modulate spasticity.
Drug management is important also, but treatment may increase
functional disability when increased extensor tone is providing
additional support for patients with weak legs. Dantrolene weakens
muscle contraction by interfering with the role of calcium. It is best
avoided in patients with poor respiratory function or severe
myocardial disease. Treatment is begun with 25 mg once daily, and
the daily dose is built up by 25 mg increments every 3 days,
depending on tolerance, to a maximum of 100 mg four times daily.
Side effects include diarrhea, nausea, weakness, hepatic dysfunction
(that may rarely be fatal, especially in women older than 35),
drowsiness, light-headedness, and hallucinations.
Baclofen is an effective drug for treating spasticity of spinal origin
and painful flexor (or extensor) spasms. The maximum
recommended daily oral dose is 80 mg; treatment is started with a
dose of 5 or 10 mg twice daily orally and then built up gradually.
Side effects include gastrointestinal disturbances, lassitude, fatigue,
sedation, unsteadiness, confusion, and hallucinations. Diazepam may
modify spasticity by its action on spinal interneurons and perhaps
also by influencing supraspinal centers, but effective doses often
cause intolerable drowsiness and vary with different patients.
Tizanidine, a centrally acting α2 -adrenergic agonist, is as effective
as these other agents and is probably better tolerated. The daily
dose is built up gradually, usually to 8 mg taken three times daily.
Side effects include sedation, lassitude, hypotension, and dryness of
the mouth.
Intramuscular injection of botulinum toxin has been used to relax
targeted muscles.
In patients with severe spasticity that is unresponsive to other
therapies and is associated with marked disability, intrathecal
injection of phenol or alcohol may be helpful. Surgical options
include implantation of an intrathecal baclofen pump, rhizotomy, or
neurectomy. Severe contractures may be treated by surgical tendon
release.
Spasticity may be exacerbated by decubitus ulcers, urinary or
other infections, and nociceptive stimuli.
Simpson DM et al. Botulinum neurotoxin for the treatment of
spasticity (an evidence-based review): report of the Therapeutics
and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American
Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2008 May 6;70(19):1691–8.
[PMID: 18458229]
 
Simpson DM et al. Botulinum neurotoxin versus tizanidine in upper
limb spasticity: a placebo-controlled study. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2009 Apr;80(4):380–5. [PMID: 18977811]
 
MYELOPATHIES IN AIDS
A variety of myelopathies may occur in patients with AIDS. These
are discussed in Chapter 31.
MYELOPATHY OF HUMAN T CELL LEUKEMIA VIRUS
INFECTION
Human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV-1), a human retrovirus, is
transmitted by breast-feeding, sexual contact, blood transfusion,
and contaminated needles. Most patients are asymptomatic, but
after a variable latent period (which may be as long as several
years) a myelopathy develops in some instances. The MRI,
electrophysiologic, and cerebrospinal fluid findings are similar to
those of multiple sclerosis, but HTLV-1 antibodies are present in
serum and spinal fluid. There is no specific treatment, but
intravenous or oral corticosteroids may help in the initial
inflammatory phase of the disease. Prophylactic measures are
important. Needles or syringes should not be shared; infected
patients should not breastfeed their infants or donate blood, semen,
or other tissue. Infected patients should use condoms to prevent
sexual transmission.
Biswas HH et al. Neurologic abnormalities in HTLV-I- and
HTLV-II-infected individuals without overt myelopathy.
Neurology. 2009 Sep 8;73(10):781–9. [PMID: 19738173]
 
SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION OF THE
SPINAL CORD
Subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord is due to
vitamin B12 deficiency, such as occurs in pernicious anemia. It is
characterized by myelopathy with predominant pyramidal and
posterior column deficits, sometimes in association with
polyneuropathy, 
mental 
changes, 
or 
optic 
neuropathy.
Megaloblastic anemia may also occur, but this does not parallel the
neurologic disorder, and the former may be obscured if folic acid
supplements have been taken. Treatment is with vitamin B12. For
pernicious anemia, a convenient therapeutic regimen is 100 mg
cyanocobalamin intramuscularly daily for 1 week, then weekly for 1
month, and then monthly for the remainder of the patient's life.
WERNICKE ENCEPHALOPATHY & KORSAKOFF
SYNDROME
Wernicke encephalopathy is characterized by confusion, ataxia,
and nystagmus leading to ophthalmoplegia (lateral rectus muscle
weakness, conjugate gaze palsies); peripheral neuropathy may also
be present. It is due to thiamine deficiency and in the United States
occurs most commonly in alcoholics. It may also occur in patients
with AIDS or hyperemesis gravidarum, and after surgery for
obesity. In suspected cases, thiamine (100 mg) is given
intravenously immediately and then intramuscularly on a daily basis
until a satisfactory diet can be ensured. Intravenous glucose given
before thiamine may precipitate the syndrome or worsen the
symptoms. The diagnosis is confirmed by the response in 1 or 2
days to treatment, which must not be delayed while awaiting
laboratory confirmation of thiamine deficiency from a blood sample
obtained prior to thiamine administration. Korsakoff syndrome
occurs in more severe cases; it includes anterograde and retrograde
amnesia and sometimes confabulation, and may not be recognized
until after the initial delirium has lifted.
Sechi G et al. Wernicke's encephalopathy: new clinical settings and
recent advances in diagnosis and management. Lancet Neurol.
2007 May;6(5):442–55. [PMID: 17434099]
 
STUPOR & COMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Level of consciousness is depressed.
 Stuporous patients respond only to repeated vigorous stimuli.
 Comatose patients are unarousable and unresponsive.
 
 General Considerations
The patient who is stuporous is unresponsive except when
subjected to repeated vigorous stimuli, while the comatose patient is
unarousable and unable to respond to external events or inner
needs, although reflex movements and posturing may be present.
Coma is a major complication of serious central nervous system
disorders. It can result from seizures, hypothermia, metabolic
disturbances, or structural lesions causing bilateral cerebral
hemispheric dysfunction or a disturbance of the brainstem reticular
activating system. A mass lesion involving one cerebral hemisphere
may cause coma by compression of the brainstem. All comatose
patients should be admitted to hospital and referred to a neurologist
or neurosurgeon.
Assessment & Emergency Measures
The diagnostic workup of the comatose patient must proceed
concomitantly with management. Supportive therapy for respiration
or blood pressure is initiated; in hypothermia, all vital signs may be
absent and all such patients should be rewarmed before the
prognosis is assessed.
The patient can be positioned on one side with the neck partly
extended, dentures removed, and secretions cleared by suction; if
necessary, the patency of the airways is maintained with an
oropharyngeal airway. Blood is drawn for serum glucose,
electrolyte, and calcium levels; arterial blood gases; liver and kidney
function tests; and toxicologic studies as indicated. Dextrose 50%
(25 g), naloxone (0.4–1.2 mg), and thiamine (100 mg) are given
intravenously without delay.
Further details are then obtained from attendants of the patient's
medical history, the circumstances surrounding the onset of coma,
and the time course of subsequent events. Abrupt onset of coma
suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage, brainstem stroke, or
intracerebral hemorrhage, whereas a slower onset and progression
occur with other structural or mass lesions. Urgent noncontrast CT
scanning of the head is appropriate if it can be obtained directly
from the emergency department, in order to identify intracranial
hemorrhage, brain herniation, or other structural lesion that may
require immediate neurosurgical intervention. A metabolic cause is
likely with a preceding intoxicated state or agitated delirium. On
examination, attention is paid to the behavioral response to painful
stimuli, the pupils and their response to light, the position of the eyes
and their movement in response to passive movement of the head
and ice-water caloric stimulation, and the respiratory pattern.
A. Response to Painful Stimuli
Purposive limb withdrawal from painful stimuli implies that sensory
pathways from and motor pathways to the stimulated limb are
functionally intact. Unilateral absence of responses despite
application of stimuli to both sides of the body in turn implies a
corticospinal lesion; bilateral absence of responsiveness suggests
brainstem involvement, bilateral pyramidal tract lesions, or
psychogenic unresponsiveness. Inappropriate responses may also
occur. Decorticate posturing may occur with lesions of the internal
capsule and rostral cerebral peduncle, decerebrate posturing with
dysfunction or destruction of the midbrain and rostral pons, and
decerebrate posturing in the arms accompanied by flaccidity or
slight flexor responses in the legs in patients with extensive
brainstem damage extending down to the pons at the trigeminal
level.
B. Ocular Findings
1. Pupils—Hypothalamic disease processes may lead to unilateral
Horner syndrome, while bilateral diencephalic involvement or
destructive pontine lesions may lead to small but reactive pupils.
Ipsilateral pupillary dilation with no direct or consensual response to
light occurs with compression of the third cranial nerve, eg, with
uncal herniation. The pupils are slightly smaller than normal but
responsive to light in many metabolic encephalopathies; however,
they may be fixed and dilated following overdosage with atropine or
scopolamine, and pinpoint (but responsive) with opioids. Pupillary
dilation for several hours following cardiopulmonary arrest implies a
poor prognosis.
2. Eye movements—Conjugate deviation of the eyes to the side
suggests the presence of an ipsilateral hemispheric lesion or a
contralateral pontine lesion. A mesencephalic lesion leads to
downward conjugate deviation. Dysconjugate ocular deviation in
coma implies a structural brainstem lesion unless there was
preexisting strabismus.
The oculomotor responses to passive head turning and to caloric
stimulation relate to each other and provide complementary
information. In response to brisk rotation of the head from side to
side and to flexion and extension of the head, normally conscious
patients with open eyes do not exhibit contraversive conjugate eye
deviation (doll's-head eye response) unless there is voluntary visual
fixation or bilateral frontal pathology. With cortical depression in
lightly comatose patients, a brisk doll's-head eye response is seen.
With brainstem lesions, this oculocephalic reflex becomes impaired
or lost, depending on the site of the lesion.
The oculovestibular reflex is tested by caloric stimulation using
irrigation with ice water. In normal subjects, jerk nystagmus is
elicited for about 2 or 3 minutes, with the slow component toward
the irrigated ear. In unconscious patients with an intact brainstem,
the fast component of the nystagmus disappears, so that the eyes
tonically deviate toward the irrigated side for 2–3 minutes before
returning to their original position. With impairment of brainstem
function, the response becomes perverted and finally disappears. In
metabolic coma, oculocephalic and oculovestibular reflex responses
are preserved, at least initially.
C. Respiratory Patterns
Diseases causing coma may lead to respiratory abnormalities.
Cheyne-Stokes respiration (in which episodes of deep breathing
alternate with periods of apnea) may occur with bihemispheric or
diencephalic disease or in metabolic disorders. Central neurogenic
hyperventilation occurs with lesions of the brainstem tegmentum;
apneustic breathing (in which there are prominent end-inspiratory
pauses) suggests damage at the pontine level (eg, due to basilar
artery occlusion); and atactic breathing (a completely irregular
pattern of breathing with deep and shallow breaths occurring
randomly) is associated with lesions of the lower pontine tegmentum
and medulla.
1. Stupor & Coma Due to Structural Lesions
Supratentorial mass lesions tend to affect brain function in an
orderly way. There may initially be signs of hemispheric dysfunction,
such as hemiparesis. As coma develops and deepens, cerebral
function becomes progressively disturbed, producing a predictable
progression of neurologic signs that suggest rostrocaudal
deterioration.
Thus, as a supratentorial mass lesion begins to impair the
diencephalon, the patient becomes drowsy, then stuporous, and
finally comatose. There may be Cheyne-Stokes respiration; small
but reactive pupils; doll's-head eye responses with side-to-side
head movements but sometimes an impairment of reflex upward
gaze with brisk flexion of the head; tonic ipsilateral deviation of the
eyes in response to vestibular stimulation with cold water; and
initially a positive response to pain but subsequently only decorticate
posturing. With further progression, midbrain failure occurs. Motor
dysfunction progresses from decorticate to bilateral decerebrate
posturing in response to painful stimuli; Cheyne-Stokes respiration
is gradually replaced by sustained central hyperventilation; the pupils
become middle-sized and fixed; and the oculocephalic and
oculovestibular reflex responses become impaired, perverted, or
lost. As the pons and then the medulla fail, the pupils remain
unresponsive; oculovestibular responses are unobtainable;
respiration is rapid and shallow; and painful stimuli may lead only to
flexor responses in the legs. Finally, respiration becomes irregular
and stops, the pupils often then dilating widely.
In contrast, a subtentorial (ie, brainstem) lesion may lead to an
early, sometimes abrupt disturbance of consciousness without any
orderly rostrocaudal progression of neurologic signs. Compressive
lesions of the brainstem, especially cerebellar hemorrhage, may be
clinically indistinguishable from intraparenchymal processes.
A structural lesion is suspected if the findings suggest focality. In
such circumstances, a CT scan should be performed before, or
instead of, a lumbar puncture in order to avoid any risk of cerebral
herniation. Further management is of the causal lesion and is
considered separately under the individual disorders.
2. Stupor & Coma Due to Metabolic Disturbances
Patients with a metabolic cause of coma generally have signs of
patchy, diffuse, and symmetric neurologic involvement that cannot
be explained by loss of function at any single level or in a sequential
manner, although focal or lateralized deficits may occur in
hypoglycemia. Moreover, pupillary reactivity is usually preserved,
while other brainstem functions are often grossly impaired.
Comatose patients with meningitis, encephalitis, or subarachnoid
hemorrhage may also exhibit little in the way of focal neurologic
signs, however, and clinical evidence of meningeal irritation is
sometimes very subtle in comatose patients. Examination of the
cerebrospinal fluid in such patients is essential to establish the
correct diagnosis.
In patients with coma due to cerebral ischemia and hypoxia, the
absence of pupillary light reflexes at the time of initial examination
indicates that there is little chance of regaining independence; by
contrast, preserved pupillary light responses, the development of
spontaneous eye movements (roving, conjugate, or better), and
extensor, flexor, or withdrawal responses to pain at this early stage
imply a relatively good prognosis.
Treatment of metabolic encephalopathy is of the underlying
disturbance and is considered in other chapters. If the cause of the
encephalopathy is obscure, all drugs except essential ones may have
to be withdrawn in case they are responsible for the altered mental
status.
Stevens RD et al. Approach to the comatose patient. Crit Care
Med. 2006 Jan;34(1):31–41. [PMID: 16374153]
 
Wijdicks EF et al. Practice parameter: Prediction of outcome in
comatose survivors after cardiopulmonary resuscitation (an
evidence-based review): Report of the Quality Standards
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2006 Jul 25;67(2):203–10. [PMID: 16864809]
 
3. Brain Death
The definition of brain death is controversial, and diagnostic criteria
have been published by many different professional organizations. In
order to establish brain death, the irreversibly comatose patient
must be shown to have lost all brainstem reflex responses, including
the 
pupillary, 
corneal, 
oculovestibular, 
oculocephalic,
oropharyngeal, and respiratory reflexes, and should have been in
this condition for at least 6 hours. Spinal reflex movements do not
exclude the diagnosis, but ongoing seizure activity or decerebrate or
decorticate posturing is not consistent with brain death. The apnea
test (presence or absence of spontaneous respiratory activity at a
Paco2 of at least 60 mm Hg) serves to determine whether the
patient is capable of respiratory activity.
Reversible coma simulating brain death may be seen with
hypothermia (temperature < 32 °C) and overdosage with central
nervous system depressant drugs, and these conditions must be
excluded. Certain ancillary tests may assist the determination of
brain 
death 
but 
are 
not 
essential. 
An 
isoelectric
electroencephalogram, when the recording is made according to the
recommendations of the American Electroencephalographic
Society, may help in confirming the diagnosis. Alternatively, the
demonstration of an absent cerebral circulation by intravenous
radioisotope cerebral angiography or by four-vessel contrast
cerebral angiography is confirmatory.
Wijdicks EF. The case against confirmatory tests for determining
brain death in adults. Neurology. 2010 Jul 6;75(1):77–83. [PMID:
20603486]
 
Wijdicks EF et al. Pronouncing brain death: contemporary practice
and safety of the apnea test. Neurology. 2008 Oct 14;71(16):
1240–4. [PMID: 18852438]
 
4. Persistent Vegetative State
Patients with severe bilateral hemispheric disease may show some
improvement from an initially comatose state, so that, after a
variable interval, they appear to be awake but lie motionless and
without evidence of awareness or higher mental activity. This
persistent vegetative state has been variously referred to as akinetic
mutism, apallic state, or coma vigil. Most patients in this persistent
vegetative state will die in months or years, but partial recovery has
occasionally occurred and in rare instances has been sufficient to
permit communication or even independent living.
5. Minimally Conscious State
In this state, patients exhibit inconsistent evidence of consciousness.
There is some degree of functional recovery of behaviors suggesting
self- or environmental awareness, such as basic verbalization or
context-appropriate gestures, emotional responses (eg, smiling) to
emotional but not neutral stimuli, or purposive responses to
environmental stimuli (eg, a finger movement or eye blink apparently
to command). Further improvement is manifest by the restoration of
communication with the patient. The minimally conscious state may
be temporary or permanent. Little information is available about its
natural history or long-term outlook, which reflect the underlying
cause. The likelihood of useful functional recovery diminishes with
time; after 12 months, patients are likely to remain severely disabled
and without a reliable means of communication. Prognostication is
difficult.
6. Locked-In Syndrome (De-efferented State)
Acute destructive lesions (eg, infarction, hemorrhage, demyelination,
encephalitis) involving the ventral pons and sparing the tegmentum
may lead to a mute, quadriparetic but conscious state in which the
patient is capable of blinking and of voluntary eye movement in the
vertical plane, with preserved pupillary responses to light. Such a
patient can mistakenly be regarded as comatose. Physicians should
recognize that “locked-in” individuals are fully aware of their
surroundings. The prognosis is usually poor, but recovery has
occasionally been reported in some cases, including resumption of
independent daily life.
HEAD INJURY
Trauma is the most common cause of death in young people, and
head injury accounts for almost half of these trauma-related deaths.
The incidence of head injury can be reduced by, for example, using
bicycle helmets and protective equipment in sports.
The prognosis following head injury depends on the site and
severity of brain damage. Some guide to prognosis is provided by
the mental status, since loss of consciousness implies a worse
prognosis than otherwise. Similarly, the degree of retrograde and
posttraumatic amnesia provides an indication of the severity of
injury and thus of the prognosis. Absence of skull fracture does not
exclude the possibility of severe head injury. During the physical
examination, special attention should be given to the level of
consciousness and extent of any brainstem dysfunction.
Note Patients (especially elderly, > 65 years) who are
intoxicated with drugs or alcohol or have evidence of soft-tissue
injury above the clavicles following head injury should be admitted
to the hospital for observation, as should patients with recurrent
vomiting, persistent anterograde amnesia, retrograde amnesia for
more than 30 minutes, focal neurologic deficits, lethargy, or skull
fractures. If admission is declined, responsible family members
should be given clear instructions about the need for, and manner
of, checking on them at regular (hourly) intervals and for obtaining
additional medical help if necessary.
Skull radiographs or CT scans may provide evidence of
fractures. Because injury to the spine may have accompanied head
trauma, cervical spine radiographs (especially in the lateral
projection) should always be obtained in comatose patients and in
patients with severe neck pain or a deficit possibly related to cord
compression.
CT scanning has an important role in demonstrating intracranial
hemorrhage and may also provide evidence of cerebral edema and
displacement of midline structures.
1. Cerebral Injuries
These are summarized in Table 24–7. Increased intracranial
pressure may result from ventilatory obstruction, abnormal neck
position, seizures, dilutional hyponatremia, or cerebral edema; an
intracranial hematoma requiring surgical evacuation may also be
responsible. Other measures that may be necessary to reduce
intracranial pressure include induced hyperventilation, intravenous
mannitol infusion, and intravenous furosemide; corticosteroids
provide no benefit in this context. Overall, treatment is mainly
supportive. The role of induced hypothermia in reducing long-term
neurologic deficits is currently under investigation.
2. Scalp Injuries & Skull Fractures
Scalp lacerations and depressed or compound depressed skull
fractures should be treated surgically as appropriate. Simple skull
fractures require no specific treatment.
The clinical signs of basilar skull fracture include bruising about
the orbit (raccoon sign), blood in the external auditory meatus
(Battle sign), and leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (which can be
identified by its glucose content) from the ear or nose. Cranial nerve
palsies (involving especially the first, second, third, fourth, fifth,
seventh, and eighth nerves in any combination) may also occur. If
there is any leakage of cerebrospinal fluid, conservative treatment,
with elevation of the head, restriction of fluids, and administration of
acetazolamide (250 mg four times daily), is often helpful; but if the
leak continues for more than a few days, lumbar subarachnoid
drainage may be necessary. Antibiotics are given if infection occurs,
based on culture and sensitivity studies. Only very occasional
patients require intracranial repair of the dural defect because of
persistence of the leak or recurrent meningitis.
3. Late Complications of Head Injury
The relationship of chronic subdural hemorrhage to head injury is
not always clear. In many elderly persons there is no history of
trauma, but in other cases a head injury, often trivial, precedes the
onset of symptoms by several weeks. The clinical presentation is
usually with mental changes such as slowness, drowsiness,
headache, confusion, memory disturbances, personality change, or
even dementia. Focal neurologic deficits such as hemiparesis or
hemisensory disturbance may also occur but are less common. CT
scan is an important means of detecting the hematoma, which is
sometimes bilateral. Treatment is by surgical evacuation to prevent
cerebral compression and tentorial herniation. There is no clear
evidence that prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy reduces the
incidence of posttraumatic seizures.
After major head injury causing severe, acute mental status
changes, cognitive deficits may persist indefinitely. In addition, there
is an association between head trauma and the later development of
a neurodegenerative disease, such as Alzheimer or Parkinson
disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
 
Table 24–7. Acute cerebral sequelae of hea
 
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus may follow head injury,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, or meningoencephalitis. Other late
complications of head injury include posttraumatic seizure disorder,
headache, vertigo, and hyposmia.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with focal neurologic deficits, altered
consciousness, or skull fracture.
•    Patients with late complications of head injury, eg,
posttraumatic seizure disorder or normal pressure
hydrocephalus.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients (especially elderly, > 65 years) who are
intoxicated with drugs or alcohol or have evidence of soft-
tissue injury above the clavicles should be admitted for
observation.
•    Patients with recurrent vomiting, focal neurologic
deficits, persistent anterograde amnesia, retrograde
amnesia for more than 30 minutes, altered consciousness,
or skull fracture.
•    Patients with acute epidural, subdural, or cerebral
hematoma.
•    Patients requiring shunt placement for normal pressure
hydrocephalus.
Harris OA et al. Discrete cerebral hypothermia in the management
of traumatic brain injury: a randomized controlled trial. J
Neurosurg. 2009 Jun;110(6):1256–64. [PMID: 19249933]
 
Maas AI et al. Moderate and severe traumatic brain injury in
adults. Lancet Neurol. 2008 Aug;7(8):728–41. [PMID:
18635021]
 
Ropper AH et al. Clinical practice. Concussion. N Engl J Med.
2007 Jan 11;356(2):166–72. [PMID: 17215534]
 
SPINAL TRAUMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of preceding trauma.
 Development of acute neurologic deficit.
 Signs of myelopathy on examination.
 
 General Considerations
While spinal cord damage may result from whiplash injury, severe
injury usually relates to fracture-dislocation causing compression or
angular deformity of the cord either cervically or in the lower
thoracic and upper lumbar regions. Extreme hypotension following
injury may also lead to cord infarction.
 Clinical Findings
Total cord transection results in immediate flaccid paralysis and loss
of sensation below the level of the lesion. Reflex activity is lost for a
variable period, and there is urinary and fecal retention. As reflex
function returns over the following days and weeks, spastic
paraplegia or quadriplegia develops, with hyperreflexia and
extensor plantar responses, but a flaccid atrophic (lower motor
neuron) paralysis may be found depending on the segments of the
cord that are affected. The bladder and bowels also regain some
reflex function, permitting urine and feces to be expelled at intervals.
As spasticity increases, flexor or extensor spasms (or both) of the
legs become troublesome, especially if the patient develops bed
sores or a urinary tract infection. Paraplegia with the legs in flexion
or extension may eventually result.
With lesser degrees of injury, patients may be left with mild limb
weakness, distal sensory disturbance, or both. Sphincter function
may also be impaired, urinary urgency and urgency incontinence
being especially common. More particularly, a unilateral cord lesion
leads to an ipsilateral motor disturbance with accompanying
impairment of proprioception and contralateral loss of pain and
temperature appreciation below the lesion (Brown-Séquard
syndrome). A central cord syndrome may lead to a lower motor
neuron deficit and loss of pain and temperature appreciation, with
sparing of posterior column functions. A radicular deficit may occur
at the level of the injury—or, if the cauda equina is involved, there
may be evidence of disturbed function in several lumbosacral roots.
 Treatment
Treatment of the injury consists of immobilization and—if there is
cord compression—decompressive laminectomy and fusion. Early
treatment 
with 
high 
doses 
of 
corticosteroids 
(eg,
methylprednisolone, 30 mg/kg by intravenous bolus, followed by
5.4 mg/kg/h for 23 hours) may improve neurologic recovery if
commenced within 8 hours after injury; the findings from various
studies are conflicting, however, and evaluation of the published
evidence suggest that significant benefit is unlikely. Anatomic
realignment of the spinal cord by traction and other orthopedic
procedures is important. Subsequent care of the residual neurologic
deficit—paraplegia or quadriplegia—requires treatment of spasticity
and care of the skin, bladder, and bowels.
 When to Refer
All patients with focal neurologic deficits should be referred.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with neurologic deficits.
•    Patients with spinal cord injury, compression, or acute
epidural or subdural hematoma.
•    Patients with vertebral fracture-dislocation likely to
compress the cord.
Furlan JC et al. The impact of age on mortality, impairment, and
disability among adults with acute traumatic spinal cord injury. J
Neurotrauma. 2009 Oct;26(10):1707–17. [PMID: 19413491]
 
Tator CH. Review of treatment trials in human spinal cord injury:
issues, difficulties, and recommendations. Neurosurgery. 2006
Nov;59(5):957–82. [PMID: 17143232]
 
Thuret S et al. Therapeutic interventions after spinal cord injury.
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006 Aug;7(8):628–43. [PMID: 16858391]
 
SYRINGOMYELIA
Destruction or degeneration of gray and white matter adjacent to
the central canal of the cervical spinal cord leads to cavitation and
accumulation of fluid within the spinal cord. The precise
pathogenesis is unclear, but many cases are associated with Arnold-
Chiari malformation, in which there is displacement of the cerebellar
tonsils, medulla, and fourth ventricle into the spinal canal, sometimes
with accompanying meningomyelocele. In such circumstances, the
cord cavity connects with and may merely represent a dilated
central canal. In other cases, the cause of cavitation is less clear.
There is a characteristic clinical picture, with segmental atrophy,
areflexia and loss of pain and temperature appreciation in a “cape”
distribution, owing to the destruction of fibers crossing in front of the
central canal in the mid-cervical spinal cord. Thoracic
kyphoscoliosis is usually present. With progression, involvement of
the long motor and sensory tracts occurs as well, so that a
pyramidal and sensory deficit develops in the legs. Upward
extension of the cavitation (syringobulbia) leads to dysfunction of
the lower brainstem and thus to bulbar palsy, nystagmus, and
sensory impairment over one or both sides of the face.
Syringomyelia, ie, cord cavitation, may also occur in association
with an intramedullary tumor or following severe cord injury, and
the cavity then does not communicate with the central canal.
In patients with Arnold-Chiari malformation, CT scans reveal a
small posterior fossa and enlargement of the foramen magnum,
along with other associated skeletal abnormalities at the base of the
skull and upper cervical spine. MRI reveals the syrinx as well as the
characteristic findings of the Arnold-Chiari malformation, including
the caudal displacement of the fourth ventricle and herniation of the
cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum. Focal cord
enlargement is found at myelography or by MRI in patients with
cavitation related to past injury or intramedullary neoplasms.
Treatment of Arnold-Chiari malformation with associated
syringomyelia is by suboccipital craniectomy and upper cervical
laminectomy, with the aim of decompressing the malformation at the
foramen magnum. The cord cavity should be drained, and if
necessary an outlet for the fourth ventricle can be made. In
cavitation associated with intramedullary tumor, treatment is
surgical, but radiation therapy may be necessary if complete
removal is not possible. Posttraumatic syringomyelia is also treated
surgically if it leads to increasing neurologic deficits or to intolerable
pain.
Aghakhani N et al. Long-term follow-up of Chiari-related
syringomyelia in adults: analysis of 157 surgically treated cases.
Neurosurgery. 2009 Feb;64(2):308–15. [PMID: 19190458]
 
DEGENERATIVE MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Weakness.
 No sensory loss or sphincter disturbance.
 Progressive course.
 No identifiable underlying cause other than genetic basis in
familial cases.
 
 General Considerations
This group of degenerative disorders is characterized clinically by
weakness and variable wasting of affected muscles, without
accompanying sensory changes.
Motor neuron disease in adults generally commences between 30
and 60 years of age. There is degeneration of the anterior horn cells
in the spinal cord, the motor nuclei of the lower cranial nerves, and
the corticospinal and corticobulbar pathways. The disorder is
usually sporadic, but familial cases may occur and several genetic
mutations or loci have been identified.
 Classification
Five varieties have been distinguished on clinical grounds.
A. Progressive Bulbar Palsy
Bulbar involvement predominates owing to disease processes
affecting primarily the motor nuclei of the cranial nerves.
B. Pseudobulbar Palsy
Bulbar involvement predominates in this variety also, but it is due to
bilateral corticobulbar disease and thus reflects upper motor neuron
dysfunction. There may be a “pseudo-bulbar affect,” with
uncontrollable episodes of laughing or crying to stimuli that would
not normally have elicited such marked reactions.
C. Progressive Spinal Muscular Atrophy
This is characterized primarily by a lower motor neuron deficit in the
limbs due to degeneration of the anterior horn cells in the spinal
cord.
D. Primary Lateral Sclerosis
There is a purely upper motor neuron deficit in the limbs.
E. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
A mixed upper and lower motor neuron deficit is found in the limbs.
This disorder is sometimes associated with cognitive decline (in a
pattern consistent with frontotemporal dementia), a pseudobulbar
affect, or parkinsonism.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Difficulty in swallowing, chewing, coughing, breathing, and talking
(dysarthria) occur with bulbar involvement. In progressive bulbar
palsy, there is drooping of the palate; a depressed gag reflex;
pooling of saliva in the pharynx; a weak cough; and a wasted,
fasciculating tongue. In pseudobulbar palsy, the tongue is contracted
and spastic and cannot be moved rapidly from side to side. Limb
involvement is characterized by motor disturbances (weakness,
stiffness, wasting, fasciculations) reflecting lower or upper motor
neuron dysfunction; there are no objective changes on sensory
examination, although there may be vague sensory complaints. The
sphincters are generally spared. Cognitive changes or pseudobulbar
affect may be present. The disorder is progressive, and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is usually fatal within 3–5 years; death
usually results from pulmonary infections. Patients with bulbar
involvement generally have the poorest prognosis, while patients
with primary lateral sclerosis often have a longer survival despite
profound quadriparesis and spasticity.
B. Laboratory and Other Studies
Electromyography may show changes of chronic partial
denervation, with abnormal spontaneous activity in the resting
muscle and a reduction in the number of motor units under voluntary
control. In patients with suspected spinal muscular atrophy or
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the diagnosis should not be made with
confidence unless such changes are found in at least three spinal
regions (cervical, thoracic, lumbosacral) or two spinal regions and
the bulbar musculature. Motor conduction velocity is usually normal
but may be slightly reduced, and sensory conduction studies are
also normal. Biopsy of a wasted muscle shows the histologic
changes of denervation. The serum creatine kinase may be slightly
elevated but never reaches the extremely high values seen in some
of the muscular dystrophies. The cerebrospinal fluid is normal.
Approximately 10% of cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are
familial and have been associated with mutations at several different
genetic loci. The spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are inherited
syndromes caused most often by mutations of the survival motor
neuron (SMN) gene on chromosome 5. Different mutations result in
more or less severe disruptions of the protein, resulting in an age of
onset that ranges from infancy (SMA type I; Werdnig-Hoffmann
disease), to early (type II) or late childhood (type III; Kugelberg-
Welander syndrome), to adulthood (type IV). X-linked bulbospinal
neuronopathy (Kennedy syndrome) is associated with an expanded
trinucleotide repeat sequence on the androgen receptor gene and
carries a more benign prognosis than other forms of motor neuron
disease. There have been recent reports of juvenile spinal muscular
atrophy due to hexosaminidase deficiency, with abnormal findings
on rectal biopsy and reduced hexosaminidase A in serum and
leukocytes. Pure motor syndromes resembling motor neuron
disease may also occur in association with monoclonal gammopathy
or multifocal motor neuropathies with conduction block. A motor
neuronopathy may also develop in Hodgkin disease and has a
relatively benign prognosis. Infective anterior horn cell diseases
(polio virus or West Nile virus infection) can generally be
distinguished by the acute onset and monophasic course of the
illness, as discussed in Chapter 32.
 Treatment
Riluzole, 50 mg orally twice daily, which reduces the pre-synaptic
release of glutamate, may slow progression of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. There is otherwise no specific treatment except in patients
with gammopathy, in whom plasmapheresis and immunosuppression
may lead to improvement. Therapeutic trials of various neurotrophic
factors and other agents to slow disease progression have yielded
generally disappointing results. Symptomatic and supportive
measures may include prescription of anticholinergic drugs (such as
trihexyphenidyl, amitriptyline, or atropine) or use of a portable
suction machine if drooling is troublesome, braces or a walker to
improve mobility, and physical therapy to prevent contractures.
Behavioral modification (eg, exercising facial muscles and
encouraging 
frequent 
swallowing) 
or 
over-the-counter
decongestants may also help mild drooling. Spasticity may be
helped by baclofen or diazepam. A semiliquid diet or nasogastric
tube feeding may be needed if dysphagia is severe. Gastrostomy or
cricopharyngomyotomy is sometimes resorted to in extreme cases
of predominant bulbar involvement, and tracheostomy may be
necessary if respiratory muscles are severely affected; however, in
the terminal stages of these disorders, the aim of treatment should
be to keep patients as comfortable as possible. Information on
palliative care is provided in Chapter 5.
 When to Refer
All patients (to exclude other treatable causes of symptoms and
signs) should be referred.
 When to Admit
Patients should be admitted during the terminal stages of the
disorders for palliative care.
Lomen-Hoerth C. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis from bench to
bedside. Semin Neurol. 2008 Apr;28(2):205–11. [PMID:
18351522]
 
Mitchell JD et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet. 2007 Jun
16;369(9578):2031–41. [PMID: 17574095]
 
Mitsumoto H et al. Palliative care for patients with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis: “Prepare for the worst and hope for the best”.
JAMA. 2007 Jul 11;298(2):207–16. [PMID: 17622602]
 
Phukan J et al. Cognitive impairment in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Lancet Neurol. 2007 Nov;6(11):994–1003. [PMID:
17945153]
 
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHIES
Peripheral neuropathies can be categorized on the basis of the
structure primarily affected. The predominant pathologic feature
may be axonal degeneration (axonal or neuronal neuropathies) or
paranodal or segmental demyelination. The distinction may be
possible on the basis of neurophysiologic findings. Motor and
sensory conduction velocity can be measured in accessible
segments of peripheral nerves. In axonal neuropathies, conduction
velocity is normal or reduced only mildly and needle
electromyography provides evidence of denervation in affected
muscles. In demyelinating neuropathies, conduction may be slowed
considerably in affected fibers, and in more severe cases,
conduction is blocked completely, without accompanying
electromyographic signs of denervation.
Nerves may be injured or compressed by neighboring anatomic
structures at any point along their course. Common
mononeuropathies of this sort are considered below. They lead to
a sensory, motor, or mixed deficit that is restricted to the territory of
the affected nerve. A similar clinical disturbance is produced by
peripheral nerve tumors, but these are rare except in patients with
neurofibromatosis type 1. Multiple mononeuropathies suggest a
patchy multifocal disease process such as vasculopathy (eg,
diabetes, arteritis), an infiltrative process (eg, leprosy, sarcoidosis),
radiation damage, or an immunologic disorder (eg, brachial
plexopathy). 
Diffuse polyneuropathies lead to a symmetric
sensory, motor, or mixed deficit, often most marked distally. They
include the hereditary, metabolic, and toxic disorders; idiopathic
inflammatory polyneuropathy (Guillain-Barré syndrome); and the
peripheral neuropathies that may occur as a nonmetastatic
complication of malignant diseases. Involvement of motor fibers
leads to flaccid weakness that is most marked distally; dysfunction
of sensory fibers causes impaired sensory perception. Tendon
reflexes are depressed or absent. Paresthesias, pain, and muscle
tenderness may also occur.
POLYNEUROPATHIES & MONONEURITIS
MULTIPLEX
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Weakness, sensory disturbances, or both in the extremities.
 Pain sometimes common.
 Depressed or absent tendon reflexes.
 May be family history of neuropathy.
 May be history of systemic illness or toxic exposure.
 
The cause of polyneuropathy or mononeuritis multiplex is
suggested by the history, mode of onset, and predominant clinical
manifestations. Laboratory workup includes a complete blood
count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum protein
electrophoresis, and immunophoresis, determination of plasma urea
and electrolytes, liver and thyroid function tests, tests for rheumatoid
factor and antinuclear antibody, HBsAg determination, a serologic
test for syphilis, fasting blood glucose level, urinary heavy metal
levels, cerebrospinal fluid examination, and chest radiography.
These tests should be ordered selectively, as guided by symptoms
and signs. Measurement of nerve conduction velocity is important in
confirming the peripheral nerve origin of symptoms and providing a
means of following clinical changes, as well as indicating the likely
disease process (ie, axonal or demyelinating neuropathy).
Cutaneous nerve biopsy may help establish a precise diagnosis (eg,
polyarteritis, amyloidosis). In about half of cases, no specific cause
can be established; of these, slightly less than half are subsequently
found to be familial.
Treatment is of the underlying cause, when feasible, and is
discussed below under the individual disorders. Physical therapy
helps prevent contractures, and splints can maintain a weak
extremity in a position of useful function. Anesthetic extremities must
be protected from injury. To guard against burns, patients should
check the temperature of water and hot surfaces with a portion of
skin having normal sensation, measure water temperature with a
thermometer, and use cold water for washing or lower the
temperature setting of their hot-water heaters. Shoes should be
examined frequently during the day for grit or foreign objects in
order to prevent pressure lesions.
Patients with polyneuropathies or mononeuritis multiplex are
subject to additional nerve injury at pressure points and should
therefore avoid such behavior as leaning on elbows or sitting with
crossed legs for lengthy periods.
Neuropathic, burning pain is sometimes troublesome and may
respond to simple analgesics, such as aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory agents, and to gabapentin (300 mg orally three times
daily, titrated up to a maximum of 1200 mg orally three times daily
as necessary). Duloxetine (60 mg orally daily) or venlafaxine (start
37.5 mg orally twice daily, and titrate up to 75 mg orally two to
three times daily) may be helpful, especially in painful diabetic
neuropathy. Opioids may be necessary for severe hyperpathia or
pain induced by minimal stimuli, but their use should be avoided as
much as possible. The use of a frame or cradle to reduce contact
with bedclothes may be helpful. Many patients experience episodic
stabbing pains, which may respond to gabapentin, pregabalin (100
mg orally three times daily), carbamazepine (start 100 mg orally
twice daily, and titrate up to 400 mg orally twice daily), or tricyclic
antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline 10–150 mg orally at bedtime
daily).
Symptoms of autonomic dysfunction are occasionally
troublesome. Postural hypotension is often helped by wearing
waist-high elastic stockings and sleeping in a semierect position at
night. Fludrocortisone reduces postural hypotension, but doses as
high as 1 mg/d are sometimes necessary in diabetics and may lead
to recumbent hypertension. Midodrine, an α-agonist, is sometimes
helpful in a dose of 2.5–10 mg three times daily. Erectile
dysfunction and diarrhea are difficult to treat; a flaccid neuropathic
bladder may respond to parasympathomimetic drugs such as
bethanechol chloride, 10–50 mg three or four times daily.
Freeman R. Autonomic peripheral neuropathy. Neurol Clin. 2007
Feb;25(1):277–301. [PMID: 17324728]
 
Kanji JN et al. Does this patient with diabetes have large-fiber
peripheral neuropathy? JAMA. 2010 Apr 21;303(15):1526–32.
[PMID: 20407062]
 
Moore RA et al. Pregabalin for acute and chronic pain in adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8; (3):CD007076.
[PMID: 19588419]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Peripheral neuropathy.
JAMA. 2008 Mar 5;299(9):1096. [PMID: 18319421]
 
1. Inherited Neuropathies
A. Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (HMSN Type I, II)
Several distinct varieties of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease can be
recognized. There is usually an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, but occasional cases occur on a sporadic, recessive, or
X-linked basis. The responsible gene is commonly located on the
short arm of chromosome 17 and less often shows linkage to
chromosome 1 or the X chromosome. It has also been linked to
several other chromosomes, emphasizing the genetic heterogeneity
of the disorder. Clinical presentation may be with foot deformities
or gait disturbances in childhood or early adult life. Slow
progression leads to the typical features of polyneuropathy, with
distal weakness and wasting that begin in the legs, a variable amount
of distal sensory loss, and depressed or absent tendon reflexes.
Tremor is a conspicuous feature in some instances.
Electrodiagnostic studies show a marked reduction in motor and
sensory conduction velocity (hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy [HMSN] type I).
In other instances (HMSN type II), motor conduction velocity is
normal or only slightly reduced, sensory nerve action potentials may
be absent, and signs of chronic partial denervation are found in
affected muscles electromyo-graphically. The predominant
pathologic change is axonal loss rather than segmental
demyelination.
A similar disorder may occur in patients with progressive distal
spinal muscular atrophy, but there is no sensory loss;
electrophysiologic investigation reveals that motor conduction
velocity is normal or only slightly reduced, and nerve action
potentials are normal.
B. Dejerine-Sottas Disease (HMSN Type III)
The disorder may occur on a sporadic, autosomal dominant or, less
commonly, autosomal recessive basis. Onset in infancy or childhood
leads to a progressive motor and sensory polyneuropathy with
weakness, ataxia, sensory loss, and depressed or absent tendon
reflexes. The peripheral nerves may be palpably enlarged and are
characterized pathologically by segmental demyelination, Schwann
cell hyperplasia, and thin myelin sheaths. Electrophysiologically,
there is slowing of conduction, and sensory action potentials may be
unrecordable.
C. Friedreich Ataxia
This disorder, the only known autosomal recessive trinucleotide
repeat disease, is caused by expansion of a poly-GAA locus in the
gene for frataxin on chromosome 9, leading to symptoms in
childhood or early adult life. The gait becomes ataxic, the hands
become clumsy, and other signs of cerebellar dysfunction develop
accompanied by weakness of the legs and extensor plantar
responses. Involvement of peripheral sensory fibers leads to
sensory disturbances in the limbs and depressed tendon reflexes.
There is bilateral pes cavus. Pathologically, there is a marked loss of
cells in the posterior root ganglia and degeneration of peripheral
sensory fibers. In the central nervous system, changes are
conspicuous in the posterior and lateral columns of the cord.
Electrophysiologically, conduction velocity in motor fibers is normal
or only mildly reduced, but sensory action potentials are small or
absent.
In the differential diagnosis for Friedreich ataxia are other
spinocerebellar ataxias, a growing group of at least 29 inherited
disorders, each involving a different identified gene. These
heterogeneous disorders, which frequently (but not exclusively)
exhibit an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern and poly-CAG
expansion of the affected gene, typically cause cerebellar ataxia and
varying combinations of other symptoms (such as peripheral
neuropathy, ophthalmoparesis, dysarthria, and pyramidal and
extrapyramidal signs).
D. Refsum Disease (HMSN Type IV)
This autosomal recessive disorder is due to a disturbance in
phytanic acid metabolism. Clinically, pigmentary retinal degeneration
is accompanied by progressive sensorimotor polyneuropathy and
cerebellar signs. Auditory dysfunction, cardiomyopathy, and
cutaneous manifestations may also occur. Motor and sensory
conduction velocity are reduced, often markedly, and there may be
electromyographic evidence of denervation in affected muscles.
Dietary restriction of phytanic acid and its precursors may be helpful
therapeutically. Plasmapheresis to reduce stored phytanic acid may
help at the initiation of treatment.
E. Porphyria
Peripheral nerve involvement may occur during acute attacks in
both variegate porphyria and acute intermittent porphyria. Motor
symptoms usually occur first, and weakness is often most marked
proximally and in the upper limbs rather than the lower. Sensory
symptoms and signs may be proximal or distal in distribution.
Autonomic 
involvement 
is 
sometimes 
pronounced. 
The
electrophysiologic findings are in keeping with the results of
neuropathologic studies suggesting that the neuropathy is axonal in
type. Hematin (4 mg/kg intravenously over 15 minutes once or
twice daily) may lead to rapid improvement. A high-carbohydrate
diet and, in severe cases, intravenous glucose or levulose may also
be helpful. Propranolol (up to 100 mg orally every 4 hours) may
control tachycardia and hypertension in acute attacks.
2. Neuropathies Associated with Systemic & Metabolic
Disorders
A. Diabetes Mellitus
In this disorder, involvement of the peripheral nervous system may
lead to symmetric sensory or mixed polyneuropathy, asymmetric
motor radiculoneuropathy or plexopathy (diabetic amyotrophy),
thoracoabdominal radiculopathy, autonomic neuropathy, or isolated
lesions of individual nerves. These may occur singly or in any
combination and are discussed in Chapter 27.
Bansal D et al. Amitriptyline vs. pregabalin in painful diabetic
neuropathy: a randomized double blind clinical trial. Diabet Med.
2009 Oct;26(10):1019–26. [PMID: 19900234]
 
Zochodne DW. Diabetic polyneuropathy: an update. Curr Opin
Neurol. 2008 Oct;21(5):527–33. [PMID: 18769245]
 
B. Uremia
Uremia may lead to a symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy that
tends to affect the lower limbs more than the upper limbs and is
more marked distally than proximally (see Chapter 22). The
diagnosis can be confirmed electro-physiologically, for motor and
sensory conduction velocity is moderately reduced. The neuropathy
improves both clinically and electrophysiologically with kidney
transplantation and to a lesser extent with chronic dialysis.
Krishnan AV et al. Uremic neuropathy: clinical features and new
pathophysiological insights. Muscle Nerve. 2007 Mar; 35(3):273–
90. [PMID: 17195171]
 
C. Alcoholism and Nutritional Deficiency
Many alcoholics have an axonal distal sensorimotor polyneuropathy
that is frequently accompanied by painful cramps, muscle
tenderness, and painful paresthesias and is often more marked in the
legs than in the arms. Symptoms of autonomic dysfunction may also
be conspicuous. Motor and sensory conduction velocity may be
slightly reduced, even in subclinical cases, but gross slowing of
conduction is uncommon. A similar distal sensorimotor
polyneuropathy is a well-recognized feature of beriberi (thiamine
deficiency). In vitamin B12 deficiency, distal sensory polyneuropathy
may develop but is usually overshadowed by central nervous
system manifestations (eg, myelopathy, optic neuropathy, or
intellectual changes).
D. Paraproteinemias
A symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy that is gradual in onset,
progressive in course, and often accompanied by pain and
dysesthesias in the limbs may occur in patients (especially men) with
multiple myeloma. The neuropathy is of the axonal type in classic
lytic myeloma, but segmental demyelination (primary or secondary)
and axonal loss may occur in sclerotic myeloma and lead to
predominantly motor clinical manifestations. Both demyelinating and
axonal neuropathies are also observed in patients with
paraproteinemias without myeloma. A small fraction will develop
myeloma if serially followed. The demyelinating neuropathy in these
patients may be due to the monoclonal protein's reacting to a
component of the nerve myelin. The neuropathy of classic multiple
myeloma is poorly responsive to therapy. The polyneuropathy of
benign 
monoclonal 
gammopathy 
may 
respond 
to
immunosuppressant drugs and plasmapheresis.
Polyneuropathy may also occur in association with
macroglobulinemia and cryoglobulinemia and sometimes responds
to plasmapheresis. Entrapment neuropathy, such as carpal tunnel
syndrome, is more common than polyneuropathy in patients with
(nonhereditary) generalized amyloidosis. With polyneuropathy due
to amyloidosis, sensory and autonomic symptoms are especially
conspicuous, whereas distal wasting and weakness occur later;
there is no specific treatment.
3. Neuropathies Associated with Infectious & Inflammatory
Diseases
A. Leprosy
Leprosy is an important cause of peripheral neuropathy in certain
parts of the world. Sensory disturbances are mainly due to
involvement of intracutaneous nerves. In tuberculoid leprosy, they
develop at the same time and in the same distribution as the skin
lesion but may be more extensive if nerve trunks lying beneath the
lesion are also involved. In lepromatous leprosy, there is more
extensive sensory loss, and this develops earlier and to a greater
extent in the coolest regions of the body, such as the dorsal surfaces
of the hands and feet, where the bacilli proliferate most actively.
Motor deficits result from involvement of superficial nerves where
their temperature is lowest, eg, the ulnar nerve in the region
proximal to the olecranon groove, the median nerve as it emerges
from beneath the forearm flexor muscle to run toward the carpal
tunnel, the peroneal nerve at the head of the fibula, and the posterior
tibial nerve in the lower part of the leg; patchy facial muscular
weakness may also occur owing to involvement of the superficial
branches of the seventh cranial nerve.
Motor disturbances in leprosy are suggestive of multiple
mononeuropathy, whereas sensory changes resemble those of distal
polyneuropathy. Examination, however, relates the distribution of
sensory deficits to the temperature of the tissues; in the legs, for
example, sparing frequently occurs between the toes and in the
popliteal fossae, where the temperature is higher. Treatment is with
antileprotic agents (see Chapter 33).
B. AIDS
A variety of neuropathies occur in HIV-infected patients (see
Chapter 31). Patients with AIDS may develop a chronic symmetric
sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy associated usually with no
abnormal cerebrospinal fluid findings. Treatment is symptomatic.
AIDS patients may also develop progressive polyradiculopathy or
radiculomyelopathy that leads to leg weakness and urinary
retention; sensory loss is less conspicuous than in polyneuropathy.
The cerebrospinal fluid may show mononuclear pleocytosis and
increased protein and low glucose concentrations. Cytomegalovirus
is responsible in at least some cases. The prognosis is generally
poor, but some patients respond to intravenous ganciclovir (2.5
mg/kg every 8 hours for 10 days, then 7.5 mg/kg daily 5 days per
week).
An 
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
sometimes occurs in HIV-seropositive patients without AIDS and
may follow an acute, subacute, or chronic course. Weakness is
usually more conspicuous distally than proximally and tends to
overshadow sensory symptoms. Tendon reflexes are depressed or
absent. The cerebrospinal fluid shows an increased cell count and
protein concentration. Treatment with plasmapheresis has helped
some patients. Spontaneous improvement may also occur.
Seropositive patients without AIDS may also develop a
mononeuropathy multiplex that sometimes responds to treatment
with plasmapheresis.
C. Lyme Borreliosis
The neurologic manifestations of Lyme disease include meningitis,
meningoencephalitis, 
polyradiculoneuropathy, 
mononeuropathy
multiplex, and cranial neuropathy. Serologic tests establish the
underlying disorder. Lyme disease and its treatment are discussed in
depth in Chapter 34.
D. Sarcoidosis
Cranial nerve palsies (especially facial palsy), multiple
mononeuropathy and, less commonly, symmetric polyneuropathy
may all occur, the latter sometimes preferentially affecting either
motor or sensory fibers. Improvement may occur with use of
corticosteroids.
E. Polyarteritis
Involvement of the vasa nervorum by the vasculitic process may
result in infarction of the nerve. Clinically, one encounters an
asymmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex)
that pursues a waxing and waning course. Corticosteroids and
cytotoxic agents—especially cyclophosphamide—may be of benefit
in severe cases.
F. Rheumatoid Arthritis
Compressive or entrapment neuropathies, ischemic neuropathies,
mild distal sensory polyneuropathy, and severe progressive
sensorimotor polyneuropathy can occur in rheumatoid arthritis.
4. Neuropathy Associated with Critical Illness
Patients in intensive care units with sepsis and multiorgan failure
sometimes develop polyneuropathies. This may be manifested
initially by unexpected difficulty in weaning patients from a
mechanical ventilator and in more advanced cases by wasting and
weakness of the extremities and loss of tendon reflexes. Sensory
abnormalities are relatively inconspicuous. The neuropathy is axonal
in type. Its pathogenesis is obscure, and treatment is supportive.
The prognosis is good provided patients recover from the
underlying critical illness.
5. Toxic Neuropathies
Axonal polyneuropathy may follow exposure to industrial agents or
pesticides such as acrylamide, organophosphorus compounds,
hexacarbon solvents, methyl bromide, and carbon disulfide; metals
such as arsenic, thallium, mercury, and lead; and drugs such as
phenytoin, perhexiline, isoniazid, nitrofurantoin, vincristine, and
pyridoxine in high doses. Detailed occupational, environmental, and
medical histories and recognition of clusters of cases are important
in suggesting the diagnosis. Treatment is by preventing further
exposure to the causal agent. Isoniazid neuropathy is prevented by
pyridoxine supplementation.
Diphtheritic neuropathy results from a neurotoxin released by the
causative organism and is common in many areas. Palatal weakness
may develop 2–4 weeks after infection of the throat, and infection
of the skin may similarly be followed by focal weakness of
neighboring muscles. Disturbances of accommodation may occur
about 4–5 weeks after infection and distal sensorimotor
demyelinating polyneuropathy after 1–3 months.
6. Neuropathies Associated with Malignant Diseases
Both a sensorimotor and a purely sensory polyneuropathy may
occur as a nonmetastatic complication of malignant diseases, and
have been associated with circulating anti-MAG or anti-Hu
antibodies that can be detected by a paraneoplastic antibody panel
that is available commercially. The sensorimotor polyneuropathy
may be mild and occur in the course of known malignant disease, or
it may have an acute or subacute onset, lead to severe disability,
and occur before there is any clinical evidence of the cancer,
occasionally following a remitting course. An autonomic neuropathy
may also occur as a paraneoplastic disorder related to the presence
of anti-Hu antibodies or to an antibody against ganglionic
acetylcholine receptors (anti-nAChR).
7. Acute Idiopathic Polyneuropathy (Guillain-Barré
Syndrome)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute or subacute progressive polyradiculoneuropathy.
 Weakness is more severe than sensory disturbances.
 Acute dysautonomia may be life-threatening.
 
 General Considerations
This acute or subacute polyradiculoneuropathy sometimes follows
infective illness, inoculations, or surgical procedures. There is an
association with preceding Campylobacter jejuni enteritis. The
disorder probably has an immunologic basis, but the precise
mechanism is unclear.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The main complaint is of weakness that varies widely in severity in
different patients and often has a proximal emphasis and symmetric
distribution. It usually begins in the legs, spreading to a variable
extent but frequently involving the arms and often one or both sides
of the face. The muscles of respiration or deglutition may also be
affected. Sensory symptoms are usually less conspicuous than
motor ones, but distal paresthesias and dysesthesias are common,
and neuropathic or radicular pain is present in many patients.
Autonomic disturbances are also common, may be severe, and are
sometimes life-threatening; they include tachycardia, cardiac
irregularities, hypotension or hypertension, facial flushing,
abnormalities of sweating, pulmonary dysfunction, and impaired
sphincter control. The axonal subtypes of the syndrome (acute
motor axonal neuropathy [AMAN] and acute motor and sensory
axonal neuropathy [AMSAN]) are caused by antibodies to
gangliosides on the axon membrane, including anti-GM1, anti-
GM1b, anti-GD1a, anti-GD1b, and (in AMAN) anti-GalNAC-
GD1a antibodies. The Miller Fisher syndrome, another subtype, is
characterized by the clinical triad of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and
areflexia, and is associated with anti-GQ1b antibodies.
B. Laboratory Findings
The cerebrospinal fluid characteristically contains a high protein
concentration with a normal cell content, but these changes may
take 2 or 3 weeks to develop. Electrophysiologic studies may
reveal marked abnormalities, which do not necessarily parallel the
clinical disorder in their temporal course. Pathologic examination
shows primary demyelination or, less commonly, axonal
degeneration.
 Differential Diagnosis
When the diagnosis is made, the history and appropriate laboratory
studies should exclude the possibility of porphyric, diphtheritic, or
toxic (heavy metal, hexacarbon, organophosphate) neuropathies.
The temporal course excludes other peripheral neuropathies.
Poliomyelitis, botulism, and tick paralysis must also be considered
as they cause weakness of acute onset. The presence of pyramidal
signs, a markedly asymmetric motor deficit, a sharp sensory level,
or early sphincter involvement should suggest a focal cord lesion.
 Treatment
Treatment with prednisone is ineffective and may prolong recovery
time. Plasmapheresis is of value; it is best performed within the first
few days of illness and is particularly useful for clinically severe or
rapidly progressive cases or those with ventilatory impairment.
IVIG (400 mg/kg/d for 5 days) is equally helpful and imposes less
stress on the cardiovascular system than plasmapheresis. Patients
should be admitted to intensive care units if their forced vital
capacity is declining, and intubation is considered if the forced vital
capacity reaches 15 mL/kg, the mean inspiratory force reaches −40
mm Hg, dyspnea becomes evident, or the oxygen saturation
declines. Respiratory toilet and chest physical therapy help prevent
atelectasis. Marked hypotension may respond to volume
replacement or pressor agents. Low-dose heparin to prevent
pulmonary embolism should be considered.
Approximately 3% of patients with acute idiopathic
polyneuropathy have one or more clinically similar relapses,
sometimes several years after the initial illness. Plasma exchange
therapy may produce improvement in chronic and relapsing
inflammatory polyneuropathy.
Prognosis
Most patients eventually make a good recovery, but this may take
many months, and about 20% of patients are left with persisting
disability.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
All patients should be hospitalized until their condition is stable and
there is no respiratory compromise.
Haber P et al. Vaccines and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Drug Saf.
2009;32(4):309–23. [PMID: 19388722]
 
Hughes RA et al. Corticosteroids for Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Feb 17;2:CD001446.
[PMID: 20166061]
 
Hughes RA et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin for Guillain-Barré
syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jun 16;6:
CD002063. [PMID: 20556755]
 
Lo YL. Clinical and immunological spectrum of the Miller Fisher
syndrome. Muscle Nerve. 2007 Nov;36(5):615–27. [PMID:
17657801]
 
van Doorn PA et al. Clinical features, pathogenesis, and treatment
of Guillain-Barré syndrome. Lancet Neurol. 2008 Oct; 7(10):939–
50. [PMID: 18848313]
 
Yuki N. Ganglioside mimicry and peripheral nerve disease. Muscle
Nerve. 2007 Jun;35(6):691–711. [PMID: 17373701]
 
8. Chronic Inflammatory Polyneuropathy
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, an acquired
immunologically mediated disorder, is clinically similar to Guillain-
Barré syndrome except that it has a relapsing or steadily
progressive course over months or years and that autonomic
dysfunction is generally less common. It may present as an
exclusively motor disorder or with a mixed sensorimotor
disturbance. In the relapsing form, partial recovery may occur after
some relapses, but in other instances there is no recovery between
exacerbations. Although remission may occur spontaneously with
time, the disorder frequently follows a progressive downhill course
leading to severe functional disability.
Electrodiagnostic studies show marked slowing of motor and
sensory conduction, and focal conduction block. Signs of partial
denervation may also be present owing to secondary axonal
degeneration. Nerve biopsy may show chronic perivascular
inflammatory infiltrates in the endoneurium and epineurium, without
accompanying evidence of vasculitis. However, a normal nerve
biopsy result or the presence of nonspecific abnormalities does not
exclude the diagnosis.
Corticosteroids may arrest or reverse the downhill course.
Treatment is usually begun with prednisone, 60–80 mg daily,
continued for 2–3 months or until a definite response has occurred.
If no response has occurred despite 3 months of treatment, a higher
dose may be tried. In responsive cases, the dose is gradually
tapered, but most patients become corticosteroid-dependent, often
requiring prednisone, 20 mg daily on alternate days, on a long-term
basis. IVIG can be used in place of—or in addition to—
corticosteroids and is best used as the initial treatment in pure motor
syndromes. When both IVIG and corticosteroids are ineffective,
plasma exchange may be worthwhile. Immunosuppressant or
immunomodulatory drugs (such as azathioprine) may be added
when the response to other measures is unsatisfactory or to enable
maintenance doses of corticosteroids to be lowered. Symptomatic
treatment is also important.
Eftimov F et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin for chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):CD001797. [PMID:
19160200]
 
Latov N et al; IGIV-C CIDP Efficacy (ICE) Study Group. Timing
and course of clinical response to intravenous immunoglobulin in
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy. Arch
Neurol. 2010 Jul;67(7):802–7. [PMID: 20457948]
 
Rajabally YA et al. Validity of diagnostic criteria for chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy: a multicentre
European study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;
80(12):1364–8. [PMID: 19622522]
 
van Schaik IN et al. Pulsed high-dose dexamethasone versus
standard prednisolone treatment for chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (PREDICT study): a
double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2010
Mar;9(3):245–53. [PMID: 20133204]
 
MONONEUROPATHIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Focal motor or sensory deficit.
 Deficit is in territory of an individual peripheral nerve.
 
An individual nerve may be injured along its course or may be
compressed, angulated, or stretched by neighboring anatomic
structures, especially at a point where it passes through a narrow
space (entrapment neuropathy). The relative contributions of
mechanical factors and ischemia to the local damage are not clear.
With involvement of a sensory or mixed nerve, pain is commonly
felt distal to the lesion. Symptoms never develop with some
entrapment neuropathies, resolve rapidly and spontaneously in
others, and become progressively more disabling and distressing in
yet other cases. The precise neurologic deficit depends on the nerve
involved. Percussion of the nerve at the site of the lesion may lead
to paresthesias in its distal distribution.
Entrapment neuropathy may be the sole manifestation of
subclinical polyneuropathy, and this must be borne in mind and
excluded by nerve conduction studies. Such studies are also
indispensable for the accurate localization of the focal lesion.
In patients with acute compression neuropathy such as may
occur in intoxicated individuals (“Saturday night palsy”), no
treatment is necessary. Complete recovery generally occurs, usually
within 2 months, presumably because the underlying pathology is
demyelination. However, axonal degeneration can occur in severe
cases, and recovery then takes longer and may never be complete.
In chronic compressive or entrapment neuropathies, avoidance of
aggravating factors and correction of any underlying systemic
conditions are important. Local infiltration of the region about the
nerve with corticosteroids may be of value; in addition, surgical
decompression may help if there is a progressively increasing
neurologic deficit or if electrodiagnostic studies show evidence of
partial denervation in weak muscles.
Peripheral 
nerve 
tumors 
are 
uncommon, 
except 
in
neurofibromatosis type 1, but also give rise to mononeuropathy.
This may be distinguishable from entrapment neuropathy only by
noting the presence of a mass along the course of the nerve and by
demonstrating the precise site of the lesion with appropriate
electrophysiologic studies. Treatment of symptomatic lesions is by
surgical removal if possible.
1. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
See Chapter 20.
2. Pronator Teres or Anterior Interosseous Syndrome
The median nerve gives off its motor branch, the anterior
interosseous nerve, below the elbow as it descends between the
two heads of the pronator teres muscle. A lesion of either nerve
may occur in this region, sometimes after trauma or owing to
compression from, for example, a fibrous band. With anterior
interosseous nerve involvement, there is no sensory loss, and
weakness is confined to the pronator quadratus, flexor pollicis
longus, and the flexor digitorum profundus to the second and third
digits. Weakness is more widespread and sensory changes occur in
an appropriate distribution when the median nerve itself is affected.
The prognosis is variable. If improvement does not occur
spontaneously, decompressive surgery may be helpful.
3. Ulnar Nerve Lesions
Ulnar nerve lesions are likely to occur in the elbow region as the
nerve runs behind the medial epicondyle and descends into the
cubital tunnel. In the condylar groove, the ulnar nerve is exposed to
pressure or trauma. Moreover, any increase in the carrying angle of
the elbow, whether congenital, degenerative, or traumatic, may
cause excessive stretching of the nerve when the elbow is flexed.
Ulnar nerve lesions may also result from thickening or distortion of
the anatomic structures forming the cubital tunnel, and the resulting
symptoms may also be aggravated by flexion of the elbow, because
the tunnel is then narrowed by tightening of its roof or inward
bulging of its floor. A severe lesion at either site causes sensory
changes in the medial 1½ digits and along the medial border of the
hand. There is weakness of the ulnar-innervated muscles in the
forearm and hand. With a cubital tunnel lesion, however, there may
be relative sparing of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle.
Electrophysiologic evaluation using nerve stimulation techniques
allows more precise localization of the lesion.
If conservative measures are unsuccessful in relieving symptoms
and preventing further progression, surgical treatment may be
necessary. This consists of nerve transposition if the lesion is in the
condylar groove, or a release procedure if it is in the cubital tunnel.
Ulnar nerve lesions may also develop at the wrist or in the palm
of the hand, usually owing to repetitive trauma or to compression
from ganglia or benign tumors. They can be subdivided depending
on their presumed site. Compressive lesions are treated surgically. If
repetitive mechanical trauma is responsible, this is avoided by
occupational adjustment or job retraining.
Watts AC et al. Patient-rated outcome of ulnar nerve
decompression: a comparison of endoscopic and open in situ
decompression. J Hand Surg Am. 2009 Oct;34(8):1492–8.
[PMID: 19695795]
 
4. Radial Nerve Lesions
The radial nerve is particularly liable to compression or injury in the
axilla (eg, by crutches or by pressure when the arm hangs over the
back of a chair). This leads to weakness or paralysis of all the
muscles supplied by the nerve, including the triceps. Sensory
changes may also occur but are often surprisingly inconspicuous,
being marked only in a small area on the back of the hand between
the thumb and index finger. Injuries to the radial nerve in the spiral
groove occur characteristically during deep sleep, as in intoxicated
individuals (Saturday night palsy), and there is then sparing of the
triceps muscle, which is supplied more proximally. The nerve may
also be injured at or above the elbow; its purely motor posterior
interosseous branch, supplying the extensors of the wrist and
fingers, may be involved immediately below the elbow, but then
there is sparing of the extensor carpi radialis longus, so that the wrist
can still be extended. The superficial radial nerve may be
compressed by handcuffs or a tight watch strap.
5. Femoral Neuropathy
The clinical features of femoral nerve palsy consist of weakness and
wasting of the quadriceps muscle, with sensory impairment over the
anteromedian aspect of the thigh and sometimes also of the leg to
the medial malleolus, and a depressed or absent knee jerk. Isolated
femoral neuropathy may occur in diabetics or from compression by
retroperitoneal neoplasms or hematomas (eg, expanding aortic
aneurysm). Femoral neuropathy may also result from pressure from
the inguinal ligament when the thighs are markedly flexed and
abducted, as in the lithotomy position.
6. Meralgia Paresthetica
The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, a sensory nerve arising from
the L2 and L3 roots, may be compressed or stretched in obese or
diabetic patients and during pregnancy. The nerve usually runs
under the outer portion of the inguinal ligament to reach the thigh,
but the ligament sometimes splits to enclose it. Hyperextension of
the hip or increased lumbar lordosis—such as occurs during
pregnancy—leads to nerve compression by the posterior fascicle of
the ligament. However, entrapment of the nerve at any point along
its course may cause similar symptoms, and several other anatomic
variations predispose the nerve to damage when it is stretched.
Pain, paresthesia, or numbness occurs about the outer aspect of the
thigh, usually unilaterally, and is sometimes relieved by sitting.
Examination shows no abnormalities except in severe cases when
cutaneous sensation is impaired in the affected area. Symptoms are
usually mild and commonly settle spontaneously. Hydrocortisone
injections medial to the anterosuperior iliac spine often relieve
symptoms temporarily, while nerve decompression by transposition
may provide more lasting relief.
7. Sciatic & Common Peroneal Nerve Palsies
Misplaced deep intramuscular injections are probably still the most
common cause of sciatic nerve palsy. Trauma to the buttock, hip, or
thigh may also be responsible. The resulting clinical deficit depends
on whether the whole nerve has been affected or only certain fibers.
In general, the peroneal fibers of the sciatic nerve are more
susceptible to damage than those destined for the tibial nerve. A
sciatic nerve lesion may therefore be difficult to distinguish from
peroneal neuropathy unless there is electromyographic evidence of
involvement of the short head of the biceps femoris muscle. The
common peroneal nerve itself may be compressed or injured in the
region of the head and neck of the fibula, eg, by sitting with crossed
legs or wearing high boots. There is weakness of dorsiflexion and
eversion of the foot, accompanied by numbness or blunted
sensation of the anterolateral aspect of the calf and dorsum of the
foot.
8. Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome
The tibial nerve, the other branch of the sciatic, supplies several
muscles in the lower extremity, gives origin to the sural nerve, and
then continues as the posterior tibial nerve to supply the plantar
flexors of the foot and toes. It passes through the tarsal tunnel
behind and below the medial malleolus, giving off calcaneal
branches and the medial and lateral plantar nerves that supply small
muscles of the foot and the skin on the plantar aspect of the foot
and toes. Compression of the posterior tibial nerve or its branches
between the bony floor and ligamentous roof of the tarsal tunnel
leads to pain, paresthesias, and numbness over the bottom of the
foot, especially at night, with sparing of the heel. Muscle weakness
may be hard to recognize clinically. Compressive lesions of the
individual plantar nerves may also occur more distally, with clinical
features similar to those of the tarsal tunnel syndrome. Treatment is
surgical decompression.
9. Facial Neuropathy
An isolated facial palsy is most often idiopathic (Bell palsy) but may
occur in patients with HIV seropositivity, sarcoidosis, Lyme disease
(Figure 24–2; also see Chapter 34) or with any process causing an
inflammatory reaction in the subarachnoid space, such as meningitis.
Whenever facial palsies occur bilaterally, or a facial palsy occurs in
conjunction with other neurologic deficits, MRI brain imaging should
be undertaken and other investigations considered.
Figure 24–2. facial palsy caused by an infection with Borrelia
burgdorferi (lyme disease). (Public Health Image Library
 
 When to Refer
 
•    If there is uncertainty about the diagnosis.
•    Symptoms or signs are progressing despite treatment.
 When to Admit
When a patient should be hospitalized depends on the cause and
treatment.
BELL PALSY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of lower motor neuron facial palsy.
 Hyperacusis or impaired taste may occur.
 No other neurologic abnormalities.
 
 General Considerations
Bell palsy is an idiopathic facial paresis of lower motor neuron type
that has been attributed to an inflammatory reaction involving the
facial nerve near the stylomastoid foramen or in the bony facial
canal. Increasing evidence incriminates reactivation of herpes
simplex or varicella zoster virus infection in the geniculate ganglion at
least in some instances. The disorder is more common in pregnant
women or in persons with diabetes mellitus.
 Clinical Findings
The facial paresis (Figure 24–2) generally comes on abruptly, but it
may worsen over the following day or so. Pain about the ear
precedes or accompanies the weakness in many cases but usually
lasts for only a few days. The face itself feels stiff and pulled to one
side. There may be ipsilateral restriction of eye closure and difficulty
with eating and fine facial movements. A disturbance of taste is
common, owing to involvement of chorda tympani fibers, and
hyperacusis due to involvement of fibers to the stapedius occurs
occasionally.
 Treatment
Other disorders that can produce a facial palsy and require specific
treatment, such as tumors, Lyme disease, AIDS, sarcoidosis, and
herpes zoster infection of the geniculate ganglion, must be excluded.
The management of Bell palsy is controversial. Approximately 60%
of cases recover completely without treatment, presumably because
the lesion is so mild that it leads merely to conduction block.
Considerable improvement occurs in most other cases, and only
about 10% of all patients have permanent disfigurement or other
long-term sequelae. Treatment is unnecessary in most cases but is
indicated for patients in whom an unsatisfactory outcome can be
predicted. The best clinical guide to progress is the severity of the
palsy during the first few days after presentation. Patients with
clinically complete palsy when first seen are less likely to make a full
recovery than those with an incomplete one. A poor prognosis for
recovery is also associated with advanced age, hyperacusis, and
severe initial pain. Electromyography and nerve excitability or
conduction studies provide a guide to prognosis but not early
enough to aid in the selection of patients for treatment.
The only medical treatment that may influence the outcome is
administration of corticosteroids, but this must be commenced
within 5 days of onset. Treatment with prednisone, 60–80 mg orally
daily for 4 or 5 days, followed by tapering of the dose over the next
7–10 days, is a satisfactory regimen; prednisolone (50 mg daily
orally) for 10 days is another acceptable alternative. It is helpful to
protect the eye with lubricating drops (or lubricating ointment at
night) and a patch if eye closure is not possible. Acyclovir does not
confer any additional benefit. There is no evidence that surgical
procedures to decompress the facial nerve are of benefit.
de Almeida JR et al. Combined corticosteroid and antiviral
treatment for Bell palsy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
JAMA. 2009 Sep 2;302(9):985–93. [PMID: 19724046]
 
Quant EC et al. The benefits of steroids versus steroids plus
antivirals for treatment of Bell's palsy: a meta-analysis. BMJ. 2009
Sep 7;339:b3354. [PMID: 19736282]
 
Sullivan FM et al. A randomised controlled trial of the use of
aciclovir and/or prednisolone for the early treatment of Bell's palsy:
the BELLS study. Health Technol Assess. 2009 Oct;13(47):iii–iv,
ix–xi 1–130. [PMID: 19833052]
 
DISCOGENIC NECK PAIN
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Neck pain, sometimes radiating to arms.
 Restricted neck movements.
 Motor, sensory, or reflex changes in arms with root involvement.
 Neurologic deficit in legs, gait disorder, or sphincter disturbance
with cord involvement.
 
 General Considerations
A variety of congenital abnormalities may involve the cervical spine
and lead to neck pain; these include hemivertebrae, fused vertebrae,
basilar impression, and instability of the atlantoaxial joint. Traumatic,
degenerative, infective, and neoplastic disorders may also lead to
pain in the neck. When rheumatoid arthritis involves the spine, it
tends to affect especially the cervical region, leading to pain,
stiffness, and reduced mobility; displacement of vertebrae or
atlantoaxial subluxation may lead to cord compression that can be
life-threatening if not treated by fixation. Further details are given in
Chapter 20 (including a discussion on low back pain), and
discussion here is restricted to disk disease.
1. Acute Cervical Disk Protrusion
Acute cervical disk protrusion leads to pain in the neck and
radicular pain in the arm, exacerbated by head movement. With
lateral herniation of the disk, motor, sensory, or reflex changes may
be found in a radicular (usually C6 or C7) distribution on the
affected side (Figure 24–3); with more centrally directed
herniations, the spinal cord may also be involved, leading to spastic
paraparesis and sensory disturbances in the legs, sometimes
accompanied by impaired sphincter function. The diagnosis is
confirmed by MRI or CT myelography. In mild cases, bed rest or
intermittent neck traction may help, followed by immobilization of
the neck in a collar for several weeks. If these measures are
unsuccessful or the patient has a significant neurologic deficit,
surgical removal of the protruding disk may be necessary.
2. Cervical Spondylosis
Cervical spondylosis results from chronic cervical disk
degeneration, with herniation of disk material, secondary
calcification, and associated osteophytic outgrowths. One or more
of the cervical nerve roots may be compressed, stretched, or
angulated; and myelopathy may also develop as a result of
compression, vascular insufficiency, or recurrent minor trauma to
the cord. Patients present with neck pain and restricted head
movement, occipital headaches, radicular pain and other sensory
disturbances in the arms, weakness of the arms or legs, or some
combination of these symptoms. Examination generally reveals that
lateral flexion and rotation of the neck are limited. A segmental
pattern of weakness or dermatomal sensory loss (or both) may be
found unilaterally or bilaterally in the upper limbs, and tendon
reflexes mediated by the affected root or roots are depressed. The
C5 and C6 nerve roots are most commonly involved, and
examination frequently then reveals weakness of muscles supplied
by these roots (eg, deltoids, supraspinatus and infraspinatus, biceps,
brachioradialis), pain or sensory loss about the shoulder and outer
border of the arm and forearm, and depressed biceps and
brachioradialis reflexes. Spastic paraparesis may also be present if
there is an associated myelopathy, sometimes accompanied by
posterior column or spinothalamic sensory deficits in the legs.
Figure 24–3. Cutaneous innervation. The segmental or radicular
(root) distribution is shown on the left side of the body and the
peripheral nerve distribution on the right side. Above: anterior view;
facing page: posterior view. (Reproduced, with permission, from
Simon RP et al. Clinical Neurology, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill
 
Plain radiographs of the cervical spine show osteophyte
formation, narrowing of disk spaces, and encroachment on the
intervertebral foramina, but such changes are common in middle-
aged persons and may be unrelated to the presenting complaint. CT
or MRI helps confirm the diagnosis and exclude other structural
causes of the myelopathy.
Restriction of neck movements by a cervical collar may relieve
pain. Operative treatment may be necessary to prevent further
progression if there is a significant neurologic deficit or if root pain is
severe, persistent, and unresponsive to conservative measures.
Matz PG et al; Joint Section on Disorders of the Spine and
Peripheral Nerves of the American Association of Neurological
Surgeons and Congress of Neurological Surgeons. The natural
history of cervical spondylotic myelopathy. J Neurosurg Spine.
2009 Aug;11(2):104–11. [PMID: 19769489]
 
When to Refer
 
•    Pain unresponsive to simple measures.
•    Patients with neurologic deficits.
•    Patients in whom surgical treatment is under
consideration.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with progressive or significant neurologic
deficit.
•    Patients with sphincter involvement (from cord
compression).
•    Patients requiring surgical treatment.
BRACHIAL & LUMBAR PLEXUS
LESIONS
1. Brachial Plexus Neuropathy
Brachial plexus neuropathy may be idiopathic, sometimes occurring
in relationship to a number of different nonspecific illnesses or
factors. In other instances, brachial plexus lesions follow trauma or
result from congenital anomalies, neoplastic involvement, or injury
by various physical agents. In rare instances, the disorder occurs on
a familial basis.
Idiopathic brachial plexus neuropathy (neuralgic amyotrophy)
characteristically begins with severe pain about the shoulder,
followed within a few days by weakness, reflex changes, and
sensory disturbances involving especially the C5 and C6 segments
but affecting any nerve in the brachial plexus. Symptoms and signs
are usually unilateral but may be bilateral. Wasting of affected
muscles is sometimes profound. The disorder relates to disturbed
function of cervical roots or part of the brachial plexus, but its
precise cause is unknown. Recovery occurs over the ensuing
months but may be incomplete. Treatment is purely symptomatic.
van Alfen N et al. The clinical spectrum of neuralgic amyotrophy in
246 cases. Brain. 2006 Feb;129(Pt 2):438–50. [PMID:
16371410]
 
2. Cervical Rib Syndrome
Compression of the C8 and T1 roots or the lower trunk of the
brachial plexus by a cervical rib or band arising from the seventh
cervical vertebra leads to weakness and wasting of intrinsic hand
muscles, especially those in the thenar eminence, accompanied by
pain and numbness in the medial two fingers and the ulnar border of
the hand and forearm. The subclavian artery may also be
compressed, and this forms the basis of Adson test for diagnosing
the disorder; the radial pulse is diminished or obliterated on the
affected side when the seated patient inhales deeply and turns the
head to one side or the other. Electromyography, nerve conduction
studies, and somatosensory evoked potential studies may help
confirm the diagnosis. MRI may be especially helpful in revealing
the underlying compressive structure. Plain radiographs or CT
scanning sometimes shows the cervical rib or a large transverse
process of the seventh cervical vertebra, but normal findings do not
exclude the possibility of a cervical band. Treatment of the disorder
is by surgical excision of the rib or band.
3. Lumbosacral Plexus Lesions
A lumbosacral plexus lesion may develop in association with
diseases such as diabetes, cancer, or bleeding disorders or in
relation to injury. It occasionally occurs as an isolated phenomenon
similar to idiopathic brachial plexopathy, and pain and weakness
then tend to be more conspicuous than sensory symptoms. The
distribution of symptoms and signs depends on the level and pattern
of neurologic involvement.
Wilbourn AJ. Plexopathies. Neurol Clin. 2007 Feb;25(1):139–71.
[PMID: 17324724]
 
DISORDERS OF NEUROMUSCULAR
TRANSMISSION
1. Myasthenia Gravis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fluctuating weakness of commonly used voluntary muscles,
producing symptoms such as diplopia, ptosis, and difficulty in
swallowing.
 Activity increases weakness of affected muscles.
 Short-acting anticholinesterases transiently improve the
weakness.
 
 General Considerations
Myasthenia gravis occurs at all ages, sometimes in association with
a thymic tumor or thyrotoxicosis, as well as in rheumatoid arthritis
and lupus erythematosus. It is most common in young women with
HLA-DR3; if thymoma is associated, older men are more
commonly affected. Onset is usually insidious, but the disorder is
sometimes unmasked by a coincidental infection that leads to
exacerbation of symptoms. Exacerbations may also occur before
the menstrual period and during or shortly after pregnancy.
Symptoms are due to a variable degree of block of neuro-muscular
transmission caused by autoantibodies binding to acetylcholine
receptors; these are found in most patients with the disease and
have a primary role in reducing the number of functioning
acetylcholine receptors. Additionally, cellular immune activity
against the receptor is found. Clinically, this leads to weakness;
initially powerful movements fatigue readily. The external ocular
muscles and certain other cranial muscles, including the masticatory,
facial, and pharyngeal muscles, are especially likely to be affected,
and the respiratory and limb muscles may also be involved.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients present with ptosis, diplopia, difficulty in chewing or
swallowing, respiratory difficulties, limb weakness, or some
combination of these problems. Weakness may remain localized to
a few muscle groups, especially the ocular muscles, or may become
generalized. Symptoms often fluctuate in intensity during the day,
and this diurnal variation is superimposed on a tendency to longer-
term spontaneous relapses and remissions that may last for weeks.
Nevertheless, the disorder follows a slowly progressive course and
may have a fatal outcome owing to respiratory complications such
as aspiration pneumonia.
Clinical examination confirms the weakness and fatigability of
affected muscles. In most cases, the extraocular muscles are
involved, and this leads to ocular palsies and ptosis, which are
commonly asymmetric. Pupillary responses are normal. The bulbar
and limb muscles are often weak, but the pattern of involvement is
variable. Sustained activity of affected muscles increases the
weakness, which improves after a brief rest. Sensation is normal,
and there are usually no reflex changes.
Life-threatening exacerbations of myasthenia (so-called
myasthenic crisis) may lead to respiratory weakness requiring
immediate admission to the intensive care unit, where respiratory
function can be monitored and ventilator support is readily available.
B. Imaging
A CT scan of the chest with and without contrast should be
obtained to demonstrate a coexisting thymoma, but a normal study
does not exclude this possibility.
C. Laboratory and Other Studies
Electrophysiologic demonstration of a decrementing muscle
response to repetitive 2- or 3-Hz stimulation of motor nerves
indicates a disturbance of neuromuscular transmission. Such an
abnormality may even be detected in clinically strong muscles with
certain provocative procedures. Needle electromyography of
affected muscles shows a marked variation in configuration and size
of 
individual 
motor 
unit 
potentials, 
and 
single-fiber
electromyography reveals an increased jitter, or variability, in the
time interval between two muscle fiber action potentials from the
same motor unit.
Assay of serum for elevated levels of circulating acetylcholine
receptor antibodies is useful because it has a sensitivity of 80–90%
for the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Certain patients without
antibodies to acetylcholine receptors have serum antibodies to
muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK), which should therefore be
determined; these patients are more likely to have facial,
respiratory, and proximal muscle weakness than those with
antibodies to acetylcholine receptors.
 Treatment
Medication such as aminoglycosides that may exacerbate
myasthenia gravis should be avoided. Anticholinesterase drugs
provide symptomatic benefit without influencing the course of the
disease. Neostigmine, pyridostigmine, or both can be used, the
dose being determined on an individual basis. The usual dose of
neostigmine is 7.5–30 mg (average, 15 mg) orally taken four times
daily; of pyridostigmine, 30–180 mg (average, 60 mg) orally four
times daily. Overmedication may temporarily increase weakness.
Thymectomy usually leads to symptomatic benefit or remission
and should be considered in all patients younger than age 60, unless
weakness is restricted to the extraocular muscles. If the disease is of
recent onset and only slowly progressive, operation is sometimes
delayed for a year or so, in the hope that spontaneous remission will
occur.
Treatment with corticosteroids is indicated for patients who have
responded poorly to anticholinesterase drugs and have already
undergone thymectomy. It is often introduced with the patient in the
hospital, since weakness may initially be aggravated. Once
weakness has stabilized after 2–3 weeks or any improvement is
sustained, further management can be on an outpatient basis.
Alternate-day treatment is usually well tolerated, but if weakness is
enhanced on the nontreatment day it may be necessary for
medication to be taken daily. The dose of corticosteroids is
determined on an individual basis, but an initial high daily dose (eg,
prednisone, 60–100 mg orally daily) can gradually be tapered to a
relatively low maintenance level as improvement occurs; total
withdrawal is difficult, however. Treatment with azathioprine may
also be effective. The usual dose is 2–3 mg/kg orally daily after a
lower initial dose.
In patients with major disability, plasmapheresis or IVIG therapy
may be beneficial. It is also useful for stabilizing patients before
thymectomy and for managing acute crisis. Mycophenolate mofetil,
an immunosuppressant, may provide symptomatic benefit and allow
the corticosteroid dose to be reduced.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with acute exacerbation or respiratory
involvement.
•    Patients requiring plasmapheresis.
•    Patients who are starting corticosteroid therapy.
•    For thymectomy.
Benatar M et al. Evidence report: the medical treatment of ocular
myasthenia (an evidence-based review). Report of the Quality
Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2007 Jun 12;68(24):2144–9. [PMID: 17460154]
 
Chaudhuri A et al. Myasthenic crisis. QJM. 2009 Feb;102(2): 97–
107. [PMID: 19060020]
 
Meriggioli MN et al. Autoimmune myasthenia gravis: emerging
clinical and biological heterogeneity. Lancet Neurol. 2009
May;8(5):475–90. [PMID: 19375665]
 
Okumura M et al. Biological implications of thymectomy for
myasthenia gravis. Surg Today. 2010;40(2):102–7. [PMID:
20107947]
 
2. Myasthenic Syndrome (Lambert-Eaton Syndrome)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Variable weakness, typically improving with activity.
 Dysautonomic symptoms may also be present.
 A history of malignant disease may be obtained.
 
 General Considerations
Myasthenic syndrome may be associated with small-cell carcinoma,
sometimes developing before the tumor is diagnosed, and
occasionally occurs with certain autoimmune diseases. There is
defective release of acetylcholine in response to a nerve impulse,
caused by P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium-channel antibody, and
this leads to weakness, especially of the proximal muscles of the
limbs. Unlike myasthenia gravis, however, power steadily increases
with sustained contraction. The diagnosis can be confirmed
electrophysiologically, because the muscle response to stimulation
of its motor nerve increases remarkably if the nerve is stimulated
repetitively at high rates, even in muscles that are not clinically
weak.
Treatment with plasmapheresis and immunosuppressive drug
therapy (prednisone and azathioprine) may lead to clinical and
electrophysiologic improvement, in addition to therapy aimed at
tumor when present. Prednisone is usually initiated in a daily dose of
60–80 mg and azathioprine in a daily dose of 2 mg/kg.
Symptomatic therapy includes the use of potassium channel
antagonists; of these, 3,4-diaminopyridine (60–80 mg/d orally in
three divided doses) has been best studied and appears efficacious.
Guanidine hydrochloride (25–50 mg/kg/d orally in divided doses) is
an alternative and is occasionally helpful in seriously disabled
patients, but adverse effects of the drug include marrow
suppression. The response to treatment with anticholinesterase
drugs such as pyridostigmine or neostigmine is usually disappointing.
Pourmand R. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. Front Neurol
Neurosci. 2009;26:120–5. [PMID: 19349709]
 
Quartel A et al. Current therapy for Lambert-Eaton myasthenic
syndrome: development of 3,4-diaminopyridine phosphate salt as
first-line symptomatic treatment. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010
Jun;26(6):1363–75. [PMID: 20377318]
 
3. Botulism
The toxin of Clostridium botulinum prevents the release of
acetylcholine at neuromuscular junctions and autonomic synapses.
Botulism occurs most commonly following the ingestion of
contaminated home-canned food and should be suggested by the
development of sudden, fluctuating, severe weakness in a previously
healthy person. Symptoms begin within 72 hours following ingestion
of the toxin and may progress for several days. Typically, there is
diplopia, ptosis, facial weakness, dysphagia, and nasal speech,
followed by respiratory difficulty and finally by weakness that
appears last in the limbs. Blurring of vision (with unreactive dilated
pupils) is characteristic, and there may be dryness of the mouth,
constipation (paralytic ileus), and postural hypotension. Sensation is
preserved, and the tendon reflexes are not affected unless the
involved muscles are very weak. If the diagnosis is suspected, the
local health authority should be notified and a sample of serum and
contaminated food (if available) sent to be assayed for toxin.
Support for the diagnosis may be obtained by electrophysiologic
studies; with repetitive stimulation of motor nerves at fast rates, the
muscle response increases in size progressively.
Patients should be hospitalized in case respiratory assistance
becomes necessary. Treatment is with trivalent antitoxin, once it is
established that the patient is not allergic to horse serum. Potassium
channel antagonists may provide symptomatic relief as they do in
Lambert-Eaton 
myasthenic 
syndrome 
(see 
above).
Anticholinesterase drugs are of no value. Respiratory assistance and
other supportive measures should be provided as necessary.
Further details are provided in Chapter 33.
4. Disorders Associated with Use of Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycoside antibiotics, eg, gentamicin, may produce a clinical
disturbance similar to botulism by preventing the release of
acetylcholine from nerve endings, but symptoms subside rapidly as
the responsible drug is eliminated from the body. These antibiotics
are particularly dangerous in patients with preexisting disturbances
of neuromuscular transmission and are therefore best avoided in
patients with myasthenia gravis.
MYOPATHIC DISORDERS
1. Muscular Dystrophies
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Muscle weakness, often in a characteristic distribution.
 Age at onset and inheritance pattern depend on the specific
dystrophy.
 
 General Considerations
These inherited myopathic disorders are characterized by
progressive muscle weakness and wasting. They are subdivided by
mode of inheritance, age at onset, and clinical features, as shown in
Table 24–8. In the Duchenne type, pseudohypertrophy of muscles
frequently occurs at some stage; intellectual retardation is common;
and there may be skeletal deformities, muscle contractures, and
cardiac involvement. The serum creatine kinase level is increased,
especially in the Duchenne and Becker varieties, and mildly
increased also in limb-girdle dystrophy. Electromyography may help
confirm that weakness is myopathic rather than neurogenic.
Similarly, histopathologic examination of a muscle biopsy specimen
may help confirm that weakness is due to a primary disorder of
muscle and to distinguish between various muscle diseases.
 
Table 24–8. the muscular dystrophies.1
 
1Not all possible genetic loci are shown.
A genetic defect on the short arm of the X chromosome has been
identified in Duchenne dystrophy. The affected gene codes for the
protein dystrophin, which is markedly reduced or absent from the
muscle of patients with the disease. Dystrophin levels are generally
normal in the Becker variety, but the protein is qualitatively altered.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy can now be recognized early in
pregnancy in about 95% of women by genetic studies; in late
pregnancy, DNA probes can be used on fetal tissue obtained for
this purpose by amniocentesis. The genes causing some of the other
muscular dystrophies are listed in Table 24–8.
There is no specific treatment for the muscular dystrophies, but it
is important to encourage patients to lead as normal lives as
possible. Prednisone (0.75 mg/kg orally daily) improves muscle
strength and function in boys with Duchenne dystrophy, but side
effects need to be monitored. Prolonged bed rest must be avoided,
as inactivity often leads to worsening of the underlying muscle
disease. Physical therapy and orthopedic procedures may help
counteract deformities or contractures.
Angelini C. The role of corticosteroids in muscular dystrophy: a
critical appraisal. Muscle Nerve. 2007 Oct;36(4):424–35. [PMID:
17541998]
 
Guglieri M et al. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. Curr Opin
Neurol. 2008 Oct;21(5):576–84. [PMID: 18769252]
 
Tawil R et al. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Muscle
Nerve. 2006 Jul;34(1):1–15. [PMID: 16508966]
 
Trollet C et al. Gene therapy for muscular dystrophy: current
progress and future prospects. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2009
Jul;9(7):849–66. [PMID: 19527108]
 
2. Myotonic Dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy, a slowly progressive, dominantly inherited
disorder, usually manifests itself in the third or fourth decade but
occasionally appears early in childhood. Myotonic dystrophy type 1
results from an expanded CTG repeat in a protein kinase gene on
chromosome 19; in type 2, the defect is a CCTG repeat expansion
in the gene for zinc-finger protein-9 on chromosome 3. Myotonia
leads to complaints of muscle stiffness and is evidenced by the
marked delay that occurs before affected muscles can relax after a
contraction. This can often be demonstrated clinically by delayed
relaxation of the hand after sustained grip or by percussion of the
belly of a muscle. In addition, there is weakness and wasting of the
facial, sternocleidomastoid, and distal limb muscles. Associated
clinical features include cataracts, frontal baldness, testicular
atrophy, diabetes mellitus, cardiac abnormalities, and intellectual
changes. Electromyographic sampling of affected muscles reveals
myotonic discharges in addition to changes suggestive of myopathy.
It is difficult to determine whether drug therapy for myotonia is
safe or effective. When myotonia is disabling, treatment with a
sodium channel blocker—such as phenytoin (100 mg orally three
times daily), procainamide (0.5–1 g orally four times daily), or
mexiletine (150–200 mg orally three times daily)—may be helpful,
but the associated side effects, particularly for antiarrhythmic drugs,
are often limiting. There is preclinical work to develop potent
analogs of procainide for treatment of myotonia. Neither the
weakness nor the course of the disorder is influenced by treatment.
Logigian EL et al. Mexiletine is an effective antimyotonia treatment
in myotonic dystrophy type 1. Neurology. 2010 May 4;
74(18):1441–8. [PMID: 20439846]
 
Miller TM. Differential diagnosis of myotonic disorders. Muscle
Nerve. 2008 Mar;37(3):293–9. [PMID: 18067134]
 
Trip J et al. Drug treatment for myotonia. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2006 Jan 25; (1):CD004762. [PMID: 16437496]
 
3. Myotonia Congenita
Myotonia congenita is commonly inherited as a dominant trait. The
responsible gene on chromosome 7 encodes a voltage-gated
chloride channel. Generalized myotonia without weakness is usually
present from birth, but symptoms may not appear until early
childhood. Patients complain of muscle stiffness that is enhanced by
cold and inactivity and relieved by exercise. Muscle hypertrophy, at
times pronounced, is also a feature. A recessive form with later
onset is associated with slight weakness and atrophy of distal
muscles. Treatment with procainamide, tocainide, mexiletine, or
phenytoin may help the myotonia, as in myotonic dystrophy.
4. Polymyositis & Dermatomyositis
See Chapter 20.
5. Inclusion Body Myositis
This disorder, of unknown cause, begins insidiously, usually after
middle age, with progressive proximal weakness of first the lower
and then the upper extremities, and affecting facial and pharyngeal
muscles. Weakness often begins in the quadriceps femoris in the
lower limbs and the forearm flexors in the upper limbs. Distal
weakness is usually mild. Serum creatine kinase levels may be
normal or increased. The diagnosis is confirmed by muscle biopsy.
Corticosteroid and immunosuppressive therapy is usually ineffective,
but IVIG therapy is occasionally of mild benefit.
Lloyd TE. Novel therapeutic approaches for inclusion body
myositis. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Nov;22(6):658–64. [PMID:
20827206]
 
Machado P et al. Sporadic inclusion body myositis: an unsolved
mystery. Acta Rheumatol Port. 2009 Apr–Jun;34(2A):161–82.
[PMID: 19474772]
 
6. Mitochondrial Myopathies
The mitochondrial myopathies are a clinically diverse group of
disorders that on pathologic examination of skeletal muscle with the
modified Gomori stain show characteristic “ragged red fibers”
containing accumulations of abnormal mitochondria. Patients may
present with progressive external ophthalmoplegia or with limb
weakness that is exacerbated or induced by activity. Other patients
present with central neurologic dysfunction, eg, myoclonic epilepsy
(myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red fiber syndrome, or MERRF), or
the combination of myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and
stroke-like episodes (MELAS). These disorders result from
separate abnormalities of mitochondrial DNA. (See also Chapter
20.) Treatment is symptomatic and palliative, but various
experimental approaches are being explored.
A mitochondrial myopathy may develop in patients receiving
zidovudine for treatment of AIDS, and patients receiving highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for HIV-1 infection may
develop a lipodystrophy, with fat accumulating in muscle.
Rahman S et al. Diagnosis and therapy in neuromuscular disorders:
diagnosis and new treatments in mitochondrial diseases. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Sep;80(9):943–53. [PMID:
19684231]
 
7. Myopathies Associated with Other Disorders
Myopathy may occur in association with chronic hypokalemia, any
endocrinopathy, and in patients taking corticosteroids, chloroquine,
colchicine, clofibrate, emetine, aminocaproic acid, lovastatin,
bretylium tosylate, or drugs causing potassium depletion. Weakness
is mainly proximal, and serum creatine kinase is typically normal,
except in hypothyroidism and some of the toxic myopathies.
Treatment is of the underlying cause. Myopathy also occurs with
chronic alcoholism, whereas acute reversible muscle necrosis may
occur shortly after acute alcohol intoxication. Inflammatory
myopathy may occur in patients taking penicillamine; myotonia may
be induced by clofibrate, and preexisting myotonia may be
exacerbated or unmasked by depolarizing muscle relaxants (eg,
suxamethonium), β-blockers (eg, propranolol), fenoterol, ritodrine
and, possibly, certain diuretics.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred (to establish the diagnosis and
underlying cause).
 When to Admit
 
•    For respiratory assistance.
•    For rhabdomyolysis.
PERIODIC PARALYSIS SYNDROMES
Periodic paralysis may have a familial (dominant inheritance) basis.
The syndromes to be described are channelopathies that manifest as
abnormal, often potassium-sensitive, muscle-membrane excitability
and lead clinically to episodes of flaccid weakness or paralysis,
sometimes in association with abnormalities of the plasma potassium
level. Strength is normal between attacks. Mutations in genes
encoding three ion channels [CACNA1S (1q32), SCN4A
(17q23.1-q25.3), and KCNJ2 (17q23.1-q24.2)] account for most
cases. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis has been related to
mutations in the CACNL1A3, SCN4A, or KCNE3 (11q13-q14)
gene and is characterized by attacks that tend to occur on
awakening, after exercise, or after a heavy meal and may last for
several days. Patients should avoid excessive exertion. A low-
carbohydrate and low-salt diet may help prevent attacks, as may
acetazolamide, 250–750 mg/d. Nonselective β-adrenergic blockers
may also prevent recurrent paralytic attacks. An ongoing attack
may be aborted by potassium chloride given orally or by
intravenous drip, provided the ECG can be monitored and kidney
function is satisfactory. In young Asian men, it is commonly
associated with hyperthyroidism and has been related to
polymorphism in the CACNA1S gene; treatment of the endocrine
disorder prevents recurrences. In hyperkalemic periodic
paralysis, which is mostly associated with mutations in the SCN4A
gene, attacks also tend to occur after exercise but usually last for <
1 hour. They may be terminated by intravenous calcium gluconate
(1–2 g) or by intravenous diuretics (furosemide, 20–40 mg),
glucose, or glucose and insulin; daily acetazolamide or
chlorothiazide may prevent recurrences. Normokalemic periodic
paralysis is similar clinically to the hyperkalemic variety, but the
plasma potassium level remains normal during attacks; treatment is
with acetazolamide.
 When to Refer
All patients should be referred.
Alkaabi JM et al. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a case series,
review of the literature and update of management. Eur J Emerg
Med. 2010 Feb;17(1):45–7. [PMID: 20201128]
 
Barahona MJ et al. Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis: a case report
and literature review. Clin Med Res. 2009 Sep;7(3):96–8. [PMID:
19625499]
 
 
 
Psychiatric Disorders
Stuart J. Eisendrath, MD
Jonathan E. Lichtmacher, MD
COMMON PSYCHIATRIC
DISORDERS
 
STRESS & ADJUSTMENT DISORDERS (Situational
Disorders)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Anxiety or depression clearly secondary to an identifiable stress.
 Subsequent symptoms of anxiety or depression commonly
elicited by similar stress of lesser magnitude.
 Alcohol and other drugs are commonly used in self-treatment.
 
 General Considerations
Stress exists when the adaptive capacity of the individual is
overwhelmed by events. The event may be an insignificant one
objectively considered, and even favorable changes (eg, promotion
and transfer) requiring adaptive behavior can produce stress. For
each individual, stress is subjectively defined, and the response to
stress is a function of each person's personality and physiologic
endowment.
Opinion differs about what events are most apt to produce stress
reactions. The causes of stress are different at different ages—eg, in
young adulthood, the sources of stress are found in the marriage or
parent-child relationship, the employment relationship, and the
struggle to achieve financial stability; in the middle years, the focus
shifts to changing spousal relationships, problems with aging
parents, and problems associated with having young adult offspring
who themselves are encountering stressful situations; in old age, the
principal concerns are apt to be retirement, loss of physical
capacity, major personal losses, and thoughts of death.
 Clinical Findings
An individual may react to stress by becoming anxious or
depressed, by developing a physical symptom, by running away,
having a drink, overeating, starting an affair, or in limitless other
ways. Common subjective responses are fear (of repetition of the
stress-inducing event), rage (at frustration), guilt (over aggressive
impulses), and shame (over helplessness). Acute and reactivated
stress may be manifested by restlessness, irritability, fatigue,
increased startle reaction, and a feeling of tension. Inability to
concentrate, sleep disturbances (insomnia, bad dreams), and
somatic preoccupations often lead to self-medication, most
commonly with alcohol or other central nervous system
depressants. Maladaptive behavior in response to stress is called
adjustment disorder, with the major symptom specified (eg,
“adjustment disorder with depressed mood”).
 Differential Diagnosis
Adjustment disorders must be distinguished from anxiety disorders,
affective disorders, and personality disorders exacerbated by stress
and from somatic disorders with psychic overlay. Adjustment
disorders may have symptoms that overlap with other disorders,
such as anxiety symptoms, but they occur in reaction to an
identifiable life stressor such as a difficult work situation or romantic
breakup. Adjustment disorders are diagnosed when the symptoms
do not fit with a more specific diagnosis.
 Treatment
A. Behavioral
Stress reduction techniques include immediate symptom reduction
(eg, rebreathing in a bag for hyperventilation) or early recognition
and removal from a stress source before full-blown symptoms
appear. It is often helpful for the patient to keep a daily log of stress
precipitators, responses, and alleviators. Relaxation and exercise
techniques are also helpful in reducing the reaction to stressful
events.
B. Social
The stress reactions of life crisis problems are a function of
psychosocial upheaval, and patients frequently present with somatic
symptoms. While it is not easy for the patient to make necessary
changes (or they would have been made long ago), it is important
for the clinician to establish the framework of the problem, since the
patient's denial system may obscure the issues. Clarifying the
problem allows the patient to begin viewing it within the proper
context and facilitates the sometimes difficult decisions the patient
eventually must make (eg, change of job or relocation of adult-
dependent offspring).
C. Psychological
Prolonged in-depth psychotherapy is seldom necessary in cases of
isolated stress response or adjustment disorder. Supportive
psychotherapy (see above) with an emphasis on the here and now
and strengthening of existing coping mechanisms is a helpful
approach so that time and the patient's own resiliency can restore
the previous level of function.
D. Medical
Judicious use of sedatives (eg, lorazepam, 0.5-1 mg two or three
times daily orally) for a limited time and as part of an overall
treatment plan can provide relief from acute anxiety symptoms.
Problems arise when the situation becomes chronic through
inappropriate treatment or when the treatment approach supports
the development of chronicity.
 Prognosis
Return to satisfactory function after a short period is part of the
clinical picture of this syndrome. Resolution may be delayed if
others’ responses to the patient's difficulties are thoughtlessly
harmful or if the secondary gains outweigh the advantages of
recovery. The longer the symptoms persist, the worse the
prognosis.
Alim TN et al. Trauma, resilience and recovery in a high-risk
African-American population. Am J Psychiatry. 2008 Dec;
165(12):1566–75. [PMID: 19015233]
 
Birnie K et al. Psychological benefits for cancer patients and their
partners participating in mindfulness-based stress reduction
(MBSR). Psychooncology. 2009 Nov 16. [Epub ahead of print].
[PMID: 19918956]
 
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure to traumatic (life-threatening) event.
 Symptoms, such as flashbacks, intrusive images, and nightmares,
often represent reexperiencing the event.
 Avoidance symptoms, including numbing, social withdrawal, and
avoidance of stimuli associated with the event.
 Increased vigilance, such as startle reactions and difficulty falling
asleep.
 Symptoms impair functioning.
 
 General Considerations
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)—included among the
anxiety disorders in DSM-IV— is a syndrome characterized by
“reexperiencing” a traumatic event (eg, rape, severe burns, military
combat) and decreased responsiveness and avoidance of current
events associated with the trauma. The National Veterans Vietnam
Readjustment Survey indicated that 53.4% of male and 48.1% of
female Vietnam war veterans experienced some symptoms of
PTSD, with approximately 60% of these affected veterans
experiencing the full syndrome. Of the male veterans, 44.7%
experienced a lifetime prevalence of alcohol or drug abuse, with
13% experiencing current abuse or dependence. Data indicate that
13% of veterans who served in Iraq and 6% of those who served in
Afghanistan have experienced PTSD. The 2005 National
Comorbidity Survey Report estimated the lifetime prevalence of
PTSD among adult Americans at 6.8% with a current prevalence of
3.6% and with women having rates twice as high as men. PTSD is
more common when the event is associated with physical injury than
when it is not. Many individuals with PTSD (20–40%) have
experienced other associated problems, including divorce, parenting
problems, difficulties with the law, and substance abuse. Since the
terrorist attacks in the United States on September 11, 2001,
estimates of PTSD have ranged from 4.7% to 10.2% in those
witnessing the live attacks and have been associated with functional
impairment as well as increased rates of substance use.
 Clinical Findings
Patients with PTSD experience physiologic hyperarousal, including
startle reactions, intrusive thoughts, illusions, overgeneralized
associations, sleep problems, nightmares, dreams about the
precipitating event, impulsivity, difficulties in concentration, and
hyperalertness. The symptoms may be precipitated or exacerbated
by events that are a reminder of the original stress. Symptoms
frequently arise after a long latency period (eg, child abuse can
result in later-onset posttraumatic stress disorder).
 Differential Diagnosis
In 75% of cases, PTSD occurs with comorbid depression or panic
disorder, and there is considerable overlap in the symptom
complexes of all three conditions. The key to establishing the PTSD
diagnosis lies in the history of exposure to a life-threatening event
followed by intrusive (eg, flashbacks, nightmares) or avoidance (eg,
withdrawal) symptoms. Acute stress disorder occurs during or
shortly after a traumatic event and has many of the same symptoms
as PTSD but lasts between 2 and 28 days. Some individuals with
dissociative features, such as borderline personality disorders, may
mimic some of the symptoms of PTSD, but those disorders are
typically more related to chronic childhood maltreatment not a
specific traumatic event.
 Treatment
A. Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy should be initiated as soon as possible after the
traumatic event, and it should be brief (typically 8-12 sessions),
once the individual is in a safe environment. Cognitive behavior
therapy, exposure therapy, and eye-movement desensitization
reprocessing have been effective in significantly reducing the
duration of symptoms. In all of these approaches, the individual
confronts the traumatic situation and learns to view it with less
reactivity. Psychological debriefing in a single session, once a
mainstay in prevention of PTSD, is now considered to be ineffective
and possibly harmful. Posttraumatic stress syndromes respond to
interventions that help patients integrate the event in an adaptive
way with some sense of mastery in having survived the trauma.
Marital problems are a major area of concern, and it is important
that the clinician have available a dependable referral source when
marriage counseling is indicated.
Treatment initiated later, when symptoms have crystallized,
includes programs for cessation of alcohol and other drug abuse,
group and individual psychotherapy, and improved social support
systems. The therapeutic approach is to facilitate the normal
recovery that was blocked at the time of the trauma.
B. Medication
Early treatment of anxious arousal with β-blockers (eg, propranolol,
80–160 mg orally daily) may lessen the peripheral symptoms of
anxiety (eg, tremors, palpitations) but has not been shown to help
prevent development of PTSD. Antidepressant medications—
particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)—in full
dosage are helpful in ameliorating depression, panic attacks, sleep
disruption, and startle responses in chronic PTSD. Sertraline and
paroxetine are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for this purpose. Antiseizure medications such as
carbamazepine (400–800 mg orally daily) will often mitigate
impulsivity and difficulty with anger management. Benzodiazepines,
such as clonazepam (1–4 mg daily orally, divided into one or two
doses), will reduce anxiety and panic attacks when used in
adequate dosage, but dependency problems are a concern,
particularly when the patient has had such problems in the past. The
α-adrenergic blocking agent prazosin (2–10 mg orally at bedtime)
has been successfully used to decrease nightmares and improve
quality of sleep in PTSD.
 Prognosis
The sooner therapy is initiated after the trauma, the better the
prognosis. Approximately half of patients experience chronic
symptoms. Prognosis is best in those with good premorbid
psychiatric functioning. Individuals experiencing an acute stress
disorder typically do better than those experiencing a delayed
posttraumatic disorder. Individuals who experience trauma resulting
from a natural disaster (eg, earthquake or hurricane) tend to do
better than those who experience a traumatic interpersonal
encounter (eg, rape or combat).
Hetrick SE et al. Combined pharmacotherapy and psychological
therapies for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jul 7; (7):CD007316. [PMID:
20614457]
 
Mellman T et al. Posttraumatic stress disorder: characteristics and
treatment. J Clin Psychiatry. 2008 Jan;69(1):e2. [PMID:
18312029]
 
Olff M et al. A psychobiological rationale for oxytocin in the
treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. CNS Spectr. 2010
Aug;15(8):522–30. [PMID: 20703199]
 
Taylor FB et al. Prazosin effects on objective sleep measures and
clinical symptoms in civilian trauma posttraumatic stress disorder: a
placebo-controlled study. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Mar
15;63(6):629–32. [PMID: 17868655]
 
ANXIETY DISORDERS & DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Overt anxiety or an overt manifestation of a coping mechanism
(such as a phobia), or both.
 Not limited to an adjustment disorder.
 Somatic symptoms referable to the autonomic nervous system or
to a specific organ system (eg, dyspnea, palpitations,
paresthesias).
 Not a result of physical disorders, psychiatric conditions (eg,
schizophrenia), or drug abuse (eg, cocaine).
 
 General Considerations
Stress, fear, and anxiety all tend to be interactive. The principal
components of anxiety are psychological (tension, fears, difficulty
in concentration, apprehension) and somatic (tachycardia,
hyperventilation, palpitations, tremor, sweating). Other organ
systems (eg, gastrointestinal) may be involved in multiple-system
complaints. Fatigue and sleep disturbances are common.
Sympathomimetic symptoms of anxiety are both a response to a
central nervous system state and a reinforcement of further anxiety.
Anxiety can become self-generating, since the symptoms reinforce
the reaction, causing it to spiral. This is often the case when the
anxiety is an epiphenomenon of other medical or psychiatric
disorders.
Anxiety may be free-floating, resulting in acute anxiety attacks,
occasionally becoming chronic. When one or several coping
mechanisms (see above) are functioning, the consequences are
well-known problems such as phobias, conversion reactions,
dissociative states, obsessions, and compulsions. Lack of structure
is frequently a contributing factor, as noted in those people who
have “Sunday neuroses.” They do well during the week with a
planned work schedule but cannot tolerate the unstructured
weekend. Planned-time activities tend to bind anxiety, and many
people have increased difficulties when this is lost, as in retirement.
Some believe that various manifestations of anxiety are not a
result of unconscious conflicts but are “habits”—persistent patterns
of nonadaptive behavior acquired by learning. The “habits,” being
nonadaptive, are unsatisfactory ways of dealing with life's problems
—hence the resultant anxiety. Help is sought only when the anxiety
becomes too painful. Exogenous factors such as stimulants (eg,
caffeine, cocaine) must be considered as a contributing factor.
 Clinical Findings
A. Generalized Anxiety Disorder
This is the most common of the clinically significant anxiety
disorders. Initial manifestations appear at age 20–35 years, and
there is a slight predominance in women. The anxiety symptoms of
apprehension, worry, irritability, difficulty in concentrating, insomnia,
and somatic complaints are present more days than not for at least
6 months. Manifestations can include cardiac (eg, tachycardia,
increased blood pressure), gastrointestinal (eg, increased acidity,
nausea, epigastric pain), and neurologic (eg, headache, near-
syncope) systems. The focus of the anxiety may be a number of
everyday activities.
B. Panic Disorder
This is characterized by short-lived, recurrent, unpredictable
episodes of intense anxiety accompanied by marked physiologic
manifestations. Agoraphobia, fear of being in places where escape
is difficult, such as open spaces or public places where one cannot
easily hide, may be present and may lead the individual to confine
his or her life to the home environment. Distressing symptoms and
signs such as dyspnea, tachycardia, palpitations, headaches,
dizziness, paresthesias, choking, smothering feelings, nausea, and
bloating are associated with feelings of impending doom (alarm
response). Although these symptoms may lead to overlap with
some of the same bodily complaints found in the somatoform
disorders, the key to the diagnosis of panic disorder is the psychic
pain and suffering the individual expresses. Recurrent sleep panic
attacks (not nightmares) occur in about 30% of panic disorders.
Anticipatory anxiety develops in all these patients and further
constricts their daily lives. Panic disorder tends to be familial, with
onset usually under age 25; it affects 3–5% of the population, and
the female-to-male ratio is 2:1. The premenstrual period is one of
heightened vulnerability. Patients frequently undergo emergency
medical evaluations (eg, for “heart attacks” or “hypoglycemia”)
before the correct diagnosis is made. Gastrointestinal symptoms are
especially common, occurring in about one-third of cases.
Myocardial infarction, pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism, and
various recreational drug reactions can mimic panic disorder. Mitral
valve prolapse may be present but is not usually a significant factor.
Patients who have recurrent panic disorder often become
demoralized, hypochondriacal, agoraphobic, and depressed.
These individuals are at increased risk for major depression and the
suicide attempts associated with that disorder. Alcohol abuse (in
about 20%) results from self-treatment and is not infrequently
combined with dependence on sedatives. Some patients have
atypical panic attacks associated with seizure-like symptoms that
often include psychosensory phenomena (a history of stimulant
abuse often emerges). About 25% of panic disorder patients also
have obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
C. Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
In the obsessive-compulsive reaction, the irrational idea or the
impulse persistently intrudes into awareness. Obsessions (constantly
recurring thoughts such as fears of exposure to germs) and
compulsions (repetitive actions such as washing the hands many
times) are recognized by the individual as absurd and are resisted,
but anxiety is alleviated only by ritualistic performance of the action
or by deliberate contemplation of the intruding idea or emotion.
Many patients do not mention the symptoms and must be asked
about them. These patients are usually predictable, orderly,
conscientious, and intelligent—traits that are seen in many
compulsive behaviors such as food binging and purging and
compulsive exercise. There is an overlapping of OCD and other
behaviors (“OCD spectrum”), including tics, trichotillomania (hair
pulling), onychophagia (nail biting), hypochondriasis, Tourette
syndrome, and eating disorders (see Chapter 29). The 2–3%
incidence of OCD in the general population is much higher than was
previously recognized. In addition, there is a high comorbidity of
OCD and major depression; two-thirds of OCD patients will
develop major depression during their lifetime. Male to female ratios
are similar, with the highest rates occurring in the young, divorced,
separated, and unemployed (all high-stress categories). Neurologic
abnormalities of fine motor coordination and involuntary movements
are common. Under extreme stress, these patients sometimes
exhibit paranoid and delusional behaviors, often associated with
depression, and can mimic schizophrenia.
D. Phobic Disorder
Phobic ideation can be considered a form of “displacement” in
which patients transfer feelings of anxiety from their true object to
one that can be avoided. However, since phobias are ineffective
coping mechanisms, there tends to be an increase in their scope,
intensity, and number. Social phobias are global or specific; in the
former, all social situations are poorly tolerated, while the latter
group includes performance anxiety or well-delineated phobias (eg,
fear of bridges). Agoraphobia is frequently associated with severe
panic attacks, and it often develops in early adult life, making a
normal lifestyle difficult.
E. Dissociative Disorder
Fugue (the sudden, unexpected travel away from one's home with
inability to recall one's past), amnesia, somnambulism, dissociative
identity 
disorder 
(multiple 
personality 
disorder), 
and
depersonalization are all dissociative states. The reaction is
precipitated by emotional crisis. The symptom produces anxiety
reduction and a temporary solution of the crisis. Mechanisms
include repression and isolation as well as particularly limited scope
of attention as seen in hypnotic states. Dissociative symptoms are
similar in many ways to symptoms seen in patients with temporal
lobe dysfunction.
 Treatment
In all cases, underlying medical disorders must be ruled out (eg,
cardiovascular, endocrine, respiratory, and neurologic disorders
and substance-related syndromes, both intoxication and withdrawal
states). These and other disorders can coexist with panic disorder.
A. Medical
1. Generalized anxiety—Benzodiazepines are the anxiolytics of
choice in the acute management of generalized anxiety (Table 25–
1). They are almost immediately effective. Antidepressants can be
efficacious for the long-term treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder, panic disorder, social phobia, and OCD.
All of the benzodiazepines may be given orally, and several are
available in parenteral formulations. Benzodiazepines such as
lorazepam are absorbed rapidly when given intramuscularly. In
psychiatric disorders, the benzodiazepines are usually given orally;
in controlled medical environments (eg, the ICU), where the rapid
onset of respiratory depression can be assessed, they are often
given intravenously. Onset of action is a function of the rate of
absorption (related to lipophilic property) and varies, with diazepam
and clorazepate being the most rapidly absorbed orally. This
characteristic, along with high lipid solubility, may explain the
popularity of diazepam. In the average case of anxiety, diazepam,
5–10 mg orally twice daily as needed, is a reasonable starting
regimen.
 
Table 25–1. Commonly used antianxiety and hypnotic agents.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
2Intermediate physical half-life (10–20 hours).
3Long physical half-life (> 20 hours).
4Intravenously for procedures.
5Short physical half-life (1–6 hours).
6Short physical half-life (about 1 hour).
 
The duration of action of the benzodiazepines varies as a function
of the active metabolites they produce. Benzodiazepines such as
lorazepam do not produce active metabolites and have intermediate
half-lives of 10–20 hours, characteristics useful in treating elderly
patients. Ultra-short-acting agents such as triazolam have half-lives
of 1–3 hours and may lead to rebound withdrawal anxiety. Longer-
acting benzodiazepines such as flurazepam and diazepam produce
active metabolites, have half-lives of 20–120 hours, and should be
avoided in the elderly. Since people vary widely in their response
and since the medications are long-lasting, the dosage must be
individualized. Once this is established, an adequate dose early in
the course of symptom development will obviate the need for “pill
popping,” which contributes to dependency problems. Panic
disorder does not usually respond to benzodiazepines other than
clonazepam and alprazolam. Those high-potency benzodiazepines
and the antidepressants are most commonly used for panic
disorder. Notably, alprazolam has a relatively short half-life and
over time can lead to interdose rebound anxiety, although the
extended release form is available and obviates this difficulty.
Whether the indications for benzodiazepines are anxiety or
insomnia, the medications should be used judiciously. The longer-
acting benzodiazepines are used for the treatment of alcohol
withdrawal and anxiety symptoms; the intermediate medications are
useful as sedatives for insomnia (eg, lorazepam), while short-acting
agents (eg, midazolam) are used for medical procedures such as
endoscopy.
The side effects of all the benzodiazepine antianxiety agents are
patient and dose dependent. As the dosage exceeds the levels
necessary for sedation, the side effects include disinhibition, ataxia,
dysarthria, nystagmus, and delirium. (The patient should be told not
to operate machinery until he or she is well stabilized without side
effects.)
Paradoxical agitation, anxiety, psychosis, confusion, mood
lability, and anterograde amnesia have been reported, particularly
with the shorter-acting benzodiazepines. These agents produce
cumulative clinical effects with repeated dosage (especially if the
patient has not had time to metabolize the previous dose), additive
effects when given with other classes of sedatives or alcohol (many
apparently “accidental” deaths are the result of concomitant use of
sedatives and alcohol), and residual effects after termination of
treatment (particularly in the case of medications that undergo slow
biotransformation).
Overdosage results in respiratory depression, hypotension, shock
syndrome, coma, and death. Flumazenil, a benzodiazepine
antagonist, is effective in overdosage. Overdosage (see Chapter 38)
and withdrawal states are medical emergencies. Serious side effects
of chronic excessive dosage are development of tolerance, resulting
in increasing dose requirements, and physiologic dependence,
resulting in withdrawal symptoms similar in appearance to alcohol
and barbiturate withdrawal (withdrawal effects must be
distinguished from reemergent anxiety). Abrupt withdrawal of
sedative medications may cause serious and even fatal convulsive
seizures. Psychosis, delirium, and autonomic dysfunction have also
been described. Both duration of action and duration of exposure
are major factors related to likelihood of withdrawal.
 
Table 25–2. Benzodiazepine interactions with other medications.
 
 
 
Drug
Effects
Antacids
Decreased absorption of
benzodiazepines
Cimetidine
Increased half-life of diazepam and
triazolam
Contraceptives Increased levels of diazepam and
triazolam
Digoxin
Alprazolam and diazepam raise digoxin
level
Disulfiram
Increased duration of action of sedatives
Isoniazid
Increased plasma diazepam
Levodopa
Inhibition of antiparkinsonism effect
Propoxyphene Impaired clearance of diazepam
Rifampin
Decreased plasma diazepam
Warfarin
Decreased prothrombin time
Common withdrawal symptoms after low to moderate daily use
of benzodiazepines are classified as somatic (disturbed sleep,
tremor, nausea, muscle aches), psychological (anxiety, poor
concentration, irritability, mild depression), or perceptual (poor
coordination, mild paranoia, mild confusion). The presentation of
symptoms will vary depending on the half-life of the drug. There are
no significant side effects on organ systems other than the brain, and
the medications are safe in most medical conditions. Benzodiazepine
interactions with other medications are listed in Table 25–2.
Antidepressants are the first-line medications for sustained
treatment of generalized anxiety disorder, having the advantage of
not causing serious physiologic dependency problems. At initiation
of treatment, antidepressants can themselves be anxiogenic—thus,
an initial dose, in conjunction with short-term treatment with a
benzodiazepine, is often indicated. Venlafaxine and duloxetine
(serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) are FDA-
approved for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in usual
antidepressant doses. Initial daily dosing should start low (37.5–75
mg for venlafaxine and 30 mg for duloxetine) and be titrated
upward as needed. SSRIs, such as paroxetine, are also used.
Similarly, buspirone, sometimes used as an augmenting agent in the
treatment of depression and compulsive behaviors, is also effective
for generalized anxiety. Buspirone is usually given in a total dosage
of 15–60 mg/d in three divided doses. Higher doses tend to be
counterproductive and produce gastrointestinal symptoms and
dizziness. There is a 2- to 4-week delay before antidepressants and
buspirone take effect, and patients require education regarding this
lag. Sleep is sometimes negatively affected. β-Blockers such as
propranolol may help reduce peripheral somatic symptoms. Alcohol
is the most frequently self-administered drug and should be
interdicted. The highly addicting medications with a narrow margin
of safety such as glutethimide, ethchlorvynol, methprylon,
meprobamate, and the barbiturates (with the exception of
phenobarbital) should be avoided. Phenobarbital, in addition to its
anticonvulsant properties, is a reasonably safe and very inexpensive
sedative but has the disadvantage of causing hepatic microsomal
enzyme stimulation (not the case with benzodiazepines), which may
affect the metabolism of other medications.
2. Panic attacks—Panic attacks may be treated in several ways.
A sublingual dose of alprazolam (0.5–1 mg) is often effective for
urgent treatment. For sustained treatment, SSRIs are the initial
medications of choice (adequate blood levels will require dosages
similar to those used in the treatment of depression). For example,
sertraline starting at 25 mg/d and increased after 1 week to 50 mg/d
may be effective. Because of initial agitation in response to
antidepressants, doses should start low and be very gradually
increased. High-potency benzodiazepines may be used for
symptomatic treatment as the antidepressant dose is titrated
upward. Clonazepam (1–6 mg/d orally) and alprazolam (0.5–6
mg/d orally) are effective alternatives to antidepressants. Both
medications may produce marked withdrawal if stopped abruptly
and should always be tapered. Because of chronicity of the
disorders and the problem of dependency with benzodiazepine
medications, it is generally desirable to use antidepressant
medications 
as 
the 
principal 
pharmacologic 
approach.
Antidepressants have been used in conjunction with β-blockers in
resistant cases. Propranolol (40–160 mg/d orally) can mute the
peripheral symptoms of anxiety without significantly affecting motor
and cognitive performance. They block symptoms mediated by
sympathetic stimulation (eg, palpitations, tremulousness) but not
nonadrenergic symptoms (eg, diarrhea, muscle tension). Contrary to
current belief, they usually do not cause depression as a side effect
and can be used cautiously in patients with depression. Valproate
has been found to be as effective in panic disorder as the
antidepressants and is another useful alternative.
3. Phobic disorder—Phobic disorder may be part of the panic
disorder and is treated within that framework. Global social phobias
may be treated with SSRIs, such as paroxetine, sertraline, and
fluvoxamine, or monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors in the same
dosage as used for depression. Gabapentin, an anticonvulsant with
anxiolytic properties, may be an alternative to antidepressants in the
treatment of social phobia in a dosage of 300–3600 mg/d,
depending on response versus sedation. Specific phobias such as
performance anxiety may respond to moderate doses of β-
blockers, such as propranolol, 20–40 mg 1 hour prior to exposure.
D-cycloserine (DCS), an antituberculosis drug, has been
investigated as an augmenting agent in exposure treatment. As a
partial agonist at the NMDA receptor in the amygdala, DCS may
be useful in reducing fear responses. Importantly, such medications
must be used in combination with cognitive behavioral exposure
strategies.
4. Obsessive-compulsive disorder—OCD responds to
serotonergic medications in about 60% of cases and usually
requires a longer response time than for depression (up to 12
weeks). Clomipramine has proved effective in doses equivalent to
those used for depression. Fluoxetine (an SSRI drug) has been
widely used in this disorder but in doses higher than those used in
depression (up to 60–80 mg/d). The other SSRI medications such
as sertraline, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine are being used with
comparable efficacy, each with its own side-effect profile.
Buspirone in doses of 15–60 mg/d appears to be effective primarily
as an anti-obsessional augmenting agent for the SSRI medications.
There is some evidence that antipsychotics may be helpful as
adjuncts to the SSRIs in treatment-resistant cases. Psychosurgery
has a limited place in selected cases of severe unremitting OCD.
The stereo tactic techniques now being used, including modified
cingulotomy, are great improvements over the crude methods of the
past. Experimental work has suggested a role for deep brain
stimulation in OCD.
B. Behavioral
Behavioral approaches are widely used in various anxiety disorders,
often in conjunction with medication. Any of the behavioral
techniques can be used beneficially in altering the contingencies
(precipitating factors or rewards) supporting any anxiety-provoking
behavior. Relaxation techniques can sometimes be helpful in
reducing anxiety. Desensitization, by exposing the patient to graded
doses of a phobic object or situation, is an effective technique and
one that the patient can practice outside the therapy session.
Emotive imagery, wherein the patient imagines the anxiety-
provoking situation while at the same time learning to relax, helps
decrease the anxiety when the patient faces the real-life situation.
Physiologic symptoms in panic attacks respond well to relaxation
training. Exposure techniques with response prevention are useful
for OCD.
C. Psychological
Cognitive behavioral approaches have been effective in treatment of
panic disorders, phobias, and OCD when erroneous beliefs need
correction. These approaches share a common behavioral
technique of exposing the individual to the feared object or situation.
The combination of medical and cognitive behavioral therapy is
more effective than either alone. Group therapy is the treatment of
choice when the anxiety is clearly a function of the patient's
difficulties in dealing with social settings.
D. Social
Peer support groups for panic disorder and agoraphobia have been
particularly helpful. Social modification may require measures such
as family counseling to aid acceptance of the patient's symptoms
and avoid counterproductive behavior in behavioral training. Any
help in maintaining the social structure is anxiety-alleviating, and
work, school, and social activities should be maintained. School and
vocational counseling may be provided by professionals, who often
need help from the clinician in defining the patient's limitations.
 Prognosis
Anxiety disorders are usually long-standing and may be quite
difficult to treat. All can be relieved to varying degrees with
medications and behavioral techniques. The prognosis is much
better if the commonly observed anxiety-panic-phobia-depression
cycle can be broken with a combination of the therapeutic
interventions discussed above.
Blanco C et al. A placebo-controlled trial of phenelzine, cognitive
behavioral group therapy, and their combination for social anxiety
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010 Mar;67(3): 286–95. [PMID:
20194829]
 
Kopell BH et al. Anatomy and physiology of the basal ganglia:
implications for DBS in psychiatry. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
2008;32(3):408–22. [PMID: 17854894]
 
Roy-Byrne P et al. Delivery of evidence-based treatment for
multiple anxiety disorders in primary care: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2010 May 19;303(19):1921–8. [PMID: 20483968]
 
Wilhelm S et al. Augmentation of behavior therapy with D-
cycloserine for obsessive compulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry.
2008 Mar;165(3):335–41. [PMID: 18245177]
 
SOMATOFORM DISORDERS (Abnormal illness
Behaviors)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Physical symptoms may involve one or more organ systems and
are not intentional.
 Subjective complaints exceed objective findings.
 Correlations of symptom development and psychosocial stresses.
 Combination of biogenetic and developmental patterns.
 
 General Considerations
Somatoform disorders can occur focused on any organ system.
Vulnerability in one or more organ systems and exposure to family
members with somatization problems play a major role in the
development of particular symptoms, and the “functional” versus
“organic” dichotomy is a hindrance to good treatment. Clinicians
should suspect psychiatric disorders in a number of conditions. For
example, 45% of patients complaining of palpitations had lifetime
psychiatric diagnoses including generalized anxiety, depression,
panic, and somatization disorders. Similarly, 33–44% of patients
who undergo coronary angiography for chest pain but have negative
results have been found to have panic disorder.
In any patient presenting with a condition judged to be
somatoform, depression must be considered in the diagnosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Conversion Disorder
“Conversion” (formerly “hysterical conversion”) of psychic conflict
into physical symptoms in parts of the body innervated by the
sensorimotor system (eg, paralysis, aphonia) is a disorder that is
more common in individuals from lower socioeconomic classes and
certain cultures. The coping mechanisms used in this condition are
repression (a barring from consciousness) and isolation (a splitting
of the affect from the idea). The somatic manifestation that takes the
place of anxiety is often paralysis, and in some instances the organ
dysfunction may have symbolic meaning (eg, arm paralysis in
marked anger so the individual cannot use the arm to strike
someone). Pseudoepileptic (“hysterical”) seizures are often difficult
to differentiate from intoxication states or panic attacks. Retention
of consciousness, random flailing with asynchronous movements of
the right and left sides, and resistance to having the nose and mouth
pinched closed during the attack, all point toward a pseudoepileptic
event. 
Electroencephalography, 
particularly 
in 
a 
video-
electroencephalography assessment unit, during the attack is the
most helpful diagnostic aid in excluding genuine seizure states.
Serum prolactin levels rise abruptly in the postictal state only in true
epilepsy. La belle indifférence (an unconcerned affect) is not a
significant identifying characteristic, as commonly believed, since
individuals even with genuine medical illness, may exhibit a high level
of denial. Important conversion disorder criteria include a history of
conversion or somatization disorder, modeling the symptom after
someone else who had a similar presentation, a serious precipitating
emotional event, associated psychopathology (eg, depression,
schizophrenia, personality disorders), a temporal correlation
between the precipitating event and the symptom, and a temporary
“solving of the problem” by the conversion. It is important to
identify physical disorders with unusual presentations (eg, multiple
sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus).
B. Somatization Disorder (Briquet Syndrome, Hysteria)
This is characterized by multiple physical complaints referable to
several organ systems. Anxiety, panic disorder, and depression are
often present, and major depression is an important consideration
in the differential diagnosis. There is a significant relationship (20%)
to a lifetime history of panic-agoraphobia-depression. It usually
occurs before age 30 and is ten times more common in women.
Polysurgery is often a feature of the history. Preoccupation with
medical and surgical therapy becomes a lifestyle that excludes most
other activities. The symptoms are a reflection of maladaptive
coping techniques and reactivity of the particular organ system.
There is often evidence of longstanding somatic symptoms
(particularly dysmenorrhea, a lump in the throat, vomiting, shortness
of breath, burning in the sex organs, painful extremities, and
amnesia), often with a history of similar organ system involvement in
other family members. Multiple symptoms that constantly change
and inability of more than three doctors to make a diagnosis are
strong clues to the problem.
C. Pain Disorder Associated with Psychological Factors (Formerly
Somatoform Pain Disorder)
This involves a long history of complaints of severe pain not
consonant with anatomic and clinical signs. This diagnosis must not
be one of exclusion and should be made only after extended
evaluation has established a clear correlation of psychogenic factors
with exacerbations and remissions of complaints.
D. Hypochondriasis
This is a fear of disease and preoccupation with the body, with
perceptual amplification and heightened responsiveness. A process
of social learning is usually involved, frequently with a role model
who was a member of the family and may be a part of the
underlying psychodynamic causation. It is common in panic
disorders.
E. Factitious Disorders
These disorders, in which symptom production is intentional, are not
somatoform conditions in that symptoms are produced consciously,
in contrast to the unconscious process of the above conditions.
They are characterized by self-induced symptoms or false physical
and laboratory findings for the purpose of deceiving clinicians or
other hospital personnel. The deceptions may involve self-
mutilation, fever, hemorrhage, hypoglycemia, seizures, and an
almost endless variety of manifestations—often presented in an
exaggerated and dramatic fashion (Munchausen syndrome).
“Munchausen by proxy” is the term used when a parent creates an
illness in a child so the adult (usually the mother) can maintain a
relationship with clinicians. The duplicity may be either simple or
extremely complex and difficult to recognize. The patients are
frequently connected in some way with the health professions; they
are often migratory; and there is no apparent external motivation
other than achieving the patient role.
 Complications
A poor clinician-patient relationship, with iatrogenic disorders and
“doctor shopping,” tends to exacerbate the problem. Sedative and
analgesic dependency is the most common iatrogenic complication.
 Treatment
A. Medical
Medical support with careful attention to building a therapeutic
practitioner-patient relationship is the mainstay of treatment. It must
be accepted that the patient's distress is real. Every problem not
found to have an organic basis is not necessarily a mental disease.
Diligent attempts should be made to relate symptoms to adverse
developments in the patient's life. It may be useful to have the
patient keep a meticulous diary, paying particular attention to
various pertinent factors evident in the history. Regular, frequent,
short appointments that are not symptom-contingent may be helpful.
Medications (frequently abused) should not be prescribed to
replace appointments. One person should be the primary clinician,
and consultants should be used mainly for evaluation. An empathic,
realistic, optimistic approach must be maintained in the face of the
expected ups and downs. Ongoing reevaluation is necessary, since
somatization can coexist with a concurrent physical illness.
B. Psychological
Psychological approaches can be used by the primary clinician
when it is clear that the patient is ready to make some changes in
lifestyle in order to achieve symptomatic relief. This is often best
approached on a here-and-now basis and oriented toward
pragmatic changes rather than an exploration of early experiences
that the patient frequently fails to relate to current distress. Group
therapy with other individuals who have similar problems is
sometimes of value to improve coping, allow ventilation, and focus
on interpersonal adjustment. Hypnosis or lorazepam interviews used
early are helpful in resolving conversion disorders. If the primary
clinician has been working with the patient on psychological
problems related to the physical illness, the groundwork is often laid
for successful psychiatric referral.
For patients who have been identified as having a factitious
disorder, early psychiatric consultation is indicated. There are two
main treatment strategies for these patients. One consists of a
conjoint confrontation of the patient by both the primary clinician
and the psychiatrist. The patient's disorder is portrayed as a cry for
help, and psychiatric treatment is recommended. The second
approach avoids direct confrontation and attempts to provide a
face-saving way to relinquish the symptom without overt disclosure
of the disorder's origin. Techniques such as biofeedback and self-
hypnosis may foster recovery using this strategy. Another face-
saving approach is to use a double bind with the patient. For
example, the patient is told there are two possible diagnoses: (1) an
organic disease that should respond to the next medical intervention
(usually modest and noninvasive), or (2) factitious disorder for
which the patient will need psychiatric treatment. Given these
options, many patients will choose to recover and not have to admit
the origin of their problem.
C. Behavioral
Behavioral therapy is probably best exemplified by biofeedback
techniques. In biofeedback, the particular abnormality (eg,
increased peristalsis) must be recognized and monitored by the
patient and therapist (eg, by an electronic stethoscope to amplify the
sounds). This is immediate feedback, and after learning to recognize
it, the patient can then learn to identify any change thus produced
(eg, a decrease in bowel sounds) and so become a conscious
originator of the feedback instead of a passive recipient. Relief of
the symptom operantly conditions the patient to utilize the maneuver
that relieves symptoms (eg, relaxation causing a decrease in bowel
sounds). With emphasis on this type of learning, the patient is able
to identify symptoms early and initiate the countermaneuvers, thus
decreasing the symptomatic problem. Migrainoid and tension
headaches have been particularly responsive to biofeedback
methods.
D. Social
Social endeavors include family, work, and other interpersonal
activity. Family members should come for some appointments with
the patient so they can learn how best to live with the patient. This is
particularly important in treatment of somatization and pain
disorders. Peer support groups provide a climate for encouraging
the patient to accept and live with the problem. Ongoing
communication with the employer may be necessary to encourage
long-term continued interest in the employee. Employers can
become just as discouraged as clinicians in dealing with employees
who have chronic problems.
 Prognosis
The prognosis is much better if the primary clinician is able to
intervene early before the situation has deteriorated. After the
problem has crystallized into chronicity, it is very difficult to effect
change.
Asmundson GJ et al. Health anxiety: current perspectives and
future directions. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2010 Aug;12(4):306–12.
[PMID: 20549396]
 
Gordon-Elliott JS et al. An approach to the patient with multiple
physical symptoms or chronic disease. Med Clin North Am. 2010
Nov;94(6):1207–16. [PMID: 20951278]
 
Krahn LE et al. Looking toward DSM-V: should factitious
disorder become a subtype of somatoform disorder?
Psychosomatics. 2008 Jul–Aug;49(4):277–82. [PMID:
18621932]
 
CHRONIC PAIN DISORDERS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Chronic complaints of pain.
 Symptoms frequently exceed signs.
 Minimal relief with standard treatment.
 History of having seen many clinicians.
 Frequent use of several nonspecific medications.
 
 General Considerations
A problem in the management of pain is the lack of distinction
between acute and chronic pain syndromes. Most clinicians are
adept at dealing with acute pain problems but have difficulty
handling the patient with a chronic pain disorder. This type of
patient frequently takes too many medications, stays in bed a great
deal, has seen many clinicians, has lost skills, and experiences little
joy in either work or play. All relationships suffer (including those
with clinicians), and life becomes a constant search for succor. The
search results in complex clinician-patient relationships that usually
include many drug trials, particularly sedatives, with adverse
consequences (eg, irritability, depressed mood) related to long-term
use. Treatment failures provoke angry responses and depression
from both the patient and the clinician, and the pain syndrome is
exacerbated. When frustration becomes too great, a new clinician is
found, and the cycle is repeated. The longer the existence of the
pain disorder, the more important become the psychological factors
of anxiety and depression. As with all other conditions, it is
counterproductive to speculate about whether the pain is “real.” It is
real to the patient, and acceptance of the problem must precede a
mutual endeavor to alleviate the disturbance.
 Clinical Findings
Components of the chronic pain syndrome consist of anatomic
changes, chronic anxiety and depression, anger, and changed
lifestyle. Usually, the anatomic problem is irreversible, since it has
already been subjected to many interventions with increasingly
unsatisfactory results. An algorithm for assessing chronic pain and
differentiating it from other psychiatric conditions is illustrated in
Figure 25–1.
Chronic anxiety and depression produce heightened irritability
and overreaction to stimuli. A marked decrease in pain threshold is
apparent. This pattern develops into a hypochondriacal
preoccupation with the body and a constant need for reassurance.
The pressure on the clinician becomes wearing and often leads to
covert rejection of the patient, such as not being available or making
referrals to other clinicians.
This is perceived by the patient, who then intensifies the effort to
find help, and the typical cycle is repeated. Anxiety and depression
are seldom discussed, almost as if there is a tacit agreement not to
deal with these issues.
Changes in lifestyle involve some of the pain behaviors. These
usually take the form of a family script in which the patient accepts
the role of being sick, and this role then becomes the focus of most
family interactions and may become important in maintaining the
family, so that neither the patient nor the family wants the patient's
role to change. Demands for attention and efforts to control the
behavior of others revolve around the central issue of control of
other people (including clinicians). Cultural factors frequently play a
role in the behavior of the patient and how the significant people
around the patient cope with the problem. Some cultures encourage
demonstrative behavior, while others value the stoic role.
Another secondary gain that frequently maintains the patient in
the sick role is financial compensation or other benefits. Frequently,
such systems are structured so that they reinforce the maintenance
of sickness and discourage any attempts to give up the role.
Clinicians unwittingly reinforce this role because of the very nature
of the practice of medicine, which is to respond to complaints of
illness. Helpful suggestions from the clinician are often met with
responses like, “Yes, but ….” Medications then become the
principal approach, and drug dependency problems may develop.
 Treatment
A. Behavioral
The cornerstone of a unified approach to chronic pain syndromes is
a comprehensive behavioral program. This is necessary to identify
and eliminate pain reinforcers, to decrease drug use, and to use
effectively those positive reinforcers that shift the focus from the
pain. It is critical that the patient be made a partner in the effort to
manage and function better in the setting of ongoing pain symptoms.
The clinician must shift from the idea of biomedical cure to ongoing
care of the patient. The patient should agree to discuss the pain only
with the clinician and not with family members; this tends to stabilize
the patient's personal life, since the family is usually tired of the
subject. At the beginning of treatment, the patient should be
assigned self-help tasks graded up to maximal activity as a means of
positive reinforcement. The tasks should not exceed capability. The
patient can also be asked to keep a self-rating chart to log
accomplishments, so that progress can be measured and
remembered. Instruct the patient to record degrees of pain on a
self-rating scale in relation to various situations and mental attitudes
so that similar circumstances can be avoided or modified.
Figure 25–1. Algorithm for assessing psychiatric component of
chronic pain. (Adapted and reproduced, with permission, from
Eisendrath SJ. Psychiatric aspects of chronic pain. Neurology.
1995 Dec;45(12 Suppl 9):S26–34.)
 
Avoid positive reinforcers for pain such as marked sympathy and
attention to pain. Emphasize a positive response to productive
activities, which remove the focus of attention from the pain.
Activity is also desensitizing, since the patient learns to tolerate
increasing activity levels.
Biofeedback techniques (see Somatoform Disorders, above) and
hypnosis have been successful in ameliorating some pain
syndromes. Hypnosis tends to be most effective in patients with a
y
yp
p
high level of denial, who are more responsive to suggestion.
Hypnosis can be used to lessen anxiety, alter perception of the
length of time that pain is experienced, and encourage relaxation.
Mindfulness-based stress reduction programs have been useful in
helping individuals develop an enhanced capacity to live a higher
quality life with persistent pain.
B. Medical
A single clinician in charge of the comprehensive treatment
approach is the highest priority. Consultations as indicated and
technical procedures done by others are appropriate, but the care
of the patient should remain in the hands of the primary clinician.
Referrals should not be allowed to raise the patient's hopes
unrealistically or to become a way for the clinician to reject the
case. The attitude of the clinician should be one of honesty, interest,
and hopefulness—not for a cure but for control of pain and
improved function. If the patient manifests opioid addiction,
detoxification may be an early treatment goal.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications are often the first-line
of treatment for pain. If opioid analgesics or sedatives are
prescribed, they should not be given on an “as-needed” schedule
(see Chapter 5). A fixed schedule lessens the conditioning effects of
these medications. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) (eg,
nortriptyline), venlafaxine, and duloxetine in doses up to those used
in depression may be helpful, particularly in neuropathic pain
syndromes. In other conditions, their effects on pain may be less
clear, but ameliorating depression is usually important nonetheless.
Gabapentin, an anticonvulsant with possible applications in the
treatment of anxiety disorders, has been shown to be useful in
postherpetic and diabetic neuropathy and somatoform disorders.
In addition to medications, a variety of nonpharmacologic
strategies may be offered, including physical therapy and
acupuncture.
C. Social
Involvement of family members and other significant persons in the
patient's life should be an early priority. The best efforts of both
patient and therapists can be unwittingly sabotaged by other
persons who may feel that they are “helping” the patient. They
frequently tend to reinforce the negative aspects of the chronic pain
disorder. The patient becomes more dependent and less active, and
the pain syndrome becomes an immutable way of life. The more
destructive pain behaviors described by many experts in chronic
pain disorders are the results of well-meaning but misguided efforts
of family members. Ongoing therapy with the family can be helpful
in the early identification and elimination of these behavior patterns.
D. Psychological
In addition to group therapy with family members and others,
groups of patients can be helpful if properly led. The major goal,
whether of individual or group therapy, is to gain patient
involvement. A group can be a powerful instrument for achieving
this goal, with the development of group loyalties and cooperation.
People will frequently make efforts with group encouragement that
they would never make alone. Individual therapy should be directed
toward strengthening existing coping mechanisms and improving
self-esteem. For example, teaching patients to challenge
expectations induced by chronic pain may lead to improved
functioning. As an illustration, many chronic pain patients, making
assumptions more derived from acute injuries, incorrectly believe
they will damage themselves by attempting to function. The rapport
between patient and clinician, as in all psychotherapeutic efforts, is
the major factor in therapeutic success.
Morley S. Efficacy and effectiveness of cognitive behaviour
therapy for chronic pain: Progress and some challenges. Pain.
2010 Dec 13. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21159433]
 
Verdu B et al. Antidepressants for the treatment of chronic pain.
Drugs. 2008;68(18):2611–32. [PMID: 19093703]
 
Vitiello MV et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
improves sleep and decreases pain in older adults with comorbid
insomnia and osteoarthritis. J Clin Sleep Med. 2009
Aug;5(4):363–4. [PMID: 19968014]
 
PSYCHOSEXUAL DISORDERS
The stages of sexual activity include excitement (arousal), orgasm,
a n d resolution. The precipitating excitement or arousal is
psychologically determined. Arousal response leading to plateau is a
physiologic and psychological phenomenon of vasocongestion, a
parasympathetic reaction causing erection in men and labial-clitoral
congestion in women. The orgasmic response includes emission in
men and clonic contractions of the analogous striated perineal
muscles of both men and women. Resolution is a gradual return to
normal physiologic status.
While the arousal stimuli—vasocongestive and orgasmic
responses—constitute a single response in a well-adjusted person,
they can be considered as separate stages that can produce
different syndromes responding to different treatment procedures.
 Clinical Findings
There are three major groups of sexual disorders.
A. Paraphilias (Sexual Arousal Disorders)
In these conditions, formerly called “deviations” or “variations,” the
excitement stage of sexual activity is associated with sexual objects
or orientations different from those usually associated with adult
sexual stimulation. The stimulus may be a woman's shoe, a child,
animals, instruments of torture, or incidents of aggression. The
pattern of sexual stimulation is usually one that has early
psychological roots. Poor experiences with sexual activity frequently
reinforce this pattern over time.
Exhibitionism is the impulsive behavior of exposing the genitalia
to unsuspecting strangers in order to achieve sexual excitation. It is
a childhood sexual behavior carried into adult life.
Transvestism consists of recurrent cross-dressing behavior in a
heterosexual man for the purpose of sexual excitation. Such
fetishistic behavior can be part of masturbation foreplay.
Transvestism in homosexuality and transsexualism is not for the
purpose of sexual excitement but is a function of preference or
gender identity disorder.
Voyeurism involves the achievement of sexual arousal by
watching the activities of an unsuspecting person, usually in various
stages of undress or sexual activity. In both exhibitionism and
voyeurism, excitation leads to masturbation as a replacement for
sexual activity.
Pedophilia is the use of a child of either sex to achieve sexual
arousal and, in many cases, gratification. Contact is frequently oral,
with either participant being dominant, but pedophilia includes
intercourse of any type. Adults of both sexes engage in this
behavior, but because of social and cultural factors it is more
commonly identified with men. The pedophile has difficulty in adult
sexual relationships, and men who perform this act are frequently
impotent.
Incest involves a sexual relationship with a person in the
immediate family, most frequently a child. In many ways it is similar
to pedophilia (intrafamilial pedophilia). Incestuous feelings are fairly
common, but cultural mores are usually sufficiently strong to act as a
barrier to the expression of sexual feelings.
Sexual sadism is the attainment of sexual arousal by inflicting
pain upon the sexual object. Much sexual activity has aggressive
components (eg, biting, scratching). However, forced sexual
acquiescence (eg, rape) is considered to be primarily an act of
aggression.
Sexual masochism is the achievement of erotic pleasure by
being humiliated, enslaved, physically bound, and restrained. It may
be life threatening, since neck binding or partial asphyxiation usually
forms part of the ritual. The practice is much more common in men
than in women.
B. Gender Identity Disorder
Core gender identity reflects a biologic self-image—the conviction
that “I am a boy” or “I am a girl” that is usually well developed by
age 3 or 4. Gender dysphoria refers to the development of a sexual
identity that is the opposite of the biologic one.
Transsexualism is an attempt to deny and reverse biologic sex
by maintaining sexual identity with the opposite gender.
Transsexuals do not alternate between gender roles; rather, they
assume a fixed role of attitudes, feelings, fantasies, and choices
consonant with those of the opposite sex, all of which clearly date
back to early development. For example, male to female
transsexuals in early childhood behave, talk, and fantasize as if they
were girls. They do not grow out of feminine patterns; they do not
work in professions traditionally considered to be masculine; and
they have no interest in their own penises either as evidence of
maleness or as organs for erotic behavior. The desire for sex
change starts early and may culminate in assumption of a feminine
lifestyle, hormonal treatment, and use of surgical procedures, eg,
castration and vaginoplasty.
C. Psychosexual Dysfunction
This category includes a large group of vasocongestive and
orgasmic disorders. Often, they involve problems of sexual
adaptation, education, and technique that are often initially
discussed with, diagnosed by, and treated by the primary care
provider.
There are two conditions common in men: erectile dysfunction
and ejaculation disturbances.
Erectile dysfunction is inability to achieve or maintain an
erection firm enough for satisfactory intercourse; patients sometimes
use the term to mean premature ejaculation. Careful questioning is
necessary, since causes of this vasocongestive disorder can be
psychological, 
physiologic, 
or 
both. 
The 
majority 
are
pathophysiologic and, to varying degrees, treatable. After onset of
the problem, a history of occasional erections—especially nocturnal
penile tumescence, which may be evaluated by a simple monitoring
device, or a sleep study in the sleep laboratory—is usually evidence
that the dysfunction is psychological in origin, with the caveat that
decreased nocturnal penile tumescence occurs in some depressed
patients. Psychological erectile dysfunction is caused by
interpersonal or intrapsychic factors (eg, marital disharmony,
depression). Organic factors are discussed in Chapter 23.
Ejaculation disturbances include premature ejaculation,
inability to ejaculate, and retrograde ejaculation. (Ejaculation is
possible in patients with erectile dysfunction.) Ejaculation is usually
connected with orgasm, and ejaculatory control is an acquired
behavior that is minimal in adolescence and increases with
experience. Pathogenic factors are those that interfere with learning
control, most frequently sexual ignorance. Intrapsychic factors
(anxiety, guilt, depression) and interpersonal mal-adaptation (marital
problems, unresponsiveness of mate, power struggles) are also
common. Organic causes include interference with sympathetic
nerve distribution (often due to surgery or trauma) and the effects of
pharmacologic agents (eg, SSRIs or sympatholytics).
In women, the two most common forms of sexual dysfunction are
vaginismus and frigidity.
Vaginismus is a conditioned response in which a spasm of the
perineal muscles occurs if there is any stimulation of the area. The
desire is to avoid penetration. Sexual responsiveness and
vasocongestion may be present, and orgasm can result from clitoral
stimulation.
Frigidity is a complex condition in which there is a general lack
of sexual responsiveness. The woman has difficulty in experiencing
erotic sensation and does not have the vasocongestive response.
Sexual activity varies from active avoidance of sex to an occasional
orgasm. Orgasmic dysfunction—in which a woman has a
vasocongestive response but varying degrees of difficulty in reaching
orgasm—is sometimes differentiated from frigidity. Causes for the
dysfunctions include poor sexual techniques, early traumatic sexual
experiences, interpersonal disharmony (marital struggles, use of sex
as a means of control), and intrapsychic problems (anxiety, fear,
guilt). Organic causes include any conditions that might cause pain in
intercourse, pelvic pathology, mechanical obstruction, and
neurologic deficits.
Disorders of sexual desire consist of diminished or absent
libido in either sex and may be a function of organic or
psychological difficulties (eg, anxiety, phobic avoidance). Any
chronic illness can reduce desire. Hormonal disorders, including
hypogonadism or use of antiandrogen compounds such as
cyproterone acetate, and chronic kidney disease contribute to
deterioration in sexual desire. Although menopause may lead to
diminution of sexual desire in some women, the relationship
between menopause and libido is complicated and may be
influenced by sociocultural factors. Alcohol, sedatives, opioids,
marijuana, and some medications may affect sexual drive and
performance.
 Treatment
A. Paraphilias and Gender Identity Disorders
1. Psychological—Sexual arousal disorders involving variant
sexual activity (paraphilia), particularly those of a more superficial
nature (eg, voyeurism) and those of recent onset, are responsive to
psychotherapy in a moderate percentage of cases. The prognosis is
much better if the motivation comes from the individual rather than
the legal system; unfortunately, however, judicial intervention is
frequently the only stimulus to treatment, because the condition
persists and is reinforced until conflict with the law occurs.
Therapies frequently focus on barriers to normal arousal response;
the expectation is that the variant behavior will decrease as normal
behavior increases.
2. Behavioral—Aversive and operant conditioning techniques
have been tried frequently in gender role disorders but have only
occasionally been successful. In some cases, the sexual arousal
disorders improve with modeling, role-playing, and conditioning
procedures. Emotive imagery is occasionally helpful in lessening
anxiety in fetish problems.
3. Social—Although they do not produce a change in sexual
arousal patterns or gender role, self-help groups have facilitated
adjustment to an often hostile society. Attention to the family is
particularly important in helping persons in such groups to accept
their situation and alleviate their guilt about the role they think they
had in creating the problem.
4. Medical—Medroxyprogesterone acetate, a suppressor of
libidinal drive, is used to mute disruptive sexual behavior in men of
all ages. Onset of action is usually within 3 weeks, and the effects
are generally reversible. Fluoxetine or other SSRIs at depression
doses (see Table 25–8) may reduce some of the compulsive sexual
behaviors including the paraphilias. A focus of study in the treatment
of severe paraphilia has been agonists of luteinizing hormone–
releasing hormone. Although some transsexuals are treated with
genital reconstructive surgery, many others are screened out by trial
periods of living as the other sex prior to operation.
B. Psychosexual Dysfunction
1. Medical—Identification of a contributory reversible cause is
most important. Even if the condition is not reversible, identification
of the specific cause helps the patient to accept the condition.
Marital disharmony, with its exacerbating effects, may thus be
avoided. Of all the sexual dysfunctions, erectile dysfunction is the
condition most likely to have an organic basis. Sildenafil, tadalafil,
and vardenafil are phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors that are
effective oral agents for the treatment of penile erectile dysfunction
(eg, sildenafil 25–100 mg orally 1 hour prior to intercourse). These
agents are effective for SSRI-induced erectile dysfunction in men
and in some cases for SSRI-associated sexual dysfunction in
women. Use of the medications in conjunction with any nitrates,
particularly in individuals with coronary artery disease, can have
significant hypotensive effects leading to death in some cases. The
medication, which does not appear to impact sexual desire, should
be used only once a day. Because of their common effect in
delaying ejaculation, the SSRIs have been effective in premature
ejaculation.
2. Behavioral—Syndromes resulting from conditioned responses
have been treated by conditioning techniques, with excellent results.
Vaginismus responds well to desensitization with graduated Hegar
dilators along with relaxation techniques. Masters and Johnson have
used behavioral approaches in all of the sexual dysfunctions, with
concomitant supportive psychotherapy and with improvement of the
communication patterns of the couple.
3. Psychological—The use of psychotherapy by itself is best suited
for those cases in which interpersonal difficulties or intrapsychic
problems predominate. Anxiety and guilt about parental injunctions
against sex may contribute to sexual dysfunction. Even in these
cases, however, a combined behavioral-psychological approach
usually produces results most quickly.
4. Social—The proximity of other people (eg, a mother-inlaw) in a
household is frequently an inhibiting factor in sexual relationships. In
such cases, some social engineering may alleviate the problem.
Eardley I et al. Pharmacotherapy for erectile dysfunction. J Sex
Med. 2010 Jan;7(1 Pt 2):524–40. [PMID: 20092451]
 
Nurnburg HG et al. Sildenafil treatment of women with anti-
depressant-associated sexual dysfunction: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2008 Jul 23;300(4):395–404. [PMID: 18647982]
 
PERSONALITY DISORDERS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Long history dating back to childhood.
 Recurrent maladaptive behavior.
 Low self-esteem and lack of confidence.
 Minimal introspective ability with a tendency to blame others for
all problems.
 Major difficulties with interpersonal relationships or society.
 Depression with anxiety when maladaptive behavior fails.
 
 General Considerations
An individual's personality structure, or character, is an integral part
of self-image. It reflects genetics, interpersonal influences, and
recurring patterns of behavior adopted in order to cope with the
environment. The classification of subtypes of personality disorders
depends on the predominant symptoms and their severity. The most
severe disorders—those that bring the patient into greatest conflict
with society—tend to be classified as antisocial (psychopathic) or
borderline.
Personality disorders can be considered a matrix for some of the
more severe psychiatric problems (eg, schizotypal, relating to
schizophrenia, and avoidance types, relating to some anxiety
disorders).
 Classification & Clinical Findings
See Table 25–3.
 
Table 25–3. Personality disorders: Classification and clinical
findings.
 
 
 
Personality
Disorder
Clinical Findings
Paranoid
Defensive, oversensitive, secretive,
suspicious, hyperalert, with limited
emotional response.
 
Schizoid
Shy, introverted, withdrawn, avoids close
relationships.
 
Obsessive
compulsive
Perfectionist, egocentric, indecisive, with
rigid thought patterns and need for control.
 
Histrionic
(hysterical)
Dependent, immature, seductive,
egocentric, vain, emotionally labile.
 
Schizotypal
Superstitious, socially isolated, suspicious,
with limited interpersonal ability, eccentric
behaviors, and odd speech.
 
Narcissistic
Exhibitionist, grandiose, preoccupied with
power, lacks interest in others, with
excessive demands for attention.
 
Avoidant
Fears rejection, hyperreacts to rejection and
failure, with poor social endeavors and low
self-esteem.
 
Dependent
Passive, overaccepting, unable to make
decisions, lacks confidence, with poor self-
esteem.
 
Antisocial
Selfish, callous, promiscuous, impulsive,
unable to learn from experience, has legal
problems.
 
Borderline
Impulsive; has unstable and intense
interpersonal relationships; is suffused with
anger, fear, and guilt; lacks self-control and
self-fulfillment; has identity problems and
affective instability; is suicidal (a serious
problem—up to 80% of hospitalized
borderline patients make an attempt at
some time during treatment, and the
incidence of completed suicide is as high as
5%); aggressive behavior, feelings of
emptiness, and occasional psychotic
decompensation. This group has a high
drug abuse rate, which plays a role in
symptoms. There is extensive overlap with
other diagnostic categories, particularly
mood disorders and posttraumatic stress
disorder.
 
 Differential Diagnosis
Patients with personality disorders tend to show anxiety and
depression when pathologic coping mechanisms fail, and their
symptoms can be similar to those disorders. Occasionally, the more
severe cases may decompensate into psychosis under stress and
mimic other psychotic disorders.
 Treatment
A. Social
Social and therapeutic environments such as day hospitals, halfway
houses, and self-help communities utilize peer pressures to modify
the self-destructive behavior. The patient with a personality disorder
often has failed to profit from experience, and difficulties with
authority impair the learning experience. The use of peer
relationships and the repetition possible in a structured setting of a
helpful community enhance the behavioral treatment opportunities
and increase learning. When problems are detected early, both the
school and the home can serve as foci of intensified social pressure
to change the behavior, particularly with the use of behavioral
techniques.
B. Behavioral
The behavioral techniques used are principally operant conditioning
and aversive conditioning. The former simply emphasizes the
recognition of acceptable behavior and its reinforcement with praise
or other tangible rewards. Aversive responses usually mean
punishment, although this can range from a mild rebuke to some
specific punitive responses such as deprivation of privileges.
Extinction plays a role in that an attempt is made not to respond to
inappropriate behavior, and the lack of response eventually causes
the person to abandon that type of behavior. Pouting and tantrums,
for example, diminish quickly when such behavior elicits no
reaction. Dialectical behavioral therapy is a program of individual
and group therapy specifically designed for patients with chronic
suicidality and borderline personality disorder. It blends mindfulness
and a cognitive-behavioral model to address self-awareness,
interpersonal functioning, affective lability, and reactions to stress.
C. Psychological
Psychological intervention is best conducted in group settings.
Group therapy is helpful when specific interpersonal behavior needs
to be improved. This mode of treatment also has a place with so-
called acting-out patients, ie, those who frequently act in an
impulsive and inappropriate way. The peer pressure in the group
tends to impose restraints on rash behavior. The group also quickly
identifies the patient's types of behavior and helps improve the
validity of the patient's self-assessment, so that the antecedents of
the unacceptable behavior can be effectively handled, thus
decreasing its frequency. Individual therapy should initially be
supportive, ie, helping the patient to restabilize and mobilize coping
mechanisms. If the individual has the ability to observe his or her
own behavior, a longer-term and more introspective therapy may
be warranted. The therapist must be able to handle
countertransference feelings (which are frequently negative),
maintain appropriate boundaries in the relationship (no physical
contacts, however well-meaning), and refrain from premature
confrontations and interpretations.
D. Medical
Hospitalization is indicated in the case of serious suicidal or
homicidal danger. In most cases, treatment can be accomplished in
the day treatment center or self-help community. Antipsychotics
may be required for short periods in conditions that have
temporarily decompensated into transient psychoses (eg, olanzapine
[2.5–10 mg/d orally], risperidone [0.5–2 mg/d orally], or
haloperidol [0.5-2 mg/d orally, split into two doses]). In some
cases, these medications are required only for several days and can
be discontinued after the patient has regained a previously
established level of adjustment; they can also provide ongoing
support. Carbamazepine, 400–800 mg orally daily in divided doses,
decreases the severity of behavioral dyscontrol. Antidepressants
have improved anxiety, depression, and sensitivity to rejection in
some borderline patients. SSRIs may have a role in reducing
aggressive behavior in impulsive aggressive patients.
 Prognosis
Antisocial and borderline categories generally have a guarded
prognosis. Those patients with a history of parental abuse and a
family history of mood disorder tend to have the most challenging
treatments.
Ingenhoven T et al. Effectiveness of pharmacotherapy for severe
personality disorders: meta-analyses of randomized controlled
trials. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010 Jan;71(1):14–25. [PMID:
19778496]
 
McMain SF et al. A randomized trial of dialectical behavior
therapy versus general psychiatric management for borderline
personality disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;166(12):1365–
74. [PMID: 19755574]
 
SCHIZOPHRENIA & OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Social withdrawal, usually slowly progressive, often with
deterioration in personal care.
 Loss of ego boundaries, with inability to perceive oneself as a
separate entity.
 Loose thought associations, often with slowed thinking or
overinclusive and rapid shifting from topic to topic.
 Autistic absorption in inner thoughts and frequent sexual or
religious preoccupations.
 Auditory hallucinations, often of a derogatory nature.
 Delusions, frequently of a grandiose or persecutory nature.
 Symptoms of at least 6 months’ duration.
Frequent additional signs:
 Flat affect and rapidly alternating mood shifts irrespective of
circumstances.
 Hypersensitivity to environmental stimuli, with a feeling of
enhanced sensory awareness.
 Variability or changeable behavior incongruent with the external
environment.
 Concrete thinking with inability to abstract; inappropriate
symbolism.
 Impaired concentration worsened by hallucinations and delusions.
 Depersonalization, wherein one behaves like a detached observer
of one's own actions.
 
 General Considerations
The schizophrenic disorders are a group of syndromes manifested
by massive disruption of thinking, mood, and overall behavior as
well as poor filtering of stimuli. The characterization and
nomenclature of the disorders are quite arbitrary and are influenced
by sociocultural factors and schools of psychiatric thought.
It is currently believed that the schizophrenic disorders are of
multifactorial 
cause, 
with 
genetic, 
environmental, 
and
neurotransmitter pathophysiologic components. At present, there is
no laboratory method for confirming the diagnosis of schizophrenia.
There may or may not be a history of a major disruption in the
individual's life (failure, loss, physical illness) before gross psychotic
deterioration is evident.
Schizophrenic symptoms have been classified into positive and
negative categories. Positive symptoms include hallucinations,
delusions, and formal thought disorders; these symptoms appear to
be related to increased dopaminergic (D2) activity in the mesolimbic
region. Negative symptoms include diminished sociability, restricted
affect, and poverty of speech; these symptoms appear to be related
to decreased D2 activity in the mesocortical system.
“Other psychotic disorders” are conditions that are similar to
schizophrenic disorders in their acute symptoms but have a less
pervasive influence over the long term. The patient usually attains
higher levels of functioning. The acute psychotic episodes tend to be
less disruptive of the person's lifestyle, with a fairly quick return to
previous levels of functioning.
 Classification
A. Schizophrenic Disorders
Schizophrenic disorders are subdivided on the basis of certain
prominent phenomena that are frequently present. Disorganized
(hebephrenic) schizophrenia is characterized by marked
incoherence and an incongruous or silly affect. Catatonic
schizophrenia is distinguished by a marked psychomotor
disturbance of either excitement (purposeless and stereotyped) or
rigidity with mutism. Infrequently, there may be rapid alternation
between excitement and stupor (see under catatonic syndrome,
below). Paranoid schizophrenia includes marked persecutory or
grandiose delusions often consonant with hallucinations of similar
content and with less marked disorganization of speech and
behavior. Undifferentiated schizophrenia denotes a category in
which symptoms are not specific enough to warrant inclusion of the
illness in the other subtypes. Residual schizophrenia is a
classification that includes persons who have clearly had an episode
warranting a diagnosis of schizophrenia but who at present have no
overt psychotic symptoms, although they show milder signs such as
social withdrawal, flat affect, and eccentric behaviors.
B. Delusional Disorders
Delusional disorders are psychoses in which the predominant
symptoms are persistent, nonbizarre delusions with minimal
impairment of daily functioning. (The schizophrenic disorders show
significant impairment.) Intellectual and occupational activities are
little affected, whereas social and marital functioning tend to be
markedly involved. Hallucinations are not usually present. Common
delusional themes include paranoid delusions of persecution,
delusions of being related to or loved by a well-known person, and
delusions that one's partner is unfaithful.
C. Schizoaffective Disorders
Schizoaffective disorders are those cases that fail to fit comfortably
either in the schizophrenic or in the affective categories. They are
usually cases with affective symptoms that precede or develop
concurrently with psychotic manifestations. There has been
increasing interest in studying prodromal schizophrenia with a goal
of prevention or early treatment.
D. Schizophreniform Disorders
Schizophreniform disorders are similar in their symptoms to
schizophrenic disorders except that the duration of prodromal,
acute, and residual symptoms is > 1 week but < 6 months.
E. Brief Psychotic Disorders
These disorders last < 1 week. They are the result of psychological
stress. The shorter duration is significant and correlates with a more
acute onset and resolution as well as a much better prognosis.
F. Late Life Psychosis
Brain abnormalities occur in 40% of patients who develop
psychotic symptoms after age 60. The psychotic symptoms are
typical, and there are other findings such as low IQ scores and
diminished cognitive function.
G. Atypical Psychoses
This group includes a wide range of conditions with psychotic
symptoms. The cause is often not clear, but later events (eg, new
symptoms) may clarify the diagnosis. The most common example is
chronic psychosis developing either during periods of heavy abuse
of drugs or at some time after the drug use has ceased. Other
conditions include temporal lobe dysfunction, HIV infection, and a
number of the conditions noted in the differential diagnosis (see
below). They often have a good premorbid history, a precipitous
onset, and an episodic course with symptom-free intervals.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms and signs of schizophrenia vary markedly among
individuals as well as in the same person at different times. The
patient's appearance may be bizarre, although the usual finding is a
mild to moderate unkempt blandness. Motor activity is generally
reduced, although extremes ranging from catatonic stupor to
frenzied excitement occur. Social behavior is characterized by
marked withdrawal coupled with disturbed interpersonal
relationships and a reduced ability to experience pleasure.
Dependency and a poor self-image are common. Verbal
utterances are variable, the language being concrete yet symbolic,
with unassociated rambling statements (at times interspersed with
mutism) during an acute episode. Neologisms (made-up words or
phrases), echolalia (repetition of words spoken by others), and
verbigeration (repetition of senseless words or phrases) are
occasionally present. Affect is usually flattened, with occasional
inappropriateness. Depression is present in almost all cases but
may be less apparent during the acute psychotic episode and more
obvious during recovery. Depression is sometimes confused with
akinetic side effects of antipsychotic medications. It is also related
t o boredom, which increases symptoms and decreases the
response to treatment. Work is generally unavailable and time
unfilled, providing opportunities for counterproductive activities such
as drug abuse, withdrawal, and increased psychotic symptoms.
Thought content may vary from a paucity of ideas to a rich
complex of delusional fantasy with archaic thinking. One frequently
notes after a period of conversation that little if any information has
actually been conveyed. Incoming stimuli produce varied responses.
In some cases a simple question may trigger explosive outbursts,
whereas at other times there may be no overt response whatsoever
(catatonia). When paranoid ideation is present, the patient is often
irritable and less cooperative. Delusions (false beliefs) are
characteristic of paranoid thinking, and they usually take the form of
a preoccupation with the supposedly threatening behavior exhibited
by other individuals. This ideation may cause the patient to adopt
active countermeasures such as locking doors and windows, taking
up weapons, covering the ceiling with aluminum foil to counteract
radar waves, and other bizarre efforts. Somatic delusions revolve
around issues of bodily decay or infestation. Perceptual
distortions 
usually 
include 
auditory 
hallucinations—visual
hallucinations are more commonly associated with organic mental
states—and may include illusions (distortions of reality) such as
figures changing in size or lights varying in intensity. Cenesthetic
hallucinations (eg, a burning sensation in the brain, feeling blood
flowing in blood vessels) occasionally occur. Lack of humor,
feelings of dread, depersonalization (a feeling of being apart from
the self), and fears of annihilation may be present. Any of the above
symptoms generate higher anxiety levels, with heightened arousal
and occasional panic and suicidal ideation, as the individual fails to
cope.
The development of the acute episode in schizophrenia frequently
is the end product of a gradual decompensation. Frustration and
anxiety appear early, followed by depression and alienation, along
with progressive ineffectiveness in day-to-day coping. This often
leads to feelings of panic and increasing disorganization, with loss of
the ability to test and evaluate the reality of perceptions. The stage
of so-called psychotic resolution includes delusions, autistic
preoccupations, and psychotic insight, with acceptance of the
decompensated state. The process is frequently complicated by the
use of caffeine, alcohol, and other recreational drugs. Life
expectancy of schizophrenic patients is as much as 20% shorter
than that of cohorts in the general population and is often associated
with comorbid conditions such as the metabolic syndrome.
Polydipsia may produce water intoxication with hyponatremia—
characterized by symptoms of confusion, lethargy, psychosis,
seizures, and occasionally death—in any psychiatric disorder, but
most commonly in schizophrenia. These problems exacerbate the
schizophrenic symptoms and can be confused with them. Possible
patho-genetic factors in polydipsia include a hypothalamic defect,
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, neuroleptic
medications (anticholinergic effects, stimulation of hypothalamic
thirst center, effect on ADH), smoking (nicotine and syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone [SIADH]), psychotic thought
processes (delusions), and other medications (eg, diuretics,
antidepressants, lithium, alcohol). Other causes of polydipsia must
be ruled out (eg, diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, kidney
disease).
B. Imaging
Ventricular enlargement and cortical atrophy, as seen on CT scan,
have been correlated with chronic course, severe cognitive
impairment, and nonresponsiveness to neuroleptic medications.
Decreased frontal lobe activity seen on PET scan has been
associated with negative symptoms.
 Differential Diagnosis
One should not hesitate to reconsider the diagnosis of schizophrenia
in any person who has received that diagnosis in the past,
particularly when the clinical course has been atypical. A number of
these patients have been found to actually have atypical episodic
affective disorders that have responded well to lithium. Manic
episodes often mimic schizophrenia. Furthermore, schizophrenia has
been diagnosed in many individuals because of inadequacies in
psychiatric nomenclature. Thus, schizophrenia was often
inappropriately diagnosed in persons with brief reactive psychoses,
OCD, paranoid disorders, and schizophreniform disorders.
Psychotic depressions, psychotic organic mental states, and any
illness with psychotic ideation tend to be confused with
schizophrenia, partly because of the regrettable tendency to use the
terms interchangeably. Adolescent phases of growth and
counterculture behaviors constitute another area of diagnostic
confusion. It is particularly important to avoid a misdiagnosis in
these groups, because of the long-term implications arising from
having such a serious diagnosis made in a formative stage of life.
Medical disorders such as thyroid dysfunction, adrenal and
pituitary disorders, reactions to toxic materials (eg, mercury,
PCBs), and almost all of the organic mental states in the early stages
must be ruled out. Postpartum psychosis is discussed under Mood
Disorders. Complex partial seizures, especially when
psychosensory phenomena are present, are an important differential
consideration. Toxic drug states arising from prescription, over-the-
counter, herbal and street drugs may mimic all of the psychotic
disorders. The chronic use of amphetamines, cocaine, and other
stimulants frequently produces a psychosis that is almost identical to
the acute paranoid schizophrenic episode. The presence of
formication (sensation of insects crawling on or under the skin) and
stereotypy suggests the possibility of stimulant abuse. Phencyclidine
(see below), a very common street drug, may cause a reaction that
is difficult to distinguish from other psychotic disorders. Cerebellar
signs, excessive salivation, dilated pupils, and increased deep
tendon reflexes should alert the clinician to the possibility of a toxic
psychosis. Industrial chemical toxicity (both organic and metallic),
degenerative disorders, and metabolic deficiencies must be
considered in the differential diagnosis.
Catatonic syndrome, frequently assumed to exist solely as a
component of schizophrenic disorders, is actually the end product
of a number of illnesses, including various organic conditions.
Neoplasms, viral and bacterial encephalopathies, central nervous
system hemorrhage, metabolic derangements such as diabetic
ketoacidosis, sedative withdrawal, and hepatic and renal
malfunction have all been implicated. It is particularly important to
realize that drug toxicity (eg, overdoses of antipsychotic medications
such as fluphenazine or haloperidol) can cause catatonic syndrome,
which may be misdiagnosed as a catatonic schizophrenic disorder
and inappropriately treated with more antipsychotic medication.
 Treatment
A. Medical
Hospitalization is often necessary, particularly when the patient's
behavior shows gross disorganization. The presence of competent
family members lessens the need for hospitalization, and each case
should be judged individually. The major considerations are to
prevent self-inflicted harm or harm to others and to provide the
patient's basic needs. A full medical evaluation and CT scan or MRI
of the brain should be considered in first episodes of
schizophreniform disorder and other psychotic episodes of
unknown cause.
Antipsychotic medications (see below) are the treatment of
choice. The relapse rate can be reduced by 50% with proper
maintenance neuroleptic therapy. Long-acting, injectable depot
neuroleptics are used in noncompliant patients or nonresponders to
oral medication.
Antipsychotic medications include the “typical” neuroleptics
phenothiazines, thioxanthenes (both similar in structure),
butyrophenones, 
dihydroindolones, 
dibenzoxazepines, 
and
benzisoxazoles, and the newer “atypical” neuroleptics clozapine,
risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole, ziprasidone,
asenapine, paliperidone, and iloperidone (Table 25–4). Generally,
increasing milligram potency of the typical neuroleptics is associated
with decreasing anticholinergic and adrenergic side effects and
increasing extrapyramidal symptoms (Table 25–5). For example,
chlorpromazine has lower potency and more severe anticholinergic
and adrenergic side effects. The increased anticholinergic effect of
chlorpromazine, however, lowers the risk of extrapyramidal
symptoms.
The Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness
(CATIE) study compared “atypical” and “typical” neuroleptic
medications. Although it was not definitive, it suggested similar
antipsychotic efficacy for both classes and a tendency for the
atypicals, particularly olanzapine, to be better tolerated leading to
enhanced compliance. It also highlighted lack of patient adherence
as a major factor in treatments.
 
Table 25–4. Commonly used antipsychotics and medications.
 
1Can be higher in some cases.
2Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
3Indicates piperazine structure.
4For risperidone, daily doses above 6 mg increase the risk of
extrapyramidal syndrome. Risperidone 6 mg is approximately equivalent to
haloperidol 20 mg.
 
The phenothiazines comprise the bulk of the currently used
“typical” neuroleptic medications. The only butyrophenone
commonly used in psychiatry is haloperidol, which is different in
structure but similar in action and side effects to the piperazine
phenothiazines 
such 
as fluphenazine, 
perphenazine, 
and
trifluoperazine. These medications and haloperidol (dopamine [D2]
receptor blockers) have high potency and a paucity of autonomic
side effects and act to markedly lower arousal levels. Molindone
and loxapine, while less potent, are similar in action, side effects,
and safety to the piperazine phenothiazines.
 
Table 25–5. Relative potency and side effects of antipsychotic
medications.
 
14, strong effect; 1, weak effect.
 
The first “atypical” (novel) antipsychotic drug developed,
clozapine, a dibenzodiazepine derivative, has dopamine (D4)
receptor-blocking activity as well as central serotonergic,
histaminergic, and α-noradrenergic receptor-blocking activity. It is
effective in the treatment of about 30% of psychoses resistant to
other neuroleptic medications. Research suggests that clozapine
may have specific efficacy in decreasing suicidality in patients with
schizophrenia. It is associated with a 1% risk of agranulocytosis,
which requires weekly white blood cell count monitoring for the first
6 months followed by monitoring every other week. Weekly
monitoring for 1 month after discontinuation of the medication is
recommended. Because of an association between clozapine and
myocarditis, the drug is contraindicated in patients with severe heart
disease. Risperidone is an antipsychotic that blocks some serotonin
receptors (5-HT2) and dopamine receptors (D2). Risperidone
causes fewer extrapyramidal side effects than the typical
antipsychotics at doses < 6 mg. It appears to be as effective as
haloperidol and possibly as effective as clozapine in treatment-
resistant patients without requiring weekly white cell counts.
Risperidone-induced hyperprolactinemia, even on low doses, has
been reported, and that effect is thought to be more common with
risperidone than with other atypical antipsychotics. Risperidone is
available in a long-acting injectable preparation.
Olanzapine is a potent blocker of muscarinic, anticholinergic, 5-
HT2, and dopamine D1, D2, and D4 receptors. High doses of
olanzapine (12.5–17.5 mg daily) appear to be more effective than
lower doses. The drug appears to be more effective than
haloperidol in the treatment of negative symptoms, such as
withdrawal, psychomotor retardation, and poor interpersonal
relationships. It is available in an orally disintegrating form for
patients who are unable to tolerate standard oral dosing and in an
injectable form for the management of acute agitation associated
with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Olanzapine tends to result
in elevations of serum alanine aminotransferase more commonly
than does haloperidol. Olanzapine is associated with a much lower
incidence of dystonic reaction than haloperidol and is perhaps less
likely to induce tardive dyskinesia. Its most common side effects
include somnolence, agitation, nervousness, headache, insomnia,
dizziness, and significant weight gain. Multiple case reports have
linked olanzapine and clozapine to new-onset type 2 diabetes and
other atypical medications should be monitored for this adverse
effect as well. Further investigation is ongoing to clarify the risk, risk
g
g
g
y
,
factors, and pathophysiology. The manufacturer has alerted
physicians to an association between olanzapine and a significantly
higher risk of stroke and death in elderly patients, which has also
been noted with other atypical agents.
Quetiapine is a neuroleptic with greater 5-HT2 relative to D2
receptor blockade as well as a relatively high affinity for α1- and α2-
adrenergic receptors. It appears to be as efficacious as haloperidol
in treating positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia, with
less extrapyramidal side effects even at high doses. More common
side effects include somnolence, dizziness, and postural
hypotension. Because of an association with lens changes seen in
patients on long-term treatment, an eye examination to detect
cataract formation is recommended at initiation of treatment and
then at 6-month intervals during treatment.
Ziprasidone has both anti-dopamine receptor and anti-serotonin
receptor effects, with good efficacy for both positive and negative
symptoms of schizophrenia. In one study of 146 treatment-resistant
schizophrenic patients, ziprasidone was as effective as clozapine.
Ziprasidone is not associated with significant weight gain,
hyperlipidemia, or new-onset diabetes and offers a good alternative
for some patients. It has been implicated in QTc interval delay of >
500 ms in some patients, although in several cases of overdose
there were no incidents of torsades de pointes or sudden death.
Patients taking ziprasidone should be screened for cardiac risk
factors. A pretreatment ECG is indicated for patients at risk for
cardiac sequelae (including patients taking other medications that
might prolong the QTc interval).
Aripiprazole is the first neuroleptic that is a dopamine stabilizer.
A partial agonist at the dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT1
receptors and an antagonist at 5-HT2 receptors, it is effective
against positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia. It
functions as an antagonist or agonist, depending on the
dopaminergic activity at the dopamine receptors. This may help
decrease side effects. More activating than sedating, aripiprazole is
thought to impose a low risk of extrapyramidal symptoms, weight
gain, hyperprolactinemia, and delayed QT interval. Aripiprazole has
been approved as an augmentation agent for treatment-resistant
depression even when psychosis is not present. Asenapine,
approved for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
(mixed or manic state), appears to be particularly helpful in treating
negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Paliperidone, the active
metabolite of risperidone, is available as a capsule and a monthly
injection. It has the advantage of low associations with diabetes
mellitus, weight gain, and dyslipidemia. Both asenapine and
paliperidone increase the risk of QT interval prolongation and
should be avoided in patients with risk factors for this ECG finding.
Asenapine can cause hyperprolactinemia and weight gain.
Iloperidone, which was approved by the FDA in 2009 for acute
schizophrenia, has low incidence of extrapyramidal side effects that
is similar to the other atypical agents but requires careful initial
titration due to the risk of orthostatic hypotension and possibility of
lengthening the QT interval. When coadministered with paroxetine
or clarithromycin, the dose of iloperidone must be halved because
of decreased hepatic metabolism by the cytochrome P450
CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 isozymes. None of the antipsychotics
produce true physical dependency. All decrease adrenergic
responses. Despite higher costs, atypical neuroleptics are often
considered preferable to traditional antipsychotics because they are
thought to be associated with reduced extrapyramidal symptoms
and a lesser risk of tardive dyskinesia.
 Clinical Indications
The antipsychotics are used to treat all forms of the schizophrenias
as well as psychotic ideation in organic brain psychoses, delirium
and dementia, drug-induced psychoses, psychotic depression, and
mania. They are also effective in Tourette disorder. They quickly
lower the arousal (activity) level and, perhaps indirectly, gradually
improve socialization and thinking. The improvement rate is about
80%. Patients whose behavioral symptoms worsen with use of
antipsychotic medications may have an undiagnosed organic
condition such as anticholinergic toxicity.
Symptoms that are ameliorated by these medications include
hyperactivity, hostility, aggression, delusions, hallucinations,
irritability, and poor sleep. Individuals with acute psychosis and
good premorbid function respond quite well. The most common
cause of failure in the treatment of acute psychosis is inadequate
dosage, and the most common cause of relapse is noncompliance.
Although typical antipsychotics are efficacious in the treatment of
positive symptoms of schizophrenia, such as hallucinations and
delusions, atypical antipsychotics are thought to have efficacy in
reducing both positive and negative symptoms. Antidepressant
medications may be used in conjunction with neuroleptics if
significant depression is present. Resistant cases may require
concomitant use of lithium, carbamazepine, or valproic acid. The
addition of a benzodiazepine drug to the neuroleptic regimen may
prove helpful in treating the agitated or catatonic psychotic patient
who has not responded to neuroleptics alone—lorazepam, 1–2 mg
orally, can produce a rapid resolution of catatonic symptoms and
may allow maintenance with a lower neuroleptic dose.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) has also been effective in treating
catatonia.
 Dosage Forms & Patterns
The dosage range is quite broad. For example, risperidone, 0.25–1
mg orally at bedtime, may be sufficient for the elderly person with
mild dementia with psychosis (especially in view of the increased
risk of stroke and death in the elderly), whereas up to 6 mg/d may
be used in a young patient with acute schizophrenia. For quick
response, an atypical antipsychotic may be started in combination
with a benzodiazepine (eg, risperidone oral solution, 2 mg, or
olanzapine, 10 mg orally, and lorazepam, 2 mg orally, every 2–4
hours as needed). In an acutely distressed, psychotic patient one
might use haloperidol, 10 mg intramuscularly, which is absorbed
rapidly and achieves an initial tenfold plasma level advantage over
equal oral doses. Psychomotor agitation, racing thoughts, and
general arousal are quickly reduced. The dose can be repeated
every 3–4 hours; when the patient is less symptomatic, oral doses
can replace parenteral administration in most cases. In the elderly,
both atypical (eg, risperidone 0.25 mg–0.5 mg daily or olanzapine
1.25 mg daily) and conventional (eg haloperidol 0.5 mg daily or
perphenazine 2 mg daily) antipsychotics, often used effectively in
small doses for behavioral control, have been linked to premature
death in some cases.
Absorption of oral medications may be increased or decreased
by concomitant administration of other medications (eg, antacids
tend to decrease the absorption of antidepressants). Previous
gastrointestinal surgery may alter pH, motility, and surface areas
available for drug absorption. There are racial differences in
metabolizing the neuroleptic medications—eg, many Asians require
only about half the usual dosage. Bioavailability is influenced by
other factors such as smoking or hepatic microsomal enzyme
stimulation with alcohol or barbiturates and enzyme-altering
medications such as carbamazepine or methylphenidate.
Neuroleptic plasma drug level determinations are not currently of
major clinical assistance.
Divided daily doses are not necessary after a maintenance dose
has been established, and most patients can then be maintained on a
single daily dose, usually taken at bedtime. This is particularly
appropriate in a case where the sedative effect of the drug is
desired for nighttime sleep, and undesirable sedative effects can be
avoided during the day. Risperidone is an exception, being given
twice daily. First-episode patients especially should be tapered off
medications after about 6 months of stability and carefully
monitored; their rate of relapse is lower than that of multiple-
episode patients.
Psychiatric patients—particularly paranoid individuals—often
neglect to take their medication. In these cases and in
nonresponders to oral medication, the enanthate and decanoate (the
latter is slightly longer-lasting and has fewer extrapyramidal side
effects) forms of fluphenazine or the decanoate form of haloperidol
may be given by deep subcutaneous injection or intramuscularly to
achieve an effect that will usually last 7–28 days. A patient who
cannot be depended on to take oral medication (or who overdoses
on minimal provocation) will generally agree to come to the
clinician's office for a “shot.” The usual dose of the fluphenazine
long-acting preparations is 25 mg every 2 weeks. Dosage and
frequency of administration vary from about 100 mg weekly to 12.5
mg monthly. Use the smallest effective amount as infrequently as
possible. A monthly injection of 25 mg of fluphenazine decanoate is
equivalent to about 15–20 mg of oral fluphenazine daily.
Risperidone is the first atypical neuroleptic available in a long-acting
injectable form (25–50 mg intramuscularly every 2 weeks).
Concomitant use of a benzodiazepine (eg, lorazepam, 2 mg orally
twice daily) may permit reduction of the required dosage of oral or
parenteral antipsychotic drug.
Intravenous haloperidol, the neuroleptic most commonly used by
this route, is often used in critical care units in the management of
agitated, delirious patients. Intravenous haloperidol should be given
no faster than 1 mg/min to reduce cardiovascular side effects, such
as torsades de pointes. Current practice indicates that ECG
monitoring should be used whenever haloperidol is being
administered intravenously.
 Side Effects
For both typical and atypical neuroleptic agents, a range of side
effects has been reported. The most common anticholinergic side
effects include dry mouth (which can lead to ingestion of caloric
liquids and weight gain or hyponatremia), blurred near vision,
urinary retention (particularly in elderly men with enlarged
prostates), delayed gastric emptying, esophageal reflux, ileus,
delirium, and precipitation of acute glaucoma in patients with narrow
anterior chamber angles. Other autonomic effects include orthostatic
hypotension and sexual dysfunction—problems in achieving
erection, ejaculation (including retrograde ejaculation), and orgasm
in men (approximately 50% of cases) and women (approximately
30%). Delay in achieving orgasm is often a factor in medication
noncompliance. Electrocardiographic changes occur frequently, but
clinically significant arrhythmias are much less common. Elderly
patients and those with preexisting cardiac disease are at greater
risk. The most frequently seen electrocardiographic changes include
diminution of the T wave amplitude, appearance of prominent U
waves, depression of the ST segment, and prolongation of the QT
interval. Thioridazine has been given an FDA warning for dose-
related QTc delay and risk of fatal cardiac arrhythmias. As noted
above, ziprasidone can produce QTc prolongation. An ECG prior
to treatment in some patients may be indicated. In some critical care
patients, torsades de pointes has been associated with the use of
high-dose intravenous haloperidol (usually > 30 mg/24 h).
Associations have been suggested between the atypical
neuroleptics and new-onset diabetes, hyperlipidemia, QTc
prolongation, and weight gain (Table 25–6). The FDA has
particularly noted the risk of hyperglycemia and new-onset diabetes
in this class of medication that is not related to weight gain. The risk
of diabetes mellitus is increased in patients taking clozapine and
olanzapine. Monitoring of weight, fasting blood sugar and lipids
prior to initiation of treatment and at regular intervals thereafter is an
important part of medication monitoring. Early research suggests
that the addition of metformin to olanzapine may improve drug-
induced weight gain in patients with drug-naïve, first-episode
schizophrenia. Neuroleptic medications in general may have
metabolic and endocrine effects, including weight gain,
hyperglycemia, impaired temperature regulation in hot weather, and
water intoxication, that may be due to inappropriate ADH
secretion. Lactation and menstrual irregularities are common
(antipsychotic medications should be avoided, if possible, in breast
cancer patients because of potential trophic effects of elevated
prolactin levels on the breast). Both antipsychotic and anti-
depressant medications inhibit sperm motility. Bone marrow
depression and cholestatic jaundice occur rarely; these are
hypersensitivity reactions, and they usually appear in the first 2
months of treatment. They subside on discontinuance of the drug.
There is cross-sensitivity among all of the phenothiazines, and a
drug from a different group should be used when allergic reactions
occur.
 
Table 25–6. Adverse factors associated with atypical antipsychotic
medications.
 
1QTc prolongation is a side effect of many medications and suggests a
possible risk for arrhythmia.
Pharmacist's Letter/Prescriber's Letter, Therapeutic Research Center,
October 2009, Vol 25:251010; Adapted, with permission, from American
Diabetes Association: Consensus Development Conference on
Antipsychotic Drugs and Obesity and Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2004
Feb;27(2):596–601.
 
Clozapine is associated with a 1.6% risk of agranulocytosis
(higher in persons of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry), and its use must
be strictly monitored with weekly blood counts during the first 6
months of treatment, with monitoring every other week thereafter.
Discontinuation of the medication requires weekly monitoring of the
white blood cell count for 1 month. Clozapine has been associated
with fatal myocarditis and is contraindicated in patients with severe
heart disease. In addition, clozapine lowers the seizure threshold
and has many side effects, including sedation, hypotension,
increased liver enzyme levels, hypersalivation, respiratory arrest,
weight gain, and changes in both the ECG and the
electroencephalogram.
Photosensitivity, retinopathy, and hyperpigmentation are
associated with use of fairly high dosages of chlorpromazine and
thioridazine. The appearance of particulate melanin deposits in the
lens of the eye is related to the total dose given, and patients on
long-term medication should have periodic eye examinations.
Teratogenicity has not been causally related to these medications,
but prudence is indicated particularly in the first trimester of
pregnancy. The seizure threshold is lowered, but it is safe to use
these medications in epileptics who take anticonvulsants.
The neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a catatonia-
like state manifested by extrapyramidal signs, blood pressure
changes, altered consciousness, and hyperpyrexia; it is an
uncommon but serious complication of neuroleptic treatment.
Muscle rigidity, involuntary movements, confusion, dysarthria, and
dysphagia are accompanied by pallor, cardiovascular instability,
fever, pulmonary congestion, and diaphoresis and may result in
stupor, coma, and death. The cause may be related to a number of
factors, including poor dosage control of neuroleptic medication,
affective illness, decreased serum iron, dehydration, and increased
sensitivity of dopamine receptor sites. Lithium in combination with a
neuroleptic drug may increase vulnerability, which is already
increased in patients with an affective disorder. In most cases, the
symptoms develop within the first 2 weeks of antipsychotic drug
treatment. The syndrome may occur with small doses of the
medications. Intramuscular administration is a risk factor. Elevated
creatine kinase and leukocytosis with a shift to the left are present
early in about half of cases. Treatment includes controlling fever and
providing fluid support. Dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine,
2.5–10 mg orally three times a day, and amantadine, 100–200 mg
orally twice a day, have also been useful. Dantrolene, 50 mg
intravenously as needed, is used to alleviate rigidity (do not exceed
10 mg/kg/d due to hepatotoxicity risk). There is ongoing
controversy about the efficacy of these three agents as well as the
use of calcium channel blockers and benzodiazepines. ECT has
been used effectively in resistant cases. Clozapine has been used
with relative safety and fair success as an antipsychotic drug for
patients who have had NMS. The syndrome must be differentiated
from acute lethal catatonia, malignant hyperthermia, neurotoxic
syndromes (including AIDS), and a variety of other conditions such
as viral encephalitis, Wilson disease, central anticholinergic
syndrome, and hypertonic states (eg, tetany, strychnine poisoning).
Akathisia is the most common (about 20%) extrapyramidal
symptom. It usually occurs early in treatment (but may persist after
neuroleptics are discontinued) and is frequently mistaken for anxiety
or exacerbation of psychosis. It is characterized by a subjective
desire to be in constant motion followed by an inability to sit or
stand still and consequent pacing. It may induce suicidality or
feelings of fright, rage, terror, or sexual torment. Insomnia is often
present. It is crucial to educate patients in advance about these
potential side effects so that the patients do not misinterpret them as
signs of increased illness. In all cases, reevaluate the dosage
requirement or the type of neuroleptic drug. One should inquire also
about cigarette smoking, which in women has been associated with
an increased incidence of akathisia. Antiparkinsonism medications
(such as trihexyphenidyl, 2–5 mg orally three times daily) may be
helpful, but first-line treatment often includes a benzodiazepine (such
as clonazepam 0.5–1 mg orally three times daily). In resistant cases,
symptoms may be alleviated by propranolol, 30–80 mg/d orally,
diazepam, 5 mg orally three times daily, or amantadine, 100 mg
orally three times daily.
Acute dystonias usually occur early, although a late (tar-dive)
occurrence is reported in patients (mostly men after several years of
therapy) who previously had early severe dystonic reactions and a
mood disorder (see below). Younger patients are at higher risk for
acute dystonias. The most common signs are bizarre muscle spasms
of the head, neck, and tongue. Frequently present are torticollis,
oculogyric crises, swallowing or chewing difficulties, and masseter
spasms. Laryngospasm is particularly dangerous. Back, arm, or leg
muscle spasms are occasionally reported. Diphenhydramine, 50 mg
intramuscularly, is effective for the acute crisis; one should then give
benztropine mesylate, 2 mg orally twice daily, for several weeks,
and then discontinue gradually, since few of the extrapyramidal
symptoms require long-term use of the antiparkinsonism
medications (all of which are about equally efficacious—though
trihexyphenidyl tends to be mildly stimulating and benztropine mildly
sedating).
Drug-induced parkinsonism is indistinguishable from idiopathic
parkinsonism, but it is reversible, occurs later in treatment than the
preceding extrapyramidal symptoms, and in some cases appears
after neuroleptic withdrawal. The condition includes the typical signs
of apathy and reduction of facial and arm movements (akinesia,
which can mimic depression), festinating gait, rigidity, loss of
postural reflexes, and pill-rolling tremor. AIDS patients seem
particularly vulnerable to extrapyramidal side effects. High-potency
neuroleptics often require antiparkinsonism medications (see Table
24–6). The neuroleptic dosage should be reduced, and immediate
relief can be achieved with antiparkinsonism medications in the
same dosages as above. After 4–6 weeks, these antiparkinsonism
medications can often be discontinued with no recurrent symptoms.
In any of the extrapyramidal symptoms, amantadine, 100–400 mg
orally daily, may be used instead of the anti-parkinsonism
medications. Neuroleptic-induced catatonia is similar to catatonic
stupor with rigidity, drooling, urinary incontinence, and cogwheeling.
It usually responds slowly to withdrawal of the offending medication
and use of anti-parkinsonism agents.
Tardive dyskinesia is a syndrome of abnormal involuntary
stereotyped movements of the face, mouth, tongue, trunk, and limbs
that may occur after months or (usually) years of treatment with
neuroleptic agents. The syndrome affects 20–35% of patients who
have undergone long-term neuroleptic therapy. Predisposing factors
include older age, many years of treatment, cigarette smoking, and
diabetes mellitus. Pineal calcification is higher in this condition by a
margin of 3:1. There are no clearcut differences among the
antipsychotic medications in the development of tardive dyskinesia.
(Although the atypical antipsychotics appear to offer a lower risk of
tardive dyskinesia, the CATIE study did not address their long-term
effects.) Early manifestations of tardive dyskinesia include fine
worm-like movements of the tongue at rest, difficulty in sticking out
the tongue, facial tics, increased blink frequency, or jaw movements
of recent onset. Later manifestations may include bucco-linguo-
masticatory movements, lip smacking, chewing motions, mouth
opening and closing, disturbed gag reflex, puffing of the cheeks,
disrupted speech, respiratory distress, or choreoathetoid
movements of the extremities (the last being more prevalent in
younger patients). The symptoms do not necessarily worsen and in
rare cases may lessen even though neuroleptic medications are
continued. The dyskinesias do not occur during sleep and can be
voluntarily suppressed for short periods. Stress and movements in
other parts of the body will often aggravate the condition.
Early signs of dyskinesia must be differentiated from those
reversible signs produced by ill-fitting dentures or nonneuroleptic
medications such as levodopa, TCAs, anti-parkinsonism agents,
anticonvulsants, and antihistamines. Other neurologic conditions
such as Huntington chorea can be differentiated by history and
examination.
The emphasis should be on prevention. Use the least amount of
neuroleptic drug necessary to mute the psychotic symptoms, and
use atypical antipsychotics as first line agents. Detect early
manifestations of dyskinesias. When these occur, stop
anticholinergic medications and gradually discontinue neuroleptic
medications, if clinically feasible. Weight loss and cachexia
sometimes appear on withdrawal of neuroleptics. In an
indeterminate number of cases, the dyskinesias will remit. Keep the
patient off the medications until reemergent psychotic symptoms
dictate their resumption, at which point they are restarted in low
doses and gradually increased until there is clinical improvement. If
neuroleptic medications are restarted, clozapine and olanzapine
appear to offer less risk of recurrence. The use of adjunctive agents
such as benzodiazepines or lithium may help directly or indirectly by
allowing control of psychotic symptoms with a low dosage of
neuroleptics. If the dyskinesic syndrome recurs and it is necessary
to continue neuroleptic medications to control psychotic symptoms,
informed consent should be obtained. Benzodiazepines, buspirone
(in doses of 15–60 mg/d orally), phosphatidylcholine, clonidine,
calcium channel blockers, vitamin E, omega-3 fatty acids, and
propranolol all have had limited usefulness in treating the dyskinetic
side effects.
B. Social
Environmental considerations are most important in the individual
with a chronic illness, who usually has a history of repeated
hospitalizations, a continued low level of functioning, and symptoms
that never completely remit. Family rejection and work failure are
common. In these cases, board and care homes staffed by
personnel experienced in caring for psychiatric patients are most
important. There is frequently an inverse relationship between
stability of the living situation and the amounts of required
antipsychotic medications, since the most salutary environment is
one that reduces stimuli. Nonresidential self-help groups such as
Recovery, Inc., should be utilized whenever possible. They provide
a setting for sharing, learning, and mutual support and are frequently
the only social involvement with which this type of patient is
comfortable. Vocational rehabilitation and work agencies (eg,
Goodwill Industries, Inc.) provide assessment, training, and job
opportunities at a level commensurate with the person's clinical
condition.
C. Psychological
The need for psychotherapy varies markedly depending on the
patient's current status and history. In a person with a single
psychotic episode and a previously good level of adjustment,
supportive psychotherapy may help the patient reintegrate the
experience, gain some insight into antecedent problems, and
become a more self-observant individual who can recognize early
signs of stress. Insight-oriented psychotherapy is often
counterproductive in this type of disorder. Research suggests that
cognitive behavioral therapy—in conjunction with medication
management—may have some efficacy in the treatment of
symptoms of schizophrenia. Cognitive behavioral therapy for
schizophrenia involves helping the individual challenge psychotic
thinking and alters response to hallucinations. Similarly, a form of
psychotherapy called acceptance and commitment therapy has
shown value in helping prevent hospitalizations in schizophrenia.
Cognitive remediation therapy is another approach to treatment that
shows promise in helping schizophrenics become better able to
focus their disorganized thinking. Family therapy may also help
alleviate the patient's stress and to assist relatives in coping with the
patient.
D. Behavioral
Behavioral techniques (see above) are most frequently used in
therapeutic settings such as day treatment centers, but there is no
reason why they cannot be incorporated into family situations or any
therapeutic setting. Many behavioral techniques (eg, positive
reinforcement—whether it be a word of praise or an approving nod
—after some positive behavior), can be a powerful instrument for
helping a person learn behaviors that will facilitate social
acceptance. Music from portable digital players with earphones is
one of many ways to divert the patient's attention from auditory
hallucinations.
 Prognosis
In any psychosis, in the large majority of patients the prognosis is
excellent for alleviation of positive symptoms such as hallucinations
or delusions treated with medication. Negative symptoms such as
diminished affect and sociability are much more difficult to treat but
appear responsive to atypical antipsychotics. Unavailability of
structured work situations and lack of family therapy are two other
reasons why the prognosis is so guarded in such a large percentage
of schizophrenic patients. Psychosis connected with a history of
serious drug abuse has a guarded prognosis because of the central
nervous system damage, usually from the medications themselves
and associated medical illnesses.
Ellinger LK et al. Efficacy of metformin and topiramate in
prevention and treatment of second-generation antipsychotic-
induced weight gain. Ann Pharmacother. 2010 Apr;44(4): 668–
79. [PMID: 20233913]
 
Hasnain M et al. Metabolic syndrome associated with
schizophrenia and atypical antipsychotics. Curr Diab Rep. 2010
Jun;10(3):209–16. [PMID: 20425584]
 
Ray WA et al. Atypical antipsychotic drugs and the risk of sudden
cardiac death. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jan 15;360(3):225–35.
[PMID: 19144938]
 
Swartz MS et al. What CATIE found: results from the
schizophrenia trial. Psychiatr Serv. 2008 May;59(5):500–6.
[PMID: 18451005]
 
MOOD DISORDERS (Depression & Mania)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Present in most depressions:
 Mood varies from mild sadness to intense feelings of guilt,
worthlessness, and hopelessness.
 Difficulty in thinking, including inability to concentrate,
ruminations, and lack of decisiveness.
 Loss of interest, with diminished involvement in work and
recreation.
 Somatic complaints such as headache; disrupted, lessened, or
excessive sleep; loss of energy; change in appetite; decreased
sexual drive.
 Anxiety.
Present in some severe depressions:
 Psychomotor retardation or agitation.
 Delusions of a hypochondriacal or persecutory nature.
 Withdrawal from activities.
 Physical symptoms of major severity, eg, anorexia, insomnia,
reduced sexual drive, weight loss, and various somatic
complaints.
 Suicidal ideation.
Present in mania:
 Mood ranging from euphoria to irritability.
 Sleep disruption.
 Hyperactivity.
 Racing thoughts.
 Grandiosity.
 Variable psychotic symptoms.
 
General Considerations
Depression is extremely common, with up to 30% of primary care
patients having depressive symptoms. Depression may be the final
expression of (1) genetic factors (neurotransmitter dysfunction), (2)
developmental problems (personality problems, childhood events),
or (3) psychosocial stresses (divorce, unemployment). It frequently
presents in the form of somatic complaints with negative medical
workups. Although sadness and grief are normal responses to loss,
depression is not. Patients experiencing normal grief tend to
produce sympathy and sadness in the clinician caregiver; depression
often produces frustration and irritation in the clinician. Grief is
usually accompanied by intact self-esteem, whereas depression is
marked by a sense of guilt and worthlessness.
Mania is often combined with depression and may occur alone,
together with depression in a mixed episode, or in cyclic fashion
with depression.
 Clinical Findings
In general, there are four major types of depressions, with similar
symptoms in each group.
A. Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood
Depression may occur in reaction to some identifiable stressor or
adverse life situation, usually loss of a person by death (grief
reaction), divorce, etc; financial reversal (crisis); or loss of an
established role, such as being needed. Anger is frequently
associated with the loss, and this in turn often produces a feeling of
guilt. The disorder occurs within 3 months of the stressor and
causes significant impairment in social or occupational functioning.
The symptoms range from mild sadness, anxiety, irritability, worry,
lack of concentration, discouragement, and somatic complaints to
the more severe symptoms of frank depression.
B. Depressive Disorders
The subclassifications include major depressive disorder and
dysthymia.
1. Major depressive disorder—A major depressive disorder (eg,
“endogenous” unipolar disorder, melancholia) consists of at least
one episode of serious mood depression that occurs at any time of
life. Many consider a physiologic or metabolic aberration to be
causative. Complaints vary widely but most frequently include a loss
of interest and pleasure (anhedonia), withdrawal from activities, and
feelings of guilt. Also included are inability to concentrate, some
cognitive dysfunction, anxiety, chronic fatigue, feelings of
worthlessness, 
somatic 
complaints 
(unidentifiable 
somatic
complaints frequently indicate depression), loss of sexual drive, and
thoughts of death. Diurnal variation with improvement as the day
progresses is common. Vegetative signs that frequently occur are
insomnia, anorexia with weight loss, and constipation. Occasionally,
severe agitation and psychotic ideation (paranoid thinking, somatic
delusions) are present. These symptoms are more common in
depressed persons who are older than 50 years. Paranoid
symptoms may range from general suspiciousness to ideas of
reference with delusions. The somatic delusions frequently revolve
around feelings of impending annihilation or hypochondriacal beliefs
(eg, that the body is rotting away with cancer). Hallucinations are
uncommon.
Subcategories 
include major depression with atypical
features characterized by hypersomnia, overeating, lethargy, and
rejection sensitivity. Major depression with a seasonal onset
(seasonal affective disorder) is a dysfunction of circadian
rhythms that occurs more commonly in the winter months and is
believed to be due to decreased exposure to full-spectrum light.
Common symptoms include carbohydrate craving, lethargy,
hyperphagia, 
and 
hypersomnia. Major depression with
postpartum onset usually occurs 2 weeks to 6 months
postpartum.
Most women (up to 80%) experience some mild let-down of
mood in the postpartum period. For some of these (10–15%), the
symptoms are more severe and similar to those usually seen in
serious depression, with an increased emphasis on concerns related
to the baby (obsessive thoughts about harming it or inability to care
for it). When psychotic symptoms occur, there is frequently
associated sleep deprivation, volatility of behavior, and manic-like
symptoms. Postpartum psychosis is much less common (< 2%),
often occurs within the first 2 weeks, and requires early and
aggressive management. Biologic vulnerability with hormonal
changes and psychosocial stressors all play a role. The chances of a
second episode are about 25% and may be reduced with
prophylactic treatment.
2. Dysthymia—Dysthymia is a chronic depressive disturbance.
Sadness, loss of interest, and withdrawal from activities over a
period of 2 or more years with a relatively persistent course is
necessary for this diagnosis. Generally, the symptoms are milder but
longer-lasting than those in a major depressive episode.
3. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder—Depressive symptoms
occur during the late luteal phase (last 2 weeks) of the menstrual
cycle. (See also chapter 18)
C. Bipolar Disorders
Bipolar disorders consist of episodic mood shifts into mania, major
depression, hypomania, and mixed mood states. The ability of
bipolar disorder to mimic aspects of many other coincident major
mental health disorders and a high comorbidity with substance
abuse can make the initial diagnosis of bipolar disorder difficult.
1. Mania—A manic episode is a mood change characterized by
elation with hyperactivity, over involvement in life activities,
increased irritability, flight of ideas, easy distractibility, and little need
for sleep. The overenthusiastic quality of the mood and the
expansive behavior initially attract others, but the irritability, mood
lability with swings into depression, aggressive behavior, and
grandiosity usually lead to marked interpersonal difficulties.
Activities may occur that are later regretted, eg, excessive spending,
resignation from a job, a hasty marriage, sexual acting out, and
exhibitionistic behavior, with alienation of friends and family.
Atypical manic episodes can include gross delusions, paranoid
ideation of severe proportions, and auditory hallucinations usually
related to some grandiose perception. The episodes begin abruptly
(sometimes precipitated by life stresses) and may last from several
days to months. Spring and summer tend to be the peak periods.
Generally, the manic episodes are of shorter duration than the
depressive episodes. In almost all cases, the manic episode is part
of a broader bipolar (manic-depressive) disorder. Patients with four
or more discrete episodes of a mood disturbance in 1 year are
called “rapid cyclers.” (Substance abuse, particularly cocaine, can
mimic rapid cycling.) These patients have a higher incidence of
hypothyroidism. Manic patients differ from patients with
schizophrenia in that the former use more effective interpersonal
maneuvers, are more sensitive to the social maneuvers of others,
and are more able to utilize weakness and vulnerability in others to
their own advantage. Creativity has been positively correlated with
mood disorders, but the best work done is between episodes of
mania and depression.
2. Cyclothymic disorders—These are chronic mood disturbances
with episodes of depression and hypomania. The symptoms must
have at least a 2-year duration and are milder than those that occur
in depressive or manic episodes. Occasionally, the symptoms will
escalate into a full-blown manic or depressive episode, in which
case reclassification as bipolar I or bipolar II disorder would be
warranted.
D. Mood Disorders Secondary to Illness and Medications
Any illness, severe or mild, can cause significant depression.
Conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, stroke,
and chronic heart disease are particularly likely to be associated
with depression, as are other chronic illnesses. Depression is
common in cancer, as well, with a particularly high degree of
comorbidity in pancreatic cancer. Hormonal variations clearly play a
role in some depressions. Varying degrees of depression occur at
various times in schizophrenic disorders, central nervous system
disease, and organic mental states. Alcohol dependency frequently
coexists with serious depression.
The classic model of drug-induced depression occurs with the
use of reserpine, both in clinical settings and as a pharmacologic
probe in research settings. Corticosteroids and oral contraceptives
are commonly associated with affective changes. Antihypertensive
medications such as methyldopa, guanethidine, and clonidine have
been associated with the development of depressive syndromes, as
have digitalis and antiparkinsonism medications (eg, levodopa).
Interferons are strongly associated with depressed mood as a side
effect; consultation with a psychiatrist prior to prescribing these
agents is indicated in cases where there is a history of depression. It
is unusual for β-blockers to produce depression when given for
short periods, such as in the treatment of performance anxiety.
Sustained use of β-blockers for medical conditions such as
hypertension may produce depression in some patients, although
most individuals do not suffer this adverse effect and the data
supporting this association remain inconclusive. Infrequently,
disulfiram and anticholinesterase medications may be associated
with symptoms of depression. All stimulant use results in a
depressive syndrome when the drug is withdrawn. Alcohol,
sedatives, opiates, and most of the psychedelic drugs are
depressants and, paradoxically, are often used in self-treatment of
depression.
 Differential Diagnosis
Since depression may be a part of any illness—either reactively or
as a secondary symptom—careful attention must be given to
personal life adjustment problems and the role of medications (eg,
reserpine, corticosteroids, levodopa). Schizophrenia, partial
complex seizures, organic brain syndromes, panic disorders, and
anxiety disorders must be differentiated. Subtle thyroid dysfunction
must be ruled out.
 Complications
The most important complication is suicide, which often includes
some elements of aggression. Suicide rates in the general population
vary from 9 per 100,000 in Spain to 20 per 100,000 in the United
States to 58 per 100,000 in Hungary. In individuals with
depression, the lifetime risk rises to 10–15%. In patients with
bipolar disorder, the risk is higher, with up to 20% of individuals
dying of suicide. Men tend toward successful suicide, particularly in
older age groups, whereas women make more attempts with lower
mortality rates. An increased suicide rate is being observed in the
younger population, ages 15–35. Patients with cancer, respiratory
illnesses, AIDS, and those being maintained on hemodialysis have
higher suicide rates. Alcohol use is a significant factor in many
suicide attempts.
There are several groups of people who make suicide attempts.
One group includes those individuals with acute situational
problems. These individuals may be acutely distressed by a recent
breakup in a relationship or another type of disappointment. This
group also includes those who may not be diagnosed as having
depression but who are overwhelmed by a stressful situation often
with an aspect of public humiliation (eg, the man charged with child
molestation who hangs himself in his cell). A suicide attempt in such
cases may be an impulsive or aggressive act not associated with
significant depression. In such cases, a suicide attempt is clearly a
stratagem for controlling or hurting others or an attempted escape.
Another high-risk group includes individuals with severe
depression. Severe depression may be due to conditions such as
medical illness (eg, AIDS, whose victims have a suicide rate over
30 times that of the general population) or comorbid psychiatric
disorders (eg, panic disorders). Anxiety, panic, and fear are major
findings in suicidal behavior. A patient may seem to make a
dramatic improvement, but the lifting of depression may be due to
the patient's decision to commit suicide. Another high-risk group are
individuals with psychotic illness who tend not to verbalize their
concerns, are unpredictable, and are often successful in their suicide
attempt, although they make up only a small percentage of the total.
Finally, suicide is ten times more prevalent in patients with
schizophrenia than in the general population, and jumping from
bridges is a more common means of attempted suicide by
schizophrenics than by others. In one study of 100 jumpers, 47%
had schizophrenia.
The immediate goal of psychiatric evaluation is to assess the
current suicidal risk and the need for hospitalization versus
outpatient management. The intent is less likely to be truly suicidal,
for example, if small amounts of poison or medication were ingested
or scratching of wrists was superficial, if the act was performed in
the vicinity of others or with early notification of others, or if the
attempt was arranged so that early detection would be anticipated.
Alcohol, hopelessness, delusional thoughts, and complete or nearly
complete loss of interest in life or ability to experience pleasure are
all positively correlated with suicide attempts. Other risk factors are
previous attempts, a family history of suicide, medical or psychiatric
illness (eg, anxiety, depression, psychosis), male sex, older age,
contemplation of violent methods, a humiliating social stressor, and
drug use (including long-term sedative or alcohol use), which
contributes to impulsiveness or mood swings. Successful treatment
of the patient at risk for suicide cannot be achieved if the patient
continues to abuse drugs.
The patient's current mood status is best evaluated by direct
evaluation of plans and concerns about the future, personal
reactions to the attempt, and thoughts about the reactions of others.
Measurement of mood is often facilitated by using a standardized
instrument such as the Hamilton or Montgomery-Asberg rating
scales or the Patient Health Questionnaire-9. Such measures allow
for initial assessment as well as ongoing treatment tracking. The
patient's immediate resources should also be assessed—people
who can be significantly involved (most important), family support,
job situation, financial resources, etc.
If hospitalization is not indicated (eg, gestures, impulsive
attempts; see above), the clinician must formulate and institute a
treatment plan or make an adequate referral. Medication should be
dispensed in small amounts to at-risk patients. Although TCAs and
SSRIs are associated with an equal incidence of suicide attempts,
the risk of successful suicide is higher with TCA overdose. Guns
and medications should be removed from the patient's household.
Driving should be interdicted until the patient improves. The
problem is often worsened by the long-term complications of the
suicide attempt, eg, brain damage due to hypoxia, peripheral
neuropathies caused by staying for long periods in one position
causing nerve compressions, and medical or surgical problems such
as esophageal strictures and tendon dysfunctions.
The reasons for self-mutilation, most commonly wrist cutting
(but also autocastration, autoamputation, and autoenucleation,
which are associated with psychoses), may be very different from
the reasons for a suicide attempt. The initial treatment plan,
however, should presume suicidal ideation, and conservative
treatment should be initiated.
Sleep disturbances in the depressions are discussed below.
 Treatment of Depression
A. Medical
Depression associated with reactive disorders usually does not call
for drug therapy and can be managed by psychotherapy and the
passage of time. In severe cases—particularly when vegetative signs
are significant and symptoms have persisted for more than a few
weeks—antidepressant drug therapy is often effective. Drug
therapy is also suggested by a family history of major depression in
first-degree relatives or a past history of prior episodes.
The antidepressant medications may be conveniently classified
into three groups: (1) the newer antidepressants, including the
SSRIs and bupropion, duloxetine, venlafaxine, nefazodone, and
mirtazapine, (2) the TCAs and clinically similar medications, and (3)
the MAO inhibitors (see Table 25–8). These groups are described
in greater detail below. ECT is effective in all types of depression
and will also rapidly resolve a manic episode. It is also very
effective for postpartum depression. Megavitamin treatment,
acupuncture, and electrosleep are of unproved usefulness for any
psychiatric condition. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
has recently been approved by the FDA for individuals who have
failed one trial of an antidepressant and is being evaluated for wider
application.
Hospitalization is necessary if suicide is a major consideration or
if complex treatment modalities are required.
Drug selection is influenced by the history of previous responses
if that information is available. If a relative has responded to a
particular drug, this suggests that the patient may respond similarly.
If no background information is available, a drug such as sertraline,
25 mg orally daily and increasing gradually up to 200 mg, or
desipramine, starting with 50 mg orally and gradually increasing to
150 mg, can be selected and a full trial instituted. The medication
trial should be monitored for worsening mood or suicidal ideation
with patient assessments every 1–2 weeks until week 6. If
successful, the medication should be continued for 6–12 months at
the full therapeutic dose before tapering is considered.
Antidepressants should usually be continued indefinitely at full
dosage in individuals with a first episode of depression before the
age of 20 or after the age of 50, with more than two episodes after
age 40, at least one episode after age 50, or with three or more
total episodes. If the response is inadequate the best alternatives are
to switch to a second agent or to try augmenting the first agent
according to the STAR*D study. The latter course is often taken
when there has been at least a partial response to the initial drug. If
a second drug is tried, it does not appear to matter whether that
drug is from the same or different class. If the second drug fails or
augmentation was selected as the second step, the choices include
lithium (eg, 600–900 mg/d orally), buspirone (eg, 30–60 mg/d
orally), or thyroid medication (eg, liothyronine, 25 mcg/d orally).
Dysthymia is also treated in this way. The Agency for Health Care
Policy and Research has produced clinical practice guidelines that
outline one algorithm of treatment decisions (Figure 25–2).
Psychotic depression should be treated with a combination of an
antipsychotic such as olanzapine and an antidepressant such as an
SSRI at their usual doses. Mifepristone may have specific and early
activity against psychotic depression.
Major depression with atypical features or seasonal onset can be
treated with an MAO inhibitor or an SSRI with good results.
Figure 25–2. overview of treatment for depression.
(Reproduced from Agency for Health Care Policy and Research:
Depression in Primary Care. Vol. 2: Treatment of Major
Depression. United States Department of Health and Human
Services, 1993.)
 
Stimulants such as dextroamphetamine (5–30 mg/d orally) and
methylphenidate (10–45 mg/d orally) have enjoyed a resurgence of
interest for the short-term treatment of depression in medically ill
and geriatric patients. Their 50–60% efficacy rate is slightly below
that of other agents. The stimulants are notable for rapid onset of
action (hours) and a paucity of side effects (tachycardia, agitation)
in most patients. They are usually given in two divided doses early in
the day (eg, 7 am and noon) so as to avoid interfering with sleep.
These agents may also be useful as adjunctive agents in refractory
depression.
Caution Depressed patients may have suicidal thoughts, and the
amount of drug dispensed should be appropriately controlled. It
appears that in children and adolescent populations, antidepressants
may be associated with some slightly increased risk of suicidality,
but this diminishes by age 25. After that, antidepressants have
neutral or possibly protective effects until age 65 years or older
when they have protective effects. The older TCAs have a narrow
therapeutic index, and one advantage of the newer medications is
their wider margin of safety. Nonetheless, even with newer agents,
because of the possibility of suicidality early in antidepressant
treatment, close follow-up is indicated. In all cases of
pharmacologic management of depressed states, caution is
indicated until the risk of suicide is considered minimal.
1. SSRIs and atypical antidepressants—The chief advantages
of these agents are that they do not generally cause significant
cardiovascular or anticholinergic side effects, and they have much
lower lethality in overdose compared to TCAs. The SSRIs include
fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, fluvoxamine, citalopram and its
enantiomer escitalopram. The atypical antidepressants are
bupropion, which appears to exert its effect through the dopamine
neurotransmitter system; venlafaxine and duloxetine, both of which
inhibit the reuptake of both serotonin and norepinephrine;
nefazodone, which blocks the reuptake of serotonin but also inhibits
the 5-HT2 postsynaptic receptors; and mirtazapine, which
selectively blocks presynaptic α2-adrenergic receptors and
enhances both noradrenergic and serotonergic transmission. All of
these antidepressants are effective in the treatment of depression,
both typical and atypical. The SSRI medications have been effective
in the treatment of panic attacks, bulimia, generalized anxiety
disorder, OCD, and PTSD. They do not seem to be as clearly
effective in some pain syndromes as the TCAs, although venlafaxine
may have some efficacy in the treatment of neuropathic pain, and
duloxetine is FDA-approved for the treatment of diabetic peripheral
neuropathy and fibromyalgia.
Most of the medications in this group tend to be activating and
are given in the morning so as not to interfere with sleep. Some
patients, however, may have sedation, requiring that the drug be
given at bedtime. This reaction occurs most commonly with
paroxetine, fluvoxamine, and mirtazapine. The SSRIs can be given
in once-daily dosage. Nefazodone and venlafaxine are usually given
twice daily. Bupropion and venlafaxine are available in extended-
release formulations and can be given once daily. There is usually
some delay in response; fluoxetine, for example, requires 2–6
weeks to act in depression, 4–8 weeks to be effective in panic
disorder, and 6–12 weeks in treatment of OCD. The starting dose
(10 mg) is given for 1 week before increasing to the average daily
oral dose of 20 mg for depression, while OCD may require up to
80 mg daily. Some patients, particularly the elderly, may tolerate
and benefit from as little as 10 mg/d or every other day. The other
SSRIs have shorter half-lives and a lesser effect on hepatic
enzymes, which reduces their impact on the metabolism of other
medications (thus not increasing significantly the serum
concentrations of other medications as much as fluoxetine). The
shorter half-lives also allow for more rapid clearing if adverse side
effects appear. Venlafaxine appears to be more effective with doses
> 200 mg/d orally, although some individuals respond to doses as
low as 75 mg/d.
The side effects common to all of these medications are
headache, nausea, tinnitus, insomnia, and nervousness. Akathisia
has been common with the SSRIs; other extrapyramidal symptoms
(eg, dystonias) have occurred infrequently but particularly in
withdrawal states. Because SSRIs affect platelet serotonin levels,
abnormal bleeding can occur. Sertraline and citalopram appear to
be the safest agents in this class when used with warfarin. Sexual
side effects of erectile dysfunction, retrograde ejaculation, and
dysorgasmia are very common with the SSRIs. Oral
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (such as sildenafil, 25–50 mg;
tadalafil, 5-20 mg; or vardenafil, 10-20 mg taken 1 hour prior to
sexual activity) can improve erectile dysfunction in some patients.
Adjunctive bupropion (75–150 mg orally daily) may also help with
restoring erectile function. Cyproheptadine, 4 mg orally prior to
sexual activity, may be helpful in countering drug-induced
anorgasmia. The SSRIs are strong serotonin uptake blockers and
may in high dosage or in combination with MAO inhibitors,
including the antiparkinsonian drug selegiline, cause a “serotonin
syndrome.” This syndrome is manifested by rigidity, hyperthermia,
autonomic instability, myoclonus, confusion, delirium, and coma.
This syndrome can be a particularly troublesome problem in the
elderly. Several cases of angina have been reported in association
with SSRIs. However, current research indicates that SSRIs are
safer agents to use than TCAs in patients with cardiac disease. A
study has found that sertraline is a safe and effective antidepressant
treatment in patients with acute myocardial infarction or unstable
angina.
Withdrawal syndromes have been reported for the SSRIs and
venlafaxine. These include dysphoric mood, agitation, and a flulike
state. These medications should be discontinued gradually over a
period of weeks or months to reduce the risk of withdrawal
phenomena.
Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, sertraline, venlafaxine, and citalopram in
customary antidepressant doses do not appear to increase the risk
of major fetal malformation when used during pregnancy. At the
same time, paroxetine may be associated with a twofold increased
risk of cardiac abnormalities. A 2007 study of SSRI use in the first
trimester suggests that despite the association of specific
medications with specific congenital defects, the absolute risk of
rare defects is low. Postpartum developmental effects of
antidepressants have been thought to be minimal, however, this
question calls for ongoing investigation. A 2010 study of depressed
women in their third trimester of pregnancy, comparing those who
were treated with an SSRI versus those who were untreated,
suggests the SSRI may have relatively delayed gross motor
development at 6 months. Peripartum effects may be a concern and
are documented anecdotally in the literature. Maternal depression in
pregnancy by itself carries its own risks to the mother and fetus and
has been linked to low birth weight and preterm delivery.
Postpartum effects of prenatal depression have not been studied.
The decision to use SSRIs and other psychotropic agents during
pregnancy and postpartum must be based on a thorough risk-
benefit analysis for each individual.
Venlafaxine is reported to be well-tolerated without significant
anticholinergic or cardiovascular side effects. Nausea, nervousness,
and profuse sweating appear to be the major side effects.
Venlafaxine appears to have few drug-drug interactions. It does
require monitoring of blood pressure because dose-related
hypertension may develop in some individuals. Desvenlafaxine, a
newer form of the drug, is started at its target dose of 50 mg/d
orally and does not require upward titration. Duloxetine may also
result in small increases in blood pressure. Common side effects
include dry mouth, dizziness, and fatigue. Inhibitors of 1A2 and 2D6
may increase duloxetine levels with a risk of toxicity.
Nefazodone appears to lack the anticholinergic effects of the
TCAs and the agitation sometimes induced by SSRIs. Nefazodone
should not be given with terfenadine, astemizole, or cisapride.
(Terfenadine, astemizole, and cisapride are not commercially
available in the United States.) Because nefazodone inhibits the
liver's cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzymes, concurrent use of these
medications can lead to serious QT prolongation, ventricular
tachycardia, or death. Through the same mechanism of enzyme
inhibition, nefazodone can elevate cyclosporine levels sixfold to
tenfold. Nefazodone has been given an FDA warning because it has
been implicated in liver failure in rare cases. Pretreatment and
ongoing monitoring of liver enzymes are indicated.
Mirtazapine is thought to enhance central noradrenergic and
serotonergic activity with minimal sexual side effects compared with
the SSRIs. Its action as a potent antagonist of histaminergic
receptors may make it a useful agent for patients with depression
and insomnia. It is also an effective antiemetic due to its antagonism
of the 5-HT3 receptor. Its most common adverse side effects
include somnolence, increased appetite, weight gain, lipid
abnormalities, and dizziness. There have been reports of
agranulocytosis in 2 of 2796 patients. Although it is metabolized by
P450 isoenzymes, it is not an inhibitor of this system. It is given in a
single oral dose at bedtime starting at 15 mg and increasing in 15-
mg increments every week or every other week up to 45 mg.
2. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and clinically similar
medications—TCAs were the mainstay of drug therapy for
depression for many years. They have also been effective in panic
disorders, pain syndromes, and anxiety states. Specific ones have
been effective in OCD (clomipramine), enuresis (imipramine),
psychotic depression (amoxapine), and reduction of craving in
cocaine withdrawal (desipramine).
TCAs are characterized more by their similarities than by their
differences. There is a lag in clinical response for up to several
weeks, largely the result of anticholinergic side effects that prevent
rapid increase in dosage. They tend to affect both serotonin and
norepinephrine reuptake; some medications act mainly on the
former and others principally on the latter neurotransmitter system.
Individuals receiving the same dosages vary markedly in therapeutic
drug levels achieved (elderly patients require smaller doses), and
determination of plasma drug levels is helpful when clinical response
has been disappointing. Nortriptyline is usually effective when
plasma levels are between 50 and 150 ng/mL; imipramine at plasma
levels of 200–250 ng/mL; and desipramine at plasma levels of 100–
250 ng/mL. High blood levels are not more effective than moderate
levels and may be counterproductive (eg, delirium, seizures).
Patients with gastrointestinal side effects benefit from plasma level
monitoring to assess absorption of the drug. Most TCAs can be
given in a single dose at bedtime, starting at fairly low doses (eg,
nortriptyline 25 mg orally) and increasing by 25 mg every several
days as tolerated until the therapeutic response is achieved (eg,
nortriptyline, 100–150 mg) or to maximum dose if necessary (eg,
nortriptyline, 150 mg). The most common cause of treatment failure
is an inadequate trial. A full trial consists of giving maximum daily
dosage for at least 6 weeks. Because of marked anticholinergic and
sedating side effects, clomipramine is started at a low dose (25
mg/d orally) and increased slowly in divided doses up to 100 mg/d,
held at that level for several days, and then gradually increased as
necessary up to 250 mg/d. Any of the TCA-like medications should
be started at very low doses (eg, 10–25 mg/d) and increased
slowly in the treatment of panic disorder.
The TCAs have anticholinergic side effects to varying degrees
(amitriptyline 100 mg is equivalent to atropine 5 mg). One must be
particularly wary of the effect in elderly men with prostatic
hyperplasia. The anticholinergic effects also predispose to other
medical problems such as constipation, heat stroke, or dental
problems from xerostomia. Orthostatic hypotension is fairly
common, is not dose-dependent and may not remit with time on
medication; this may predispose to falls and hip fractures in the
elderly. Cardiac effects of the TCAs are functions of the
anticholinergic effect, direct myocardial depression (quinidine-like
effect), and interference with adrenergic neurons. These factors may
produce altered rate, rhythm, and contractility, particularly in
patients with preexisting cardiac disease, such as bundle-branch or
bifascicular block. Electrocardiographic changes range from benign
ST segment and T wave changes and sinus tachycardia to a variety
of complex and serious arrhythmias, the latter requiring a change in
medication. Because TCAs have class I antiar-rhythmic effects,
they should be used with caution in patients with ischemic heart
disease, arrhythmias, or conduction disturbances. SSRIs or the
atypical antidepressants are better initial choices for this population.
TCAs lower the seizure threshold so this is of particular concern in
patients with a propensity for seizures (eg, previous head injury,
alcohol withdrawal). Loss of libido and erectile, ejaculatory, and
orgasmic dysfunction are fairly common and can compromise
compliance. Trazodone rarely causes priapism (1 in 9000), but
when it occurs, it requires treatment within 12 hours (epinephrine
1:1000 injected into the corpus cavernosum). Delirium, agitation,
and mania are infrequent complications of the TCAs but can occur.
Sudden discontinuation of some of these medications can produce
“cholinergic rebound,” manifested by headaches and nausea with
abdominal cramps. Overdoses of TCAs are often serious because
of the narrow therapeutic index and quinidine-like effects (see
Chapter 38).
3. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors—The MAO inhibitors are
generally used as third-line medications for depression (after a
failure of SSRIs, TCAs, or the atypical antidepressants) because of
the dietary and other restrictions required (see below and Table
25–7). They should be considered third-line medications for
refractory panic disorder and depression; however, this hierarchy
has become more flexible since MAO inhibitor skin patches
(selegiline) have become available. They deliver the MAO inhibitor
to the bloodstream bypassing the gastrointestinal tract so that
dietary restrictions are not necessary in the lowest dosage strength
(6 mg/24 h).
 
Table 25–7. Principal dietary restrictions in MAOI use.
 
1. Cheese, except cream cheese and cottage cheese and
fresh yogurt
2. Fermented or aged meats such as bologna, salami
3. Broad bean pods such as Chinese bean pods
4. Liver of all types
5. Meat and yeast extracts
6. Red wine, sherry, vermouth, cognac, beer, ale
7. Soy sauce, shrimp paste, sauerkraut
MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitor.
Oral MAO inhibitors are administered in gradual stepwise
dosage and may be given in the morning or evening, depending
upon their effect on sleep. They tend to take effect in a fairly low
dosage range (Table 25–8). Blood levels are not congruent with
therapeutic response.
The MAO inhibitors commonly cause symptoms of orthostatic
hypotension (which may persist) and sympathomimetic effects of
tachycardia, sweating, and tremor. Nausea, insomnia (often
associated with intense afternoon drowsiness), and sexual
dysfunction are common. Trazodone, 25–75 mg orally at bedtime,
may ameliorate the MAO-induced insomnia. Central nervous
system effects include agitation and toxic psychoses. Dietary
limitations (see Table 25–7) and abstinence from drug products
containing 
phenylpropanolamine, 
phenylephrine, 
meperidine,
dextromethorphan, and pseudoephedrine are mandatory for MAO-
A type inhibitors (those marketed for treatment of depression),
since the reduction of available MAO leaves the patient vulnerable
to exogenous amines (eg, tyramine in foodstuffs).
Treatment for a resultant hypertensive crisis has been the same as
for pheochromocytoma (see Chapter 26), but there have been
reports of success with nifedipine, 10 mg chewed and placed under
the tongue, normalizing blood pressure in 1–5 minutes. The
restrictions on the proscribed foodstuffs and sympathomimetic
medications are in effect during treatment and for 2–3 weeks after
cessation of therapy. Termination of therapy with MAO inhibitors
may be associated with anxiety, agitation, cognitive slowing, and
headache. Very gradual withdrawal and short-term benzodiazepine
therapy will ameliorate symptoms.
4. Switching and combination therapy—If the therapeutic
response has been poor after an adequate trial with the chosen
drug, the diagnosis should be reassessed. Assuming that the trial has
been adequate and the diagnosis is correct, a trial with a second
drug is appropriate. In switching from one group to another, an
adequate “washout time” must be allowed. This is critical in certain
situations—eg, in switching from an MAO inhibitor to a TCA, allow
2–3 weeks between stopping one drug and starting another; in
switching from an SSRI to an MAO inhibitor, allow 4–5 weeks. In
switching within groups—eg, from one TCA to another
(amitriptyline to desipramine, etc)—no washout time is needed, and
one can rapidly decrease the dosage of one drug while increasing
the other. As described earlier, adjunctive treatment with
buproprion, lithium, or thyroid hormone may be helpful in
depression. The adjunctive use of low-dose atypical anti-psychotics
such as aripiprazole, olanzapine, and risperidone in the treatment of
patients with refractory depression is supported by recent research.
The side effect risk is the same as when treating psychosis. The
FDA has approved aripiprazole for this purpose. Adding an
atypical agent requires monitoring body mass index, lipids, and
glucose. Combining two antidepressants, or adding an antipsychotic
to an antidepressant, requires caution and is usually reserved for
clinicians who feel comfortable managing this or after psychiatric
consultation.
5. Maintenance and tapering—When clinical relief of symptoms
is obtained, medication is continued for 12 months in the effective
maintenance dosage, which is the dosage required in the acute
stage. The full dosage should be continued indefinitely when the
individual has a first episode before age 20 or after age 50, is over
age 40 with two episodes, at least one episode after age 50, or has
had three episodes at any age. Major depression should often be
considered a chronic disease. If the medication is being tapered, it
should be done gradually over several months, monitoring closely
for relapse.
6. Drug interactions—Interactions with other medications are
listed in Table 25–9.
7. Electroconvulsive therapy—ECT causes a generalized central
nervous system seizure (peripheral convulsion is not necessary) by
means of electric current. The key objective is to exceed the seizure
threshold, which can be accomplished by a variety of means. The
mechanism of action is not known, but it is thought to involve major
neurotransmitter responses at the cell membrane. Electrical current
insufficient to cause a seizure produces no therapeutic benefit.
ECT is the most effective (about 70–85%) treatment of severe
depression—particularly the delusions and agitation commonly seen
with depression in the elderly. It is indicated when medical
conditions preclude the use of antidepressants, nonresponsiveness
to these medications, and extreme suicidality. Comparative
controlled studies of ECT in severe depression show that it is more
effective than pharmacotherapy. It is also effective in the manic
disorders and psychoses during pregnancy (when medications may
be contraindicated). It has not been shown to be helpful in chronic
schizophrenic disorders, and it is generally not used in acute
schizophrenic episodes unless medications are not effective and it is
urgent that the psychosis be controlled (eg, a catatonic stupor
complicating an acute medical condition).
 
Table 25–8. Commonly used antidepressants.
 
14, strong effect; 1, weak effect.
2Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
3Wellbutrin XL is a once-daily form of bupropion. Bupropion is still
available as immediate release, and, if used, no single dose should
exceed 150 mg.
4200 mg twice daily.
SSRIs, serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors.
 
Table 25–9. Antidepressant drug interactions with other
medications.
 
 
 
Drug
Effects
Tricyclic and other non-MAOI antidepressants
Antacids
Decreased absorption of
antidepressants
Anticoagulants
Increased hypoprothrombinemic
effect
Cimetidine
Increased antidepressant blood
levels and psychosis
Clonidine
Decreased antihypertensive
effect
Digitalis
Increased incidence of heart
block
Disulfiram
Increased antidepressant blood
levels
Guanethidine
Decreased antihypertensive
effect
Haloperidol
Increased clomipramine levels
Insulin
Decreased blood sugar
Lithium
Increased lithium levels with
fluoxetine
Methyldopa
Decreased antihypertensive
effect
Other anticholinergic
medications
Marked anticholinergic
responses
Phenytoin
Increased blood levels
Procainamide
Decreased ventricular
conduction
Procarbazine
Hypertensive crisis
Propranolol
Increased hypotension
Quinidine
Decreased ventricular
conduction
Rauwolfia derivatives
Increased stimulation
Sedatives
Increased sedation
Sympathomimetic
medications
Increased pressor effect
Terfenadine,1
astemizole,1 cisapride1 Torsades de pointes
MAOIs
Antihistamines
Increased sedation
Belladonna-like
medications
Increased blood pressure
Dextromethorphan
Same as meperidine
Guanethidine
Decreased blood pressure
Insulin
Decreased blood sugar
Levodopa
Increased blood pressure
Meperidine
Increased agitation, seizures,
coma, death
Methyldopa
Decreased blood pressure
Pseudoephedrine
Hypertensive crisis (increased
blood pressure)
Reserpine
Increased blood pressure and
temperature
Succinylcholine
Increased neuromuscular
blockade
Sulfonylureas
Decreased blood sugar
Sympathomimetic
medications
Increased blood pressure
1Terfenadine, astemizole, and cisapride are not commercially available in
the United States.
MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
The most common side effects are memory disturbance and
headache. Memory loss or confusion is usually related to the
number and frequency of ECT treatments and proper oxygenation
during treatment. Unilateral ECT is associated with less memory
loss than bilateral ECT. Some memory loss is occasionally
permanent, but most memory faculties return to full capacity within
several weeks. There have been reports that lithium administration
concurrent with ECT resulted in greater memory loss.
Increased intracranial pressure is a serious contraindication.
Other problems such as cardiac disorders, aortic aneurysms,
bronchopulmonary disease, and venous thrombosis are relative
contraindications and must be evaluated in light of the severity of the
medical problem versus the need for ECT. Serious complications
arising from ECT occur in < 1 in 1000 cases. Most of these
problems are cardiovascular or respiratory in nature (eg, aspiration
of gastric contents). Poor patient understanding and lack of
acceptance of the technique by the public are the biggest obstacles
to the use of ECT.
8. Phototherapy—Phototherapy is used in major depression with
seasonal onset. It consists of exposure (at a 3-foot distance) to a
light source of 2500 lux for 2 hours daily. Light visors are an
adaptation that provides greater mobility and an adjustable light
intensity. The dosage varies, with some patients requiring morning
and night exposure. One effect is alteration of biorhythm through
melatonin mechanisms.
9. Experimental treatments—In preliminary studies, transcranial
magnetic stimulation appears to be effective in nonpsychotic
depression. Its use in this condition has been approved by the FDA
for individuals who have not responded to an antidepressant. It is
usually delivered in a course of 16–20 sessions over 1 month. Vagal
nerve stimulation has shown some promise in extremely refractory
cases and is approved by the FDA but has not been approved by
many insurers.
B. Psychological
It is seldom possible to engage an individual in penetrating
psychotherapeutic endeavors during the acute stage of a severe
depression. While medications may be taking effect, a supportive
approach to strengthen existing coping mechanisms and appropriate
consideration of the patient's continuing need to function at work, to
engage in recreational activities, etc, are necessary as the severity of
the depression lessens. If the patient is not seriously depressed, it is
often quite appropriate to initiate intensive psychotherapeutic
efforts, since flux periods are a good time to effect change. A
catharsis of repressed anger and guilt may be beneficial. Therapy
during or just after the acute stage may focus on coping techniques,
with some practice of alternative choices. Depression-specific
psychotherapies help improve self-esteem, increase assertiveness,
and lessen dependency. Interpersonal psychotherapy for depression
has shown efficacy in the treatment of acute depression, helping
patients master interpersonal stresses and develop new coping
strategies. Cognitive behavioral therapy for depression addresses
patients’ patterns of negative thoughts, called cognitive distortions,
that lead to feelings of depression and anxiety. Treatment usually
includes homework assignments such as keeping a journal of
cognitive distortions and of positive responses to them. As
previously noted, numerous studies have shown that the
combination of drug therapy plus interpersonal psychotherapy or
cognitive behavioral therapy is more effective than either modality
alone. It is usually helpful to involve the spouse or other significant
family members early in treatment. Mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy has reduced relapse rates in several randomized controlled
trials. In two studies, it was as effective as maintenance medication
in preventing relapse. This therapy incorporates meditation and
teaches patients to distance themselves from depressive thinking. It
may be a preferable alternative for individuals who wish to have an
alternative to long-term medications to stay free of depressive
episodes.
C. Social
Flexible use of appropriate social services can be of major
importance in the treatment of depression. Since alcohol is often
associated with depression, early involvement in alcohol treatment
programs such as Alcoholics Anonymous can be important to future
success (see Alcohol Dependency and Abuse, below). The
structuring of daily activities during severe depression is often quite
difficult for the patient, and loneliness is often a major factor. The
help of family, employer, or friends is often necessary to mobilize
the patient who experiences no joy in daily activities and tends to
remain uninvolved and to deteriorate. Insistence on sharing activities
will help involve the patient in simple but important daily functions.
In some severe cases, the use of day treatment centers or support
groups of a specific type (eg, mastectomy groups) is indicated. It is
not unusual for a patient to have multiple legal, financial, and
vocational problems requiring legal and vocational assistance.
D. Behavioral
When depression is a function of self-defeating coping techniques
such as passivity, the role-playing approach can be useful.
Behavioral techniques, including desensitization, may be used in
problems such as phobias where depression is a by-product. When
depression is a regularly used interpersonal style, behavioral
counseling to family members or others can help in extinguishing the
behavior in the patient. Behavioral activation, a technique of
motivating depressed patients to begin engaging in pleasurable
activities, has been shown to be a useful depression-specific
psychotherapy.
 Treatment of Mania
Acute manic or hypomanic symptoms will respond to lithium or
valproic acid after several days of treatment, but it is increasingly
common to use atypical neuroleptics as adjunctive treatment or
monotherapy. High-potency benzodiazepines (eg, clonazepam) may
also be useful adjuncts in managing acute cases. Some
schizoaffective disorders and some cases of so-called schizophrenia
are probably atypical bipolar affective disorder, for which lithium
treatment may be effective.
A. Neuroleptics
Acute manic symptoms of agitation and psychosis may be treated
initially with the atypical antipsychotic olanzapine, (eg, 5–20 mg
orally), risperidone (2–3 mg orally), or aripiprazole (15–30 mg) in
conjunction with a benzodiazepine if indicated. Alternatively, when
behavioral control is immediately necessary, olanzapine in an
injectable form (2.5–10 mg intramuscularly) or haloperidol, 5–10
mg orally or intramuscularly repeated as needed until symptoms
subside, may be used. The dosage of the neuroleptic may be
gradually reduced after lithium or another mood stabilizer is started
(see below). Olanzapine is approved as a maintenance treatment for
bipolar disorder.
B. Clonazepam
Clonazepam can be an alternative or adjunct to a neuroleptic in
controlling acute behavioral symptoms. Clonazepam has the
advantage of causing no extrapyramidal side effects. Although 1–2
mg orally every 4–6 hours may be effective, up to 16 mg/d may be
necessary.
C. Lithium
As a prophylactic drug for bipolar affective disorder, lithium
significantly decreases the frequency and severity of both manic and
depressive attacks in about 70% of patients. A positive response is
more predictable if the patient has a low frequency of episodes (no
more than two per year with intervals free of psychopathology). A
positive response occurs more frequently in individuals who have
blood relatives with a diagnosis of manic or hypomanic attacks.
Patients who swing rapidly back and forth between manic and
depressive attacks (at least four cycles per year) usually respond
poorly to lithium prophylaxis initially, but some improve with
continued long-term treatment. Carbamazepine (see below) has
been used with success in this group.
In addition to its use in manic states, lithium is sometimes useful in
the prophylaxis of recurrent unipolar depressions (perhaps
undiagnosed bipolar disorder). Lithium may ameliorate nonspecific
aggressive behaviors and dyscontrol syndromes. The dosages are
the same as used in bipolar disorder. Most patients with bipolar
disease can be managed long-term with lithium alone, although
some will require continued or intermittent use of a neuroleptic,
antidepressant, or carbamazepine. An excellent resource for
information is the Lithium Information Center, Madison Institute of
Medicine, 7617 Mineral Point Road, Suite 300, Madison, WI
53717-1914, http://www.miminc.org/aboutlithinfoctr.html.
Before treatment, the clinical workup should include a medical
history and physical examination; complete blood count; T4,
thyroid-stimulating hormone, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum
creatinine, and serum electrolyte determinations; urinalysis; and
electrocardiography in patients over age 45 or with a history of
cardiac disease.
1. Dosage—The common starting dosage of lithium carbonate is
300 mg orally two or three times daily, with trough blood levels
measured after 5 days of treatment. In a small minority of patients, a
slow release form or units of different dosage may be required.
Lithium citrate is available as a syrup. The dosage is that required to
maintain blood levels in the therapeutic range. For acute attacks,
this ranges from 1 to 1.5 mEq/L. Although there is controversy
about the optimal long-term maintenance dose, many clinicians
reduce the acute level to 0.6–1 mEq/L in order to reduce side
effects. The dose required to meet this need will vary in different
individuals. For acute mania, doses of 1200–1800 mg/d are
generally recommended. Augmentation of antidepressants is usually
achieved with half of these doses. Once-a-day dosage is
acceptable, but most patients have less nausea when they take the
drug in divided doses with meals.
Lithium is readily absorbed, with peak serum levels occurring
within 1–3 hours and complete absorption in 8 hours. Half of the
total body lithium is excreted in 18–24 hours (95% in the urine).
Blood for lithium levels should be drawn 12 hours after the last
dose. Serum levels should be measured 5–7 days after initiation of
treatment and changes in dose. For maintenance treatment, lithium
levels should be monitored initially every 1–2 months but may be
measured every 6–12 months in stable, long-term patients. Levels
should be monitored more closely when there is any condition that
causes volume depletion (eg, diarrhea, dehydration, use of
diuretics).
2. Side effects—Mild gastrointestinal symptoms (take lithium with
food and in divided doses), fine tremors (treat with propranolol,
20–60 mg/d orally, only if persistent), slight muscle weakness, and
some degree of somnolence are early side effects that are usually
transient. Moderate polyuria (reduced renal responsiveness to
ADH) and polydipsia (associated with increased plasma renin
concentration) are often present. Potassium administration can blunt
this effect, as may once-daily dosing of lithium. Weight gain (often a
result of calories in fluids taken for polydipsia) and leukocytosis not
due to infection are fairly common.
Other side effects include goiter (3%; often euthyroid),
hypothyroidism (10%; concomitant administration of lithium and
iodide or lithium and carbamazepine enhances the hypothyroid and
goitrogenic effect of either drug), changes in the glucose tolerance
test toward a diabetes-like curve, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
(usually resolving about 8 weeks after cessation of lithium therapy),
nephrotic syndrome, edema, folate deficiency, and pseudotumor
cerebri (ophthalmoscopy is indicated if there are complaints of
headache or blurred vision). A metallic taste, hair loss, and Raynaud
phenomenon have been reported in a few cases. Thyroid and
kidney function should be checked at 3- to 4-month intervals. Most
of these side effects subside when lithium is discontinued; when
residual side effects exist, they are usually not serious. Most
clinicians treat lithium-induced hypothyroidism (more common in
women) with thyroid hormone while continuing lithium therapy.
Hypercalcemia and elevated parathyroid hormone levels occur in
some patients. Electrocardiographic abnormalities (principally T
wave flattening or inversion) may occur during lithium administration
but are not of major clinical significance. Sinoatrial block may
occur, particularly in the elderly. Other medications that prolong
intraventricular conduction, such as TCAs, must be used cautiously
in conjunction with lithium. Lithium impairs ventilatory function in
patients with airway obstruction. Lithium alone does not have a
significant effect on sexual function, but when combined with
benzodiazepines (clonazepam in most symptomatic patients) it
causes sexual dysfunction in about 50% of men. Lithium may
precipitate or exacerbate psoriasis in some patients.
Patients receiving long-term lithium therapy may have cogwheel
rigidity and, occasionally, other extrapyramidal signs. Lithium
potentiates the parkinsonian effects of haloperidol. Long-term
lithium therapy has also been associated with a relative lowering of
the level of memory and perceptual processing (affecting
compliance in some cases). Some impairment of attention and
emotional reactivity has also been noted. Lithium-induced delirium
with therapeutic lithium levels is an infrequent complication usually
occurring in the elderly and may persist for several days after serum
levels have become negligible. Encephalopathy has occurred in
patients receiving combined lithium and neuroleptic therapy and in
those who have cerebrovascular disease, thus requiring careful
evaluation of patients who develop neurotoxic signs at subtoxic
blood levels.
Some reports have suggested that the long-term use of lithium
may have adverse effects on kidney function (with interstitial
fibrosis, tubular atrophy, or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus).
Persistent polyuria should require an investigation of the kidney's
ability to concentrate urine. A rise in serum creatinine levels is an
indication for in-depth evaluation of kidney function and
consideration of alternative treatments if the individual can tolerate a
change. Incontinence has been reported in women, apparently
related to changes in bladder cholinergic-adrenergic balance.
Prospective studies suggest that the overall risk imposed by
lithium in pregnancy may be overemphasized. However, lithium
exposure in early pregnancy does increase the frequency of
congenital anomalies, especially Ebstein and other major
cardiovascular anomalies. For women who take psychotropic
medications who become pregnant, the decision to make a change
in medication is complex and requires informed consent regarding
the relative risks to the patient and fetus. Indeed, the risk of
untreated bipolar disorder carries its own risks for pregnancy.
Formula feeding should be considered in mothers taking lithium,
since concentration in breast milk is one-third to half that in serum.
Frank toxicity usually occurs at blood lithium levels > 2 mEq/L.
Because sodium and lithium are reabsorbed at the same loci in the
proximal renal tubules, any sodium loss (diarrhea, use of diuretics,
or excessive perspiration) results in increased lithium levels.
Symptoms and signs include vomiting and diarrhea, the latter
exacerbating the problem since more sodium is lost and more
lithium is absorbed. Other symptoms and signs, some of which may
not be reversible, include tremors, marked muscle weakness,
confusion, dysarthria, vertigo, choreoathetosis, ataxia, hyperreflexia,
rigidity, lack of coordination, myoclonus, seizures, opisthotonos,
and coma. Toxicity is more severe in the elderly, who should be
maintained on slightly lower serum levels. Lithium overdosage may
be accidental or intentional or may occur as a result of poor
monitoring.
Patients with massive ingestions of lithium or blood lithium levels
> 2.5 mEq/L should be treated with induced emesis and gastric
lavage. If kidney function is normal, osmotic and saline diuresis
increases renal lithium clearance. Urinary alkalinization is also
helpful, since sodium bicarbonate decreases lithium reabsorption in
the proximal tubule, as does acetazolamide as well. Aminophylline
potentiates the diuretic effect by increasing the clearance of lithium.
Medications affecting the distal loop have no effect on lithium
reabsorption. Blood lithium levels > 2.5 mEq/L (confirmed by
cerebrospinal fluid lithium levels) should be considered an indication
for hemodialysis.
Compliance with lithium therapy is adversely affected by the loss
of some hypomanic experiences valued by the patient. These
include social extroversion and a sense of heightened enjoyment in
many activities such as sex and business dealings, often with
increased productivity in the latter.
3. Drug interactions—Patients receiving lithium should use
diuretics with caution and only under close medical supervision. The
thiazide diuretics cause increased lithium reabsorption from the
proximal renal tubules, resulting in increased serum lithium levels
(Table 25–10), and adjustment of lithium intake must be made to
compensate for this. Reduce lithium dosage by 25–40% when the
patient is receiving 50 mg of hydrochlorothiazide daily. Potassium-
sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene) may also
increase serum lithium levels and require careful monitoring of
lithium levels. Loop diuretics (furosemide, ethacrynic acid,
bumetanide) do not appear to alter serum lithium levels. Concurrent
use of lithium and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors requires
a 50–75% reduction in lithium intake to achieve therapeutic lithium
levels.
 
Table 25–10. Lithium interactions with other medications.
 
 
 
Drug
Effects
ACE inhibitors
↑ Lithium levels
Fluoxetine
↑ Lithium levels
Ibuprofen
↑ Lithium levels
Indomethacin
↑ Lithium levels
Methyldopa
Rigidity, mutism,
fascicular twitching
Osmotic diuretics (urea, mannitol)
↑ Lithium excretion
Phenylbutazone
↑ Lithium levels
Potassium-sparing diuretics
(spironolactone, amiloride,
triamterene)
↑ Lithium levels
Sodium bicarbonate
↑ Lithium excretion
Succinylcholine
↑ Duration of action
of succinylcholine
Theophylline, aminophylline
↑ Lithium excretion
Thiazide diuretics
↑ Lithium levels
Valproic acid
↓ Lithium levels
COX-2 inhibitors
↑ Lithium levels
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; COX-2, cyclooxygenase-2.
D. Valproic Acid
Valproic acid (divalproex) is an antiseizure drug whose activity is at
least partially related to GABA neurotransmission. It is a first-line
treatment for mania because it has a broader index of safety than
lithium. This issue is particularly important in AIDS or other
medically ill patients prone to dehydration or malabsorption with
wide swings in serum lithium levels. Valproic acid has also been
used effectively in panic disorder and migraine headache. Treatment
is often started at a dose of 750 mg/d orally in divided doses, and
dosage is then titrated to achieve therapeutic serum levels. Oral
loading in acutely manic bipolar patients in an inpatient setting
(initiated at a dosage of 20 mg/kg/d) can safely achieve serum
therapeutic levels in 2–3 days. Concomitant use of aspirin may
increase valproate levels, carbamazepine or phenytoin may
decrease valproate levels, while warfarin levels may be elevated by
valproate. Gastrointestinal symptoms and weight gain are the main
side effects. Liver function tests, complete blood counts, glucose
levels, and weight should be monitored, and significant teratogenic
effects are a concern so pregnancy should be ruled out prior to
initiation.
E. Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine, an antiseizure drug that stabilizes the activity of cell
membranes, has been used with increasing frequency in the
treatment of bipolar patients who cannot be satisfactorily treated
with lithium (nonresponsive, excessive side effects, or rapid cycling).
It is often effective at 800–1600 mg/d orally. It has also been used
in the treatment of resistant depressions, alcohol withdrawal, and
hallucinations (in conjunction with neuroleptics) and in patients with
behavioral dyscontrol or panic attacks. It suppresses some phases
of kindling (see Stimulants) and has been used to treat residual
symptoms in previous stimulant abusers (eg, PTSD with impulse
control problems). Dose-related side effects include sedation and
ataxia. Dosages start at 400–600 mg orally daily and are increased
slowly to therapeutic levels. Skin rashes and a mild reduction in
white count are common. SIADH occurs rarely. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory medications (except aspirin), the antibiotics
erythromycin and isoniazid, the calcium channel blockers verapamil
and diltiazem (but not nifedipine), fluoxetine, propoxyphene, and
cimetidine all increase carbamazepine levels. Carbamazepine can be
effective in conjunction with lithium, although there have been
reports of reversible neurotoxicity with the combination.
Carbamazepine stimulates hepatic microsomal enzymes and so
tends to decrease levels of haloperidol and oral contraceptives. It
also lowers T4, free T4, and T3 levels. Cases of fetal malformation
(particularly spina bifida) have been reported along with growth
deficiency and developmental delay. Liver tests and complete blood
counts should be monitored in patients taking carbamazepine.
Oxcarbazepine, a derivative of carbamazepine, does not appear to
induce its own metabolism and is associated with fewer drug
interactions, although it may impose a higher risk of hyponatremia.
FDA-approved for partial seizures, oxcarbazepine may have
efficacy in acute mania. It appears to be a safer alternative to
carbamazepine due to its lower risk of hepatotoxicity.
F. Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine is thought to inhibit neuronal sodium channels and the
release of the excitatory amino acids, glutamate and aspartate. It is
FDA approved for long-term maintenance of bipolar disorder. Two
double-blind studies support its efficacy in the treatment of acute
bipolar depression as adjunctive therapy or as monotherapy. Its
metabolism is inhibited by coadministration of valproic acid—
doubling its half-life—and accelerated by hepatic enzyme-inducing
agents such as carbamazepine. More frequent mild side effects
include headache, dizziness, nausea, and diplopia. Rash occurring in
10% of patients is an indication for immediate cessation of dosing,
since lamotrigine has been associated with Stevens-Johnson
syndrome (1:1000) and, rarely, toxic epidermal necrolysis. Dosing
starts at 25–50 mg/d orally and is titrated upward slowly to
decrease the likelihood of rash. Slower titration and a lower total
dose are indicated for patients taking valproic acid.
 Prognosis
Reactive depressions are usually time-limited, and the prognosis
with treatment is good if a pathologic pattern of adjustment does not
intervene. Major affective disorders frequently respond well to a full
trial of drug treatment.
Mania and bipolar disorder have a good prognosis with adequate
treatment, although patient adherence to treatment is often quite
challenging.
ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics. ACOG
Practice Bulletin: Clinical management guidelines for obstetrician-
gynecologists number 92, April 2008 (replaces practice bulletin
number 87, November 2007). Use of psychiatric medications
during pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol. 2008
Apr;111(4):1001–20. [PMID: 18378767]
 
Ansari A et al. The psychopharmacology algorithm project at the
Harvard South Shore Program: an update on bipolar depression.
Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2010;18(1):36–55. [PMID: 20047460]
 
Belmaker RH et al. Major depressive disorder. N Engl J Med.
2008 Jan 3;358(1):55–68. [PMID: 18172175]
 
Kuyken W et al. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy to prevent
relapse in recurrent depression. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2008
Dec;76(6):966–78. [PMID: 19045965]
 
Parikh S et al. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
Treatments (CANMAT) clinical guidelines for the management of
major depressive disorder in adults. II. Psychotherapy alone or in
combination with antidepressant medication. J Affect Disord. 2009
Oct;117(Suppl 1):S15–25. [PMID: 19682749]
 
Rush AJ et al. Acute and longer-term outcomes in depressed
outpatients requiring one or several treatment steps: a STAR*D
report. Am J Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;163(11):1905–17. [PMID:
17074942]
 
Tess AV et al. Medical evaluation of patients undergoing electro-
convulsive therapy. N Engl J Med. 2009 Apr 2;360(14):1437–44.
[PMID: 19339723]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Depression. JAMA. 2008
Nov 12;300(18):2202. [PMID: 19001632]
 
Weissman MM et al. Remissions in maternal depression and child
psychopathology: STAR*D-child report. JAMA. 2006 Mar
22;295(12):1389–98. [PMID: 16551710]
 
Yonkers KA et al. The management of depression during
pregnancy: a report from the American Psychiatric Association and
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Gen
Hosp Psychiatry. 2009 Sep–Oct;31(5):403–13. [PMID:
19703633]
 
SLEEP DISORDERS
Sleep consists of two distinct states as shown by
electroencephalographic studies: (1) REM (rapid eye movement)
sleep, also called dream sleep, D state sleep, paradoxic sleep, and
(2) NREM (non-REM) sleep, also called S stage sleep, which is
divided into stages 1, 2, 3, and 4 and is recognizable by different
electroencephalographic patterns. Stages 3 and 4 are “delta” sleep.
Dreaming occurs mostly in REM and to a lesser extent in NREM
sleep.
Sleep is a cyclic phenomenon, with four or five REM periods
during the night accounting for about one-fourth of the total night's
sleep (1.5–2 hours). The first REM period occurs about 80–120
minutes after onset of sleep and lasts about 10 minutes. Later REM
periods are longer (15–40 minutes) and occur mostly in the last
several hours of sleep. Most stage 4 (deepest) sleep occurs in the
first several hours.
Age-related changes in normal sleep include an unchanging
percentage of REM sleep and a marked decrease in stage 3 and
stage 4 sleep, with an increase in wakeful periods during the night.
These normal changes, early bedtimes, and daytime naps play a role
in the increased complaints of insomnia in older people. Variations
in sleep patterns may be due to circumstances (eg, “jet lag”) or to
idiosyncratic patterns (“night owls”) in persons who perhaps
because of different “biologic rhythms” habitually go to bed late and
sleep late in the morning. Creativity and rapidity of response to
unfamiliar situations are impaired by loss of sleep. There are also
rare individuals who have chronic difficulty in adapting to a 24-hour
sleep-wake cycle (desynchronization sleep disorder), which can be
resynchronized by altering exposure to light.
The three major sleep disorders are discussed below.
1. Dyssomnias (Insomnia)
 Classification & Clinical Findings
Patients may complain of difficulty getting to sleep or staying asleep,
intermittent wakefulness during the night, early morning awakening,
or combinations of any of these. Transient episodes are usually of
little significance. Stress, caffeine, physical discomfort, daytime
napping, and early bedtimes are common factors.
Psychiatric disorders are often associated with persistent
insomnia. Depression is usually associated with fragmented sleep,
decreased total sleep time, earlier onset of REM sleep, a shift of
REM activity to the first half of the night, and a loss of slow wave
sleep—all of which are nonspecific findings. In manic disorders,
sleeplessness is a cardinal feature and an important early sign of
impending mania in bipolar cases. Total sleep time is decreased,
with shortened REM latency and increased REM activity. Sleep-
related panic attacks occur in the transition from stage 2 to stage 3
sleep in some patients with a longer REM latency in the sleep
pattern preceding the attacks.
Abuse of alcohol may cause or be secondary to the sleep
disturbance. There is a tendency to use alcohol as a means of
getting to sleep without realizing that it disrupts the normal sleep
cycle. Acute alcohol intake produces a decreased sleep latency
with reduced REM sleep during the first half of the night. REM
sleep is increased in the second half of the night, with an increase in
total amount of slow wave sleep (stages 3 and 4). Vivid dreams and
frequent awakenings are common. Chronic alcohol abuse increases
stage 1 and decreases REM sleep (most medications delay or
block REM sleep), with symptoms persisting for many months after
the individual has stopped drinking. Acute alcohol or other sedative
withdrawal causes delayed onset of sleep and REM rebound with
intermittent awakening during the night.
Heavy smoking (more than a pack a day) causes difficulty
falling asleep—apparently independently of the often associated
increase in coffee drinking. Excess intake near bedtime of caffeine,
cocaine, and other stimulants (eg, over-the-counter cold remedies)
causes decreased total sleep time—mostly NREM sleep—with
some increased sleep latency.
Sedative-hypnotics—specifically, the benzodiazepines, which
are the most commonly prescribed medications to promote sleep—
tend to increase total sleep time, decrease sleep latency, and
decrease nocturnal awakening, with variable effects on NREM
sleep. Withdrawal causes just the opposite effects and results in
continued use of the drug for the purpose of preventing withdrawal
symptoms. Antidepressants decrease REM sleep (with marked
rebound on withdrawal in the form of nightmares) and have varying
effects on NREM sleep. The effect on REM sleep correlates with
reports that REM sleep deprivation produces improvement in some
depressions.
Persistent insomnias are also related to a wide variety of medical
conditions, particularly delirium, pain, respiratory distress
syndromes, uremia, asthma, thyroid disorders, and nocturia due to
benign prostatic hyperplasia. Adequate analgesia and proper
treatment of medical disorders will reduce symptoms and decrease
the need for sedatives.
 Treatment
In general, there are two broad classes of treatment for insomnia,
and the two may be combined: psychological (cognitive-behavioral)
and pharmacologic. In situations of acute distress, such as a grief
reaction, pharmacologic measures may be most appropriate. With
primary insomnia, however, initial efforts should be psychologically
based. This is particularly true in the elderly to avoid the potential
adverse reactions of medications. The elderly population is at risk
for complaints of insomnia because sleep becomes lighter and more
easily disrupted with aging. Medical disorders that become more
common with age may also pre-dispose to insomnia.
A. Psychological
Psychological strategies should include educating the patient
regarding good sleep hygiene: (1) Go to bed only when sleepy. (2)
Use the bed and bedroom only for sleeping and sex. (3) If still
awake after 20 minutes, leave the bedroom and only return when
sleepy. (4) Get up at the same time every morning regardless of the
amount of sleep during the night. (5) Discontinue caffeine and
nicotine, at least in the evening if not completely. (6) Establish a
daily exercise regimen. (7) Avoid alcohol as it may disrupt
continuity of sleep. (8) Limit fluids in the evening. (9) Learn and
practice relaxation techniques. (10) Establish a bedtime ritual and a
routine time for going to sleep. A 2009 study suggests that cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia was as effective as zolpidem with
benefits sustained 1 year after treatment.
B. Medical
When the above measures are insufficient, medications may be
useful. Lorazepam (0.5 mg orally nightly), temazepam (7.5–15 mg
orally nightly) and the nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics, zolpidem (5–
10 mg orally nightly), and zaleplon (5–10 mg orally nightly), are
often effective for the elderly population and can be given in larger
doses—twice what is prescribed for the elderly—in younger
patients. A nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic, eszopiclone (2–3 mg
orally), is similar in action to zolpidem and zaleplon but dissimilar in
that it is not restricted to short-term use. A lower dose of 1 mg is
indicated in the elderly or those with hepatic impairment. It is
important to note that short-acting agents like triazolam or zolpidem
may lead to amnestic episodes if used on a daily ongoing basis.
Longer-acting agents such as flurazepam (half-life of > 48 hours)
may accumulate in the elderly and lead to cognitive slowing, ataxia,
falls, and somnolence. In general, it is appropriate to use
medications for short courses of 1–2 weeks. The medications
described above have largely replaced barbiturates as hypnotic
agents because of their greater safety in overdose and their lesser
hepatic enzyme induction effects. Antihistamines such as
diphenhydramine (25 mg orally nightly) or hydroxyzine (25 mg
orally nightly) may also be useful for sleep, as they produce no
pharmacologic dependency; their anticholinergic effects may,
however, produce confusion or urinary symptoms in the elderly.
Trazodone, an atypical antidepressant, is a non–habit-forming,
effective sleep medication in lower than antidepressant doses (25–
150 mg orally at bedtime). Priapism is a rare side effect requiring
emergent treatment. Ramelteon, 8 mg orally at bedtime, is a
melatonin receptor agonist that helps with sleep onset and does not
appear to have abuse potential. It appears to be safe for ongoing
use without the development of tolerance.
Triazolam has achieved popularity as a hypnotic drug because of
its very short duration of action. However, because it has been
associated with dependency, transient psychotic reactions,
anterograde amnesia, and rebound anxiety, it has been removed
from the market in several European countries. If used, it must be
prescribed only for short periods of time.
2. Hypersomnias (Disorders of Excessive Sleepiness)
 Classification & Clinical Findings
A. Sleep Apnea
This disorder is characterized by cessation of breathing for at least
30 episodes (each lasting about 10 seconds) during the night. There
are two types: obstructive and central. (See Chapter 9.)
B. Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy consists of a tetrad of symptoms: (1) Sudden, brief
(about 15 minutes) sleep attacks that may occur during any type of
activity; (2) cataplexy—sudden loss of muscle tone involving
specific small muscle groups or generalized muscle weakness that
may cause the person to slump to the floor, unable to move, often
associated with emotional reactions and sometimes confused with
seizure disorder; (3) sleep paralysis—a generalized flaccidity of
muscles with full consciousness in the transition zone between sleep
and waking; and (4) hypnagogic hallucinations, visual or auditory,
which may precede sleep or occur during the sleep attack. The
attacks are characterized by an abrupt transition into REM sleep—
a necessary criterion for diagnosis. The disorder begins in early
adult life, affects both sexes equally, and usually levels off in severity
at about 30 years of age.
REM sleep behavior disorder, characterized by motor dyscontrol
and often violent dreams during REM sleep, may be related to
narcolepsy.
C. Kleine-Levin Syndrome
This syndrome, which occurs mostly in young men, is characterized
by hypersomnic attacks three or four times a year lasting up to 2
days, with hyperphagia, hypersexuality, irritability, and confusion on
awakening. It has often been associated with antecedent neurologic
insults. It usually remits after age 40.
D. Nocturnal Myoclonus
Periodic lower leg movements occur during sleep with subsequent
daytime sleepiness, anxiety, depression, and cognitive impairment.
 Treatment
Narcolepsy can be managed by daily administration of a stimulant
such as dextroamphetamine sulfate, 10 mg orally in the morning,
with increased dosage as necessary. Modafinil is a schedule IV
medication FDA-approved for treating the excessive daytime
fatigue of narcolepsy. Usual dosing is 200 mg orally each morning.
Its mechanism of action is unknown, yet it is thought to be less of an
abuse risk than stimulants that are primarily dopaminergic. Common
side effects include headache and anxiety; however, modafinil
appears to be generally well tolerated. Modafinil may reduce the
efficacy of cyclosporine, oral contraceptives, and other medications
by inducing their hepatic metabolism. Imipramine, 75–100 mg orally
daily, has been effective in treatment of cataplexy but not
narcolepsy.
Nocturnal myoclonus and REM sleep behavior disorder can be
treated with clonazepam with variable results. There is no treatment
for Kleine-Levin syndrome.
Treatment of sleep apnea is discussed in Chapter 9.
3. Parasomnias (Abnormal Behaviors during Sleep)
These disorders are fairly common in children and less so in adults.
 Classification & Clinical Findings
A. Sleep Terror
Sleep terror (pavor nocturnus) is an abrupt, terrifying arousal from
sleep, usually in preadolescent boys although it may occur in adults
as well. It is distinct from sleep panic attacks. Symptoms are fear,
sweating, tachycardia, and confusion for several minutes, with
amnesia for the event.
B. Nightmares
Nightmares occur during REM sleep; sleep terrors in stage 3 or
stage 4 sleep.
C. Sleepwalking
Sleepwalking (somnambulism) includes ambulation or other intricate
behaviors while still asleep, with amnesia for the event. It affects
mostly children aged 6–12 years, and episodes occur during stage 3
or stage 4 sleep in the first third of the night and in REM sleep in the
later sleep hours. Sleepwalking in elderly people may be a feature
of dementia. Idiosyncratic reactions to drugs (eg, marijuana,
alcohol) and medical conditions (eg, partial complex seizures) may
be causative factors in adults.
D. Enuresis
Enuresis is involuntary micturition during sleep in a person who
usually has voluntary control. Like other parasomnias, it is more
common in children, usually in the 3–4 hours after bedtime, but is
not limited to a specific stage of sleep. Confusion during the episode
and amnesia for the event are common.
 Treatment
Treatment for sleep terrors is with benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam,
5–20 orally mg at bedtime), since it will suppress stage 3 and stage
4 sleep. Somnambulism responds to the same treatment for the
same reason, but simple safety measures should not be neglected.
Enuresis may respond to imipramine, 50–100 mg orally at bedtime,
although desmopressin nasal spray (an ADH preparation) has
increasingly become the treatment of choice for nocturnal enuresis.
Behavioral approaches (eg, bells that ring when the pad gets wet)
have also been successful.
Bagai K. Obstructive sleep apnea, stroke, and cardiovascular
diseases. Neurologist. 2010 Nov;16(6):329–39. [PMID:
21150380]
 
Morin CM et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy, singly and
combined with medication, for persistent insomnia: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2009 May 20;301(19):2005–15. [PMID:
19454639]
 
Parmet S et al. JAMA patient page. Insomnia. JAMA. 2006 Jun
28;295(24):2952. [PMID: 16804158]
 
Schutte-Rodin S et al. Clinical guideline for the evaluation and
management of chronic insomnia in adults. J Clin Sleep Med. 2008
Oct 15;4(5):487–504. [PMID: 18853708]
 
DISORDERS OF AGGRESSION
Aggression and violence are symptoms rather than diseases, and
most frequently they are not associated with an underlying medical
condition. Clinicians are unable to predict dangerous behavior with
greater than chance accuracy. Depression, schizophrenia,
personality disorders, mania, paranoia, temporal lobe dysfunction,
and organic mental states may be associated with acts of
aggression. Impulse control disorders are characterized by physical
abuse (usually of the aggressor's domestic partner or children), by
pathologic intoxication, by impulsive sexual activities, and by
reckless driving. Anabolic steroid usage by athletes has been
associated with increased tendencies toward violent behavior.
In the United States, a significant proportion of all violent deaths
are alcohol-related. The ingestion of even small amounts of alcohol
can result in pathologic intoxication that resembles an acute organic
mental condition. Amphetamines, crack cocaine, and other
stimulants are frequently associated with aggressive behavior.
Phencyclidine is a drug commonly associated with violent behavior
that is occasionally of a bizarre nature, partly due to lowering of the
pain threshold. Domestic violence and rape are much more
widespread than previously recognized. Awareness of the problem
is to some degree due to increasing recognition of the rights of
women and the understanding by women that they do not have to
accept abuse. Acceptance of this kind of aggressive behavior
inevitably leads to more, with the ultimate aggression being murder
—20–50% of murders in the United States occur within the family.
Police are called for more domestic disputes than all other criminal
incidents combined. Children living in such family situations
frequently become victims of abuse.
Features of individuals who have been subjected to long-term
physical or sexual abuse are as follows: trouble expressing anger,
staying angry longer, general passivity in relationships, feeling
“marked for life” with an accompanying feeling of deserving to be
victimized, lack of trust, and dissociation of affect from experiences.
They are prone to express their psychological distress with
somatization symptoms, often pain complaints. They may also have
symptoms related to posttraumatic stress, as discussed above. The
clinician should be suspicious about the origin of any injuries not
fully explained, particularly if such incidents recur.
 Treatment
A. Psychological
Management of any violent individual includes appropriate
psychological maneuvers. Move slowly, talk slowly with clarity and
reassurance, and evaluate the situation. Strive to create a setting that
is minimally disturbing, and eliminate people or things threatening to
the violent individual. Do not threaten or abuse, and do not touch or
crowd the person. Allow no weapons in the area (an increasing
problem in hospital emergency departments). Proximity to a door is
comforting to both the patient and the examiner. Use a negotiator
the violent person can relate to comfortably. Food and drink are
helpful in defusing the situation (as are cigarettes for those who
smoke). Honesty is important. Make no false promises, bolster the
patient's self-esteem, and continue to engage the subject verbally
until the situation is under control. This type of individual does better
with strong external controls to replace the lack of inner controls
over the long term. Close probationary supervision and judicially
mandated restrictions can be most helpful. There should be a major
effort to help the individual avoid drug use (eg, Alcoholics
Anonymous). Victims of abuse are essentially treated as any victim
of trauma and, not infrequently, have evidence of PTSD.
B. Pharmacologic
Pharmacologic means are often necessary whether or not
psychological approaches have been successful. This is particularly
true in the agitated or psychotic patient. The drug of choice in
psychotic aggressive states is haloperidol, 5–10 mg intramuscularly
every hour until symptoms are alleviated. Benzodiazepine sedatives
(eg, diazepam, 5 mg orally or intravenously every several hours) can
be used for mild to moderate agitation, but an antipsychotic drug is
preferred for management of the seriously violent and psychotic
patient. Chronic aggressive states, particularly in retardation and
brain damage (rule out causative organic conditions and medications
such as anticholinergic medications in amounts sufficient to cause
confusion), have been ameliorated with risperidone, 0.5–2 mg/d
orally, propranolol, 40–240 mg/d orally, or pindolol, 5 mg twice
daily orally (pindolol causes less bradycardia and hypotension).
Carbamazepine and valproic acid are effective in the treatment of
aggression and explosive disorders, particularly when associated
with known or suspected brain lesions. Lithium and SSRIs are also
effective for some intermittent explosive outbursts. Buspirone (10–
45 mg/d orally) is helpful for aggression, particularly in mentally
retarded patients.
C. Physical
Physical management is necessary if psychological and
pharmacologic means are not sufficient. It requires the active and
visible presence of an adequate number of personnel (five or six) to
reinforce the idea that the situation is under control despite the
patient's lack of inner controls. Such an approach often precludes
the need for actual physical restraint. When adequate personnel are
not available, however, two people shielded by a mattress (single-
bed size) can usually corner and subdue the patient without injury to
anyone. Seclusion rooms and restraints should be used only when
necessary (ambulatory restraints are an alternative), and the patient
must then be observed at frequent intervals. Design of corridors and
seclusion rooms is important. Narrow corridors, small spaces, and
crowded areas exacerbate the potential for violence in an anxious
patient.
D. Other Interventions
The treatment of victims (eg, battered women) is challenging and
often complicated by their reluctance to leave the situation. Reasons
for staying vary, but common themes include the fear of more
violence because of leaving, the hope that the situation may
ameliorate (in spite of steady worsening), and the financial aspects
of the situation, which are seldom to the woman's advantage.
Concerns for the children often finally compel the woman to seek
help. An early step is to get the woman into a therapeutic situation
that provides the support of others in similar straits. Al-Anon is
frequently a valuable asset and quite appropriate when alcohol is a
factor. The group can support the victim while she gathers strength
to consider alternatives without being paralyzed by fear. Many cities
now offer temporary emergency centers and counseling. Use the
available resources, attend to any medical or psychiatric problems,
and maintain a compassionate interest. Some states now require
physicians to report injuries caused by abuse to police authorities.
Ellsberg M et al. Intimate partner violence and women's physical
and mental health in the WHO multi-country study on women's
health and domestic violence: an observational study. Lancet. 2008
Apr 5;371(9619):1165–72. [PMID: 18395577]
 
Hassouneh D et al. The influence of gender role stereotyping on
women's experiences of female same-sex intimate partner violence.
Violence Against Women. 2008 Mar;14(3):310–25. [PMID:
18292372]
 
Siever LJ. Neurobiology of aggression and violence. Am J
Psychiatry. 2008 Apr;165(4):429–42. [PMID: 18346997]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Intimate partner violence.
JAMA. 2008 Aug 13;300(6):754. [PMID: 18698075]
 
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
(DRUG DEPENDENCY, DRUG
ABUSE)
 
The term “drug dependency” is used in a broad sense here to
include both addictions and habituations. It involves the triad of
compulsive drug use referred to as drug addiction, which includes:
(1) a psychological dependence or craving and the behavior
involved in procurement of the drug; (2) physiologic dependence,
with withdrawal symptoms on discontinuance of the drug; and (3)
tolerance, ie, the need to increase the dose to obtain the desired
effects. Drug dependency is a function of the amount of drug used
and the duration of usage. The amount needed to produce
dependency varies with the nature of the drug and the idiosyncratic
nature of the user. The frequency of use is usually daily, and the
duration is inevitably > 2–3 weeks. Polydrug abuse is very
common. Transgenerational continuity of drug abuse is also
common.
There is accumulating evidence that an impairment syndrome
exists in many former (and current) drug users. It is believed that
drug use produces damaged neurotransmitter receptor sites and that
the consequent imbalance produces symptoms that may mimic other
psychiatric illnesses. “Kindling”—repeated stimulation of the brain
—renders the individual more susceptible to focal brain activity with
minimal stimulation. Stimulants and depressants can produce
kindling, leading to relatively spontaneous effects no longer
dependent on the original stimulus. These effects may be manifested
as mood swings, panic, psychosis, and occasionally overt seizure
activity. The imbalance also results in frequent job changes, marital
problems, and generally erratic behavior. Patients with PTSD
frequently have treated themselves with a variety of drugs. Chronic
abusers of a wide variety of drugs exhibit cerebral atrophy on CT
scans, a finding that may relate to the above symptoms. Early
recognition is important, mainly to establish realistic treatment
programs that are chiefly symptom-directed.
The clinician faces three problems with substance abuse: (1) the
prescribing of substances such as sedatives, stimulants, or opioids
that might produce dependency; (2) the treatment of individuals
who have already abused drugs, most commonly alcohol; and (3)
the detection of illicit drug use in patients presenting with psychiatric
symptoms. The usefulness of urinalysis for detection of drugs varies
markedly with different drugs and under different circumstances
(pharmacokinetics is a major factor). Water-soluble drugs (eg,
alcohol, stimulants, opioids) are eliminated in a day or so. Lipophilic
substances (eg, barbiturates, tetrahydrocannabinol) appear in the
urine over longer periods of time: several days in most cases, 1–2
months in chronic marijuana users. Sedative drug determinations are
quite variable, amount of drug and duration of use being important
determinants. False-positives can be a problem related to ingestion
of some legitimate medications (eg, phenytoin for barbiturates,
phenylpropanolamine for amphetamines, chlorpromazine for
opioids) and some foods (eg, poppy seeds for opioids, coca leaf
tea for cocaine). Manipulations can alter the legitimacy of the
testing. Dilution, either in vivo or in vitro, can be detected by
checking urine specific gravity. Addition of ammonia, vinegar, or
salt may invalidate the test, but odor and pH determinations are
simple. Hair analysis can determine drug use over longer periods,
particularly sequential drug-taking patterns. The sensitivity and
reliability of such tests are considered good, and the method may be
complementary to urinalysis.
Kosten TR et al. Management of drug and alcohol withdrawal. N
Engl J Med. 2003 May 1;348(18):1786–95. [PMID: 12724485]
 
Marlatt GA. Update on harm-reduction policy and intervention
research. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2010 Apr 27;6:591–606.
[PMID: 20192791].
 
ALCOHOL DEPENDENCY & ABUSE (Alcoholism)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Major criteria:
 Physiologic dependence as manifested by evidence of withdrawal
when intake is interrupted.
 Tolerance to the effects of alcohol.
 Evidence of alcohol-associated illnesses, such as alcoholic liver
disease, cerebellar degeneration.
 Continued drinking despite strong medical and social
contraindications and life disruptions.
 Impairment in social and occupational functioning.
 Depression.
 Blackouts.
Other signs:
 Alcohol stigmas: alcohol odor on breath, alcoholic facies, flushed
face, scleral injection, tremor, ecchymoses, peripheral
neuropathy.
 Surreptitious drinking.
 Unexplained work absences.
 Frequent accidents, falls, or injuries of vague origin; in smokers,
cigarette burns on hands or chest.
 Laboratory tests: elevated values of liver function tests, mean
corpuscular volume, serum uric acid, and triglycerides.
 
 General Considerations
Alcoholism (also known as alcohol dependence) is a syndrome
consisting of two phases: at-risk drinking and alcohol addiction. At-
risk drinking is the repetitive use of alcohol, often to alleviate anxiety
or solve other emotional problems. Alcohol addiction is a true
addiction, similar to that which occurs following the repeated use of
other sedative-hypnotics, and is characterized by recurrent use of
alcohol despite disruption in social roles (family and work), alcohol-
related legal problems, and taking safety risks by oneself and with
others. The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
formally defines at-risk drinking as more than 4 drinks per day or
14 drinks per week for men or more than 3 drinks per day or 7
drinks per week for women. These individuals are at an increased
risk for developing or are developing alcohol addiction. Alcohol and
other drug abuse patients have a much higher prevalence of lifetime
psychiatric disorders. While male-to-female ratios in alcoholic
treatment agencies remain at 4:1, there is evidence that the rates are
converging. Women delay seeking help, and when they do they
tend to seek it in medical or mental health settings. Adoption and
twin studies indicate some genetic influence. Ethnic distinctions are
important—eg, 40% of Japanese have aldehyde dehydrogenase
deficiency and are more susceptible to the effects of alcohol.
Depression is often present and should be evaluated carefully. The
majority of suicides and intrafamily homicides involve alcohol.
Alcohol is a major factor in rapes and other assaults.
There are several screening instruments that may help identify
alcoholism. One of the most useful is the CAGE questionnaire (see
Table 1–7).
 Clinical Findings
A. Acute Intoxication
The signs of alcoholic intoxication are the same as those of
overdosage with any other central nervous system depressant:
drowsiness, errors of commission, psychomotor dysfunction,
disinhibition, dysarthria, ataxia, and nystagmus. For a 70-kg person,
an ounce of whiskey, a 4- to 6-oz glass of wine, or a 12-oz bottle
of beer (roughly 15, 11, and 13 grams of alcohol, respectively) may
raise the level of alcohol in the blood by 25 mg/dL. For a 50-kg
person, the blood alcohol level would rise even higher (35 mg/dL)
with the same consumption. Blood alcohol levels below 50 mg/dL
rarely cause significant motor dysfunction (the legal limit for driving
under the influence is commonly 80 mg/dL). Intoxication as
manifested by ataxia, dysarthria, and nausea and vomiting indicates
a blood level > 150 mg/dL, and lethal blood levels range from 350
to 900 mg/dL. In severe cases, overdosage is marked by
respiratory depression, stupor, seizures, shock syndrome, coma,
and death. Serious overdoses are frequently due to a combination
of alcohol with other sedatives.
B. Withdrawal
There is a wide spectrum of manifestations of alcoholic withdrawal,
ranging from anxiety, decreased cognition, and tremulousness
through increasing irritability and hyperreactivity to full-blown
delirium tremens. Symptoms of mild withdrawal, including tremor,
elevated vital signs, and anxiety, begin within about 8 hours after the
last drink and usually have passed by day 3. Generalized seizures
occur within the first 24–38 hours and are more prevalent in
persons who have a history of withdrawal syndromes. Delirium
tremens is an acute organic psychosis that is usually manifest within
24–72 hours after the last drink (but may occur up to 7–10 days
later). It is characterized by mental confusion, tremor, sensory
hyperacuity, visual hallucinations (often of snakes, bugs, etc),
autonomic hyperactivity, diaphoresis, dehydration, electrolyte
disturbances (hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia), seizures, and
cardiovascular abnormalities. The acute withdrawal syndrome is
often completely unexpected and occurs when the patient has been
hospitalized for some unrelated problem and presents as a
diagnostic problem. Suspect alcohol withdrawal in every
unexplained delirium. The mortality rate from delirium tremens has
steadily decreased with early diagnosis and improved treatment.
In addition to the immediate withdrawal symptoms, there is
evidence of persistent longer-term ones, including sleep
disturbances, anxiety, depression, excitability, fatigue, and emotional
volatility. These symptoms may persist for 3–12 months, and in
some cases they become chronic.
C. Alcoholic (Organic) Hallucinosis
This syndrome occurs either during heavy drinking or on withdrawal
and is characterized by a paranoid psychosis without the
tremulousness, confusion, and clouded sensorium seen in
withdrawal syndromes. The patient appears normal except for the
auditory hallucinations, which are frequently persecutory and may
cause the patient to behave aggressively and in a paranoid fashion.
D. Chronic Alcoholic Brain Syndromes
These encephalopathies are characterized by increasing erratic
behavior, memory and recall problems, and emotional instability—
the usual signs of organic brain injury due to any cause. Wernicke-
Korsakoff syndrome due to thiamine deficiency may develop with a
series of episodes. Wernicke encephalopathy consists of the triad of
confusion, ataxia, and ophthalmoplegia (typically sixth nerve). Early
recognition and treatment with thiamine can minimize damage. One
of the possible sequelae is Korsakoff psychosis, characterized by
both anterograde and retrograde amnesia, with confabulation early
in the course. Early recognition and treatment of the alcoholic with
intravenous thiamine and B complex vitamins can minimize damage.
E. Laboratory Findings
Ethanol may contribute to the presence of an otherwise unexplained
osmolar gap. There may also be elevated liver function tests,
increased serum uric acid and triglycerides, and decreased serum
potassium and magnesium. The most definitive biologic marker for
chronic alcoholism is carbohydrate deficient transferrin, which can
detect heavy use (60 mg/d over 7–10 days) with high specificity.
Two other tests that may provide clues to an alcohol problem are γ-
glutamyl transpeptidase measurement (levels > 30 units/L are
suggestive of heavy drinking) and mean corpuscular volume (> 95
fL in men and > 100 fL in women). If both are elevated, a serious
drinking problem is likely. Use of other recreational drugs with
alcohol skews and negates the significance of these tests. High-
density lipoprotein cholesterol elevations combined with elevated γ-
glutamyl transpeptidase concentrations also can help identify heavy
drinkers.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of alcoholism is essentially between
primary alcoholism (when no other major psychiatric diagnosis
exists) and secondary alcoholism (when alcohol is used as self-
medication for major underlying psychiatric problems such as
schizophrenia or affective disorder). The differentiation is important,
since the latter group requires treatment for the specific psychiatric
problem. In primary and secondary alcoholism, at-risk drinking can
be distinguished from alcohol addiction by taking a careful
psychiatric history and evaluating the degree to which recurrent
drinking impacts the social role functioning and physical safety of the
individual.
The differential diagnosis of alcohol withdrawal includes other
sedative withdrawals and other causes of delirium. Acute alcoholic
hallucinosis must be differentiated from other acute paranoid states
such as amphetamine psychosis or paranoid schizophrenia. The
history and laboratory test results are the most important features in
differentiating chronic organic brain syndromes due to alcohol from
those due to other causes. The form of the brain syndrome is of little
help—eg, chronic brain syndromes from lupus erythematosus may
be associated with confabulation similar to that resulting from long-
standing alcoholism.
 Complications
The medical, economic, and psychosocial problems of alcoholism
are staggering. The central and peripheral nervous system
complications include chronic brain syndromes, cerebellar
degeneration, cardiomyopathy, and peripheral neuropathies. Direct
effects on the liver include cirrhosis, esophageal varices, and
eventual hepatic failure. Indirect effects include protein
abnormalities, coagulation defects, hormone deficiencies, and an
increased incidence of liver neoplasms.
Fetal alcohol syndrome includes one or more of the following
developmental defects in the offspring of alcoholic women: (1) low
birth weight and small size with failure to catch up in size or weight,
(2) mental retardation, with an average IQ in the 60s, and (3) a
variety of birth defects, with a large percentage of facial and cardiac
abnormalities. The fetuses are very quiet in utero, and there is an
increased frequency of breech presentations. There is a higher
incidence of delayed postnatal growth and behavior development.
The risk is appreciably higher the more alcohol ingested by the
mother each day. Cigarette and marijuana smoking as well as
cocaine use can produce similar effects on the fetus.
 Treatment of At-Risk Drinking
A. Psychological
The most important consideration for the clinician is to suspect the
problem early and take a nonjudgmental attitude, although this does
not mean a passive one. The problem of denial must be faced,
preferably with significant family members at the first meeting. This
means dealing from the beginning with any enabling behavior of the
spouse or other significant people. Enabling behavior allows the
alcoholic to avoid facing the consequences of his or her behavior.
There must be an emphasis on the things that can be done. This
approach emphasizes the fact that the clinician cares and strikes a
positive and hopeful note early in treatment. Valuable time should
not be wasted trying to find out why the patient drinks; come to
grips early with the immediate problem of how to stop the drinking.
Although total abstinence should be the ultimate goal, a harm
reduction model indicates that gradual progress toward abstinence
can be a useful treatment stratagem.
Motivational interviewing, a model of counseling that
addresses both the patient's ambivalence and motivation for change,
may contribute to reduced consumption over time.
B. Social
Get the patient into Alcoholics Anonymous and the spouse into Al-
Anon. Success is usually proportionate to the utilization of
Alcoholics Anonymous, religious counseling, and other resources.
The patient should be seen frequently for short periods and charged
an appropriate fee.
Do not underestimate the importance of religion, particularly
since the alcoholic is often a dependent person who needs a great
deal of support. Early enlistment of the help of a concerned religious
adviser can often provide the turning point for a personal conversion
to sobriety.
One of the most important considerations is the patient's job—
fear of losing a job is one of the most powerful motivations for
giving up drink. The business community has become painfully
aware of the problem, with the result that about 70% of the Fortune
500 companies offer programs to their employees to help with the
problem of alcoholism. In the latter case, some specific
recommendations to employers can be offered: (1) Avoid
placement in jobs where the alcoholic must be alone, eg, as a
traveling buyer or sales executive. (2) Use supervision but not
surveillance. (3) Keep competition with others to a minimum. (4)
Avoid positions that require quick decision making on important
matters (high-stress situations). In general, commitment to
abstinence and avoidance of situations that might be conducive to
drinking are most predictive of a good outcome.
C. Medical
Hospitalization is not usually necessary. It is sometimes used to
dramatize a situation and force the patient to face the problem of
alcoholism, but generally it should be used for medical indications.
Because of the many medical complications of alcoholism, a
complete physical examination with appropriate laboratory tests is
mandatory, with special attention to the liver and nervous system.
Use of sedatives as a replacement for alcohol is not desirable. The
usual result is concomitant use of sedatives and alcohol and
worsening of the problem. Lithium is not helpful in the treatment of
alcoholism.
Disulfiram (250–500 mg/d orally) has been used for many years
as an aversive drug to discourage alcohol use. Disulfiram inhibits
alcohol dehydrogenase, causing toxic reactions when alcohol is
consumed. The results have generally been of limited effectiveness
and depend on the motivation of the individual to be compliant.
Naltrexone, an opiate antagonist, in a dosage of 50 mg orally
daily, has been helpful in lowering relapse rates over the 3–6
months after cessation of drinking, apparently by lessening the
pleasurable effects of alcohol. One study suggests that naltrexone is
most effective when given during periods of drinking in combination
with therapy that supports abstinence but accepts the fact that
relapses occur. Naltrexone is FDA-approved for maintenance
therapy. Studies indicate that it reduces alcohol craving when used
as part of a comprehensive treatment program. Acamprosate (333–
666 mg orally three times daily) helps reduce craving and maintain
abstinence, and can be continued even during periods of relapse.
D. Behavioral
Conditioning approaches historically have been used in some
settings in the treatment of alcoholism, most commonly as a type of
aversion therapy. For example, the patient is given a drink of
whiskey and then a shot of apomorphine, and proceeds to vomit. In
this way a strong association is built up between the drinking and
vomiting. Although this kind of treatment has been successful in
some cases, after appropriate informed consent, many people do
not sustain the learned aversive response.
 
Treatment 
of 
Hallucinosis 
&
Withdrawal
A. Medical
1. Alcoholic hallucinosis—Alcoholic hallucinosis, which can occur
either during or on cessation of a prolonged drinking period, is not a
typical withdrawal syndrome and is handled differently. Since the
symptoms are primarily those of a psychosis in the presence of a
clear sensorium, they are handled like any other psychosis:
hospitalization (when indicated) and adequate amounts of
antipsychotic medications. Haloperidol, 5 mg orally twice a day for
the first day or so, usually ameliorates symptoms quickly, and the
drug can be decreased and discontinued over several days as the
patient improves. It then becomes necessary to deal with the
chronic alcohol abuse, which has been discussed.
2. Withdrawal symptoms—The onset of withdrawal symptoms is
usually 8–12 hours and the peak intensity of symptoms is 48–72
hours after alcohol consumption is stopped. Providing adequate
central nervous system depressants (eg, benzodiazepines) is
important to counteract the excitability resulting from sudden
cessation of alcohol intake. The choice of a specific sedative is less
important than using adequate doses to bring the patient to a level of
moderate sedation, and this will vary from person to person. Mild
dependency requires “drying out.” In some instances for
outpatients, a short course of tapering benzodiazepines—eg,
diazepam, 20 mg orally daily initially, decreasing by 5 mg daily—
may be a useful adjunct. In moderate to severe withdrawal,
hospitalize the patient and use diazepam orally in a dosage of 5–10
mg hourly depending on the clinical need as judged by withdrawal
symptoms, including nausea, tremor, autonomic hyperactivity,
agitation; tactile, visual, and auditory hallucinations; and
disorientation. This type of symptom-driven medication regimen for
withdrawal appears to reduce total benzodiazepine usage over
fixed-dose schedules. Antipsychotic medications should not be
used. Monitoring of vital signs and fluid and electrolyte levels is
essential for the severely ill patient.
In very severe withdrawal, intravenous administration is
necessary. After stabilization, the amount of diazepam required to
maintain a sedated state may be given orally every 8–12 hours. If
restlessness, tremulousness, and other signs of withdrawal persist,
the dosage is increased until moderate sedation occurs. The dosage
is then gradually reduced by 20% every 24 hours until withdrawal is
complete. This usually requires a week or so of treatment.
Clonidine, 5 mcg/kg orally every 2 hours, or the patch formulation
of appropriate dosage strength, suppresses cardiovascular signs of
withdrawal and has some anxiolytic effect. Carbamazepine, 400–
800 mg daily orally, compares favorably with benzodiazepines for
alcohol withdrawal.
Atenolol, as an adjunct to benzodiazepines, can reduce
symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. The daily oral atenolol dose is
100 mg when the heart rate is above 80 beats per minute and 50
mg for a heart rate between 50 and 80 beats per minute. Atenolol
should not be used when bradycardia is present.
Meticulous examination for other medical problems is necessary.
Alcoholic hypoglycemia can occur with low blood alcohol levels
(see Chapter 27). Alcoholics commonly have liver disease and
associated clotting problems and are also prone to injury—and the
combination all too frequently leads to undiagnosed subdural
hematoma.
Phenytoin does not appear to be useful in managing alcohol
withdrawal seizures per se. Sedating doses of benzodiazepines are
effective in treating alcohol withdrawal seizures. Thus, other
anticonvulsants are not usually needed unless there is a preexisting
seizure disorder.
A general diet should be given, and vitamins in high doses:
thiamine, 50 mg intravenously initially, then intramuscularly on a
daily basis; pyridoxine, 100 mg/d; folic acid, 1 mg/d; and ascorbic
acid, 100 mg twice a day. Intravenous glucose solutions should not
be given prior to thiamine for fear of precipitating Wernicke
syndrome. Thiamine is necessary as a ketolase enzyme cofactor.
Concurrent administration of vitamins is satisfactory, and hydration
should be meticulously assessed on an ongoing basis.
Chronic brain syndromes secondary to a long history of alcohol
intake are not clearly responsive to thiamine and vitamin
replenishment. Attention to the social and environmental care of this
type of patient is paramount.
B. Psychological and Behavioral
The comments in the section on problem drinking apply here also;
these methods of treatment become the primary consideration after
successful treatment of withdrawal or alcoholic hallucinosis.
Psychological and social measures should be initiated in the hospital
prior to discharge. This increases the possibility of continued post-
hospitalization treatment.
Anton RF et al; COMBINE Study Research Group. Combined
pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol
dependence: the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2006 May 3;295(17):2003–17. [PMID: 16670409]
 
Apodaca TR et al. Mechanisms of change in motivational
interviewing: a review and preliminary evaluation of the evidence.
Addiction. 2009 May;104(5):716–7. [PMID: 19413785]
 
de Wit M et al. Alcohol-use disorders in the critically ill patient.
Chest. 2010 Oct;138(4):994–1003. [PMID: 20923804]
 
Ringold S et al. JAMA patient page. Alcohol abuse and
alcoholism. JAMA. 2006 May 3;295(17):2100. [PMID:
16670424]
 
Williams SH. Medications for treating alcohol dependence. Am
Fam Physician. 2005 Nov 1;72(9):1775–80. [PMID: 16300039]
 
OTHER DRUG & SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCIES
1. Opioids
While the terms “opioids” and “narcotics” both refer to a group of
drugs with actions that mimic those of morphine, the term “opioids”
is used when discussing medications prescribed in a controlled
manner by a clinician, and the term “narcotics” is used to connote
illicit drug use. The group includes natural derivatives of opium
(opiates), synthetic surrogates (opioids), and a number of
polypeptides, some of which have been discovered to be natural
neurotransmitters. The principal narcotic of abuse is heroin
(metabolized to morphine), which is not used as a legitimate
medication. The other common opioids are prescription medications
that differ in milligram potency, duration of action, and agonist and
antagonist capabilities (see Chapter 5). All of the opioid analgesics
can be reversed by the opioid antagonist naloxone.
The clinical symptoms and signs of mild narcotic intoxication
include changes in mood, with feelings of euphoria; drowsiness;
nausea with occasional emesis; needle tracks; and miosis. The
incidence of snorting and inhaling heroin (“smoking”) is increasing,
particularly among cocaine users. This coincides with a decrease in
the availability of methaqualone (no longer marketed) and other
sedatives used to temper the cocaine “high” (see discussion of
cocaine under Stimulants, below). Overdosage causes respiratory
depression, peripheral vasodilation, pinpoint pupils, pulmonary
edema, coma, and death.
Dependency is a major concern when continued use of opioids
occurs, although withdrawal causes only moderate morbidity
(similar in severity to a bout of “flu”). Addicted patients sometimes
consider themselves more addicted than they really are and may not
require a withdrawal program. Grades of withdrawal are
categorized from 0 to 4: grade 0 includes craving and anxiety; grade
1, yawning, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, and perspiration; grade 2,
previous symptoms plus mydriasis, piloerection, anorexia, tremors,
and hot and cold flashes with generalized aching; grades 3 and 4,
increased intensity of previous symptoms and signs, with increased
temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate and depth.
In withdrawal from the most severe addiction, vomiting, diarrhea,
weight loss, hemoconcentration, and spontaneous ejaculation or
orgasm commonly occur. Complications of heroin administration
include infections (eg, pneumonia, septic emboli, hepatitis, and HIV
infection from using nonsterile needles), traumatic insults (eg, arterial
spasm due to drug injection, gangrene), and pulmonary edema.
Treatment for overdosage (or suspected overdosage) is
naloxone, 2 mg intravenously. If an overdose has been taken, the
results are dramatic and occur within 2 minutes. Since the duration
of action of naloxone is much shorter than that of the opioids, the
patient must be under close observation. Hospitalization, supportive
care, repeated naloxone administration, and observation for
withdrawal from other drugs should be maintained for as long as
necessary.
Treatment for withdrawal begins if grade 2 signs develop. If a
withdrawal program is necessary, use methadone, 10 mg orally (use
parenteral administration if the patient is vomiting), and observe. If
signs (piloerection, mydriasis, cardiovascular changes) persist for >
4–6 hours, give another 10 mg; continue to administer methadone at
4- to 6-hour intervals until signs are not present (rarely > 40 mg of
methadone in 24 hours). Divide the total amount of drug required
over the first 24-hour period by 2 and give that amount every 12
hours. Each day, reduce the total 24-hour dose by 5–10 mg. Thus,
a moderately addicted patient initially requiring 30–40 mg of
methadone could be withdrawn over a 4- to 8-day period.
Clonidine, 0.1 mg orally several times daily over a 10- to 14-day
period, is both an alternative and an adjunct to methadone
detoxification; it is not necessary to taper the dose. Clonidine is
helpful in alleviating cardiovascular symptoms but does not
significantly relieve anxiety, insomnia, or generalized aching. There is
a protracted abstinence syndrome of metabolic, respiratory, and
blood pressure changes over a period of 3–6 months.
Narcotic antagonists (eg, naltrexone) can also be used
successfully for treatment of the patient who has been free of
opioids for 7–10 days. Naltrexone blocks the narcotic “high” of
heroin when 50 mg is given orally every 24 hours initially for several
days and then 100 mg is given every 48–72 hours. Liver disorders
are a major contraindication. Compliance tends to be poor, partly
because of the dysphoria that can persist long after opioid
discontinuance. Buprenorphine, a partial agonist, is a mainstay of
office-based treatment of opiate dependency. Its use requires
special training.
Alternative strategies for the treatment of opioid withdrawal have
included rapid and ultrarapid detoxification techniques. However,
recent data do not support the use of either method. Methadone
maintenance programs are of some value in chronic recidivism.
Under carefully controlled supervision, the narcotic addict is
maintained on fairly high doses of methadone (40–120 mg/d) that
satisfy craving and block the effects of heroin to a great degree.
2. Sedatives (Anxiolytics)
See Anxiety Disorders, this chapter.
3. Psychedelics
About 6000 species of plants have psychoactive properties. All of
the 
common 
psychedelics 
(LSD, 
mescaline, 
psilocybin,
dimethyltryptamine, and other derivatives of phenylalanine and
tryptophan) can produce similar behavioral and physiologic effects.
An initial feeling of tension is followed by emotional release such as
crying or laughing (1–2 hours). Later, perceptual distortions occur,
with visual illusions and hallucinations, and occasionally there is fear
of ego disintegration (2–3 hours). Major changes in time sense and
mood lability then occur (3–4 hours). A feeling of detachment and a
sense of destiny and control occur (4–6 hours). Of course,
reactions vary among individuals, and some of the drugs produce
markedly different time frames. Occasionally, the acute episode is
terrifying (a “bad trip”), which may include panic, depression,
confusion, or psychotic symptoms. Preexisting emotional problems,
the attitude of the user, and the setting where the drug is used affect
the experience.
Treatment of the acute episode primarily involves protection of
p
p
y
p
the individual from erratic behavior that may lead to injury or death.
A structured environment is usually sufficient until the drug is
metabolized. In severe cases, antipsychotic medications with
minimal side effects (eg, haloperidol, 5 mg intramuscularly) may be
given every several hours until the individual has regained control. In
cases where “flashbacks” occur (mental imagery from a “bad trip”
that is later triggered by mild stimuli such as marijuana, alcohol, or
psychic trauma), a short course of an antipsychotic drug—eg,
olanzapine, 5–10 mg/d, or risperidone, 2 mg/d, initially, and up to
20 mg/d and 6 mg/d, respectively—is usually sufficient. Lorazepam,
1–2 mg orally or intramuscularly every 2 hours as needed for acute
agitation, may be a useful adjunct. An occasional patient may have
“flashbacks” for much longer periods and require small doses of
neuroleptic medications over the longer term.
4. Phencyclidine
Phencyclidine (PCP, angel dust, peace pill, hog), developed as an
anesthetic agent, first appeared as a street drug deceptively sold as
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Because it is simple to produce and
mimics to some degree the traditional psychedelic drugs, PCP has
become a common deceptive substitute for LSD, THC, and
mescaline. It is available in crystals, capsules, and tablets to be
inhaled, injected, swallowed, or smoked (it is commonly sprinkled
on marijuana).
Absorption after smoking is rapid, with onset of symptoms in
several minutes and peak symptoms in 15–30 minutes. Mild
intoxication produces euphoria accompanied by a feeling of
numbness. Moderate intoxication (5–10 mg) results in
disorientation, detachment from surroundings, distortion of body
image, combativeness, unusual feats of strength (partly due to its
anesthetic activity), and loss of ability to integrate sensory input,
especially touch and proprioception. Physical symptoms include
dizziness, ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus, retracted upper eyelid with
blank stare, hyperreflexia, and tachycardia. There are increases in
blood pressure, respiration, muscle tone, and urine production.
Usage in the first trimester of pregnancy is associated with an
increase in spontaneous abortion and congenital defects. Severe
intoxication (20 mg or more) produces an increase in degree of
moderate symptoms, with the addition of seizures, deepening coma,
hypertensive crisis, and severe psychotic ideation. The drug is
particularly long-lasting (several days to several weeks) owing to
high lipid solubility, gastroenteric recycling, and the production of
active metabolites. Overdosage may be fatal, with the major causes
of death being hypertensive crisis, respiratory arrest, and
convulsions. Acute rhabdomyolysis has been reported and can
result in myoglobinuric kidney failure.
Differential diagnosis involves the whole spectrum of street drugs,
since in some ways phencyclidine mimics sedatives, psychedelics,
and marijuana in its effects. Blood and urine testing can detect the
acute problem.
Treatment is discussed in Chapter 38.
5. Marijuana
Cannabis sativa, a hemp plant, is the source of marijuana. The
parts of the plant vary in potency. The resinous exudate of the
flowering tops of the female plant (hashish, charas) is the most
potent, followed by the dried leaves and flowering shoots of the
female plant (bhang) and the resinous mass from small leaves of
inflorescence (ganja). The least potent parts are the lower branches
and the leaves of the female plant and all parts of the male plant.
Mercury may be a contaminant in marijuana grown in volcanic soil.
The drug is usually inhaled by smoking. Effects occur in 10–20
minutes and last 2–3 hours. “Joints” of good quality contain about
500 mg of marijuana (which contains approximately 5–15 mg of
tetrahydrocannabinol with a half-life of 7 days). Marijuana soaked
in formaldehyde and dried (“AMP”) has produced unusual effects,
including autonomic discharge and severe though transient cognitive
impairment.
With moderate dosage, marijuana produces two phases: mild
euphoria followed by sleepiness. In the acute state, the user has an
altered time perception, less inhibited emotions, psychomotor
problems, impaired immediate memory, and conjunctival injection.
High doses produce transient psychotomimetic effects. No specific
treatment is necessary except in the case of the occasional “bad
trip,” in which case the person is treated in the same way as for
psychedelic usage. Marijuana frequently aggravates existing mental
illness and adversely affects motor performance.
Studies of long-term effects have conclusively shown
abnormalities in the pulmonary tree. Laryngitis and rhinitis are
related to prolonged use, along with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Electrocardiographic abnormalities are common, but no
chronic cardiac disease has been linked to marijuana use. Long-
term usage has resulted in depression of plasma testosterone levels
and reduced sperm counts. Abnormal menstruation and failure to
ovulate have occurred in some women. Cognitive impairments are
common. Health care utilization for a variety of health problems is
increased in long-term marijuana smokers. Sudden withdrawal
produces insomnia, nausea, myalgia, and irritability. Psychological
effects of long-term marijuana usage are still unclear. Urine testing is
reliable if samples are carefully collected and tested. Detection
periods span 4–6 days in short-term users and 20–50 days in long-
term users.
6. Stimulants: Amphetamines & Cocaine
Stimulant abuse is quite common, either alone or in combination
with abuse of other drugs. The stimulants include illicit drugs such as
methamphetamine (“speed”)—one variant is a smokable form
called “ice,” which gives an intense and fairly long-lasting high—and
methylphenidate and dextroamphetamine, which are under
prescription control. Street availability of amphetamines remains
high. Moderate usage of any of the stimulants produces
hyperactivity, a sense of enhanced physical and mental capacity,
and sympathomimetic effects. The clinical picture of acute stimulant
intoxication includes sweating, tachycardia, elevated blood
pressure, mydriasis, hyperactivity, and an acute brain syndrome
with confusion and disorientation. Tolerance develops quickly, and,
as the dosage is increased, hypervigilance, paranoid ideation (with
delusions of parasitosis), stereotypy, bruxism, tactile hallucinations
of insect infestation, and full-blown psychoses occur, often with
persecutory ideation and aggressive responses. Stimulant
withdrawal is characterized by depression with symptoms of
hyperphagia and hypersomnia.
People who have used stimulants chronically (eg, anorexigenics)
occasionally become sensitized (“kindling”) to future use of
stimulants. In these individuals, even small amounts of mild
stimulants such as caffeine can cause symptoms of paranoia and
auditory hallucinations.
Cocaine is a stimulant. It is a product of the coca plant. The
derivatives include seeds, leaves, coca paste, cocaine
hydrochloride, and the free base of cocaine. Cocaine hydro-
chloride is the salt and the most commonly used form. Free base, a
purer (and stronger) derivative called “crack,” is prepared by
simple extraction from cocaine hydrochloride.
There are various modes of use. Coca leaf chewing involves
toasting the leaves and chewing with alkaline material (eg, the ash of
other burned leaves) to enhance buccal absorption. One achieves a
mild high, with onset in 5–10 minutes and lasting for about an hour.
Intranasal use is simply snorting cocaine through a straw.
Absorption is slowed somewhat by vasoconstriction (which may
eventually cause tissue necrosis and septal perforation); the onset of
action is in 2–3 minutes, with a moderate high (euphoria,
excitement, increased energy) lasting about 30 minutes. The purity
of the cocaine is a major determinant of the high. Intravenous use of
cocaine hydrochloride or “free-base” is effective in 30 seconds and
produces a short-lasting, fairly intense high of about 15 minutes’
duration. The combined use of cocaine and ethanol results in the
metabolic production of cocaethylene by the liver. This substance
produces more intense and long-lasting cocaine-like effects.
Smoking freebase (volatilized cocaine because of the lower boiling
point) acts in seconds and results in an intense high lasting several
minutes. The intensity of the reaction is related to the marked lipid
solubility of the freebase form and produces by far the most severe
medical and psychiatric symptoms.
Cardiovascular collapse, arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, and
transient ischemic attacks have been reported. Seizures, strokes,
migraine symptoms, hyperthermia, and lung damage may occur, and
there are several obstetric complications, including spontaneous
abortion, abruptio placentae, teratogenic effects, delayed fetal
growth, and prematurity. Cocaine can cause anxiety, mood swings,
and delirium, and chronic use can cause the same problems as other
stimulants (see above).
Clinicians should be alert to cocaine use in patients presenting
with unexplained nasal bleeding, headaches, fatigue, insomnia,
anxiety, depression, and chronic hoarseness. Sudden withdrawal of
the drug is not life-threatening but usually produces craving, sleep
disturbances, hyperphagia, lassitude, and severe depression
(sometimes with suicidal ideation) lasting days to weeks.
Treatment is imprecise and difficult. Since the high is related to
blockage of dopamine reuptake, the dopamine agonist
bromocriptine, 1.5 mg orally three times a day, alleviates some of
the symptoms of craving associated with acute cocaine withdrawal.
Other dopamine agonists such as apomorphine, levodopa, and
amantadine are under study for this purpose. Carbamazepine may
be a useful adjunct in treating symptoms of alcohol withdrawal, and
desipramine in moderate doses has been useful in helping maintain
abstinence in the early stages of treatment. Treatment of psychosis
is the same as that of any psychosis: antipsychotic medications in
dosages sufficient to alleviate the symptoms. Any medical symptoms
(eg, hyperthermia, seizures, hypertension) are treated specifically.
These approaches should be used in conjunction with a structured
program, most often based on the Alcoholics Anonymous model.
Hospitalization may be required if self-harm or violence toward
others is a perceived threat (usually indicated by paranoid
delusions).
7. Caffeine
Caffeine, along with nicotine and alcohol, is one of the most
commonly used drugs worldwide. About 10 billion pounds of
coffee (the richest source of caffeine) are consumed yearly
throughout the world. Tea, cocoa, and cola drinks also contribute
to an intake of caffeine that is often astoundingly high in a large
number of people. Low to moderate doses (30–200 mg/d) tend to
improve some aspects of performance (eg, vigilance). The
approximate content of caffeine in a (180-mL) cup of beverage is
as follows: brewed coffee, 80–140 mg; instant coffee, 60–100 mg;
decaffeinated coffee, 1–6 mg; black leaf tea, 30–80 mg; tea bags,
25–75 mg; instant tea, 30–60 mg; cocoa, 10–50 mg; and 12-oz
cola drinks, 30–65 mg. A 2-oz chocolate candy bar has about 20
mg. Some herbal teas (eg, “morning thunder”) contain caffeine.
Caffeine-containing analgesics usually contain approximately 30 mg
per unit. Symptoms of caffeinism (usually associated with ingestion
of over 500 mg/d) include anxiety, agitation, restlessness, insomnia,
a feeling of being “wired,” and somatic symptoms referable to the
heart and gastrointestinal tract. It is common for a case of caffeinism
to present as an anxiety disorder. It is also common for caffeine and
other stimulants to precipitate severe symptoms in compensated
schizophrenic and manic-depressive patients. Chronically depressed
patients often use caffeine drinks as self-medication. This diagnostic
clue may help distinguish some major affective disorders.
Withdrawal from caffeine (> 250 mg/d) can produce headaches,
irritability, lethargy, and occasional nausea.
8. Miscellaneous Drugs, Solvents
The principal over-the-counter drugs of concern have been
phenylpropanolamine and an assortment of antihistaminic agents,
frequently in combination with a mild analgesic promoted as cold
remedies. Medications containing phenylpropanolamine have been
removed from sale in the United States due to an FDA ban. The
major problem in use of phenylpropanolamine relates to its side
effects as a stimulant, including precipitation of anxiety states,
increased blood pressure effects, auditory and visual hallucinations,
paranoid ideation, and occasionally delirium. Aggressiveness and
some loss of impulse control were reported as well as sleep
disturbances even with small doses.
Antihistamines usually produce some central nervous system
depression—thus their use as over-the-counter sedatives.
Practically all of the so-called sleep aids are anti-histamines. The
mixture of antihistamines with alcohol usually exacerbates the central
nervous system effects. Scopolamine and bromides have generally
been removed from over-the-counter products.
The abuse of laxatives sometimes can lead to electrolyte
disturbances that may contribute to the manifestations of a delirium.
The greatest use of laxatives tends to be in the elderly and in those
with eating disorders, both of whom are the most vulnerable to
physiologic changes.
Anabolic steroids are being abused by people who wish to
increase muscle mass for cosmetic reasons or for greater strength.
In addition to the medical problems, the practice is associated with
significant mood swings, aggressiveness, and paranoid delusions.
Alcohol and stimulant use is higher in these individuals. Withdrawal
symptoms of steroid dependency include fatigue, depressed mood,
restlessness, and insomnia.
Amyl nitrite has been used as an “orgasm expander.” The
changes in time perception, “rush,” and mild euphoria caused by the
drug prompted its nonmedical use, and popular lore concerning the
effects of inhalation just prior to orgasm has led to increased use.
Subjective effects last from 5 seconds to 15 minutes. Tolerance
develops readily, but there are no known withdrawal symptoms.
Abstinence for several days reestablishes the previous level of
responsiveness. Long-term effects may include damage to the
immune system and respiratory difficulties.
Sniffing of solvents and inhaling of gases (including aerosols)
produce a form of inebriation similar to that of the volatile
anesthetics. Agents include gasoline, toluene, petroleum ether,
lighter fluids, cleaning fluids, paint thinners, and solvents that are
present in many household products (eg, nail polish, typewriter
correction fluid). Typical intoxication states include euphoria, slurred
speech, hallucinations, and confusion, and with high doses, acute
manifestations 
are 
unconsciousness 
and 
cardiorespiratory
depression or failure; chronic exposure produces a variety of
symptoms related to the liver, kidney, bone marrow, or heart. Lead
encephalopathy can be associated with sniffing leaded gasoline. In
addition, studies of workers chronically exposed to jet fuel showed
significant increases in neurasthenic symptoms, including fatigue,
anxiety, mood changes, memory difficulties, and somatic
complaints. These same problems have been noted in long-term
solvent abuse.
The so-called designer drugs are synthetic substitutes for
commonly used recreational drugs and are produced in small,
clandestine laboratories. The most common designer drugs have
been methyl analogues of fentanyl and have been used as heroin
substitutes. 
MDMA 
(methylenedioxymethamphetamine), 
an
amphetamine derivative sometimes called “ecstasy,” is also a
designer drug with high abuse potential and neurotoxicity. Often not
detected by standard toxicology screens, these substances can
present a vexing problem for clinicians faced with symptoms from a
totally unknown cause.
Collins ED et al. Anesthesia-assisted vs buprenorphine- or
clonidine-assisted heroin detoxification and naltrexone induction: a
randomized trial. JAMA. 2005 Aug 24;294(8): 903–13. [PMID:
16118380]
 
Donaher PA et al. Managing opioid addiction with buprenorphine.
Am Fam Physician. 2007 May 1;73(9):1573–8. [PMID:
16719249]
 
Lundqvist T. Cognitive consequences of cannabis use: comparison
with abuse of stimulants and heroin with regard to attention,
memory and executive functions. Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
2005 Jun;81(2):319–30. [PMID: 15925403]
 
Moore BA et al. Primary care office-based buprenorphine
treatment: comparison of heroin and prescription opioid dependent
patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2007 Apr;22(4):527–30. [PMID:
17372805]
 
DELIRIUM & OTHER
COGNITIVE DISORDERS
(FORMERLY: ORGANIC BRAIN
SYNDROME)
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Transient or permanent brain dysfunction.
 Cognitive impairment to varying degrees.
 Impaired recall and recent memory, inability to focus attention,
random psychomotor activity such as stereotypy, and problems
in perceptual processing, often with psychotic ideation.
 Emotional disorders frequently present: depression, anxiety,
irritability.
 Behavioral disturbances: impulse control, sexual acting-out,
attention deficits, aggression, and exhibitionism.
 
 General Considerations
The organic problem may be a primary brain disease or a
secondary manifestation of some general disorder. All of the
cognitive disorders show some degree of impaired thinking
depending on the site of involvement, the rate of onset and
progression, and the duration of the underlying brain lesion.
Emotional disturbances (eg, depression) are often present as
significant comorbidities. The behavioral disturbances tend to be
more common with chronicity, more directly related to the
underlying personality or central nervous system vulnerability to
drug side effects, and not necessarily correlated with cognitive
dysfunction.
y
The causes of cognitive disorders are listed in Table 25–11.
 Clinical Findings
The manifestations are many and varied and include problems with
orientation, short or fluctuating attention span, loss of recent
memory and recall, impaired judgment, emotional lability, lack of
initiative, impaired impulse control, inability to reason through
problems, depression (worse in mild to moderate types),
confabulation (not limited to alcohol organic brain syndrome),
constriction of intellectual functions, visual and auditory
hallucinations, and delusions. Physical findings will naturally vary
according to the cause. The electroencephalogram usually shows
generalized slowing in delirium.
A. Delirium
Delirium (acute confusional state) is a transient global disorder of
attention, with clouding of consciousness, usually a result of
systemic problems (eg, medications, hypoxemia). Onset is usually
rapid. The mental status fluctuates (impairment is usually least in the
morning), with varying inability to concentrate, maintain attention,
and sustain purposeful behavior. (“Sundowning”—mild to moderate
delirium at night—is more common in patients with preexisting
dementia and may be precipitated by hospitalization, medications,
and sensory deprivation.) There is a marked deficit of short-term
memory and recall. Anxiety and irritability are common. Amnesia is
retrograde (impaired recall of past memories) and anterograde
(inability to recall events after the onset of the delirium). Orientation
problems follow the inability to retain information. Perceptual
disturbances (often visual hallucinations) and psychomotor
restlessness with insomnia are common. Autonomic changes include
tachycardia, dilated pupils, and sweating. The average duration is
about 1 week, with full recovery in most cases. Delirium can coexist
with dementia.
Terminal delirium occurs commonly at the end of life. The
delirium may be related to multiple medical causes, including organ
failure, and may be unrecognized. Treatment must be based on a
careful evaluation of the underlying etiology and the risks and
benefits of available medical and nonmedical interventions.
B. Dementia
(See Chapters 4 and 24.) Dementia is characterized by chronicity
and deterioration of selective mental functions. Specific cognitive
assessment must be performed, since many patients are able to
cover a deficit in routine conversation. The Mini-Mental State
Examination produces a numerical score with up to 30 points given
for correct answers to questions (likely organic < 27 points).
In all types of dementia, loss of impulse control (sexual and
language) is common. The tenuous level of functioning makes the
individual most susceptible to minor physical and psychological
stresses. Pseudodementia is a term applied to depressed patients
who appear to be demented. These patients are often identifiable by
their tendency to complain about memory problems vociferously
rather than try to cover them up. They usually say they can't
complete cognitive tasks but with encouragement can often do so.
They can be considered to have depression-induced reversible
dementia that remits when the depression resolves.
C. Amnestic Syndrome
This is a memory disturbance without delirium or dementia. It is
usually associated with thiamine deficiency and chronic alcohol use
(eg, Korsakoff syndrome). There is an impairment in the ability to
learn new information or recall previously learned information.
 
Table 25–11. Etiology of delirium and other cognitive disorders.
 
 
 
Disorder
Possible Causes
Intoxication
Alcohol, sedatives, bromides, analgesics
(eg, pentazocine), psychedelic drugs,
stimulants, and household solvents.
 
Drug
withdrawal
Withdrawal from alcohol, sedative-
hypnotics, corticosteroids.
 
Long-term
effects of
alcohol
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.
 
Infections
Septicemia; meningitis and encephalitis
due to bacterial, viral, fungal, parasitic, or
tuberculous organisms or to central
nervous system syphilis; acute and
chronic infections due to the entire range
of microbiologic pathogens.
 
Endocrine
disorders
Thyrotoxicosis, hypothyroidism,
adrenocortical dysfunction (including
Addison disease and Cushing
syndrome), pheochromocytoma,
insulinoma, hypoglycemia,
hyperparathyroidism,
hypoparathyroidism, panhypopituitarism,
diabetic ketoacidosis.
 
Respiratory
disorders
Hypoxia, hypercapnia.
 
Metabolic
disturbances
Fluid and electrolyte disturbances
(especially hyponatremia,
hypomagnesemia, and hypercalcemia),
acid-base disorders, hepatic disease
(hepatic encephalopathy), kidney failure,
porphyria.
 
Nutritional
deficiencies
Deficiency of vitamin B1 (beriberi),
vitamin B12 (pernicious anemia), folic
acid, nicotinic acid (pellagra); protein-
calorie malnutrition.
 
Trauma
Subdural hematoma, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, intracerebral bleeding,
concussion syndrome.
 
Cardiovascular
disorders
Myocardial infarctions, cardiac
arrhythmias, cerebrovascular spasms,
hypertensive encephalopathy,
hemorrhages, embolisms, and occlusions
indirectly cause decreased cognitive
function.
 
Neoplasms
Primary or metastatic lesions of the
central nervous system, cancer-induced
hypercalcemia.
 
Seizure
disorders
Ictal, interictal, and postictal dysfunction.
 
Collagen-
vascular and
immunologic
disorders
Autoimmune disorders, including
systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren
syndrome, and AIDS.
 
Degenerative
diseases
Alzheimer disease, Pick disease,
multiple sclerosis, parkinsonism,
Huntington chorea, normal pressure
hydrocephalus.
 
Medications
Anticholinergic medications,
antidepressants, H2-blocking agents,
digoxin, salicylates (long-term use), and a
wide variety of other over-the-counter and
prescribed medications.
 
D. Substance-Induced Hallucinosis
This condition is characterized by persistent or recurrent
hallucinations (usually auditory) without the other symptoms usually
found in delirium or dementia. Alcohol or hallucinogens are often the
cause. There does not have to be any other mental disorder, and
there may be complete spontaneous resolution.
E. Personality Changes Due to a General Medical Condition (Formerly
Organic Personality Syndrome)
This syndrome is characterized by emotional lability and loss of
impulse control along with a general change in personality. Cognitive
functions are preserved. Social inappropriateness is common. Loss
of interest and lack of concern with the consequences of one's
actions are often present. The course depends on the underlying
cause (eg, frontal lobe contusion may resolve completely).
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis consists mainly of schizophrenia and the
other psychoses, which are sometimes confused with cognitive
disorders and are often accompanied by psychotic symptoms.
 Complications
Chronicity may result from delayed correction of the defect, eg,
subdural hematoma, low-pressure hydrocephalus. Accidents
secondary to impulsive behavior and poor judgment are a major
consideration. Secondary depression and impulsive behavior not
infrequently lead to suicide attempts. Medications—particularly
sedatives—may worsen thinking abilities and contribute to the
overall problems.
 Treatment
A. Medical
Delirium should be considered a syndrome of acute brain
dysfunction analogous to acute kidney failure. The first aim of
treatment is to identify and correct the etiologic medical problem.
Evaluation should consist of a comprehensive physical examination
including a search for neurologic abnormalities, infection, or
hypoxia. Routine laboratory tests may include serum electrolytes,
serum glucose, BUN, serum creatinine, liver function tests, thyroid
function tests, arterial blood gases, complete blood count, serum
calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, vitamin B12, folate, blood
cultures, urinalysis, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. Discontinue
medications that may be contributing to the problem (eg, analgesics,
corticosteroids, cimetidine, lidocaine, anticholinergic medications,
central nervous system depressants, mefloquine). Do not overlook
any 
possibility 
of 
reversible 
organic 
disease.
Electroencephalography, CT, and MRI evaluations may be helpful
in diagnosis. Ideally, the patient should be monitored without further
medications while the evaluation is carried out. There are, however,
two indications for medication in delirious states: behavioral control
(eg, pulling out lines) and subjective distress (eg, pronounced fear
due to hallucinations). If these indications are present, medications
may be used. If there is any hint of alcohol or substance withdrawal
(the most common cause of delirium in the general hospital), a
benzodiazepine such as lorazepam (1–2 mg every hour) can be
given parenterally. If there is little likelihood of withdrawal
syndrome, haloperidol is often used in doses of 1–10 mg every
hour. Given intravenously under ECG monitoring, it appears to
impose slight risk of extrapyramidal side effects. In addition to the
medication, a pleasant, comfortable, nonthreatening, and physically
safe environment with adequate nursing or attendant services should
be provided. Once the underlying condition has been identified and
treated, adjunctive medications can be tapered.
Treatment of the behavioral manifestations of the dementia
syndrome usually involve trying to positively reinforce healthy
behaviors and not reinforcing maladaptive behaviors (such as
aggression). Arranging the physical environment to maximize
autonomy as much as feasible and promote regularity of routine,
helps the individual cope with their limited intellectual reserves.
Simple, direct statements are more easily comprehended by these
individuals. Understanding how their decreased cognitive function
limits their abilities is important. For example, one elderly man in a
residential apartment kept complaining that someone was stealing
his ice cream at night. Realizing that he was unable to recall eating it
himself, his “delusion” made a certain sense. Once his caregivers
understood this, they were able to be more compassionate in
listening to his complaints and less worried about an ice cream
burglar.
Aggressiveness and rage states in dementia can be reduced with
lipophilic β-blockers (eg, propranolol, metoprolol) in moderate
doses. Since the serotonergic system has been implicated in arousal
conditions, medications that affect serotonin have been found to be
of some benefit in aggression and agitation. Included in this group
are lithium, trazodone, buspirone, and clonazepam. Dopamine
blockers (eg, the neuroleptic medications such as haloperidol) have
been used for many years to attenuate aggression. Atypical
neuroleptics may have a role in selected geriatric patients; however,
there are reports of increased mortality in some studies related to
the use of atypical neuroleptics in this population. There are also
reports of reduced agitation in Alzheimer disease from
carbamazepine, 100–400 mg/d orally (with slow increase as
needed). Emotional lability in some cases responds to small doses
of imipramine (25 mg orally one to three times per day) or
fluoxetine (5–20 mg/d orally); depression, which often occurs early
in the course of Alzheimer dementia, responds to the usual doses of
antidepressant medications, preferably those with the least
anticholinergic side effects (eg, SSRIs and MAO inhibitors).
Ergotoxine alkaloids (ergoloid mesylates: Hydergine, others)
have been studied with mixed results; improvement in ambulatory
self-care and depressed mood has been noted, but there has been
no improvement of cognitive functioning on any standardized tests.
Stimulant medications (eg, methylphenidate) do not change
cognitive function but can improve affect and mood, which helps the
caretakers cope with the problem.
B. Social
Substitute home care, board and care, or convalescent home care
may be most useful when the family is unable to care for the patient.
The setting should include familiar people and objects, lights at
night, and a simple schedule. Counseling may help the family to
cope with problems and may help keep the patient at home as long
as possible. Information about local groups can be obtained from
the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association, 70
East Lake Street, Suite 600, Chicago, IL 60601. Volunteer
services, including homemakers, visiting nurses, and adult protective
services, may be helpful in maintaining the patient at home.
C. Behavioral
Behavioral techniques include operant responses that can be used
to induce positive behaviors, eg, paying attention to the patient who
is trying to communicate appropriately, and extinction by ignoring
inappropriate responses. Patients with Alzheimer disease can learn
skills and retain them but do not recall the circumstances in which
they were learned.
D. Psychological
Formal psychological therapies are not usually helpful and may
make things worse by taxing the patient's limited cognitive
resources.
 Progosis
The prognosis is good for recovery of mental functioning in delirium
when the underlying condition is reversible. For most dementia
syndromes, the prognosis is for gradual deterioration, although new
drug treatments may prove helpful.
Breitbart W et al. Agitation and delirium at the end of life: “We
couldn't manage him.” JAMA. 2008 Dec 24;300(24):2898–910.
[PMID: 19109118]
 
Doody R et al. Effect of dimebon on cognition, activities of daily
living, behavior, and global function in patients with mild-to-
moderate Alzheimer's disease: a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study. Lancet. 2008 Jul 19;372(9634): 207–
15. [PMID: 18640457]
 
Schneider LS et al. Risk of death with atypical antipsychotic drug
treatment for dementia: meta-analysis of randomized placebo-
controlled trials. JAMA. 2005 Oct 19;294(15):1934–43. [PMID:
16234500]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Dementia. JAMA. 2009 Aug
12;302(6):704. [PMID: 19671914]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Mild cognitive impairment.
JAMA. 2009 Jul 22;302(4):452. [PMID: 19622827]
 
Trifirò G et al. Association of community-acquired pneumonia with
antipsychotic drug use in elderly patients: a nested case-control
study. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Apr 6;152(7):418–25. [PMID:
20368647]
 
PSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS
ASSOCIATED WITH
HOSPITALIZATION & ILLNESS
 
 Diagnostic Categories
A. Acute Problems
1. Delirium with psychotic features secondary to the
medical or surgical problem, or compounded by effect of
treatment.
2. Acute anxiety, often related to ignorance and fear of the
immediate problem as well as uncertainty about the future.
3. Anxiety as an intrinsic aspect of the medical problem
(eg, hyperthyroidism).
4. Denial of illness, which may present during acute or
intermediate phases of illness.
B. Intermediate Problems
1. Depression as a function of the illness or acceptance of
the illness, often associated with realistic or fantasied
hopelessness about the future.
2. Behavioral problems, often related to denial of illness
and, in extreme cases, causing the patient to leave the
hospital against medical advice.
C. Recuperative Problems
1. Decreasing cooperation as the patient sees that
improvement and compliance are not compelled.
2. Readjustment problems with family, job, and society.
 General Considerations
A. Acute Problems
1. “Intensive care unit psychosis”—The stressful ICU
environment may be a cause of delirium. Critical care unit factors
include sleep deprivation, increased arousal, mechanical ventilation,
and social isolation. Other causes include those common to delirium
and require vigorous investigation (see Delirium, above).
2. Pre- and postsurgical anxiety states—Such problems are
common and commonly ignored. Presurgical anxiety is very
common and is principally a fear of death (many surgical patients
make out their wills). Patients may be fearful of anesthesia
(improved by the preoperative anesthesia interview), the mysterious
operating room, and the disease processes that might be uncovered
by the surgeon. Such fears frequently cause people to delay
examinations that might result in earlier surgery and a greater chance
of cure.
The opposite of this is surgery proneness, the quest for surgery
to escape from overwhelming life stresses. Polysurgery patients may
be classified as having factitious disorders. Dynamic motivations
include the need to get medical care as a way of getting dependency
needs met, the desire to outwit authority figures, unconscious guilt,
or a masochistic need to suffer. Frequent surgery may also be
related to a somatoform disorder, particularly body dysmorphic
disorder (an obsession that a body part is disfigured). More
apparent reasons may include an attempt to get relief from pain and
a lifestyle that has become almost exclusively medically oriented,
with all of the risks entailed in such an endeavor.
Postsurgical anxiety states are usually related to pain,
procedures, and loss of body image. Acute pain problems are quite
different from chronic pain disorders (see Chronic Pain Disorders,
this chapter); the former are readily handled with adequate analgesic
medication (see Chapter 5). Alterations in body image, as with
amputations, ostomies, and mastectomies, often raise concerns
about relationships with others.
3. Iatrogenic problems—These usually pertain to medications,
complications of diagnostic and treatment procedures, and
impersonal and unsympathetic staff behavior. Polypharmacy is often
a factor. Patients with unsolved diagnostic problems are at higher
risk. They are desirous of relief, and the quest engenders more
diagnostic procedures with a higher incidence of complications. The
upset patient and family may be very demanding. Excessive
demands usually result from anxiety. Such behavior is best handled
with calm and measured responses.
B. Intermediate Problems
1. Prolonged hospitalization—Prolonged hospitalization presents
unique problems in certain hospital services, eg, burn units,
orthopedic services, and tuberculosis wards. The acute problems of
the severely burned patient are discussed in Chapter 37. The
problems often are behavioral difficulties related to length of
hospitalization and necessary procedures. For example, in burn
units, pain is a major problem in addition to anxiety about
procedures. Disputes with staff are common and often concern pain
medication or ward privileges. Some patients regress to infantile
behavior and dependency. Staff members must agree about their
approach to the patient in order to ensure the smooth functioning of
the unit.
Denial of illness may present in some patients. Intervention by an
authority figure (eg, immediate work supervisor) may help the
patient accept treatment and eventually abandon the coping
mechanism of denial.
2. Depression—Depression frequently occurs during this period.
Therapeutic medications (eg, corticosteroids) may be a factor.
Depression can contribute to irritability and overt anger. Severe
depression can lead to anorexia, which further complicates healing
and metabolic balance. It is during this period that the issue of
disfigurement arises—relief at survival gives way to concern about
future function and appearance.
C. Recuperative Problems
1. Anxiety—Anxiety about return to the posthospital environment
can cause regression to a dependent position. Complications
increase, and staff forbearance again is tested. Anxiety occurring at
this stage usually is handled more easily than previous behavior
problems.
2. Posthospital adjustment—Adjustment difficulties after
discharge are related to the severity of the deficits and the use of
outpatient facilities (eg, physical therapy, rehabilitation programs,
psychiatric outpatient treatment). Some patients may experience
posttraumatic stress symptoms (eg, from traumatic injuries or even
from necessary medical treatments). Lack of appropriate follow-up
can contribute to depression in the patient, who may feel that he or
she is making poor progress and may have thoughts of “giving up.”
Reintegration into work, educational, and social endeavors may be
slow. Life is simply much more difficult when one is disfigured,
disabled, or disenfranchised.
 Clinical Findings
The symptoms that occur in these patients are similar to those
discussed in previous sections of this chapter, eg, delirium, stress
and adjustment disorders, anxiety, and depression. Behavior
problems may include lack of cooperation, increased complaints,
demands for medication, sexual approaches to nurses, threats to
leave the hospital, and actual signing out against medical
recommendations. The underlying personality structure of the
individual is a major factor in coping styles (eg, the compulsive
individual increases indecision, the hysterical individual increases
dramatic behavior).
 Differential Diagnosis
Delirium and dementia (including cases associated with HIV
infection and drug abuse) must always be ruled out, since they often
present with symptoms resembling anxiety, depression, or
psychosis. Personality disorders existing prior to hospitalization
often underlie the various behavior problems, but particularly the
management problems.
 Complications
Prolongation of hospitalization causes increased expense,
deterioration of patient-staff relationships, and increased
probabilities of iatrogenic and legal problems. The possibility of
increasing posthospital treatment problems is enhanced.
 Treatment
A. Medical
The most important consideration by far is to have one clinician in
charge, a clinician whom the patient trusts and who is able to
oversee multiple treatment approaches (see Somatoform Disorders,
above). In acute problems, attention must be paid to metabolic
imbalance, alcohol withdrawal, and previous drug use—prescribed,
recreational, or over-the-counter. Adequate sleep and analgesia are
important in the prevention of delirium. When absolute behavioral
control is urgently needed, agents such as propofol,
dexmedetomidine, opioids, and midazolam have been used.
Many clinicians are attuned to the early detection of the surgery-
prone patient. Plastic and orthopedic surgeons are at particular risk.
Appropriate consultations may help detect some problems and
mitigate future ones.
Postsurgical anxiety states can be alleviated by personal
attention from the surgeon. Anxiety is not so effectively lessened by
ancillary medical personnel, whom the patient perceives as lesser
authorities, until after the clinician has reassured the patient.
Inappropriate use of “as needed” analgesia places an unfair burden
on the nurse. “Patient-controlled analgesia” can improve pain
control, decrease anxiety, and minimize side effects.
Depression should be recognized early. If severe, it may be
treated by antidepressant medications (see Antidepressant
Medications, above). High levels of anxiety can be lowered with
judicious use of anxiolytic agents. Unnecessary medications tend to
reinforce the patient's impression that there must be a serious illness
or medication would not be required.
B. Psychological
Prepare the patient and family for what is to come. This includes the
types of units where the patient will be quartered, the procedures
that will be performed, and any disfigurements that will result from
surgery. Repetition improves understanding. The nursing staff can
be helpful, since patients frequently confide a lack of understanding
to a nurse but are reluctant to do so to the physician.
Denial of illness is frequently a block to acceptance of treatment.
This too should be handled with family members present (to help
the patient face the reality of the situation) in a series of short
interviews (for reinforcement). Dependency problems resulting from
long hospitalization are best handled by focusing on the changes to
come as the patient makes the transition to the outside world. Key
figures are teachers, vocational counselors, and physical therapists.
Challenges should be realistic and practical and handled in small
steps.
Depression is usually related to the loss of familiar hospital
supports, and the outpatient therapists and counselors help to lessen
the impact of the loss. Some of the impact can be alleviated by
anticipating, with the patient and family, the signal features of the
common depression to help prevent the patient from assuming a
permanent sick role (invalidism).
Suicide is always a concern when a patient is faced with despair.
An honest, compassionate, and supportive approach will help
sustain the patient during this trying period.
C. Behavioral
Prior desensitization can significantly allay anxiety about medical
procedures. A “dry run” can be done to reinforce the oral
description. Cooperation during acute problem periods can be
enhanced by the use of appropriate reinforcers such as a favorite
nurse or helpful family member. People who are positive reinforcers
are even more helpful during the intermediate phases when the
patient becomes resistant to the seemingly endless procedures (eg,
debridement of burned areas).
Specific situations (eg, psychological dependency on the
respirator) can be corrected by weaning with appropriate
reinforcers (eg, watching a favorite movie on a video recorder when
disconnected from the ventilator). Behavioral approaches should be
used in a positive and optimistic way for maximal reinforcement.
Relaxation techniques and attentional distraction can be used to
block side effects of a necessary treatment (eg, nausea in cancer
chemotherapy).
D. Social
A change in environment requires adaptation. Because of the illness,
admission and hospitalization may be more easily handled than
discharge. Reintegration into society can be difficult. In some cases,
the family is a negative influence. A predischarge evaluation must be
made to determine whether the family will be able to cope with the
physical or mental changes in the patient. Working with the family
while the patient is in the acute stage may presage a successful
transition later on.
Development of a new social life can be facilitated by various
self-help organizations (eg, the stoma club). Sharing problems with
others in similar circumstances eases the return to a social life, which
may be quite different from that prior to the illness.
 Prognosis
The prognosis is good in all patients who have reversible medical
and surgical conditions. It is guarded when there is serious
functional loss that impairs vocational, educational, or societal
possibilities—especially in the case of progressive and ultimately
life-threatening illness.
Davydow DS et al. Psychiatric morbidity and functional
impairments in survivors of burns, traumatic injuries and ICU stays
for other critical illnesses: a review of the literature. Int Rev
Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;21(6):531–8. [PMID: 19919206]
 
Katon W et al. Depression and diabetes: a potentially lethal
combination. J Gen Intern Med. 2008 Oct;23(10):1571–5.
[PMID: 18649108]
 
Milani RV et al. Impact of exercise training and depression on
survival in heart failure due to coronary heart disease. Am J
Cardiol. 2011 Jan;107(1):64–8. [PMID: 21146688]
 
Whooley MA. Depression and cardiovascular disease: healing the
broken hearted. JAMA. 2006 Jun 28;295(24):2874–81. [PMID:
16804154]
]
 
 
 
Endocrine Disorders
Paul A. Fitzgerald, MD
DISEASES OF THE
HYPOTHALAMUS &
PITUITARY GLAND
 
ANTERIOR HYPOPITUITARISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Partial or complete deficiency of one or any combination of
anterior pituitary hormones.
 Adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency: reduced adrenal
secretion of cortisol, testosterone, and epinephrine; aldosterone
secretion remains intact.
 Growth hormone (GH) deficiency: short stature in children;
asthenia, obesity, and increased cardiac mortality in adults.
 Prolactin deficiency: inhibition of postpartum lactation.
 Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) deficiency: secondary
hypothyroidism.
 Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) deficiency: hypogonadism and infertility in men and
women.
 
 General Considerations
Hypopituitarism can be caused by either hypothalamic or pituitary
dysfunction. Patients with hypopituitarism may have single or
multiple hormonal deficiencies (Table 26–1). When one hormonal
deficiency is discovered, others may be present.
1. Hypopituitarism caused by mass lesions— Pituitary
adenomas are usually sporadic but are sometimes part of multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1). Pituitary tumors that arise in
MEN 1 usually secrete prolactin (63%), GH (9%), or both (10%)
and are more aggressive than sporadic adenomas. Other types of
mass lesions include granulomas, Rathke cleft cysts, apoplexy,
meta-static 
carcinomas, 
aneurysms, 
and 
brain 
tumors
(craniopharyngioma, 
meningioma, 
germinoma, 
glioma,
chondrosarcoma, chordoma of the clivus). Langerhans cell
histiocytosis usually presents in youth with diabetes insipidus or
hypopituitarism. Osteolytic bone lesions are noted on radiographs.
Autoimmune hypophysitis, postpartum pituitary necrosis (Sheehan
syndrome), eclampsia–preeclampsia, sickle cell disease, and
African trypanosomiasis are rare causes.
2. Hypopituitarism without mass lesions—This may be
congenital in syndromes such as septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier
syndrome). Congenital hypopituitarism also develops in patients
with various gene mutations. Hypopituitarism may also be caused
by cranial radiation, surgery, encephalitis, hemochromatosis, or
autoimmunity. It may also occur after coronary artery bypass
grafting. At least one pituitary hormone deficiency develops in about
25–30% of survivors of moderate to severe traumatic brain injury
(Glasgow Coma Scale ≤ 13/15) and in about 55% of survivors of
aneurysmal 
subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. 
Some 
degree 
of
hypopituitarism occurs in one-third of ischemic stroke patients, most
commonly GH deficiency and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Mitotane, given for adrenal cortical carcinoma, can suppress TSH
secretion and cause reversible secondary hypothyroidism.
Congenital isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be
caused by various gene mutations that control the production or
release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), LH, or FSH.
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia (see below) is one cause of
isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. It may be autosomal
recessive or X-linked; the X-linked form is caused by a mutation in
the DAX 1 gene. Adrenal insufficiency, caused by failure to form the
adrenal cortex, can present during infancy or childhood in boys with
DAX 1 gene mutations. Prader-Willi syndrome (see below) is a
genetic disorder where genes on the paternal chromosome 15 are
deleted or unexpressed. The incidence of this disorder is 1:15,000;
both sexes are affected equally. Kallmann syndrome (see below)
is caused by various gene mutations that impair the development or
migration of GnRH-synthesizing neurons from the olfactory bulb to
the hypothalamus. Kallmann syndrome is usually sporadic but may
be familial and inherited as X-linked recessive (Kal 1), autosomal
dominant (Kal 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6), or autosomal recessive (Kal 3, 4,
or 6). Kallmann syndrome has an incidence of 1:10,000 males and
1:50,000 females.
 
Table 26–1. Pituitary hormones.
 
Anterior pituitary
     Growth hormone (GH)1
     Prolactin (PRL)
     Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
     Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
     Luteinizing hormone (LH)2
     Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Posterior pituitary
     Arginine vasopressin (AVP)3
     Oxytocin
1GH closely resembles human placental lactogen (hPL).
2LH closely resembles human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
3AVP is identical with antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Gonadotropin deficiency is also known as hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. It is caused by insufficiencies in LH and FSH, which
cause hypogonadism and infertility. Congenital gonadotropin
deficiency is characterized by partial or complete lack of pubertal
development. (See discussion of primary amenorrhea.) Patients with
Kallmann syndrome have hypogonadism and anosmia or
hyposmia. Half of these patients have unilateral renal agenesis.
Some patients with Kallmann syndrome may also exhibit
cryptorchidism, micropenis, optic problems, sensorineural deafness,
cerebellar dysfunction, cognitive problems, bimanual synkinesis,
cleft lip, or high-arched palate.
Patients with congenital adrenal hypoplasia have congenital
normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Boys with
congenital adrenal hypoplasia who survive beyond childhood usually
do not enter puberty as a result of their hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. However, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
subtle signs of adrenal failure can present in adulthood in males with
partial loss-of-function mutations in DAX 1. Patients with Prader-
p
Willi syndrome have variable features of both gonadotropin
deficiency and primary gonadal dysfunction; boys have
cryptorchidism. Other features of Prader-Willi syndrome can
include mental retardation, short stature, hyperflexibility, autonomic
dysregulation, cognitive impairment, and hyperphagia with obesity.
Acquired gonadotropin deficiency is characterized by the loss
of axillary, pubic, and body hair. This occurs gradually but becomes
particularly prominent in patients who are also hypoadrenal. Men
may note diminished beard growth. Libido is diminished. Women
have amenorrhea; men note decreased erections. Most patients are
infertile. Androgen deficiency predisposes patients to osteopenia
and muscle atrophy. (See sections on male hypogonadism and
secondary amenorrhea.) Advancing age, obesity, and poor health
also cause partial male hypogonadism. (See Male Hypogonadism.)
TSH deficiency causes hypothyroidism with manifestations such
as fatigue, weakness, weight change, and hyper-lipidemia.
Bexarotene is a retinoid chemotherapeutic agent that suppresses
TSH secretion and circulating levels of T4 and T3, thereby inducing
reversible secondary hypothyroidism. (See Hypothyroidism and
Myxedema.)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency results in
diminished cortisol secretion (see Adrenocortical Hypofunction).
Symptoms may include weakness, fatigue, weight loss, and
hypotension. Patients with partial ACTH deficiency continue to
have some cortisol secretion and may not have symptoms until
stressed by illness or surgery. Adrenal mineralocorticoid secretion
continues, so manifestations of adrenal insufficiency in
hypopituitarism are usually less striking than in bilateral adrenal
gland destruction (Addison disease); hyponatremia may occur,
especially when ACTH and TSH deficiencies are both present.
GH deficiency that is congenital presents with hypoglycemia in
infancy and short stature in childhood. GH deficiency in adulthood
tends to cause mild to moderate central obesity, increased systolic
blood pressure, increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol, and reduced cardiac output. Affected patients may also
have reduced muscle and bone mass, reduced physical and mental
energy, impaired concentration and memory, and depression.
Laron syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder that is mainly
associated with mutations in GH receptor gene. This causes
resistance to GH and severe insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)
deficiency, resulting in short stature (dwarfism). Affected individuals
have a prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge, small mandible,
and central obesity. They may have recurrent hypoglycemic
seizures. Partial resistance to GH may cause some cases of
idiopathic short stature without features of Laron syndrome.
Panhypopituitarism is the absence of all anterior pituitary
hormones. Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) refers
to a deficiency of several anterior pituitary hormones. CPHD
gradually develops in patients with PROP 1 gene mutations, usually
presenting with short stature and growth failure due to GH and TSH
deficiency; lack of pubertal development occurs due to deficiencies
in FSH and LH. ACTH-cortisol deficiency also gradually develops
in patients with PROP 1 gene mutations; these patients typically
require corticosteroid replacement therapy by age 18 years. In
addition to the manifestations noted above, patients with long-
standing hypopituitarism tend to have dry, pale, finely textured skin.
The face has fine wrinkles and an apathetic countenance.
Hypopituitarism can be caused by hypothalamic or pituitary
tumors such as craniopharyngiomas and dysgerminomas.
Hypothalamic damage can cause obesity. Local tumor effects can
cause headache or optic nerve compression with visual field
impairment.
B. Laboratory Findings
The fasting blood glucose may be low. Hyponatremia is often
present due to hypothyroidism or hypoadrenalism. Hyperkalemia
usually does not occur, since aldosterone production is not affected.
For men, an accurate serum total testosterone measurement must
be obtained. For older men, free testosterone is best measured by
calculation, using accurate assays for testosterone and sex hormone
binding globulin. Serum gonadotropins (FSH and LH) are obtained
if the serum testosterone is low in order to distinguish primary
hypogonadism from pituitary dysfunction.
The free thyroxine (FT4) level is low, and TSH is usually not
elevated. However, hypothyroidism with a paradoxically increased
serum TSH has been reported in some patients with hypothalamic
hypopituitarism. Plasma levels of sex steroids (testosterone and
estradiol) are low or low normal, as are the serum gonadotropins.
Elevated prolactin (PRL) levels are found in patients with
prolactinomas, acromegaly, and hypothalamic disease.
ACTH deficiency causes functional atrophy of the adrenal cortex
within 2 weeks of pituitary damage. Therefore, the diagnosis of
secondary hypoadrenalism may be confirmed by holding any
corticosteroid medication on the day of the test and by
administering cosyntropin (synthetic ACTH1–24), 0.25 mg
(intramuscularly or intravenously); blood is drawn 30–60 minutes
after the injection. A serum cortisol of ≥ 20 mcg/dL (550 nmol/mL),
random or stimulated, rules out the diagnosis. A baseline ACTH
level is low or normal in secondary hypoadrenalism, distinguishing it
from primary adrenal disease. Serum dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA) levels are frequently low in patients with ACTH deficiency,
helping confirm the diagnosis. Metyrapone testing is unnecessary.
Deficiency of epinephrine occurs with secondary adrenal
insufficiency, since high local concentrations of cortisol are required
to induce the production of the enzyme phenylethanolamine N-
methyltransferase (PNMT) in the adrenal medulla that catalyzes the
conversion of norepinephrine to epinephrine.
The diagnosis of GH deficiency is difficult since normal GH
secretion is pulsatile and serum GH levels are nearly undetectable
for most of the day. Also, adults normally tend to produce less GH
as they age. Therefore, GH deficiency is often inferred by
symptoms of GH deficiency in the presence of pituitary destruction
or other pituitary hormone deficiencies. GH deficiency is present in
96% of patients with three or more other pituitary hormone
deficiencies. GH stimulates the production of IGF-I. Unfortunately,
serum IGF-I is not sensitive for GH deficiency since IGF-I levels
are in the normal range in about 50% of adults with GH deficiency.
Low serum IGF-I levels are not specific for GH deficiency;
however, very low levels of IGF-I (< 84 mcg/L) are indicative of
GH deficiency, except in conditions that naturally suppress serum
IGF-I (eg, malnutrition, prolonged fasting, oral estrogen,
hypothyroidism, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, liver failure). In GH
deficiency, exercise-stimulated serum GH levels remain at < 5
ng/mL and usually fail to rise; however, by age 40 years, most
normal adults have lost their GH response to exercise.
Provocative GH-stimulation tests are commonly used but are
poor tests for GH deficiency. The insulin hypoglycemia test is now
rarely used. Other GH stimulation tests require the administration of
intravenous arginine and growth hormone–releasing hormone
(GHRH) and oral clonidine or carbidopa/levodopa (combination) in
patients pretreated with propranolol or estrogen. However, these
tests do not discriminate well between normal individuals and
patients with presumed GH deficiency (patients with three or more
other pituitary hormone deficiencies). Also, normal overweight
adults (body mass index [BMI] ≥ 25 kg/m2) typically have blunted
peak GH levels after arginine-GHRH administration.
Despite the limitations of intravenous GHRH/arginine stimulation
testing, some insurance companies insist that patients have an
abnormal test before covering the costs of GH replacement therapy.
However, the latter test has a sensitivity of only 66% for GH
deficiency. Therefore, when patients have a serum IGF-I < 84
mcg/L or three other pituitary hormone deficiencies, the likelihood
of GH deficiency is so high that symptomatic patients should have a
therapeutic trial of GH therapy.
The differential diagnosis of GH deficiency is congenital GH
resistance with deficiency of IGF-I; at its worst, IGF-I deficiency
results in Laron dwarfism that is resistant to GH therapy.
Patients with hypopituitarism without an established etiology
should be screened for hemochromatosis with a serum iron and
transferrin saturation or ferritin since hemochromatosis can cause
hypopituitarism.
C. Imaging
MRI provides the best visualization of pituitary tumors. Thickening
of the pituitary stalk can be caused by sarcoidosis or hypophysitis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Reversible hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may occur with
serious illness, malnutrition, or anorexia nervosa. The clinical
situation and the presence of normal adrenal and thyroid function
allow 
ready 
distinction 
from 
hypopituitarism. 
Profound
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism develops in men who receive
GnRH analog therapy (leuprolide) for prostate cancer; it usually
persists following cessation of therapy. Hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism usually develops in patients receiving opioid therapy,
including high-dose methadone or long-term intrathecal infusion of
opioids; both GH deficiency and secondary adrenal insufficiency
occur in 15% of such patients. Secondary adrenal insufficiency may
persist for many months following high-dose corticosteroid therapy.
Severe illness causes functional suppression of TSH and T4.
Hyperthyroxinemia reversibly suppresses TSH. Administration of
triiodothyronine (Cytomel) suppresses TSH and T4. Bexarotene,
used to treat cutaneous T cell lymphoma, suppresses TSH
secretion, resulting in temporary central hypothyroidism.
Corticosteroids or megestrol treatment reversibly suppresses
endogenous ACTH and cortisol secretion.
GH deficiency normally occurs with aging. Physiologic GH
deficiency that develops in obese patients may return to normal with
sufficient weight loss.
 Complications
Among patients with craniopharyngiomas, diabetes insipidus is
found in 16% preoperatively and in 60% postoperatively.
Hyponatremia often presents abruptly during the first 2 weeks
following pituitary surgery. Visual field impairment may occur.
Hypothalamic damage may result in morbid obesity as well as
cognitive and emotional problems. Conventional radiation therapy
results in an increased incidence of small vessel ischemic strokes
and second tumors.
Patients with untreated hypoadrenalism and a stressful illness may
become febrile and die in shock and coma.
Adults with GH deficiency have experienced an increased
cardiovascular morbidity. Rarely, acute hemorrhage may occur in
large pituitary tumors, manifested by rapid loss of vision, headache,
and evidence of acute pituitary failure (pituitary apoplexy) requiring
emergency decompression of the sella.
 Treatment
Transsphenoidal removal of pituitary tumors will sometimes reverse
hypopituitarism. Postoperative hyponatremia often occurs; serum
sodium must be checked frequently for 2 weeks after pituitary
surgery. Hypogonadism due to PRL excess usually resolves during
treatment with dopamine agonists. Endocrine substitution therapy
must be given before, during and, often, permanently after such
procedures.
GH-secreting tumors may respond to octreotide (see section on
acromegaly). Radiation therapy with x-ray, gamma knife, or heavy
particles may be necessary but increases the likelihood of
hypopituitarism.
The mainstay of substitution therapy for pituitary insufficiency
remains lifetime hormone replacement.
A. Corticosteroids
Hydrocortisone tablets, 15–35 mg/d orally in divided doses, should
be given. Most patients do well with 10–20 mg in the morning and
5–15 mg in the late afternoon. Patients with partial ACTH
deficiency (basal morning serum cortisol above 8 mg/dL [220
mmol/L]) require hydrocortisone replacement in lower doses of
about 5 mg orally twice daily. Some patients feel better taking
prednisone, 3–7.5 mg/d orally. A mineralocorticoid is rarely
needed. To determine the optimal corticosteroid replacement
dosage, it is necessary to monitor patients carefully for
manifestations of overreplacement (Cushing syndrome) or
underreplacement. A serum white blood cell count (WBC) with a
relative differential can be useful, since a relative neutrophilia and
lymphopenia can indicate overreplacement with corticosteroid, and
vice versa. Additional corticosteroids must be given during states of
stress, eg, during infection, trauma, or surgical procedures. For mild
illness, corticosteroid doses are doubled or tripled. For trauma or
surgical stress, hydrocortisone is given in doses of 50 mg
intramuscularly or intravenously every 6 hours and then reduced to
normal doses as the stress subsides. Patients with adrenal
insufficiency are advised to wear a medical alert bracelet describing
their condition and treatment.
Patients with secondary adrenal insufficiency due to treatment
with corticosteroids at supraphysiologic doses require their usual
daily dose of corticosteroid during surgery and acute illness;
supplemental hydrocortisone is not usually required.
B. Thyroid
Levothyroxine is given to correct hypothyroidism only after the
patient is assessed for cortisol deficiency or is already receiving
corticosteroids. (See Hypothyroidism.) The typical maintenance
dose is about 1.6 mcg/kg body weight. However, dosage
requirements vary widely, averaging 125 mcg daily with a range of
25–300 mcg daily. The optimal replacement dose of thyroxine for
each patient must be carefully assessed clinically on an individual
basis. Serum FT4 levels usually need to be in the high-normal range
for adequate replacement. Assessment of serum TSH is useless for
monitoring patients, since levels are always low with TSH
deficiency.
C. Sex Hormones
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism often develops in patients with
hyperprolactinemia; it may be reversed with treatment of the
hyperprolactinemia. (See Hyperprolactinemia.)
Androgen replacement is discussed in the section on male
hypogonadism. Estrogen replacement is discussed in the section on
female hypogonadism. Patients with idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, who have received several years of hormone
replacement therapy (HRT), may have a trial off hormonal therapy
to assess whether spontaneous sexual maturation may have
occurred.
Women with hypopituitarism and secondary adrenal insufficiency
whose serum DHEA levels are < 400 ng/mL may be treated with
compounded DHEA in doses of about 25–50 mg/d orally. DHEA
therapy tends to increase pubic and axillary hair and may modestly
improve libido, alertness, stamina, and overall psychological well-
being after 6 months of therapy.
To improve spermatogenesis, human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) (equivalent to LH) may be given at a dosage of 2000–3000
units intramuscularly three times weekly and testosterone
replacement is discontinued. The dose of hCG is adjusted to
normalize serum testosterone levels. After 6–12 months of hCG
treatment, if the sperm count remains low, hCG injections are
continued along with injections of FSH: follitropin-β (synthetic
recombinant FSH) or urofollitropins (urine-derived FSH). An
alternative for patients with an intact pituitary (eg, Kallmann
syndrome) is the use of leuprolide (GnRH analog) by intermittent
subcutaneous infusion. With either treatment, testicular volumes
double within 5–12 months, and spermatogenesis occurs in most
cases. With persistent treatment and the help of intracytoplasmic
sperm injection for some cases, the total pregnancy success rate is
about 70%. Clomiphene, 25–50 mg orally daily, can sometimes
stimulate a man's own pituitary gonadotropins (when his pituitary is
intact), thereby increasing testosterone and sperm production.
For fertility induction in females, ovulation may be induced with
clomiphene, 50 mg daily for 5 days every 2 months. Follitropins and
hCG can induce multiple births and should be used only by those
experienced with their administration. (See Hypogonadism.)
D. Human Growth Hormone (hGH)
Symptomatic adults with severe GH deficiency (serum IGF-I < 85
mcg/L) may be treated with a subcutaneous recombinant human
growth hormone (rhGH) injection starting at a dosage of about 0.2
mg/d (0.6 international units/d), administered three or four times
weekly. The dosage of rhGH is increased every 2–4 weeks by
increments of 0.1 mg (0.3 international units) until side effects occur
or a sufficient salutary response and a normal serum IGF-I level are
achieved. A sustained-release injectable suspension of depot GH is
available (Nutropin Depot). It can be given twice monthly and is
therefore more convenient than standard rhGH preparations. In a
study of 20 Brazilian GH-deficient adults, depot GH, given in doses
of 13.5 mg subcutaneously twice monthly over 6 months, improved
body morphology and lipid profiles but was associated with an
increase in carotid plaque. If the desired effects (eg, improved
energy and mentation, reduction in visceral adiposity) are not seen
within 3–6 months at maximum tolerated dosage, rhGH therapy is
discontinued.
During pregnancy, rhGH may be safely administered to women
with hypopituitarism at their usual pregestational dose during the first
trimester, tapering the dose during the second trimester, and
discontinuing rhGH during the third trimester.
Oral estrogen replacement reduces hepatic IGF-I production.
Therefore, prior to commencing rhGH therapy, oral estrogen is
changed to a transdermal or transvaginal estradiol.
Side effects of rhGH therapy may include peripheral edema,
hand stiffness, arthralgias, myalgias, headache, pseudotumor
cerebri, gynecomastia, carpal tunnel syndrome, tarsal tunnel
syndrome, hypertension, and proliferative retinopathy. Side effects
are more common in older patients, those with greater weight and
higher BMI, and those with adult-onset GH deficiency. Such
symptoms usually remit promptly after a sufficient reduction in
dosage. Excessive doses of rhGH could cause acromegaly; patients
receiving long-term therapy require careful clinical monitoring.
Serum IGF-I levels should be kept in the normal range and periodic
determinations of serum IGF-I levels are helpful in guiding
therapeutic dosing.
GH should not be administered during critical illness since, in one
study, administration of very high doses of rhGH to patients in an
intensive care unit was shown to increase overall mortality. There is
no role for GH replacement in the somatopause of aging.
IGF-I (mecasermin) is available to treat patients with Laron
syndrome.
E. Other Treatment
Selective transsphenoidal resection of pituitary adenomas can often
restore normal pituitary function. Cabergoline, bromocriptine, or
quinagolide 
may 
reverse 
the 
hypogonadism 
seen 
in
hyperprolactinomas. (See Disorders of Prolactin Secretion.)
Disseminated Langerhans cell histiocytosis may be treated with
bisphosphonates to improve bone pain; treatment with 2-
chlorodeoxyadenosine (cladribine) has been reported to produce
remissions.
 Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the primary cause. Hypopituitarism
resulting from a pituitary tumor may be reversible with dopamine
agonists or with careful selective resection of the tumor.
Spontaneous recovery from hypopituitarism associated with
pituitary stalk thickening has been reported. Patients can also
recover from functional hypopituitarism, eg, hypogonadism due to
starvation or severe illness, suppression of ACTH by
corticosteroids, or suppression of TSH by hyperthyroidism.
Spontaneous reversal of isolated idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism occurs in about 10% of patients after several years
of hormone replacement therapy.
Functionally, most patients with hypopituitarism do very well with
hormone replacement. Men with infertility who are treated with
hCG/FSH or GnRH are likely to resume spermatogenesis if they
have a history of sexual maturation, descended testicles, and a
baseline serum inhibin level over 60 pg/mL. Women under age 40
years, with infertility due to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, can
usually have successful induction of ovulation.
Binder G et al; South German Working Group for Pediatric
Endocrinology. Effects of dehydroepiandrosterone therapy on
pubic hair growth and psychological well-being in adolescent girls
and young women with central adrenal insufficiency: a double-
blind, randomized, placebo-controlled phase III trial. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;94(4):1182–90. [PMID: 19126625]
 
Bry-Gauillard H et al. Congenital hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism in females: clinical spectrum, evaluation, and
genetics. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2010 May;71(3):158–62.
[PMID: 20363464]
 
Chanson P et al. Comparative validation of the growth hormone-
releasing hormone and arginine test for the diagnosis of adult
growth hormone deficiency using a growth hormone assay
conforming to recent international recommendations. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Aug;95(8):3684–92. [PMID:
20484474]
 
Clemmons DR. The diagnosis and treatment of growth hormone
deficiency in adults. Curr Opinion Endocrinol Diabetes Obes.
2010 Aug;17(4):377–83. [PMID: 20588115]
 
Grossman AB. The diagnosis and management of central
hypoadrenalism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;95(6):4855–
63. [PMID: 20525912]
 
Laursen T et al. The management of adult growth hormone
deficiency syndrome. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008
Oct;9(14):2435–50. [PMID: 18778182]
 
Root AW. Reversible isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
due to mutations in the neurokinin B regulation of gonadotropin-
releasing hormone release. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
Jun;95(6):2625–9. [PMID: 20525912]
 
DIABETES INSIPIDUS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) deficiency causes central diabetes
insipidus with polyuria (2–20 l/d) and polydipsia.
 Hypernatremia occurs if fluid intake is inadequate.
 
 General Considerations
Diabetes insipidus is an uncommon disease characterized by an
increase in thirst and the passage of large quantities of urine of low
specific gravity (usually < 1.006 with ad libitum fluid intake). The
urine is otherwise normal. It is caused by a deficiency of
vasopressin or resistance to vasopressin.
Primary central diabetes insipidus (without an identifiable
lesion noted on MRI of the pituitary and hypothalamus) accounts
for about one-third of all cases of diabetes insipidus. Many such
cases appear to be due to autoimmunity against hypothalamic
arginine vasopressin (AVP)-secreting cells; pituitary stalk thickening
can often be detected on pituitary MRI scanning. The cause may
also be genetic. Familial diabetes insipidus occurs as a dominant
genetic trait with symptoms developing at about 2 years of age.
Diabetes insipidus also occurs in Wolfram syndrome, a rare
autosomal recessive disorder that is also known by the acronym
DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, type 1 diabetes mellitus, optic
atrophy, and deafness). DIDMOAD manifestations usually present
in childhood but may not occur until adulthood, along with
depression and cognitive problems. Secondary central diabetes
insipidus is due to damage to the hypothalamus or pituitary stalk by
tumor, hypophysitis, anoxic encephalopathy, surgical or accidental
trauma, infection (eg, encephalitis, tuberculosis, syphilis),
sarcoidosis, 
or 
multifocal 
Langerhans 
cell 
(eosinophilic)
granulomatosis (“histiocytosis X”). Metastases to the pituitary are
more likely to cause diabetes insipidus (33%) than are pituitary
adenomas (1%).
Vasopressinase-induced diabetes insipidus may be seen in
the last trimester of pregnancy and in the puerperium. A circulating
enzyme destroys native vasopressin; however, synthetic
desmopressin is unaffected. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a
disorder caused by a defect in the kidney tubules that interferes with
water reabsorption. These patients have normal secretion of
vasopressin, and the polyuria is unresponsive to it. Congenital
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is present from birth and is due to
defective expression of renal vasopressin V2 receptors or
vasopressin-sensitive water channels. It occurs as a familial X-
linked trait; adults often have hyperuricemia as well. Acquired
forms of vasopressin-resistant diabetes insipidus are usually
less severe and are seen in pyelonephritis, renal amyloidosis,
myeloma, potassium depletion, Sjögren syndrome, sickle cell
anemia, or chronic hypercalcemia. The disorder may occur also as
a corticosteroid effect or as an acute side effect of diuretics. Certain
drugs (eg, demeclocycline, lithium, foscarnet, or methicillin) may
induce nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The recovery from acute
tubular necrosis may also be associated with transient nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus. (See Kidney Disorders.)
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms of the disease are intense thirst, especially with a
craving for ice water, and polyuria, the volume of ingested fluid
varying from 2 L to 20 L daily, with correspondingly large urine
volumes. Partial diabetes insipidus presents with less intense
symptoms and should be suspected in patients with unremitting
enuresis. Most patients with diabetes insipidus are able to maintain
fluid balance by continuing to ingest large volumes of water.
However, diabetes insipidus may present with hypernatremia and
dehydration in patients without free access to water, or with a
damaged hypothalamic thirst center and altered thirst sensation.
Diabetes insipidus is aggravated by administration of high-dose
corticosteroids, which increases renal free water clearance.
Vasopressin-induced diabetes insipidus during pregnancy is often
associated with oligohydramnios, preeclampsia, or hepatic
dysfunction.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of diabetes insipidus as a cause of polyuria or
hypernatremia requires clinical judgment. There is no single
diagnostic laboratory test. Evaluation for diabetes insipidus should
include an accurate 24-hour urine collection that is measured for
volume and creatinine. A urine volume of < 2 L/24 h (in the absence
of hypernatremia) essentially rules out diabetes insipidus. Serum is
assayed for glucose, urea nitrogen, calcium, potassium, sodium, and
uric acid. Hyperuricemia occurs in many patients with diabetes
insipidus, since reduced vasopressin stimulation of the renal V1
receptor causes a reduction in the renal tubular clearance of urate.
A supervised “vasopressin challenge test” may be given:
Desmopressin acetate is given in an initial dose of 0.05–0.1 mL (5–
10 mcg) intranasally (or 1 mcg subcutaneously or intravenously),
with measurement of urine volume for 12 hours before and 12 hours
after administration. Serum sodium must be obtained immediately in
the event of symptoms of hyponatremia. The dosage of
desmopressin is doubled if the response is marginal. Patients with
central diabetes insipidus notice a distinct reduction in thirst and
polyuria; serum sodium stays normal except in some salt-losing
conditions.
In nonfamilial central diabetes insipidus, MRI of the pituitary
and hypothalamus and of the skull is done to look for mass lesions.
The pituitary stalk may be thickened, which may be a manifestation
of Langerhans cell histiocytosis, sarcoidosis, or lymphocytic
hypophysitis. 
When nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is a
diagnostic consideration, measurement of serum vasopressin is done
during modest fluid restriction; typically, the vasopressin level is
high.
 Differential Diagnosis
Central diabetes insipidus must be distinguished from polyuria
caused by psychogenic polydipsia, diabetes mellitus, Cushing
syndrome or corticosteroid treatment, lithium, hypercalcemia,
hypokalemia, and the nocturnal polyuria of Parkinson disease. It
must also be distinguished from vasopressinase-induced diabetes
insipidus and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
 Complications
If water is not readily available, the excessive output of urine will
lead to severe dehydration. Patients with an impaired thirst
mechanism are very prone to hypernatremia, particularly since they
usually also have impaired mentation and forget to take their
desmopressin. All the complications of the primary disease may
eventually become evident. In patients who are receiving
desmopressin acetate therapy, there is a danger of induced water
intoxication.
 Treatment
Mild cases of diabetes insipidus require no treatment other than
adequate fluid intake. Reduction of aggravating factors (eg,
corticosteroids, which directly increase renal free water clearance)
will improve polyuria.
Desmopressin acetate is the treatment of choice for central
diabetes insipidus. It is also useful in diabetes insipidus associated
with pregnancy or the puerperium, since desmopressin is resistant to
degradation by the circulating vasopressinase.
Desmopressin is given orally in a starting dose of 0.05 mg twice
daily and increased to a maximum of 0.4 mg every 8 hours, if
required. Oral desmopressin is particularly useful for patients with
sinusitis from the nasal preparation. Gastrointestinal symptoms,
asthenia, and mild increases in hepatic enzymes can occur with the
oral preparation.
The nasal preparation (100 mcg/mL solution) is given every 12–
24 hours as needed for thirst and polyuria. It may be administered
via metered-dose nasal inhaler containing 0.1 mL/spray or via a
plastic calibrated tube. The starting dose is 0.05–0.1 mL every 12–
24 hours, and the dose is then individualized according to response.
Nasal desmopressin may cause nasal irritation.
Desmopressin can also be given intravenously, intramuscularly, or
subcutaneously in doses of 1–4 mcg every 12–24 hours as needed
to treat thirst or hypernatremia.
Desmopressin may cause hyponatremia, which is uncommon if
minimum effective doses are used and the patient allows thirst to
occur periodically. Desmopression can sometimes cause emotional
changes, such as depression or agitation and there is an increased
risk of suicide among patients starting desmopressin treatment.
Erythromelalgia occurs rarely. All desmopressin preparations,
including tablets, are subject to heat degradation and should be
refrigerated.
Both central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus respond partially
to hydrochlorothiazide, 50–100 mg/d orally (with potassium
supplement or amiloride). Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus may
respond 
to 
combined 
treatments 
of 
indomethacin-
hydrochlorothiazide, 
indo-methacin-desmopressin, 
or
indomethacin-amiloride. Indomethacin, 50 mg orally every 8 hours,
is effective in acute cases.
Psychotherapy is required for most patients with psychogenic
polydipsia. Thioridazine and lithium are best avoided if psychiatric
drug therapy is needed, since they cause polyuria.
 Prognosis
Central diabetes insipidus appearing after pituitary surgery usually
remits after days to weeks but may be permanent if the upper
pituitary stalk is cut.
Chronic central diabetes insipidus is ordinarily more an
inconvenience than a dire medical condition. Treatment with
desmopressin allows normal sleep and activity. Hypernatremia can
occur, especially when the thirst center is damaged, but diabetes
insipidus does not otherwise reduce life expectancy, and the
prognosis is that of the underlying disorder.
Ananthakrishnan S. Diabetes insipidus in pregnancy: etiology,
evaluation, and management. Endocr Pract. 2009 Jul–Aug;
15(4):377–82. [PMID: 19454377]
 
Kristof RA et al. Incidence, clinical manifestations, and course of
water and electrolyte metabolism disturbances following
transsphenoidal pituitary adenoma surgery: a prospective
observational study. J Neurosurg. 2009 Sep;111(3):555–62.
[PMID: 19199508]
 
Loh JA et al. Disorders of water and salt metabolism associated
with pituitary disease. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2008
Mar;37(1):213–34. [PMID: 18226738]
 
ACROMEGALY & GIGANTISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Excessive growth of hands, feet, jaw, and internal organs; or
gigantism before closure of epiphyses.
 Amenorrhea, headaches, visual field loss, weakness.
 Soft, doughy, sweaty handshake.
 Elevated IGF-I.
 Serum GH not suppressed following oral glucose.
 
 General Considerations
GH exerts much of its growth-promoting effects by stimulating the
release of IGF-I from the liver and other tissues.
Acromegaly is nearly always caused by a pituitary adenoma.
These tumors may be locally invasive, particularly into the
cavernous sinus. Less than 1% are malignant. Most are
macroadenomas (over 1 cm in diameter). Acromegaly is usually
sporadic but may rarely be familial. The disease may also be
associated with endocrine tumors of the parathyroids or pancreas
(MEN 1). Acromegaly may also be seen in McCune–Albright
syndrome and as part of Carney syndrome (atrial myxoma, acoustic
neuroma, lentigines, adrenal hypercortisolism). Acromegaly is rarely
caused by ectopic secretion of GHRH or GH secreted by a
lymphoma, hypothalamic tumor, bronchial carcinoid, or pancreatic
tumor.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Excessive GH causes tall stature and gigantism if it occurs in youth,
before closure of epiphyses. Afterward, acromegaly develops. The
term “acromegaly,” meaning extremity enlargement, seriously
understates the manifestations. The hands enlarge and a doughy,
moist handshake is characteristic. The fingers widen, causing
patients to enlarge their rings. Carpal tunnel syndrome is common.
The feet also grow, particularly in shoe width. Facial features
coarsen since the bones and sinuses of the skull enlarge; hat size
increases. The mandible becomes more prominent, causing
prognathism and malocclusion. Tooth spacing widens. Older
photographs of the patient can be a useful comparison.
Macroglossia occurs, as does hypertrophy of pharyngeal and
laryngeal tissue; this causes a deep, coarse voice and sometimes
makes intubation difficult. Obstructive sleep apnea may occur. A
goiter may be noted. Hypertension (50%) and cardiomegaly are
common. At diagnosis, about 10% of acromegalic patients have
overt heart failure, with a dilated left ventricle and a reduced
ejection fraction. Weight gain is typical, particularly of muscle and
bone. Insulin resistance is usually present and frequently causes
diabetes mellitus (30%). Arthralgias and degenerative arthritis
occur. Overgrowth of vertebral bone can cause spinal stenosis.
Colon polyps are common, especially in patients with skin
papillomas. The skin may also manifest hyperhidrosis, thickening,
cystic acne, skin tags, and areas of acanthosis nigricans.
GH-secreting pituitary tumors usually cause some degree of
hypogonadism, either by cosecretion of PRL or by direct pressure
upon normal pituitary tissue. Decreased libido and erectile
dysfunction are common. Women with acromegaly may experience
irregular menses or amenorrhea; those who become pregnant have
an increased risk of gestational diabetes and hypertension.
Secondary hypothyroidism sometimes occurs; hypoadrenalism is
unusual. Headaches are frequent. Temporal hemianopia may occur
as a result of the optic chiasm being impinged by a suprasellar
growth of the tumor.
B. Laboratory Findings
For screening purposes, a random serum IGF-I can be obtained. If
it is normal for age, acromegaly is ruled out. For further evaluation,
the patient should be fasting for at least 8 hours (except for water),
not acutely ill, and should not have exercised on the day of testing.
Assay for the following: IGF-I (increased to over five times normal
in most acromegalic patients), PRL (cosecreted by many GH-
secreting tumors), glucose (diabetes is common in acromegaly),
liver enzymes and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (liver failure or
kidney disease can misleadingly elevate GH), serum calcium (to
screen for hyperparathyroidism), serum inorganic phosphorus
(frequently elevated), serum free T4, and TSH (secondary
hypothyroidism is common in acromegaly; primary hypothyroidism
may increase PRL; hyperthyroidism may occur as a result of excess
TSH).
Glucose syrup (75 g) is then administered orally, and serum GH
is measured 60 minutes afterward; acromegaly is excluded if the
serum GH is < 1 ng/mL (immunoradio-metric assay [IRMA] or
chemiluminescent assays). For ultrasensitive GH assays, GH should
be suppressed to < 0.3 ng/mL to exclude acromegaly. The serum
IGF-I and glucose-suppressed GH are usually complementary
tests; however, disparities between GH and IGF-I levels occur in
up to 30% of patients.
C. Imaging
MRI shows a pituitary tumor in 90% of acromegalic patients. These
tumors ordinarily involve the sella and cavernous sinus; rare ectopic
tumors may arise in the sphenoid bone. MRI is generally superior to
CT scanning, especially in the postoperative setting. Radiographs of
the skull may show an enlarged sella and thickened skull.
Radiographs may also show tufting of the terminal phalanges of the
fingers and toes. A lateral view of the foot shows increased
thickness of the heel pad.
 Differential Diagnosis
Active acromegaly must be distinguished from familial coarse
features, large hands and feet, and isolated prognathism and from
inactive (“burned-out”) acromegaly in which there has been a
spontaneous remission due to infarction of the pituitary adenoma.
GH-induced gigantism must be differentiated from familial tall
stature and from aromatase deficiency. (See Osteoporosis.)
Misleadingly high serum GH levels can be caused by exercise or
eating just prior to the test; acute illness or agitation; liver failure or
kidney disease; malnourishment; diabetes mellitus; or concurrent
treatment with estrogens, β-blockers, or clonidine. During normal
adolescence, serum IGF-I is usually elevated and GH may fail to be
suppressed.
 Complications
Complications include hypopituitarism, hypertension, glucose
intolerance or frank diabetes mellitus, cardiac enlargement, and
cardiac failure. Carpal tunnel syndrome may cause thumb weakness
and thenar atrophy. Arthritis of hips, knees, and spine can be
troublesome. Cord compression may be seen. Visual field defects
may be severe and progressive. Acute loss of vision or cranial nerve
palsy may occur if the tumor undergoes spontaneous hemorrhage
and necrosis (pituitary apoplexy). Colon polyps are more likely to
develop in patients with acromegaly.
 Treatment
Pituitary microsurgery is the treatment of choice for patients with
acromegaly. Many patients have an apparent surgical cure and a
remission in all clinical symptoms but continue to have a mildly
elevated serum GH or IGF-I postoperatively. If no residual tumor is
apparent on MRI, the patient may elect to be monitored closely,
rather than embark on adjuvant medical therapy that is expensive
and carries its own risks (see below).
A. Pituitary Microsurgery
Endoscopic transnasal, transsphenoidal pituitary micro-surgery
removes the adenoma while preserving anterior pituitary function in
most patients. Surgical remission is achieved in about 70% of
patients followed over 3 years. GH levels fall immediately;
diaphoresis and carpal tunnel syndrome often improve within a day
after surgery. Transsphenoidal surgery is usually well tolerated, but
complications occur in about 10% of patients, including infection,
cerebrospinal fluid leak, and hypopituitarism. Transsphenoidal
pituitary surgery may be difficult in patients with McCune–Albright
syndrome because of fibrous dysplasia of the skull base.
Fluid and electrolyte disturbances occur in most patients
postoperatively. Diabetes insipidus can occur within 2 days
postoperatively but is usually mild and self-correcting.
Hyponatremia can occur abruptly 4–13 days postoperatively in
21% of patients; symptoms may include nausea, vomiting,
headache, malaise, or seizure. It is treated with fluid restriction and
salt supplements. It is prudent to monitor serum sodium levels
postoperatively. Dietary salt supplements for 2 weeks
postoperatively may help prevent this complication.
Corticosteroids are administered perioperatively and tapered to
replacement doses over 1 week; hydrocortisone is discontinued and
cosyntropin stimulation test is performed about 6 weeks after
surgery. At that time, a serum T4 can be checked (to screen for
secondary hypothyroidism) and the patient is screened for
secondary hypogonadism (see above).
B. Medications
Patients who do not have a clinical or biochemical remission after
surgery may be treated with a dopamine agonist (eg, cabergoline),
somatostatin analogs, pegvisomant, or a combination of these
medications. Cabergoline may be used first, since it is an oral
medication. Cabergoline therapy is most successful for tumors that
secrete both PRL and GH but can also be effective for patients with
normal serum PRL levels. Therapy with cabergoline will shrink one-
third of such tumors by more than 50%. The initial dose is 0.25 mg
orally twice weekly, which is gradually increased to a maximum
dosage of 1 mg twice weekly, if tolerated by the patient based on
serum GH and IGF-I levels. Side effects of cabergoline include
nausea, fatigue, constipation, abdominal pain, and dizziness. Long-
term therapy with dopamine agonists (cabergoline, bromocriptine,
or pergolide) for pituitary tumors has not caused the cardiac valve
problems that can occur when much higher doses are used for
Parkinson disease.
Octreotide and lanreotide are somatostatin analogs that are
given by subcutaneous injection. Octreotide (Sandostatin LAR
depot) is given at a dose of 20–40 mg intragluteally monthly.
Lanreotide acetate (Somatuline Depot) is given by subcutaneous
intragluteal injection at a dosage of 60–120 mg monthly. Whichever
preparation is used, the dosage can be adjusted to achieve serum
GH levels under 2 ng/mL. Such long-acting somatostatin analogs
can achieve serum GH levels under 2 ng/mL in 79% of patients and
normal serum IGF-I levels in 53% of patients. Headaches often
improve, and tumor shrinkage of about 30% may be expected.
Acromegalic patients with pretreatment serum GH levels exceeding
20 ng/mL are less likely to respond to octreotide or lanreotide
therapy. Side effects are experienced by about one-third of patients
and include injection site pain, loose acholic stools, abdominal
discomfort, or cholelithiasis. All somatostatin analogs are expensive
and must be continued indefinitely or until other treatment has been
effective.
Pegvisomant is a GH receptor antagonist that blocks hepatic
IGF-I production. Pegvisomant therapy produces symptomatic
relief and normalizes serum IGF-I levels in over 90% of patients.
The starting dosage is 10 mg subcutaneously daily. The maintenance
dosage can be increased by 5–10 mg every 4–6 weeks, based on
serum IGF-I levels and liver transaminase levels; the maximum
dosage is 40 mg subcutaneously daily. Pegvisomant does not shrink
GH-secreting tumors. Patients need to be monitored carefully with
visual field examinations, GH levels, and MRI scanning of the
pituitary. Side effects of pegvisomant can include hepatitis, edema,
flulike syndrome, nausea, and hypertension. Lipohypertrophy can
occur at injection sites, so injection sites must be diligently rotated
and inspected. In acromegalic diabetics, hypoglycemic drugs are
reduced to avoid hypoglycemia during pegvisomant therapy. The
effectiveness of pegvisomant is reduced by coadministration of
opioids. Pegvisomant is detected in some GH assays, which could
overestimate serum GH levels. Pegvisomant is extremely expensive.
C. Stereotactic Radiosurgery
Acromegalic patients who have not had a complete remission with
transsphenoidal surgery or medical therapy may be treated with
stereotactic radiosurgery administered by gamma knife, heavy
particle radiation, or adapted linear accelerator. Gamma knife
radiosurgery is preferred, since it has become more widely available
and normalization of serum IGF-I has been reported in up to 80%
of treated patients. Radiosurgery precisely radiates the pituitary
tumor in a single session and reduces radiation to the normal brain.
However, it cannot be used for pituitary tumors with suprasellar
extension due to the risk of damaging the optic chiasm.
Radiosurgery can be used for pituitary tumors invading the
cavernous sinus, since cranial nerves III, IV, V, and VI are less
susceptible to radiation damage. Radiosurgery can also be used for
patients who have not responded to conventional radiation therapy.
Following any pituitary radiation therapy, patients are advised to
take lifelong daily low-dose aspirin because of the increased risk of
small-vessel stroke.
 Prognosis
Patients with acromegaly have increased morbidity and mortality
from cardiovascular disorders and progressive acromegalic
symptoms. Those who are treated and have a random serum GH
under 1.0 ng/mL or a glucose-suppressed serum GH under 0.4
ng/mL with a normal age-adjusted serum IGF-I level have reduced
morbidity and mortality. Transsphenoidal pituitary surgery is
successful in 80% of patients with tumors < 2 cm in diameter and
GH levels < 50 ng/mL. Extrasellar extension of the pituitary tumor,
particularly cavernous sinus invasion, reduces the likelihood of
surgical cure.
Adjuvant medical therapy has been quite successful in treating
patients who are not cured by pituitary surgery. Postoperatively,
normal pituitary function is usually preserved. Soft tissue swelling
regresses but bone enlargement is permanent. Hypertension
frequently persists despite successful surgery. Conventional
radiation therapy (alone) produces a remission in about 40% of
patients by 2 years and 75% of patients by 5 years after treatment.
Gamma knife or cyberknife radiosurgery reduces GH levels an
average of 77%, with 20% of patients having a full remission after
12 months. Patients with pituitary adenomas that abut the optic
chiasm can be treated with cyberknife radio-surgery, controlling
tumor growth and preserving vision in most patients. Heavy particle
pituitary radiation produces a remission in about 70% of patients by
2 years and 80% of patients by 5 years. Radiation therapy
eventually produces some degree of hypopituitarism in most
patients. Conventional radiation therapy may cause some degree of
organic brain syndrome and predisposes to small strokes. Patients
must receive lifelong follow-up, with regular monitoring of serum
GH and IGF-I levels. Serum GH levels over 5 ng/mL and rising
IGF-I levels usually indicate a recurrent tumor.
Hypopituitarism may occur, due to the tumor itself, pituitary
surgery, or radiation therapy. Hypopituitarism may develop years
following radiation therapy, so patients must have regular clinical
monitoring of their pituitary function.
Ben-Shlomo A et al. Acromegaly. Endocrinol Metab Clin North
Am. 2008 Mar;37(1):101–22. [PMID: 18226732]
 
Caron P et al. Acromegaly and pregnancy: a retrospective multi-
center study of 59 pregnancies in 46 women. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2010 Oct;95(10):4680–7. [PMID: 20660047]
 
Giustina A et al. High-dose intramuscular octreotide in patients
with acromegaly inadequately controlled on conventional
somatostatin analogue therapy: a randomised controlled trial. Eur J
Endocrinol. 2009 Aug;161(2):331–8. [PMID: 19465485]
 
Katznelson L. Approach to the patient with persistent acromegaly
after pituitary surgery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Sept;
95(9):4114–23. [PMID: 20823464]
 
Kobayashi T. Long-term results of stereotactic gamma knife
radiosurgery for pituitary adenomas. Prog Neurol Surg. 2009;
22:77–95. [PMID: 18948721]
 
Melmed S et al; Acromegaly Consensus Group. Guidelines for
acromegaly management: an update. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2009 May;94(5):1509–17. [PMID: 19208732]
 
HYPERPROLACTINEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Women: Oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea; galactorrhea; infertility.
 Prolactin normally elevated during pregnancy.
 Men: Hypogonadism; decreased libido and erectile dysfunction;
infertility.
 Elevated serum PRl.
 CT scan or MRI often demonstrates pituitary adenoma.
 
 General Considerations
Non-gestational elevations in serum PRL can be caused by
numerous conditions (Table 26–2). PRL-secreting pituitary tumors
are more common in women than in men and are usually sporadic
but may rarely be familial as part of MEN 1. Most are
microadenomas (< 1 cm in diameter) that do not grow even with
pregnancy or oral contraceptives. However, some giant
prolactinomas (over 3 cm in diameter) can spread into the
cavernous sinuses and suprasellar areas; rarely, they may erode the
floor of the sella to invade the sinuses.
 
Table 26–2. Causes of hyperprolactinemia.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hyperprolactinemia may result in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
and reduced fertility. Men usually have erectile dysfunction and
diminished libido; gynecomastia sometimes occurs but rarely with
galactorrhea. Women may note oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea,
although some women continue to menstruate normally.
Galactorrhea, defined as lactation in the absence of nursing, is
common. During pregnancy, clinically significant enlargement of a
microprolactinoma (diameter < 1 cm) occurs in < 3%; clinically
significant enlargement of a macroprolactinoma (diameter ≥ 1 cm)
occurs in about 30%.
Pituitary prolactinomas may cosecrete GH and cause acromegaly
(see above). Large tumors may cause headaches, visual symptoms,
and pituitary insufficiency.
Aside from pituitary tumors, some women secrete an abnormal
form of prolactin that appears to cause peripartum cardiomyopathy
(see Chapter 10). Suppression of prolactin secretion with dopamine
agonists can reverse the cardiomyopathy.
B. Laboratory Findings
Evaluate for conditions known to cause hyperprolactinemia,
particularly pregnancy (serum hCG), hypothyroidism (serum FT4
and TSH), kidney disease (BUN and serum creatinine), cirrhosis
(liver function tests) and hyperparathyroidism (serum calcium). Men
are evaluated for hypogonadism with determinations of serum total
and free testosterone, LH, and FSH. Women who have
amenorrhea are assessed for hypogonadism with determinations of
serum estradiol, LH, and FSH. Patients with pituitary
macroadenomas (> 3 cm in diameter) should have PRL measured
on serial dilutions of serum, since IRMA assays may otherwise
report falsely low titers, the “high-dose hook effect.” Patients with
macroprolactinomas or manifestations of possible hypopituitarism
should be evaluated for hypopituitarism as described above. An
assay for macroprolactinemia should be considered for patients with
hyperprolactinemia who are relatively asymptomatic and have no
apparent cause for hyperprolactinemia.
C. Imaging
Patients with hyperprolactinemia not induced by drugs,
hypothyroidism, or pregnancy should be examined by pituitary
MRI. Small prolactinomas may thus be demonstrated, but clear
differentiation from normal variants is not always possible. In the
event that a woman with a macroprolactinoma becomes pregnant
and elects not to take dopamine agonists during her pregnancy,
MRI is usually not performed since the normal pituitary grows
during pregnancy. However, if visual-field defects or other
neurologic symptoms develop in a pregnant woman, a limited MRI
study should be done, focusing on the pituitary without gadolinium
contrast.
 Differential Diagnosis
The causes of hyperprolactinemia are shown in Table 26–2.
Chronic nipple stimulation, nipple piercing, augmentation or
reduction mammoplasty, and mastectomy may stimulate PRL
secretion. The pituitary tumor of acromegaly can cosecrete GH and
PRL. Hyperprolactinemia may also be idiopathic. Increased
pituitary size is a normal variant in young women. About 10% of
hyperprolactinemic patients are found to be secreting
macroprolactin, a relatively inactive “big prolactin”; pituitary MRI is
normal in 78% of cases.
The differential diagnosis for galactorrhea includes the small
amount of breast milk that can be expressed from the nipple in
many parous women that is not cause for concern. Nipple
stimulation from nipple rings, chest surgery, or acupuncture can
cause galactorrhea; serum PRL levels may be normal or minimally
elevated. Some women can have galactorrhea with normal serum
PRL levels and no discernible cause (idiopathic). Normal breast
milk may be various colors besides white. Bloody galactorrhea
requires an evaluation for breast malignancy.
 Treatment
Medications known to increase PRL should be stopped if possible.
Hyperprolactinemia due to hypothyroidism is corrected by
thyroxine.
Women with microprolactinomas who have amenorrhea or are
desirous of contraception may safely take oral contraceptives or
estrogen replacement—there is minimal risk of stimulating
enlargement of the microadenoma. Patients with infertility and
hyperprolactinemia may be treated with a dopamine agonist in an
effort to improve fertility. Women with amenorrhea who elect to
receive no treatment have an increased risk of developing
osteoporosis; such women require periodic bone densitometry.
Pituitary macroprolactinomas (> 10 mm in diameter) have a
higher risk of progressive growth, particularly during treatment with
estrogen or testosterone replacement therapy or during pregnancy.
Therefore, patients with macroprolactinomas should not be treated
with sex HRT unless they are in remission with dopamine agonist
medication or surgery. Pregnant women with macroprolactinomas
should continue to receive treatment with dopamine agonists
throughout the pregnancy to prevent tumor growth. If dopamine
agonists are not used during pregnancy in a woman with a
macroprolactinoma, visual-field testing should be performed each
trimester. During pregnancy, measurement of prolactin is not useful
surveillance for tumor growth due to the fact that prolactin increases
greatly during normal pregnancy.
A. Dopamine Agonists
Dopamine agonists are the initial treatment of choice for patients
with giant prolactinomas and those with hyper-prolactinemia
desiring restoration of normal sexual function and fertility. Of the
ergot-derived dopamine agonists, cabergoline is usually the best
tolerated. The beginning dosage is 0.25 mg orally once weekly for 1
week, then 0.25 mg twice weekly for the next week, then 0.5 mg
twice weekly. Further dosage increases may be required monthly,
based on serum PRL levels, up to a maximum of 1.5 mg twice
weekly. Bromocriptine (1.25–20 mg/d orally) is an alternative drug.
Women who experience nausea with oral preparations may find
relief with deep vaginal insertion of cabergoline or bromocriptine
tablets; vaginal irritation sometimes occurs. Quinagolide (Norprolac;
not available in the United States) is a non-ergot-derived dopamine
agonist for patients intolerant or resistant to ergot-derived
medications; the starting dosage is 0.075 mg/d orally, increasing as
needed and tolerated to a maximum of 0.6 mg/d. Patients whose
tumor is resistant to one dopamine agonist may be switched to
another in an effort to induce a tolerable remission.
Dopamine agonists are given at bedtime to minimize side effects
of fatigue, nausea, dizziness, and orthostatic hypotension. These
symptoms usually improve with dosage reduction and continued
use. Erythromelalgia is rare. Dopamine agonists can cause a variety
of psychiatric side effects that are not dose related and may take
weeks to resolve once the dopamine agonist is discontinued.
Therefore, dopamine agonists should be used judiciously in
psychiatric patients whose antipsychotic medications have caused
hyperprolactinemia. Long-term therapy with dopamine agonists
(cabergoline, bromocriptine, or pergolide) for pituitary tumors has
not caused the cardiac valve problems that can occur when much
higher doses are used for Parkinson disease.
With dopamine agonist treatment, 90% of patients with
prolactinomas experience a fall in serum PRL to 10% or less of
pretreatment levels; about 80% of treated patients achieve a normal
serum PRL level. Shrinkage of a pituitary adenoma occurs early,
but the maximum effect may take up to a year. Nearly half of
prolactinomas—even massive tumors—shrink more than 50%.
Such shrinkage of giant prolactinomas can result in spinal fluid
rhinorrhea. Discontinuing therapy after months or years usually
results in the reappearance of hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea-
amenorrhea. After 2 years of cabergoline therapy, the percentage of
patients who maintain a normal serum prolactin after withdrawal of
the drug are as follows: 32% with idiopathic hyperprolactinemia,
21% with microprolactinomas, and 16% with macroprolactinomas.
Because dopamine agonists usually restore fertility promptly,
many pregnancies have resulted; no teratogenicity has been noted
with any of the dopamine agonists. However, women with
microadenomas may have treatment withdrawn during pregnancy.
Macroadenomas may enlarge significantly during pregnancy; if
therapy is withdrawn, such patients must be monitored clinically
with serum PRL determinations and with computer-assisted visual
field perimetry. Women with macroprolactinomas who have
responded to dopamine agonists may safely receive oral
contraceptive agents as long as they continue receiving therapy.
B. Surgical Treatment
Transsphenoidal pituitary surgery may be urgently required for large
tumors undergoing apoplexy or those severely compromising visual
fields. It is also used electively for patients who do not tolerate or
respond to dopamine agonists. Pituitary transsphenoidal surgery is
generally well-tolerated, with a surgical mortality rate of < 0.5%.
Complications, such as cerebrospinal fluid leakage, meningitis,
stroke, or visual loss, occur in about 3% of cases; sinusitis, nasal
septal perforation, or infection complicates about 6.5% of surgeries.
Postoperative hyponatremia occurs quite commonly, and it is
advisable to monitor serum sodium levels for the first 2 weeks
postoperatively. 
For 
pituitary 
microprolactinomas, 
skilled
neurosurgeons are successful in normalizing prolactin in 87% of
patients; the 10-year recurrence rate is 13%. Pituitary function can
be preserved in over 95% of cases. However, the surgical success
rate for macroprolactinomas is much lower, and the complication
rates are higher. Craniotomy is rarely indicated, since even large
tumors can usually be decompressed via the transsphenoidal
approach.
Fluid and electrolyte disturbances occur in most patients
postoperatively. Diabetes insipidus can occur within 2 days
postoperatively but is usually mild and self-correcting.
Hyponatremia can occur abruptly 4–13 days postoperatively in
21% of patients; symptoms may include nausea, vomiting,
headache, malaise, or seizure. It is treated with fluid restriction and
salt supplements. It is prudent to monitor serum sodium levels
postoperatively. Dietary salt supplements for 2 weeks
postoperatively may help prevent this complication.
C. Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy is reserved for patients with macroadenomas that
are growing despite treatment with dopamine agonists. A single
gamma knife or cyberknife treatment is preferable for certain
patients whose optic chiasm is clear of tumor, since it is generally
safer and more convenient than conventional radiation therapy.
Conventional radiation therapy must be given over 5 weeks and
carries a high risk of eventual hypopituitarism. Other possible side
effects include some degree of memory impairment and an
increased long-term risk of second tumors and small vessel ischemic
strokes. After radiation therapy, patients are advised to take low-
dose aspirin daily for life to reduce their stroke risk.
D. Chemotherapy
Some patients with aggressive pituitary macroadenomas or
carcinomas are not surgical candidates and do not respond to
dopamine agonists or radiation therapy. Temozolomide may be
administered, 150–200 mg/m2 orally daily for 5 days of each 28-
day cycle; after three cycles, treatment efficacy is determined by
prolactin measurement and MRI scanning. A minority of such
patients respond to temozolomide.
 
Table 26–3. Appropriate use of thyroid tests.
 
Bostwick JR et al. Antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia.
Pharmacotherapy. 2009 Jan;29(1):64–73. [PMID: 19113797]
 
Dekkers OM et al. Recurrence of hyperprolactinemia after
withdrawal of dopamine agonists: systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jan;95(1):43–51. [PMID:
19880787]
 
Kars M et al. Update in prolactinomas. Neth J Med. 2010
Mar;68(3):104–12. [PMID: 20308704]
 
Klibanski A. Clinical practice. Prolactinomas. N Engl J Med. 2010
Apr 1;362(13):1219–26. [PMID: 20357284]
 
Tan T et al. Assessment of cardiac valve dysfunction in patients
receiving cabergoline treatment for hyperprolactinaemia. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Sep;73(3):369–74. [PMID: 20550538]
 
DISEASES OF THE THYROID
GLAND
 
THYROID TESTING
Assays for FT4, total triiodothyronine (T3), and free triiodothyronine
(FT3) have largely supplanted measurements of total T4, resin T3
uptake (RT3U), and free thyroxine index (FT4I). It is particularly
important to determine “free” serum levels (FT4 and FT3) in
conditions associated with high circulating levels of thyroxine-
binding globulin, such as during therapy with oral estrogen.
Ultrasensitive assays for serum TSH have largely replaced older
TSH assays. Table 26–3 shows the appropriate use of thyroid
tests.
HYPOTHYROIDISM & MYXEDEMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Weakness, fatigue, cold intolerance, constipation, weight change,
depression, menorrhagia, hoarseness.
 Dry skin, bradycardia, delayed return of deep tendon reflexes.
 Anemia, hyponatremia, hyperlipidemia.
 FT4 level is usually low.
 TSH elevated in primary hypothyroidism.
 
 General Considerations
Hypothyroidism is common, affecting over 1% of the general
population and about 5% of individuals over age 60 years. Thyroid
hormone deficiency affects almost all body functions. The degree of
severity ranges from mild and unrecognized hypothyroid states to
striking myxedema. The fluid retention seen in myxedema is caused
by the interstitial accumulation of hydrophilic mucopolysaccharides,
which leads to lymphedema. Hyponatremia is the result of impaired
renal tubular sodium reabsorption due to reductions in Na+–K+-
ATPase.
Hypothyroidism may be due to failure or resection of the thyroid
gland itself or deficiency of pituitary TSH (see Hypopituitarism,
above). The condition must be distinguished from the functional
hypothyroidism that occurs in severe nonthyroidal illness, which
does not require treatment with thyroxine (see Euthyroid Sick
Syndrome).
Maternal hypothyroidism during pregnancy results in offspring
with IQ scores that are an average 7 points lower than those of
euthyroid mothers.
Goiter may be present with thyroiditis, iodide deficiency, genetic
thyroid enzyme defects, drug goitrogens (lithium, iodide,
propylthiouracil or methimazole, phenylbutazone, sulfonamides,
amiodarone, interferon-α, interferon-β, interleukin-2), food
goitrogens in iodide-deficient areas (eg, turnips, cassavas) or,
rarely, peripheral resistance to thyroid hormone or infiltrating
diseases (eg, cancer, sarcoidosis). A hypothyroid phase occurs in
subacute (de Quervain) viral thyroiditis following initial
hyperthyroidism. Hashimoto thyroiditis is the most common cause
of hypothyroidism (see Thyroiditis section).
Goiter is usually absent when hypothyroidism is due to
destruction of the gland by surgery, radiation therapy (to the head,
neck, chest, and shoulder region), or 131I. Chemotherapy can
reduce thyroid function, causing hypothyroidism. Sunitinib, a
protein-tyrosine kinase inhibitor used to treat gastrointestinal stromal
malignancies, causes transient primary hypothyroidism in about 50%
of treated patients.
Amiodarone, because of its high iodine content, causes clinically
significant hypothyroidism in about 15–20% of patients who receive
it. Hypothyroidism occurs most often in patients with preexisting
autoimmune thyroiditis and in patients who are not iodine-deficient.
The T4 level is normal or low, and the TSH is elevated, usually over
20 ng/dL. Another 17% of patients have milder elevations of TSH
and are asymptomatic. Low-dose amiodarone is less likely to cause
hypothyroidism. Cardiac patients with amiodarone-induced
symptomatic hypothyroidism are treated with just enough thyroxine
to relieve symptoms. Hypothyroidism usually resolves over several
months if amiodarone is discontinued. Hypothyroidism may also
develop in patients with a high iodine intake from other sources,
p
p
g
,
especially if they have underlying lymphocytic thyroiditis.
Hepatitis C is associated with an increased risk of auto-immune
thyroiditis, with 21% of affected patients having antithyroid
antibodies and 13% having hypothyroidism. The risk of thyroid
dysfunction is even higher when patients are treated with interferon.
Interferon-α and interferon-β treatment can induce thyroid
dysfunction (usually hypothyroidism, sometimes hyperthyroidism) in
6% of patients. Spontaneous resolution occurs in over 50% of
cases once interferon is discontinued.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Common manifestations—Mild hypothyroidism often escapes
detection without screening (ie, serum TSH). Common symptoms
of hypothyroidism include weight gain, fatigue, lethargy, depression,
weakness, dyspnea on exertion, arthralgias or myalgias, muscle
cramps, menorrhagia, constipation, dry skin, headache,
paresthesias, carpal tunnel syndrome, cold intolerance, and
Raynaud syndrome. Physical findings can include bradycardia;
diastolic hypertension; thin, brittle nails; thinning of hair; peripheral
edema; puffy face and eyelids; and skin pallor or yellowing
(carotenemia). Delayed relaxation of deep tendon reflexes may be
present. Patients often have a palpably enlarged thyroid (goiter) that
arises due to elevated serum TSH levels or the underlying thyroid
pathology, such as Hashimoto thyroiditis.
2. Less common manifestations—Less common symptoms of
hypothyroidism include diminished appetite and weight loss,
hoarseness, decreased sense of taste and smell, and diminished
auditory acuity. Some patients may complain of dysphagia or neck
discomfort. Although most menstruating women have menorrhagia,
some women have scant menses or amenorrhea. Physical findings
may include thinning of the outer halves of the eyebrows; thickening
of the tongue; hard pitting edema; and effusions into the pleural and
peritoneal cavities as well as into joints. Galactorrhea may also be
present. Cardiac enlargement (“myxedema heart”) and pericardial
effusions may occur. Psychosis may occur and is termed
“myxedema madness.” Hypothermia and stupor or myxedema
coma, which is often associated with infection (especially
pneumonia), may develop in patients with severe hypothyroidism.
Pituitary enlargement due to hyperplasia of TSH-secreting cells,
which is reversible following thyroid therapy, may be seen in long-
standing hypothyroidism.
Some hypothyroid patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis have
symptoms that are not due to hypothyroidism but rather to other
autoimmune disease. Some autoimmune conditions that occur more
commonly in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis include Addison
disease, hypoparathyroidism, diabetes mellitus, pernicious anemia,
Sjögren syndrome, vitiligo, biliary cirrhosis, and celiac disease.
Celiac disease is found in 5% of patients with hypothyroidism
due to Hashimoto thyroiditis. Affected patients often have weight
loss and gastrointestinal symptoms. However, many patients with
celiac disease have no gastrointestinal symptoms but may have
systemic manifestations such as fatigue, depression, osteoporosis or
osteomalacia, iron-deficiency anemia, short stature, delayed
puberty, amenorrhea, or reduced fertility. Intestinal malabsorption
may cause vitamin deficiencies with bruising due to vita-min K
deficiency, hyperkeratosis due to vitamin A deficiency, bone pain
due to vitamin D deficiency, or neuropathy and ataxia due to vitamin
E or vitamin B12 deficiency.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hypothyroidism is a common disorder; therefore, a clinician should
request thyroid function tests for any patient with the nonspecific
symptoms or signs of hypothyroidism. The single best screening test
for hypothyroidism is the serum TSH (Table 26–3). Serum TSH is
increased with primary hypothyroidism but is low or normal with
pituitary insufficiency. The FT4 may be low or low-normal. Other
laboratory abnormalities may often be seen: increased serum LDL
cholesterol, triglycerides, lipoprotein (a), liver enzymes, and creatine
kinase; increased serum PRL; and hyponatremia, hypoglycemia,
and anemia (with normal or increased mean corpuscular volume).
Semen analysis shows an increase in abnormal sperm morphology.
In patients with autoimmune thyroiditis, titers of antibodies against
thyroperoxidase and thyroglobulin are high; serum antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) are usually present in Graves disease and are not
indicative of lupus.
The normal range for ultrasensitive TSH levels is generally stated
to be 0.4–4.0 mU/L. However, the normal range of TSH varies
with age such that newborns have a much higher normal range;
children and elderly patients have a mildly higher normal range.
Over 95% of normal adults have serum TSH concentrations under
3.0 mU/L. There is a high risk of finding antithyroid antibodies in
patients with serum TSH in the upper range of normal, but most
such patients are asymptomatic. TSH may be mildly elevated in
some euthyroid individuals, especially elderly women (10%
incidence). Such patients with normal FT 4levels are considered to
have “subclinical hypothyroidism,” but can have subtle
manifestations of hypothyroidism (eg, fatigue, depression,
hyperlipidemia) that may improve with thyroid hormone
replacement. Patients who are completely asymptomatic with a
mildly elevated serum TSH and normal serum FT4 do not require
levothyroxine replacement; in fact, mildly decreased thyroid function
was associated with familial longevity in the Leiden Longevity
Study. About 18% of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism later
become definitely hypothyroid; many such patients have Hashimoto
thyroiditis.
C. Imaging
Radiologic imaging is usually not necessary for patients with
hypothyroidism. However, on CT or MRI, a goiter may be noted in
the neck or in the mediastinum (retrosternal goiter). An enlarged
thymus is frequently seen in the mediastinum in cases of autoimmune
thyroiditis. In primary hypothyroidism with elevated serum TSH
levels, MRI of the head will frequently show an enlargement of the
pituitary gland from thyrotrophe hyperplasia; such enlargement can
be mistaken for a pituitary tumor.
 Differential Diagnosis
Many clinical manifestations of hypothyroidism (see above) are
common in the general population without thyroid illness. The
differential diagnoses are the conditions and drugs that can cause
aberrations in laboratory tests, resulting in a low serum T4 or T3 or
high serum TSH in the absence of hypothyroidism (Table 26–4).
The pituitary is often quite enlarged in primary hypothyroidism, due
to reversible hyperplasia of TSH-secreting cells; the concomitant
hyperprolactinemia seen in hypothyroidism can lead to the mistaken
diagnosis of a TSH-secreting or PRL-secreting pituitary adenoma.
 
Table 26–4. Factors that may cause aberrations in laboratory tests
that may be mistaken for primary hypothyroidism.1
 
Low Serum T4 or T3
High Serum TSH
Laboratory error
Acute psychiatric problems
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Familial thyroid-binding
globulin deficiency
Severe illness
Drugs
    Androgens
    Asparaginase
    Carbamazepine
    Chloral hydrate
    Corticosteroids
    Diclofenac (T3)
    Didanosine
    Fenclofenac
    5-Fluorouracil
    Halofenate
    Mitotane
    Naproxen (T3)
    Nicotinic acid
    Oxcarbazepine
    Phenobarbital
    Phenytoin (total T4 may be
as low as 2 mcg/dL)
    Salicylates—large doses
(T3 and T4)
    Sertraline
    Stavudine
    T3 therapy
Laboratory error
Autoimmune disease (assay
interference)
Heterophile antibodies
Anti-mouse antibodies
Strenuous exercise (acute)
Sleep deprivation (acute)
Recovery from nonthyroidal
illness (transient)
Acute psychiatric
admissions (14% transient)
Elderly—especially women
(10%, mild elevations)
1True primary hypothyroidism may coexist.
T4, levothyroxine; T3, triiodothyronine; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Euthyroid sick syndrome should be considered in patients with
abnormal thyroid function tests (eg, low serum T4 and low levels of
FT4) who do not have thyroid disease; conditions that can result in
this syndrome include severe illness, caloric deprivation, or major
surgery. Patients who have undergone major surgery may have
accelerated peripheral metabolism of serum T4 to reverse T3 (rT3).
Furthermore, in most patients who are critically ill, there is a
circulating inhibitor of thyroid hormone binding to serum thyroxine-
binding proteins (TBPs). This causes the RT3U to be misleadingly
low, causing the computed FT4I to be very low. The presence of a
very low serum T4 in severe nonthyroidal illness indicates a poor
prognosis. Serum TSH tends to be suppressed in severe
nonthyroidal illness, making the diagnosis of concurrent primary
hypothyroidism quite difficult, although the presence of a goiter
suggests the diagnosis.
The clinician must decide whether such severely ill patients (with
a low serum T4 but no elevated TSH) might have hypothyroidism
due to pituitary insufficiency. Patients without symptoms of prior
brain lesion or hypopituitarism are very unlikely to suddenly develop
hypopituitarism during an unrelated illness. Patients with diabetes
insipidus, hypopituitarism, or other signs of a central nervous system
lesion may be given T4 empirically.
True secondary hypothyroidism due to direct dopamine
suppression of TSH-secreting cells may develop in patients
receiving prolonged dopamine infusions.
Certain antiseizure medications cause low serum FT4 levels by
accelerating hepatic conversion of T4 to T3; serum TSH levels are
normal.
 Complications
Cardiac complications may occur as a result of preexistent coronary
artery disease and congestive heart failure, which may be
exacerbated by levothyroxine therapy. Patients with severe
hypothyroidism have an increased susceptibility to bacterial
pneumonia. Megacolon has been described in long-standing
hypothyroidism. Organic psychoses with paranoid delusions may
occur (“myxedema madness”). Rarely, adrenal crisis may be
precipitated by thyroid therapy. Hypothyroidism is a rare cause of
infertility, which may respond to thyroid medication. Pregnancy in a
woman with untreated hypothyroidism often results in miscarriage.
Sellar enlargement and even well-defined TSH-secreting tumors
may develop in untreated cases. These tumors decrease in size after
replacement therapy is instituted.
Myxedema 
crisis 
refers 
to 
severe, 
life-threatening
hypothyroidism. The manifestations of hypothyroidism are present
and more severe. Affected patients have impaired cognition, ranging
from confusion to somnolence to coma (myxedema coma).
Convulsions and abnormal central nervous system signs may occur.
Patients have severe hypothermia, hypoventilation, hyponatremia,
hypoglycemia, and hypotension. Rhabdomyolysis and acute kidney
injury may occur. Myxedema coma is most often seen in elderly
women who have had a stroke or who have stopped taking their
thyroxine medication. It is often induced by an underlying infection;
cardiac, respiratory, or central nervous system illness; cold
exposure; or drug use. The mortality rate from myxedema coma is
high. Myxedematous patients are unusually sensitive to opioids and
average doses may result in death. Patients with severe myxedema
may have hyponatremia that is severe and refractory to treatment.
 Treatment
Before therapy with thyroid hormone is commenced, the
hypothyroid patient requires at least a clinical assessment for
adrenal insufficiency and angina, for which the patient would require
evaluation and treatment.
A. Beginning Treatment for Hypothyroidism
Levothyroxine is the preferred preparation for treating hypothyroid
patients. However, patients (as a group) receiving levothyroxine
replacement do not have the same sense of well-being as their
peers. In response, some clinicians prescribe mixed T4/T3
preparations such as Armour thyroid, but levothyroxine alone
renders patients clinically euthyroid as long as it is given in sufficient
doses (see below).
Otherwise healthy young and middle-age adults with
hypothyroidism may be treated initially with levothyroxine in doses
of 25–75 mcg orally daily. The lower doses are used for very mild
hypothyroidism, while higher doses are given for more symptomatic
hypothyroidism. Women who are pregnant with significant
hypothyroidism may begin therapy with levothyroxine at higher
doses of 100–150 mcg orally daily. The levothyroxine dosage may
be increased according to clinical response and serum TSH, initially
trying to keep the serum TSH level between 0.4 mU/L and 2.0
mU/L. The levothyroxine dose required to render patients clinically
euthyroid varies considerably, with higher doses required during
pregnancy and with certain medications (see below). Since food
interferes slightly with the absorption of levothyroxine, it is advisable
to take levothyroxine with water in the morning after an overnight
fast. The selected time should become a regular daily habit for the
patient. After beginning daily administration, significant increases in
serum T4 levels are seen within 1–2 weeks, and near-peak levels
are seen within 3–4 weeks.
Patients with coronary disease or those who are over age 60
years are treated with smaller initial doses of levothyroxine, 25–50
mcg orally daily; higher initial doses may be used if such patients are
severely hypothyroid. The dose can be increased by 25 mcg every
1–3 weeks until the patient is euthyroid. Patients with
hypothyroidism and known ischemic heart disease may begin
thyroxine therapy following restoration of coronary perfusion by
coronary artery angioplasty or bypass.
Myxedema crisis requires larger initial doses of levothyroxine
intravenously, since myxedema itself can interfere with levothyroxine
intestinal absorption. Levothyroxine sodium 400 mcg is given
intravenously as a loading dose, followed by 50–100 mcg
intravenously daily; the lower dose is given to patients with
suspected coronary insufficiency. In patients with myxedema coma,
liothyronine (T3, Triostat) can be given intravenously in doses of 5–
10 mcg every 8 hours for the first 48 hours. The hypothermic
patient is warmed only with blankets, since faster warming can
precipitate cardiovascular collapse. Patients with hypercapnia
require intubation and assisted mechanical ventilation. Infections
must be detected and treated aggressively. Patients in whom
concomitant adrenal insufficiency is suspected are treated with
hydrocortisone, 100 mg intravenously, followed by 25–50 mg every
8 hours.
B. Monitoring & Optimizing Treatment of Hypothyroidism
Every hypothyroid patient requires regular clinical assessments that
must include interim histories and physical examinations. Clinical
judgment is critical to determine the optimal levothyroxine dose for
each patient. Laboratory assays supplement clinical judgment. An
elevated serum TSH usually indicates the need for a higher dose of
levothyroxine (see below). Unfortunately, normal serum TSH and
FT4 levels do not accurately determine that the patient is euthyroid
(see below). The patient should be prescribed sufficient
levothyroxine to restore a clinically euthyroid state, while maintaining
the serum T3 within the reference range. For most patients with
hypothyroidism, a stable maintenance dose of levothyroxine can
usually be found.
Levothyroxine doses may need to be titrated upward after
patients commence taking medications that increase the hepatic
metabolism of levothyroxine (eg, carbamazepine, phenobarbital,
primidone, phenytoin, rifabutin, rifampin, and imatinib [Gleevec]).
Amiodarone can cause an increase or decrease in thyroxine dose
requirements, making it necessary to closely monitor serum TSH
and adjust the thyroxine dosage accordingly in these patients.
Malabsorption of thyroxine can be caused by coadministration of
binding substances, such as iron preparations (including iron found
in multivitamins), fiber, raloxifene, sucralfate, aluminum hydroxide
antacids, sevelemer, orlistat, calcium and magnesium supplements,
and soy milk or soy protein supplements. Bile acid-binding resins,
such as cholestyramine and colesevelam, can bind T4 and impair its
absorption even when administered 5 hours before the T4. Proton
pump inhibitors reduce gastric acidity, which interferes slightly with
the absorption of levothyroxine. Gastrointestinal disorders can
interfere with thyroxine absorption, including celiac disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, lactose intolerance, Helicobacter
pylori gastritis, and atrophic gastritis.
Different thyroxine preparations vary in their bioavailability by up
to 14%. Such differences in the bioavailability of different T4
formulations may have a subtle but significant clinical impact. It is
therefore recommended that patients always continue to take the
same brand name of thyroxine or the same manufacturer's generic
thyroxine. There is no standardized optimal dose of levothyroxine,
so each patient's dose must be based on careful clinical assessment.
Although serum TSH levels can be helpful in determining optimal
dosing, it is important to consider clinical response and to not rely
entirely on serum TSH levels to determine the patient's optimal
thyroxine dosage.
Women with hypothyroidism typically require increased doses of
T4 during therapy with oral estrogen as well as during pregnancy
(see below). Conversely, T4 dosage requirements for women often
decrease with delivery, cessation of oral estrogen, and menopause.
1. During pregnancy—Administering adequate levothyroxine to a
hypothyroid woman is critical. The fetus is at least partially
dependent on maternal T4 for central nervous system development
—particularly in the second trimester. It is therefore important to
carefully monitor hypothyroid women with serum TSH (FT4I or
FT4 concentrations in hypopituitarism) determinations every 4–6
weeks and to increase T4 replacement progressively as required
(see Chapter 19).
There is considerable individual variation in the requirement for
additional T4 replacement during pregnancy. An increase in
levothyroxine requirement has been noted as early as the fifth week
of pregnancy. Therefore, for women receiving replacement
thyroxine, it is prudent to increase levothyroxine dosages by
approximately 30% as soon as pregnancy is confirmed. By mid
pregnancy, women require an average of 47% increase in their
levothyroxine dosage.
The increased T4 dosage requirements during pregnancy are
believed to be due to several factors: (1) Rising estrogen levels
during pregnancy increase thyroxine binding globulin (TBG) serum
concentrations, reducing FT4 levels. (2) Placental deiodinase
promotes the turnover of T4. (3) Supplemental iron and prenatal
multivitamins containing iron can bind to oral T4 and reduce its
intestinal absorption. Similarly, supplemental calcium can also
reduce T4 absorption. Therefore, it is important that patients take
their T4 replacement at least 4 hours before or after such dietary
supplements. Postpartum, T4 replacement requirements ordinarily
return to prepregnancy levels.
Serum TSH levels normally drop while FT4I rises during the first
trimester of pregnancy. This is probably due to the first-trimester
high levels of hCG that has structural homology to TSH and thus
stimulates thyroid hormone production. Most women with a low
serum TSH in the first trimester are euthyroid. Serum FT4I is helpful
in evaluating the thyroid status of pregnant women, particularly in
the first trimester. Following delivery, levothyroxine dose
requirements decline.
2. Elevated serum TSH levels—This usually indicates
underreplacement with levothyroxine. However, before increasing
the T4 dosage, it is important to confirm that the patient is indeed
taking the medication as directed and does not have angina. It is
also important to consider the following: A high TSH in a patient
receiving standard replacement doses of T4 may indicate
malabsorption of levothyroxine due to concurrent administration
with binding substances (see above) or with food (instead of
fasting). Malabsorption of T4 can also occur in short bowel
syndrome; therapy with medium chain triglyceride oil may improve
absorption. Impaired absorption of T4 can also be caused by
diarrhea of any cause or malabsorption due to concurrent celiac
disease (sprue), regional enteritis, liver disease, or pancreatic
exocrine insufficiency. Serum TSH may be elevated transiently in
acute psychiatric illness and during recovery from nonthyroidal
illness. Autoimmune disease can cause false elevations of TSH by
interfering with the assay. A high TSH can also be caused by
thyrotropin-secreting pituitary tumors. TSH may be increased by
phenothiazines and atypical antipsychotics.
3. Normal serum TSH levels—Patients are treated with sufficient
levothyroxine to achieve normal serum TSH levels of 0.4–2.0
mU/L. Patients who continue to feel hypothyroid despite a normal
serum TSH may have a suboptimal serum T3; they may respond
well to higher replacement doses of levothyroxine.
4. Low or suppressed serum TSH levels—Serum TSH levels
(using a sensitive assay) that are below the reference range (0.4–4.0
mU/L) are considered “low” (0.04–0.4 mU/L) or “suppressed” (≤
0.03 mU/L). It has generally been assumed that since TSH is a
sensitive test for hyperthyroidism in Graves disease, a low serum
TSH in patients taking levothyroxine reliably indicates
overreplacement; that assumption is proving incorrect. Certainly, if a
patient taking levothyroxine has a suppressed serum TSH and
manifestations of hyperthyroidism, the dosage of levothyroxine must
be reduced. However, many patients with low serum TSH levels
exhibit no symptoms of hyperthyroidism. For such patients, it is
important to determine whether hypopituitarism or severe
nonthyroidal illness is present, which can result in low serum TSH
levels without hyperthyroidism. TSH can also be reduced by certain
medications, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; opioids;
nifedipine; verapamil; and high-dose, short-term administration of
corticosteroids. Absent such conditions, a clinically euthyroid
patient with a suppressed serum TSH should be given a lower
dosage of levothyroxine. Patients who exhibit hypothyroid
symptoms on the reduced dosage of levothyroxine may have the
higher dose resumed.
Some hypothyroid patients receiving levothyroxine have
hypothyroid-type symptoms, particularly persistent fatigue or weight
gain, despite having low serum TSH levels. Such patients require
careful assessment for concurrent illnesses such as adrenal
insufficiency, hypogonadism, anemia, celiac disease, or depression.
If such conditions are not present or are treated and hypothyroid-
type symptoms persist despite low-normal or low TSH levels, a
serum T3 level (FT3 in pregnancy and women receiving oral
estrogens) is often helpful. If the serum T3 level is low or low
normal, the patient may benefit from an increase in levothyroxine
dosage; if a definite clinical benefit is achieved, the higher dose is
continued. Patients with a low serum TSH (0.04–0.4 mU/L) on
replacement levothyroxine do not have any long-term increased risk
of cardiovascular disease, dysrhythmias, or fractures. However,
patients with suppressed serum TSH (≤ 0.03 mU/L) do have an
increased risk of such side effects and long-term monitoring for
atrial arrhythmias and osteoporosis is recommended.
 Prognosis
Hypothyroidism caused by interferon-α resolves within 17 months
of stopping the drug in 50% of patients. Patients with mild
hypothyroidism caused by Hashimoto thyroiditis have a remission
rate of 11%. With early treatment of hypothyroidism, striking
transformations take place both in appearance and mental function.
Return to a normal state is usually the rule, but relapses will occur if
treatment is interrupted. On the whole, response to thyroid
treatment is most satisfactory. However, untreated hypothyroid
patients with myxedema crisis have a mortality rate approaching
100%. Even with optimal treatment, patients with myxedema crisis
have a mortality rate of 20–50%.
Flynn RW et al. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration
and morbidity from cardiovascular disease and fractures in patients
on long-term thyroxine therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
Jan;95(1):186–93. [PMID: 19906785]
 
Kim BW et al. For some: L-thyroxine replacement might not be
enough: a genetic rationale. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009
May;94(5):1521–3. [PMID: 19420275]
 
Liwanpo L et al. Conditions and drugs interfering with thyroxine
absorption. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Dec;
23(6):781–92. [PMID: 19942153]
 
O'Reilly DS. Thyroid hormone replacement: an iatrogenic problem.
Int J Clin Pract. 2010 Jun;64(7):991–4. [PMID: 20584231]
 
Reid SM et al. Interventions for clinical and subclinical
hypothyroidism in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010
Jul 7; (7):CD007752. [PMID: 20614463]
 
Rozing MP et al. Familial longevity is associated with decreased
thyroid function. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;95(11):
4979–84. [PMID: 20739380]
 
HYPERTHYROIDISM (Thyrotoxicosis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sweating, weight loss or gain, anxiety, palpitations, loose stools,
heat intolerance, irritability, fatigue, weakness, menstrual
irregularity.
 Tachycardia; warm, moist skin; stare; tremor.
 In Graves disease: goiter (often with bruit); ophthalmopathy.
 Suppressed TSH in primary hyperthyroidism; increased T4, FT4,
T3, FT3.
 
 General Considerations
The term “thyrotoxicosis” refers to the clinical manifestations
associated with serum levels of T4 or T3 that are excessive for the
individual (hyperthyroidism). Serum TSH levels are suppressed in
( yp
y
)
pp
primary hyperthyroidism. However, certain drugs and conditions
can affect laboratory tests and lead to the erroneous diagnosis of
hyperthyroidism in euthyroid individuals (Table 26–5). The causes
of hyperthyroidism are many and diverse, as described below.
A. Graves Disease
Graves disease (known as Basedow disease in Europe) is the most
common cause of thyrotoxicosis. It is an autoimmune disorder
affecting the thyroid gland, characterized by an increase in synthesis
and release of thyroid hormones. Graves disease is much more
common in women than in men (8:1), and its onset is usually
between the ages of 20 and 40 years. It may be accompanied by
infiltrative ophthalmopathy (Graves exophthalmos) and, less
commonly, by infiltrative dermopathy (pretibial myxedema). The
thymus gland is typically enlarged and serum ANA levels are usually
elevated, reflecting the underlying autoimmunity. Graves disease has
a familial tendency, and many patients have a family history of
Graves disease or hypothyroidism from Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Histocompatibility studies have shown an association with group
HLA-B8 and HLA-DR3. The pathogenesis of the hyperthyroidism
of Graves disease involves the formation of autoantibodies that bind
to the TSH receptor in thyroid cell membranes and stimulate the
gland to hyperfunction.
 
Table 26–5. Factors that can cause aberrations in laboratory tests
that may be mistaken for spontaneous clinical primary
hyperthyroidism.1
 
High Serum T4 or T3
Low Serum TSH
Laboratory error
Collecting serum in vial with gel
barrier for T3
Acute psychiatric problems
(30%)
Acute medical illness (eg, acute
intermittent porphyria
AIDS (increased thyroid-binding
globulin)
Autoimmunity
Hepatitis: acute or chronic active
Laboratory error
Autonomous thyroid or
thyroid nodule
Acute corticosteroid
administration
Elderly euthyroid
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Pregnancy (especially with
morning sickness)
Hyperemesis gravidarum
Familial thyroid-binding
abnormalities
Familial generalized resistance
to thyroid (Refetoff syndrome)
Drugs
     Amiodarone
     Amphetamines
     Clofibrate
     Estrogens (oral)
     Heparin (dialysis method)
     Heroin
     Thyroid hormone therapy
     Methadone
     Perphenazine
     Tamoxifen
Nonthyroidal illness
(severe)
Pregnancy (especially
with morning sickness)
hCG-secreting
trophoblastic tumors
Drugs
     Thyroid hormone
     Amphetamines
     Dopamine
     Dopamine agonists
     Calcium channel
     blockers (nifedipine,
verapamil)
1True clinical hyperthyroidism may coexist.
hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs; T4, levothyroxine; T3, triiodothyronine; TSH, thyroid-
stimulating hormone
Dietary iodine supplementation can trigger Graves disease. An
increased incidence of Graves disease occurs in countries that have
embarked on national programs to fortify commercial salt with
potassium iodide; the increase in Graves disease lasts about 4
years. Similarly, patients being treated with potassium iodide or
amiodarone (which contains iodine) have an increased risk of
developing Graves disease.
Patients with Graves disease have an increased risk of other
systemic autoimmune disorders. Affected patients are at increased
risk for Sjögren syndrome, pernicious anemia, Addison disease,
alopecia areata, vitiligo, celiac disease, auto-immune diabetes
mellitus type 1, hypoparathyroidism, myasthenia gravis, and
cardiomyopathy.
B. Toxic Multinodular Goiter and Thyroid Adenomas
Autonomous toxic adenomas of the thyroid may be single (Plummer
disease) or multiple (toxic multinodular goiter). Jod-Basedow
disease, or iodine-induced hyperthyroidism, may occur in patients
with multinodular goiters after intake of large amounts of iodine in
the diet or in the form of radiographic contrast materials or drugs,
especially amiodarone. This condition is not associated with
infiltrative ophthalmopathy or dermopathy.
C. Subacute (de Quervain) Thyroiditis
Subacute thyroiditis typically presents with a moderately enlarged,
tender thyroid, and hyperthyroidism. It is thought to be due to a
viral infection. If the gland is nontender, the disorder is called “silent
thyroiditis.” Hyperthyroidism is followed by hypothyroidism.
Patients taking lithium may rarely experience thyrotoxicosis due to
silent thyroiditis. Symptoms mimic a manic episode such that the
diagnosis is often missed.
D. Thyrotoxicosis Factitia
Thyrotoxicosis factitia is due to ingestion of excessive amounts of
exogenous thyroid hormone. Isolated epidemics of thyrotoxicosis
have been caused by consumption of ground beef contaminated
with bovine thyroid gland.
E. Struma Ovarii
Thyroid tissue is contained in about 3% of ovarian dermoid tumors
and teratomas. This thyroid tissue may autonomously secrete
thyroid hormone due to a toxic nodule or in concert with the
woman's thyroid gland in Graves disease or toxic multinodular
goiter.
F. Pituitary Tumor
TSH hypersecretion by the pituitary may be caused by a tumor or
thyrotrophe cell hyperplasia and is a rare cause of hyperthyroidism.
Serum TSH is elevated or normal in the presence of true
thyrotoxicosis. Pituitary hyperplasia may be detected on MRI scan
as pituitary enlargement without a discrete adenoma being visible.
This condition appears to be due to a diminished feedback effect of
T4 upon the pituitary. Some cases are familial. Prolonged untreated
hypothyroidism causes pituitary enlargement due to thyrotrophe
hyperplasia; thyrotrophe tumors are rare.
G. Thyroiditis
Hashimoto thyroiditis may cause transient hyperthyroidism during
the initial destructive phase. This is also seen in some patients
receiving interferon-α, interferon-β, and interleukin-2. Postpartum
thyroiditis refers to Hashimoto thyroiditis that occurs in the first 6
months after delivery. It is common, occurring postpartum in 5–
10% of women in the United States. Hyperthyroidism results from
the release of stored thyroid hormone following damage to the
thyroid (see Thyroiditis). Thyroiditis and hyperthyroidism can also
develop in patients receiving sunitinib chemotherapy.
H. Pregnancy and Trophoblastic Tumors
The prevalence of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy—most commonly
due to Graves disease—is about 0.2%. Struma ovarii is rare.
Newborns have an increased risk of intrauterine growth retardation,
prematurity, and transient thyrotoxicosis from transplacental transfer
of thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb).
Although hCG generally has a low affinity for the thyroid's TSH
receptors, very high serum levels of hCG may cause sufficient
receptor activation to cause thyrotoxicosis. Mild gestational
hyperthyroidism may occur during the first 4 months of pregnancy,
when hCG levels are very high. Pregnant women are more likely to
have thyrotoxicosis and hyperemesis gravidarum if they have high
serum levels of asialo-hCG, a subfraction of hCG with greater
affinity for TSH receptors.
High levels of hCG can also cause thyrotoxicosis in some cases
of molar pregnancy, choriocarcinoma, and testicular malignancies.
I. Thyroid Carcinoma
Metastatic functioning thyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of
thyrotoxicosis. Hyperthyroidism can be induced by recombinant
human thyroid stimulating hormone (rhTSH) that is given prior to
radioiodine therapy or scanning. (See Thyroid Cancer section.)
J. Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis
Amiodarone is a widely used antiarrhythmic drug. The half-life of
amiodarone and its metabolites is about 100 days. By weight,
amiodarone is 37% iodine, and this is believed to account for the
fact that thyroid dysfunction develops in about 15–20% of patients
taking amiodarone. The relative proportion of thyrotoxicosis and
hypothyroidism depends partly on prior dietary iodine intake, with
thyrotoxicosis being relatively more common in areas of iodine
deficiency. In the United States, amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis
develops in about 3% of patients taking the drug; the incidence of
amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis is higher in Europe and in
iodine-deficient geographic areas (20%). Hyperthyroidism can
occur 4 months to 3 years after initiation of amiodarone and may
develop several months after amiodarone has been discontinued.
Type I amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis is caused by active
elaboration of excessive thyroid hormone and may occur by either
of two mechanisms: (1) Free iodine may cause toxic multinodular
goiter in iodine-deficient patients with preexisting autonomous
thyroid nodules (jodbasedow phenomenon). This is infrequently
encountered in iodine-sufficient countries such as the United States.
Thyroid radioactive iodine (RAI) uptake ranges from low to high.
(2) Excessive free iodine can trigger an immunologic attack on the
thyroid; this may cause Graves disease, commonly with diffuse
thyroid enlargement and antithyroid peroxidase antibodies (70%).
Color flow Doppler sonography shows increased vascularity and
blood flow velocity. Thyroidal radioiodine uptake may be low-
normal, normal, or increased.
Type II amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis is caused by
destructive thyroiditis, which releases stored thyroid hormone from
damaged cells; hyperthyroidism can last 1–3 months and may be
followed by hypothyroidism. On ultra-sound, the thyroid gland is
normal in size, and on color flow Doppler sonography there is no
increase in vascularity. Thyroidal radioiodine uptake is usually very
low (<3%).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Thyrotoxicosis due to any cause produces many different
manifestations of variable intensity among different individuals.
Patients may complain of nervousness, restlessness, heat
intolerance, increased sweating, pruritus, fatigue, weakness, muscle
cramps, frequent bowel movements, or weight change (usually
loss). There may be palpitations or angina pectoris. Women
frequently report menstrual irregularities.
Signs of thyrotoxicosis also include fine resting finger tremors,
moist warm skin, fever, hyperreflexia, fine hair, and onycholysis.
Chronic thyrotoxicosis may cause osteoporosis. Clubbing and
swelling of the fingers (acropachy) develop in a small number of
patients.
In patients with Graves disease, physical examination usually
reveals a diffusely enlarged thyroid, though frequently asymmetric,
often with a bruit. However, some patients have no palpable thyroid
enlargement. The thyroid gland in subacute thyroiditis is usually
moderately enlarged and tender. In patients with toxic multinodular
goiter, the thyroid usually has palpable nodules.
Cardiopulmonary manifestations of thyrotoxicosis commonly
include a forceful heartbeat, premature atrial contractions, and sinus
tachycardia. Patients often have exertional dyspnea. Atrial
fibrillation or atrial tachycardia occurs in about 8% of patients with
thyrotoxicosis, more commonly in men, the elderly, and those with
ischemic or valvular heart disease. The ventricular response from
the atrial fibrillation may be difficult to control. Thyrotoxicosis itself
can cause a thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy, and the onset of atrial
fibrillation can precipitate congestive heart failure. Echocardiogram
reveals pulmonary hypertension in 49% of patients with
hyperthyroidism; of these, 71% have pulmonary artery hypertension
while 29% have pulmonary venous hypertension. Hemodynamic
abnormalities and pulmonary hypertension are reversible with
restoration of euthyroidism.
Graves eye manifestations, which can occur with
hyperthyroidism of any etiology, include upper eyelid retraction
(Dalrymple sign), lid lag with downward gaze (von Graefe sign),
and a staring appearance (Kocher sign). Ophthalmopathy is
clinically apparent in 20–40% of patients with Graves disease and
type I amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis, but in no other
conditions causing hyperthyroidism. It usually consists of
conjunctival 
edema 
(chemosis), 
conjunctivitis, 
and 
mild
exophthalmos (proptosis). About 5–10% of patients experience
more severe exophthalmos, with the eye being pushed forward by
increased retro-orbital fat and eye muscles that have been thickened
by lymphocytic infiltration. Such patients can experience diplopia
from extraocular muscle entrapment. There may be weakness of
upward gaze (Stellwag sign). The optic nerve may be compressed
in severe cases, causing progressive loss of color vision, visual
fields, and visual acuity. Corneal drying may occur with inadequate
lid closure. Eye changes may sometimes be asymmetric or
unilateral. The severity of the eye disease is not closely correlated
with the severity of the thyrotoxicosis. Some patients with Graves
ophthalmopathy are clinically euthyroid.
Exophthalmometry should be performed on all patients with
Graves disease to document their degree of exophthalmos and
detect progression of orbitopathy. The protrusion of the eye beyond
the orbital rim is measured with a prism instrument (Hertel
exophthalmometer). Maximum normal eye protrusion varies
between kindreds and races, being about 22 mm for blacks, 20 mm
for whites, and 18 mm for Asians.
The differential diagnosis for Graves ophthalmopathy includes
diplopia caused by coexistent ocular myasthenia gravis, which is
more common in Graves disease and is usually mild, often with
selective eye involvement. Acetylcholinesterase receptor antibody
(AChR Ab) levels are elevated in only 36% of such patients, and a
thymoma is present in 9%. Orbital lymphoma can also masquerade
as Graves ophthalmopathy.
Graves dermopathy (pretibial myxedema) occurs in about 3%
of patients with Graves disease, usually in the pretibial region. It is
more common in patients with high levels of serum thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulin and in those with severe Graves
ophthalmopathy. Glycosaminoglycans accumulation and lymphoid
infiltration occur in affected skin, which becomes erythematous with
a thickened, rough texture. Elephantiasis of the legs is a rare
complication.
Thyroid acropachy is an extreme and unusual manifestation of
Graves disease. It presents with digital clubbing, swelling of fingers
and toes, and a periosteal reaction of extremity bones. It is
ordinarily associated with ophthalmopathy and thyroid dermopathy.
Most patients are smokers. The presence of thyroid acropachy is
an indication of the severity of the autoimmunity; most patients have
high serum titers of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin. Patients with
thyroid acropachy are at greater risk for having concurrent Graves
dermopathy and severe ophthalmopathy. However, acropachy itself
does not usually cause clinical complaints.
Tetany is a rare presenting feature. In hyperthyroidism, the renal
excretion of magnesium is increased and hypomagnesemia is
common. Severe magnesium depletion causes hypoparathyroidism
that can result in hypocalcemia.
Hyperthyroidism during pregnancy shares many of the
features of normal pregnancy: tachycardia, warm skin, heat
intolerance, increased sweating, and a palpable thyroid. Pregnancy
can have a beneficial effect on the thyrotoxicosis of Graves disease.
However, there is an increased risk of thyroid storm, preeclampsia–
eclampsia, congestive heart failure, premature delivery, and abruptio
placentae.
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis occurs in about 15% of Asian
or Native American men with thyrotoxicosis. It usually presents
abruptly with symmetric flaccid paralysis (and few thyrotoxic
symptoms), often after intravenous dextrose, oral carbohydrate, or
vigorous exercise. Attacks last 7–72 hours.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum FT4, T3, FT3, T4, thyroid resin uptake, and FT4 index are all
usually increased. Sometimes the FT4 level may be normal but with
an elevated serum T3 (T3 toxicosis). Serum T3 can be misleadingly
elevated when blood is collected in tubes using a gel barrier, which
causes certain immunoassays (eg, Immulite but not Axsym
analyzers) to report serum total T3 levels that are falsely elevated in
24% of normal patients. Serum T4 or T3 can be elevated in other
nonthyroidal conditions (Table 26–5).
Serum TSH is suppressed in hyperthyroidism, except in the very
rare cases of pituitary inappropriate secretion of thyrotropin. Serum
TSH may be misleadingly low in other nonthyroidal conditions
(Table 26–5). The term “subclinical hyperthyroidism” is used to
describe asymptomatic individuals with a low serum TSH but
normal serum levels of FT4 and T3; progression to symptomatic
thyrotoxicosis occurs at a rate of 1–2% per year in patients without
a goiter and at a rate of 5% per year in patients with a multi-nodular
goiter.
Hyperthyroidism can cause other laboratory abnormalities,
including hypercalcemia, increased alkaline phosphatase, anemia,
and decreased granulocytes. Hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia
occur in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis.
Problems of diagnosis occur in patients with acute psychiatric
disorders; about 30% of these patients have elevated serum T4
levels without clinical thyrotoxicosis. The TSH is not usually
suppressed, distinguishing psychiatric disorder from true
hyperthyroidism. T4 levels return to normal gradually.
In Graves disease, TSH receptor antibody (TRAb) levels are
usually detectable (65%). Antithyroglobulin or antithyroperoxidase
antibodies are usually elevated but are nonspecific. Serum ANA
and anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies are also usually elevated
without any evidence of lupus erythematosus or other collagen-
vascular disease.
With subacute thyroiditis, patients often have an increased
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) but antithyroid antibodies are
usually not present in the plasma, and tests for TRAb are negative.
With hyperthyroidism during pregnancy, women have an
elevated FT4 while the TSH is suppressed. However, apparent lack
of full TSH suppression can be seen due to misidentification of hCG
as TSH in certain assays. Although the total T4 is elevated in most
pregnant women, values over 20 mcg/dL are encountered only in
hyperthyroidism. The T3 resin uptake, which is low in normal
pregnancy because of high TBG concentration, is normal or high in
thyrotoxic persons. Pregnancy can have a beneficial effect on the
thyrotoxicosis of Graves disease, with decreasing antibody titers
and decreasing FT4 levels as the pregnancy advances.
Since high levels of T4 and FT4 are normally seen in patients
taking amiodarone, suppressed TSH (sensitive assay) must be
present along with a greatly elevated T4(> 20 mcg/dL) or T3 (> 200
ng/dL) 
in 
order 
to 
diagnose 
hyperthyroidism. 
(Note:
Hypothyroidism occurs in an additional 6% of patients receiving
amiodarone after 2–39 weeks of therapy.) In type I amiodarone-
induced thyrotoxicosis, the presence of proptosis, thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulin is diagnostic. In type II amiodarone-
induced thyrotoxicosis, serum levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) are
usually quite elevated.
C. Imaging
A RAI scan and uptake may be helpful to determine the cause for
hyperthyroidism. It is not necessary for patients with obvious
Graves disease with and elevated serum thyroid-stimulating
immunoglobulin or associated Graves ophthalmopathy. Women
with hyperthyroidism due to Graves disease should ideally have the
RAI scan extended to include the pelvis in order to screen for
concomitant struma ovarii (rare). A high RAI uptake is seen in
Graves disease and toxic nodular goiter. Patients with type 1
amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis have RAI uptake that is usually
detectable but typically below the normal range, although some
yp
y
g ,
g
patients may have elevated RAI uptake. A low RAI uptake is
characteristic of subacute thyroiditis during thyrotoxicosis but can
also be seen after an iodine load. Low RAI uptake is also seen with
interleukin-2 
therapy 
and 
after 
neck 
surgery 
for
hyperparathyroidism. 
In type 
II 
amiodarone-induced
thyrotoxicosis, thyroid RAI uptake is usually below 3%.
Thyroid ultrasound can be helpful in patients with
hyperthyroidism, particularly in patients with palpable thyroid
nodules. Color flow Doppler sonography is helpful to distinguish
type 1 from type 2 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis; the former
shows increased blood flow velocity and vascularity.
MRI and CT scanning of the orbits are the imaging methods of
choice to visualize Graves ophthalmopathy affecting the extraocular
muscles. Imaging is required only in severe or unilateral cases or in
euthyroid exophthalmos that must be distinguished from orbital
pseudotumor, tumors, and other lesions.
 Differential Diagnosis
True thyrotoxicosis must be distinguished from those conditions that
elevate serum T4 and T3 or suppress serum TSH without affecting
clinical status (see Table 26–5).
Some states of hypermetabolism without thyrotoxicosis—notably
severe anemia, leukemia, polycythemia, and cancer—rarely cause
confusion. 
Pheochromocytoma 
is 
often 
associated 
with
hypermetabolism, tachycardia, weight loss, and profuse sweating.
Acromegaly may also produce tachycardia, sweating, and thyroid
enlargement. Appropriate laboratory tests will easily distinguish
these entities.
Cardiac disease (eg, atrial fibrillation, angina) refractory to
treatment suggests the possibility of underlying (“apathetic”)
hyperthyroidism. Other causes of ophthalmoplegia (eg, myasthenia
gravis) and exophthalmos (eg, orbital tumor, pseudotumor) must be
considered. Thyrotoxicosis must also be considered in the
differential diagnosis of muscle weakness and osteoporosis.
Diabetes mellitus and Addison disease may coexist with
thyrotoxicosis.
 Complications
Hypercalcemia, osteoporosis, and nephrocalcinosis may occur.
Decreased libido, erectile dysfunction, diminished sperm motility,
and gynecomastia may be noted in men with hyperthyroidism. Other
complications include cardiac arrhythmias and heart failure, thyroid
crisis, ophthalmopathy, dermopathy, and thyrotoxic hypokalemic
periodic paralysis (see below.)
 Treatment
A. Graves Disease
The treatment of Graves disease involves a choice of methods
rather than a method of choice.
1. Propranolol—Propranolol is generally used for symptomatic
relief until the hyperthyroidism is resolved. It effectively relieves the
tachycardia, tremor, diaphoresis, and anxiety that occur with
hyperthyroidism due to any cause. It is the initial treatment of choice
for thyroid storm. The periodic paralysis seen in association with
thyrotoxicosis is also effectively treated with β-blockade. It has no
effect on thyroid hormone secretion. Treatment is usually begun with
propranolol ER 60 mg orally once or twice daily, with dosage
increases every 2–3 days to a maximum daily dose of 320 mg.
Propranolol ER is initially given every 12 hours for patients with
severe hyperthyroidism, due to accelerated metabolism of the
propranolol; it may be given once daily as hyperthyroidism
improves.
2. Thiourea drugs—Methimazole or propylthiouracil is generally
used for young adults or patients with mild thyrotoxicosis, small
goiters, or fear of isotopes. Carbimazole is another thiourea that is
converted to methimazole in vivo and is available outside the United
States. Elderly patients usually respond particularly well. These
drugs are also useful for preparing hyperthyroid patients for surgery
and elderly patients for RAI treatment. The drugs do not
permanently damage the thyroid and are associated with a lower
chance of posttreatment hypothyroidism (compared with RAI or
surgery). When thiourea therapy is discontinued, there is a high
recurrence rate for hyperthyroidism (about 50%). A better
likelihood of long-term remission is seen in patients with small
goiters or mild hyperthyroidism and those requiring small doses of
thiourea. Patients whose thyroperoxidase and thyroglobulin
antibodies remain high after 2 years of therapy have been reported
to have only a 10% rate of relapse. Thiourea therapy may be
continued long-term for patients who are tolerating it well.
Agranulocytosis occurs in about 0.3% of patients tak ing
methimazole and about 0.4% of patients taking propylthiouracil.
Agranulocytosis usually occurs in the first 60 days of therapy, and it
develops in a few patients after 5 months of therapy. There is a
genetic tendency to develop agranulocytosis with thiourea therapy;
if a close relative has had this adverse reaction, other therapies
should be considered for the patient. Patients are warned that if a
sore throat or febrile illness develops, they should seek medical
attention and have a WBC determined immediately. The
agranulocytosis is generally reversible; recovery is not improved by
filgrastim (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF]). Periodic
surveillance of the WBC during treatment has been advocated, but
the onset of agranulocytosis is generally abrupt.
Other side effects common to thiourea drugs include pruritus,
allergic dermatitis, nausea, and dyspepsia. Antihistamines may
control mild pruritus without discontinuation of the drug. Since the
two thiourea drugs are similar, patients who have had a major
allergic reaction from one should not be given the other.
Primary hypothyroidism may occur. The patient may become
clinically hypothyroid for 2 weeks or more before TSH levels rise,
having been suppressed by the preceding hyperthyroidism.
Therefore, the patient's changing thyroid status is best monitored
clinically and with serum levels of FT4. Rapid growth of the goiter
usually occurs if prolonged hypothyroidism is allowed to develop;
the goiter may sometimes become massive but usually regresses
rapidly with reduction or cessation of thiourea therapy or with
thyroid hormone replacement.
A. METHIMAZOLE—Methimazole is generally preferred over
propylthiouracil since methimazole is more convenient to use and is
less likely to cause fulminant hepatic necrosis. Methimazole therapy
is also less likely to cause 131I treatment failure. Rare complications
peculiar to methimazole include serum sickness, cholestatic
jaundice, loss of taste, alopecia, nephrotic syndrome, and
hypoglycemia. Methi mazole is given orally in initial doses of 30–60
mg once daily. Some patients with very mild hyperthyroidism may
respond well to smaller initial doses of methimazole (10–20 mg
daily). Methimazole may also be administered twice daily to reduce
the likelihood of gastrointestinal upset. Methimazole use in
pregnancy has been associated with a possibly increased risk of
fetal anomalies such as aplasia cutis, esophageal atresia, and coanal
atresia. However, methimazole may be used if the patient cannot
tolerate propylthiouracil (see below). If methimazole is used during
pregnancy or breastfeeding, the dose should not exceed 20 mg
daily. The dosage is reduced as manifestations of hyperthyroidism
resolve and as the FT4 level falls toward normal. For patients who
have elected to receive 131I therapy, methimazole is discontinued 4
days prior to receiving the 131I and is resumed at a lower dose 3
days afterwards to avoid recurrence of hyperthyroidism. About 4
weeks after 131I therapy, methimazole may be discontinued if the
patient is euthyroid.
B. PROPYLTHIOURACIL—Propylthiouracil has been the drug of
choice during breastfeeding since it is not concentrated in the milk
as much as methimazole. Propylthiouracil is also favored during
pregnancy, possibly causing fewer problems in the newborn. Rare
complications peculiar to propylthiouracil include arthritis, lupus,
aplastic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and hypoprothrombinemia.
Acute hepatitis occurs rarely and is treated with prednisone but may
progress to liver failure. Propylthiouracil is given orally in initial
doses of 300–600 mg daily in four divided doses. The dosage and
frequency of administration are reduced as symptoms of
hyperthyroidism resolve and the FT4 level approaches normal.
During pregnancy, the dose of propylthiouracil is kept below 200
mg/d to avoid goitrous hypothyroidism in the infant.
3. Iodinated contrast agents—These agents provide effective
temporary treatment for thyrotoxicosis of any cause. Iopanoic acid
(Telepaque) or ipodate sodium (Bilivist, Oragrafin) is given orally in
a dosage of 500 mg twice daily for 3 days, then 500 mg once daily.
These agents inhibit peripheral 5′-monodeiodination of T4, thereby
blocking its conversion to active T3. Within 24 hours, serum T3
levels fall an average of 62%. For patients with Graves disease,
methimazole is begun first to block iodine organification; the next
day, ipodate sodium or iopanoic acid may be added. The iodinated
contrast agents are particularly useful for patients who are very
symptomatically thyrotoxic (see Thyroid Storm). They offer a
therapeutic option for patients with T4 overdosage, subacute
thyroiditis, and amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis and for those
intolerant to thioureas and for newborns with thyrotoxicosis (due to
maternal Graves disease). Treatment periods of 8 months or more
are possible, but efficacy tends to wane with time. In Graves
disease, thyroid RAI uptake may be suppressed during treatment
but typically returns to pre-treatment uptake by 7 days after
discontinuation of the drug, allowing 131I treatment.
4. Radioactive iodine (131I, RAI)—The administration of 131I is
an excellent method of destroying overactive thyroid tissue (either
diffuse or toxic nodular goiter). There are ample data to conclude
that patients who are treated with RAI in adulthood do not have an
increased risk of subsequent thyroid cancer, leukemia, or other
malignancies. Similarly, individuals who were treated with RAI as
teenagers have not shown any increased risk of malignancy in a 36-
year retrospective study. Children born to parents previously
treated with 131I show normal rates of congenital abnormalities.
Because fetal radiation is harmful, RAI should not be given to
pregnant women. A sensitive pregnancy test (serum β-hCG)
should be obtained on all women of reproductive age prior to 131I
therapy.
Most patients may receive 131I while being symptomatically
treated with propranolol ER, which is then reduced in dosage as
hyperthyroxinemia resolves. However, some patients (those with
coronary disease, the elderly, or those with severe hyperthyroidism)
are usually rendered euthyroid with a thiouracil drug (see above)
while the dosage of propranolol is reduced. A higher rate of 131I
treatment failure has been reported in patients with Graves disease
who have been receiving methimazole or propylthiouracil. However,
therapy with 131I will usually be effective if the methimazole is
discontinued at least 4 days before RAI therapy and if the
therapeutic dosage of 131I is adjusted (upward) according to RAI
uptake on the pretherapy scan. Prior to 131I therapy, patients are
instructed against receiving intravenous iodinated contrast or
ingesting large quantities of dietary iodine, but severe restriction of
dietary iodine is not usually necessary.
Following 131I treatment for hyperthyroidism, Graves
ophthalmopathy appears or worsens in 15% of patients (23% in
smokers and 6% in nonsmokers) and improves in none, whereas
)
p
,
during treatment with methimazole, ophthalmopathy worsens in 3%
and improves in 2% of patients. Among patients receiving
prednisone following 131I treatment, preexistent ophthalmopathy
worsens in none and improves in 67%. Therefore, patients with
Graves ophthalmopathy who are to be treated with radioiodine
should be considered for prophylactic prednisone (20–40 mg/d) for
2 months following administration of 131I, particularly in patients
who have severe orbital involvement.
Smoking increases the risk of having a flare in ophthalmopathy
following 131I treatment and also reduces the effectiveness of
prednisone treatment. Therefore, patients who smoke are strongly
encouraged to quit prior to 131I treatment.
FT4 levels may sometimes drop within 2 months after131I
treatment, but then rise again to thyrotoxic levels, at which time
thyroid RAI uptake is low. This phenomenon is caused by a release
of stored thyroid hormone from injured thyroid cells and does not
indicate a treatment failure. In fact, serum FT4 then falls abruptly to
hypothyroid levels.
There is a high incidence of hypothyroidism in the months to
years after 131I, even when small doses are given. Patients with
Graves disease treated with 131I also have an increased lifetime risk
of developing hyperparathyroidism, particularly when radioiodine
therapy was administered in childhood or adolescence. Lifelong
clinical follow-up is mandatory, with measurements of serum TSH,
FT4, and calcium when indicated.
5. Thyroid surgery—Thyroidectomy may be performed for
pregnant women whose thyrotoxicosis is not controlled with low
doses of thioureas, and for women who desire to become pregnant
in the very near future. Surgery is also an option for nodular goiters,
when there is a suspicion for malignancy.
The Hartley–Dunhill operation is the procedure of choice for
patients with Graves disease having surgery; this operation consists
of a total resection of one lobe and a subtotal resection of the other
lobe, leaving about 4 g of thyroid tissue. Subtotal thyroidectomy of
both lobes is often used, but ultimately results in a 9% recurrence
rate for hyperthyroidism. Total thyroidectomy of both lobes poses
an increased risk of hypoparathyroidism and damage to the
recurrent laryngeal nerves.
Patients are ordinarily rendered euthyroid preoperatively with a
thiourea drug. Ipodate sodium or iopanoic acid (500 mg orally
twice daily) may be used in addition to a thiourea to accelerate the
decline in serum T3. Propranolol ER is given orally at initial doses of
60–80 mg twice daily and increased every 2–3 days until the heart
rate is < 90 beats per minute. Propranolol is continued until the
serum T3 (or free T3) is normal preoperatively. Thyroid vascularity
is reduced by preoperative treatment with either ipo-date sodium or
iopanoic acid (500 mg twice orally daily for 3 days) or iodine (eg,
Lugol solution, two or three drops orally daily for several days). If a
patient undergoes surgery while thyrotoxic, larger doses of
propranolol are given perioperatively to reduce the likelihood of
thyroid crisis.
Morbidity includes possible damage to the recurrent laryngeal
nerve, with resultant vocal cord paralysis. If both recurrent laryngeal
nerves are damaged, airway obstruction may develop, and the
patient 
may 
require 
intubation 
and 
tracheostomy.
Hypoparathyroidism also occurs, which means that calcium levels
must be checked postoperatively. When a competent, experienced
neck surgeon performs a thyroidectomy, surgical complications are
uncommon. Thyroid surgery should be performed as an inpatient,
with at least an overnight observational period.
B. Toxic Solitary Thyroid Nodules
Toxic solitary thyroid nodules are usually benign but may rarely be
malignant. If a nonsurgical therapy is elected, the nodule should be
evaluated with a fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNA).
Hyperthyroidism caused by a single hyper-functioning thyroid
nodule may be treated symptomatically with propranolol ER and
methimazole or propylthiouracil, as in Graves disease (see above).
Patients who tolerate methimazole well may elect to continue it for
long-term therapy. The dose of methimazole should be adjusted to
keep the TSH slightly suppressed, so the risk of TSH-stimulated
growth of the nodule is reduced. For patients under age 40 years
and for healthy older patients, surgery is usually recommended;
patients are made euthyroid with a thiourea preoperatively and
given several days of iodine, ipodate sodium, or iopanoic acid
before surgery as in Graves disease (see above). Transient
postoperative hypothyroidism resolves spontaneously. Permanent
hypothyroidism occurs in about 14% of patients by 6 years after
surgery. Patients with a toxic solitary nodule who are over age 40
years or in poor health may be offered 131I therapy. If the patient
has been receiving methimazole preparatory to 131I, the TSH should
be kept slightly suppressed in order to reduce the uptake of 131I by
the normal thyroid. Nevertheless, permanent hypothyroidism occurs
in about one-third of patients after 8 years of 131I therapy. The
nodule remains palpable in 50% and may grow in 10% of patients
after 131I.
C. Toxic Multinodular Goiter
Hyperthyroidism caused by a toxic multinodular goiter may also be
treated with propranolol ER and methimazole, as in Graves disease.
Methimazole does reverse hyperthyroidism, but there is a 95%
recurrence rate if it is stopped. Definitive treatment for large
multinodular goiters is surgery, prior to which patients are rendered
euthyroid. Surgery is particularly indicated to relieve pressure
symptoms or for cosmetic indications. Patients with toxic
multinodular goiter are prepared for surgery the same as those with
Graves disease. Patients who are to receive 131I treatment are
rendered nearly euthyroid with methimazole, which is stopped at
least 4 days before RAI treatment. Meanwhile, the patient follows a
low-iodine diet; this is done to enhance the thyroid gland's uptake of
RAI, which may be relatively low in this condition (compared to
Graves disease). Relatively high doses of 131I are usually required;
recurrent thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism are common, so
patients must be monitored closely. Peculiarly, in about 5% of
patients with diffusely nodular toxic goiter, the administration of 131I
therapy may induce Graves disease. Also, Graves eye disease has
occurred rarely following 131I therapy for multinodular goiter.
D. Subacute (de Quervain) Thyroiditis
Patients with hyperthyroidism due to subacute thyroiditis are treated
symptomatically with oral propranolol ER at initial doses of about
60–80 mg twice daily and increased every 2–3 days until the heart
rate is < 90 beats per minute. Ipodate sodium or iopanoic acid, 500
mg orally daily, promptly corrects elevated T3 levels and is
continued for 15–60 days until the serum FT4 level normalizes. The
condition subsides spontaneously within weeks to months.
Thioureas are ineffective, since thyroid hormone production is
actually low in this condition. RAI is ineffective, since the thyroid's
iodine uptake is low. Since periods of hypothyroidism may occur
following the initial inflammatory episode, patients should have close
clinical follow-up, with serum FT4 measurement when necessary.
Prompt treatment of the transient hypothyroidism may reduce the
incidence of recurrent thyroiditis. Pain can usually be managed with
non-aspirin nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
E. Hashimoto Thyroiditis (Hashitoxicosis)
Rarely, hyperthyroidism develops as a result of release of stored
thyroid hormone during severe Hashimoto thyroiditis. The
thyroperoxidase or thyroglobulin antibodies are usually high, but
RAI uptake is low, thus distinguishing it from Graves disease. This is
especially common in postpartum women, in whom it may be
transient. Treatment is with propranolol ER. Ipodate sodium or
iopanoic acid may also be used as described above. Patients are
monitored carefully for the development of hypothyroidism and
treated.
F. Hyperthyroidism during Pregnancy and Lactation
There may be a slightly increased risk of fetal anomalies associated
with methimazole in the first trimester. Therefore, pregnant women
with hyperthyroidism are treated with propylthiouracil in the first
trimester and then may be switched to methimazole. Either thiourea
should be given in the smallest dose possible, permitting mild sub-
clinical hyperthyroidism to occur since it is usually well tolerated.
Both propylthiouracil and methimazole cross the placenta and can
induce hypothyroidism, with fetal TSH hypersecretion and goiter.
Thyroid hormone administration to the mother does not prevent
hypothyroidism in the fetus, since T4 and T3 do not freely cross the
placenta. Fetal hypothyroidism is rare if the mother's
hyperthyroidism is controlled with small daily doses of
propylthiouracil (50–150 mg/d orally) or methimazole (5–15 mg/d
orally). Thyroidectomy is reserved for women who are allergic or
resistant to antithyroid drugs (usually due to noncompliance) or who
have very large goiters. Fetal ultrasound at 32 weeks gestation can
visualize any fetal goiter, so fetal thyroid dysfunction can be
diagnosed and treated.
Both methimazole and propylthiouracil are secreted in breast
milk, but not in amounts that affect the infant's thyroid hormone
levels. No adverse reactions to these drugs (eg, rash, hepatic
dysfunction, leukopenia) have been reported in breast-fed infants.
Recommended doses are 20 mg orally daily or less for methimazole
and 450 mg orally daily or less for propylthiouracil. It is
recommended that the medication be taken just after breast-
feeding.
G. Treatment of Other Causes of Hyperthyroidism
Patients 
with 
thyrotoxicosis 
from thyrotrophe pituitary
hyperplasia are treated with propranolol ER as described above.
Definitive treatment is with RAI or thyroid surgery. Patients with
thyrotoxicosis caused by a thyrotrophe pituitary adenoma are
treated with propranolol ER and methimazole, followed by
transsphenoidal resection of the pituitary tumor, when possible.
Patients with type I amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis
usually require propranolol ER. Therapy with 131I may be
successful in some patients with sufficient RAI uptake. If radioiodine
therapy is not an option (due to insufficient RAI uptake), treatment
with methimazole is begun. If radioiodine is administered,
methimazole may be started several days afterward. After two
doses of methimazole, iopanoic acid or sodium ipodate may be
added to the regimen to further block conversion of T4 to T3; the
recommended dosage for each is 500 mg orally twice daily for 3
days, followed by 500 mg once daily until thyrotoxicosis is
resolved. If iopanoic acid or sodium ipodate is not available, the
alternative is potassium perchlorate; it is given in doses of ≤ 1000
mg daily (in divided doses) for a course not to exceed 30 days in
order to avoid the complication of aplastic anemia. Amiodarone
may be withdrawn but this does not have a significant therapeutic
effect for several months. Thyroidectomy is reserved for resistant
cases.
Patients with type II amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis
usually require propranolol ER. Prednisone is given at an initial dose
of about 0.5–0.7 mg/kg; that dose of prednisone is continued for
about 2 weeks and then slowly tapered and finally withdrawn after
about 3 months. Iopanoic acid or ipodate sodium may also be used
(see above). Withdrawal of amiodarone is not usually necessary.
Methimazole is ineffective. Thyroidectomy is rarely required, since
the condition is transient. Most patients become euthyroid within
30–40 days, except in cases of very severe thyrotoxicosis.
Some cases of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis cannot be
strictly categorized as either type 1 or type 2. Such patients usually
have negligible radioiodine uptake, so treatment is usually
commenced with propranolol ER and a 1-month trial of
methimazole. Iopanoic acid or ipo-date sodium can be added to
methimazole as noted above. Prednisone is given for severe
thyrotoxicosis or when methimazole fails to correct the
thyrotoxicosis. Amiodarone is discontinued, when feasible.
H. Treatment of Complications
1. Graves ophthalmopathy—The risk of having a “flare” of
ophthalmopathy following 131I treatment for hyperthyroidism is
about 6% for nonsmokers and 23% for smokers. Graves
ophthalmopathy can also be aggravated by thiazolidinediones (eg,
pioglitazone, rosiglitazone); these oral diabetic agents should be
avoided or withdrawn in patients with Graves disease. For acute,
progressive exophthalmos, intravenous methylprednisolone, begun
promptly, is superior to oral prednisone, possibly due to improved
compliance. Methylprednisolone is given intravenously, 500 mg
weekly for 6 weeks, then 250 mg weekly for 6 weeks. If oral
prednisone is chosen for treatment, it must be given promptly in
daily doses of 40–60 mg/d orally, with dosage reduction over
several weeks. Higher initial prednisone doses of 80–120 mg/d are
used when there is optic nerve compression. Prednisone alleviates
acute eye symptoms in 64% of non-smokers, but only 14% of
smokers respond well.
Progressive active exophthalmos may be treated with retrobulbar
radiation therapy using a supervoltage linear accelerator (4–6 MeV)
to deliver 20 Gy over 2 weeks to the extraocular muscles, avoiding
the cornea and lens. Prednisone in high doses is given concurrently.
Patients who respond well to orbital radiation include those with
signs of acute inflammation, recent exophthalmos (< 6 months), or
optic nerve compression. Patients with chronic proptosis and orbital
muscle restriction respond less well. Retrobulbar radiation does not
cause cataracts or tumors; however, it can cause radiation-induced
retinopathy (usually subclinical) in about 5% of patients overall,
mostly in diabetics.
For severe cases, orbital decompression surgery may save
vision, though diplopia often persists postoperatively. General eye
protective measures include wearing glasses to protect the
protruding eye and taping the lids shut during sleep if corneal drying
is a problem. Methylcellulose drops and gels (“artificial tears”) may
also help. Tarsorrhaphy or canthoplasty can frequently help protect
the cornea and provide improved appearance. Hypothyroidism and
hyper-thyroidism must be treated promptly.
2. Cardiac complications—
A. SINUS TACHYCARDIA—T reatment consists of treating the
thyrotoxicosis. A β-blocker (as described above) such as
propranolol is used in the interim unless there is an associated
cardiomyopathy.
B. ATRIAL FIBRILLATION—Electrical cardioversion is unlikely to
convert atrial fibrillation to normal sinus rhythm while the patient is
thyrotoxic. Spontaneous conversion to normal sinus rhythm tends to
occur in about 56% of patients with achievement of euthyroidism,
but that likelihood decreases with age. Elective cardioversion may
be used for those patients in whom atrial fibrillation persists for 4
months after resolution of hyperthyroidism. Hyperthyroidism must
be treated immediately (see above). Other drugs, including digoxin,
β-blockers, anticoagulants, may be required.
(1) Digoxin— Digoxin is used to slow a fast ventricular response
to thyrotoxic atrial fibrillation; it must be used in larger than normal
doses because of increased clearance and an increased number of
cardiac cellular sodium pumps requiring inhibition. Digoxin doses
are reduced as hyper-thyroidism is corrected.
(2)β-Blockers—β-Blockers may also reduce the ventricular rate,
but they must be used with caution—particularly in patients with
cardiomegaly or signs of heart failure—since their negative inotropic
effect may precipitate congestive heart failure. Therefore, an initial
trial of a short-duration β-blocker should be considered, such as
esmolol intravenously. If a β-blocker is used, doses of digoxin must
be reduced.
(3) Anticoagulants— Anticoagulation is indicated in the following
situations: left atrial enlargement on echocardiogram, global left
ventricular dysfunction, recent congestive heart failure, hypertension,
recurrent 
atrial 
fibrillation, 
or 
a 
history 
of 
previous
thromboembolism. The doses of warfarin required in thyrotoxicosis
are smaller than normal because of an accelerated plasma clearance
of vitamin K–dependent clotting factors. Higher warfarin doses are
usually required as hyperthyroidism subsides.
C. HEART FAILURE—Heart failure due to thyrotoxicosis may be
caused by extreme tachycardia, cardiomyopathy, or both. Very
aggressive treatment of the hyperthyroidism is required in either
case (see Thyroid Crisis, below). The tachycardia from atrial
fibrillation is treated with digoxin as above. Intravenous furosemide
is typically required. Oral spironolactone or eplerenone may be
helpful. If tachycardia appears to be the main cause of the failure, β-
blockers are administered cautiously as described above.
Congestive heart failure may occur as a result of low-output
dilated cardiomyopathy in the setting of hyper-thyroidism. It is
uncommon and may be caused by an idiosyncratic severe toxic
effect of hyperthyroidism upon certain hearts. Cardiomyopathy may
occur at any age and without preexisting cardiac disease. β-
Blockers and calcium channel blockers are avoided. Emergency
treatment may include afterload reduction, diuretics, digoxin, and
other inotropic agents while the patient is being rendered euthyroid.
Heart failure usually persists despite correction of hyperthyroidism.
D. APATHETIC HYPERTHYROIDISM—Apathetic hyperthyroidism
may present with angina pectoris. Treatment is directed at reversing
the hyperthyroidism as well as providing standard antianginal
therapy. Coronary angioplasty or bypass grafting can often be
avoided by prompt diagnosis and treatment.
3. THYROID CRISIS OR “STORM”—This disorder, rarely seen
today, is an extreme form of thyrotoxicosis that may be triggered by
stressful illness, thyroid surgery, or RAI administration. Its
manifestations often include marked delirium, severe tachycardia,
vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration and very high fever. The mortality
rate is high.
A thiourea drug is given (eg, methimazole, 15–25 mg orally every
6 hours or propylthiouracil, 150–250 mg orally every 6 hours).
Ipodate sodium (500 mg/d orally) can be helpful if begun 1 hour
after the first dose of thiourea. Iodide is given 1 hour later as Lugol
solution (10 drops three times daily orally) or as sodium iodide (1 g
intravenously slowly). Propranolol is given (cautiously in the
presence of heart failure; see above) in a dosage of 0.5–2 mg
intravenously every 4 hours or 20–120 mg orally every 6 hours.
Hydrocortisone is usually given in doses of 50 mg orally every 6
hours, with rapid dosage reduction as the clinical situation improves.
Aspirin is avoided since it displaces T4 from TBG, raising FT4
serum levels. Definitive treatment with 131I or surgery is delayed
until the patient is euthyroid.
4. Hyperthyroidism from postpartum thyroiditis—Propranolol
ER is given during the hyperthyroid phase followed by levothyroxine
during the hypothyroidism phase (see Thyroiditis, below).
5. Graves dermopathy—Treatment involves application of a
topical corticosteroid (eg, fluocinolone) with nocturnal plastic
occlusive dressings.
6. Thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis—Sudden
symmetric flaccid paralysis, along with hypokalemia and
hypophosphatemia and few signs of thyrotoxicosis, may develop in
Asian and Native American men with hyperthyroidism. Therapy
with oral propranolol, 3 mg/kg, normalizes the serum potassium and
phosphate levels and reverses the paralysis within 2–3 hours. No
intravenous potassium or phosphate is ordinarily required.
Intravenous dextrose and oral carbohydrate aggravate the condition
and are to be avoided. Therapy is continued with propranolol, 60–
80 mg orally every 8 hours (or sustained-action propranolol ER
daily at equivalent daily dosage), along with a thiourea drug such as
methimazole to treat the hyperthyroidism.
 Prognosis
Graves disease may rarely subside spontaneously, particularly when
it is mild or subclinical. However, it usually persists. The ocular,
cardiac, and psychological complications can become serious and
persistent even after treatment. Permanent hypoparathyroidism and
vocal cord palsy are risks of surgical thyroidectomy. Recurrences
are common following thiourea therapy but also occur after low-
dose 131I therapy or subtotal thyroidectomy. With adequate
treatment and long-term follow-up, the results are usually good.
However, despite treatment for their hyperthyroidism, women
experience an increased long-term risk of death from thyroid
disease, cardiovascular disease, stroke, and fracture of the femur.
Posttreatment hypothyroidism is common. It may occur within a few
months or up to several years after RAI therapy or subtotal
thyroidectomy. Malignant exophthalmos has a poor prognosis
unless treated aggressively.
Subclinical hyperthyroidism refers to a condition in which
asymptomatic individuals have a low serum TSH and normal FT4
and T3. Most such patients do well without treatment. In one series,
clinical hyperthyroidism developed in only one of seven patients
after 2 years. In most patients, the serum TSH may revert to normal
within 2 years. Most such patients do not have accelerated bone
loss. However, if a baseline bone density shows significant
osteopenia, bone densitometry may be performed periodically. In
persons over age 60 years, serum TSH is very low (< 0.1 mU/L) in
3% and mildly low (0.1–0.4 mU/L) in 9%. The chance of
developing atrial fibrillation is 2.8% yearly in elderly patients with
very low TSH and 1.1% yearly in those with mildly low TSH.
Asymptomatic persons with very low TSH are monitored closely
but are not treated unless atrial fibrillation or other manifestations of
hyper-thyroidism develop.
Bahn RS. Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl J Med. 2010 Feb
25;362(8):726–38. [PMID: 20181974]
 
Bogazzi F et al. Approach to the patient with amiodarone-induced
thyrotoxicosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun; 95(6):2529–
35. [PMID: 20525904]
 
Kharlip J et al. Recent developments in hyperthyroidism. Lancet.
2009 Jun 6;373(9679):1930–2. [PMID: 19501730]
 
Kim TD et al. Thyroid dysfunction caused by second-generation
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in Philadelphia chromosome-positive
chronic myeloid leukemia. Thyroid. 2010 Nov;20(11): 1209–14.
[PMID: 20929406]
 
Laurberg P et al. Management of Graves’ hyperthyroidism in
pregnancy: focus on both maternal and foetal thyroid function, and
caution against surgical thyroidectomy in pregnancy. Eur J
Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;160(1):1–8. [PMID: 18849306]
 
Pantalone KM et al. Approach to a low TSH level: patience is a
virtue. Cleve Clin J Med. 2010 Nov;77(11):803–11. [PMID:
21048053]
 
THYROIDITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute and subacute forms: thyroid gland swelling, sometimes
causing pressure symptoms.
 Chronic form: thyroid gland may or may not be enlarged with
rubbery firmness.
 Thyroid function tests variable.
 Serum antithyroperoxidase and antithyroglobulin antibody levels
usually elevated in Hashimoto thyroiditis.
 
 General Considerations
Thyroiditis may be classified as follows: (1) chronic lymphocytic
thyroiditis due to autoimmunity (also called Hashimoto thyroiditis),
(2) subacute thyroiditis, (3) suppurative thyroiditis, and (4) Riedel
thyroiditis.
Hashimoto thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition and the most
common thyroid disorder in the United States. B-lymphocytes
invade the thyroid gland, such that the condition is also known as
chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis. Detectable levels of antithyroid
antibodies 
are 
usually 
present: 
antithyroperoxidase
(antimitochondrial) antibodies or antithyroglobulin antibodies, or
both. Elevated serum levels of antithyroid antibodies are found in
3% of men and 13% of women. Women over the age of 60 years
have a 25% incidence of elevated serum levels of antithyroid
antibodies. However, only a small subset of individuals with
elevated antithyroid antibody levels ever develops thyroid
dysfunction. One percent of the population has serum antithyroid
antibody titers > 1:6400 and they are at particular risk for thyroid
dysfunction. The incidence of Hashimoto thyroiditis varies by
kindred, race, and by sex; in persons older than 12 years of age in
the United States, elevated levels of antithyroid antibodies are found
in 14.3% of whites, 10.9% of Mexican-Americans, and 5.3% of
blacks.
Hashimoto thyroiditis tends to be familial and is six times more
common in women than in men. Its frequency is increased by
dietary iodine supplementation. Certain drugs (amiodarone,
interferon-α, interferon-β, interleukin-2, G-CSF) frequently induce
thyroid autoantibodies. Childhood or occupational exposure to
head–neck external beam radiation increases the lifetime risk of
Hashimoto thyroiditis. Subclinical thyroiditis is extremely common,
as evidenced in autopsy series that have found focal thyroiditis in
about 40% of women and 20% of men.
Hashimoto thyroiditis often progresses to hypothyroidism, which
may be linked to thyrotropin receptor–blocking antibodies,
detected in 10% of patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Hypothyroidism is more likely to develop in smokers than in
nonsmokers, possibly due to the thiocyanates in cigarette smoke.
High serum levels of thyroid peroxidase antibody also predict
progression from subclinical hypothyroidism to symptomatic
hypothyroidism. Although the hypothyroidism is usually permanent,
up to 11% of patients experience a remission after several years.
There are two possible causes for such remissions: (1) the
Hashimoto thyroiditis may improve spontaneously; and (2) thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulin is produced in sufficient quantities to
overwhelm the destructive effects of concurrent Hashimoto
thyroiditis, causing the thyroid to produce more thyroid hormone.
Rarely, if the thyroid gland goes on to produce excessive thyroid
hormone, the result is an autoimmune hyperthyroidism (see Graves
disease).
Hashimoto thyroiditis is sometimes associated with other
endocrine deficiencies as part of polyglandular auto-immunity
(PGA). Adults with type 2 PGA are prone to autoimmune
thyroiditis, diabetes mellitus type 1, autoimmune gonadal failure,
hypoparathyroidism, and adrenal insufficiency (see Adrenal
Insufficiency). Thyroiditis is associated with other autoimmune
conditions, such as pernicious anemia, Sjögren syndrome, vitiligo,
inflammatory bowel disease, and celiac disease. The incidence of
celiac disease in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis is about 5%.
Hashimoto thyroiditis is very rarely associated with other
autoimmune conditions such as myocarditis, hypophysitis, alopecia
areata, encephalitis, primary pulmonary hypertension, or
membranous nephropathy. Women with gonadal dysgenesis
(Turner syndrome) have a 15% incidence of significant thyroid
dysfunction by age 40 years. Thyroiditis is also commonly seen in
patients with hepatitis C.
Painless postpartum thyroiditis refers to autoimmune
thyroiditis that occurs soon after delivery in 7.2% of women. There
is some evidence that the autoimmunity may be triggered by the
accumulation of fetal cells in the maternal thyroid during pregnancy,
a condition known as microchimerism. Women in whom
postpartum thyroiditis develops have a 70% chance of recurrence
after subsequent pregnancies. It occurs most commonly in women
who have high levels of thyroid peroxidase antibody in the first
trimester of pregnancy or immediately after delivery. It is also more
common in women with other autoimmunity or a family history of
Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Painless sporadic thyroiditis is thought to be a sub-acute form
of Hashimoto thyroiditis that is similar to painless postpartum
thyroiditis (see above), except that it is not related to pregnancy. It
accounts for about 1% of cases of thyrotoxicosis.
Subacute thyroiditis—also called de Quervain thyroiditis,
granulomatous thyroiditis, and giant cell thyroiditis—is relatively
common. It is believed to be caused by a viral infection and often
follows an upper respiratory tract infection. Its incidence peaks in
the summer. It accounts for up to 5% of clinical thyroid disease and
young and middle-aged women are most commonly affected.
Suppurative thyroiditis refers to a nonviral infection of the
thyroid gland. It is usually bacterial. However, myco-bacterial,
fungal, and parasitic infections can occur, particularly in
immunosuppressed individuals. Suppurative thyroiditis is quite rare,
since the thyroid is resistant to infection, largely due to its high iodine
content. It tends to affect patients with preexistent thyroid disease.
Congenital pyriform sinus fistulas are a cause for recurrent
suppurative thyroiditis in otherwise normal individuals.
Riedel thyroiditis is also called invasive fibrous thyroiditis,
Riedel struma, woody thyroiditis, ligneous thyroiditis, and invasive
thyroiditis. It is the rarest form of thyroiditis and is found most
frequently in middle-aged or elderly women. It is usually a
manifestation of a multifocal systemic fibrosis syndrome.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In Hashimoto thyroiditis, the thyroid gland is usually diffusely
enlarged, firm, and finely nodular. One thyroid lobe may be
asymmetrically enlarged, raising concerns about neoplasm. Although
patients may complain of neck tightness, pain and tenderness are
not usually present. About 10% of cases are atrophic, the gland
being fibrotic, particularly in elderly women.
Systemic manifestations are mostly related to ambient levels of
thyroid hormone. However, depression and chronic fatigue are
more common in such patients, even after correction of
hypothyroidism. About one-third of patients have mild dry mouth
(xerostomia) or dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) of an
autoimmune nature related to Sjögren syndrome. It may be
associated with myasthenia gravis, which is usually of mild severity,
mainly affecting the extraocular muscles and having a relatively low
incidence of detectable AChR Ab or thymic disease. Associated
celiac disease can produce fatigue or depression, often in the
absence of gastrointestinal symptoms.
Postpartum 
thyroiditis 
is 
typically 
manifested 
by
hyperthyroidism that begins 1–6 months after delivery and persists
for only 1–2 months. Then, hypothyroidism tends to develop in
affected women beginning 4–8 months after delivery.
Thyrotoxic symptoms in painless sporadic thyroiditis are
usually mild; a small, nontender goiter may be palpated in about
50% of such patients. High serum thyroid peroxidase antibody
concentrations are found in only 50% of such patients. The course
is similar to painless postpartum thyroiditis.
Subacute thyroiditis presents with an acute, usually painful
enlargement of the thyroid gland, often with dysphagia. The pain
may radiate to the ears. Patients usually have a low-grade fever and
fatigue. The manifestations may persist for weeks or months and
may be associated with malaise. If there is no pain, it is called silent
thyroiditis. Thyrotoxicosis develops in 50% of affected patients
and tends to last for several weeks. Subsequently, hypothyroidism
develops that lasts 4–6 months. Normal thyroid function typically
returns within 12 months, but persistent hypothyroidism develops in
5% of patients.
Patients with suppurative thyroiditis usually are febrile and
have severe pain, tenderness, redness, and fluctuation in the region
of the thyroid gland. In Riedel thyroiditis, thyroid enlargement is
often asymmetric; the gland is stony hard and adherent to the neck
structures, causing signs of compression and invasion, including
dysphagia, dyspnea, pain, and hoarseness. Related conditions
include retroperitoneal fibrosis, fibrosing mediastinitis, sclerosing
cervicitis, subretinal fibrosis, and biliary tract sclerosis. It may
respond to therapy with tamoxifen (see Treatment).
B. Laboratory Findings
In Hashimoto thyroiditis with clinically evident disease, there are
usually increased circulating levels of antithyroid peroxidase (90%)
or antithyroglobulin (40%) antibodies. Antithyroid antibodies
decline during pregnancy and are often undetectable in the third
trimester. Once Hashimoto thyroiditis has been diagnosed,
monitoring of these antibody levels is not necessary. The serum
TSH level is elevated if thyroid hormone is not elaborated in
adequate amounts by the thyroid gland.
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis have a 15% incidence of
having serum antibodies associated with celiac disease (sprue,
gluten-sensitive enteropathy). About 5% of patients with Hashimoto
thyroiditis are found to have clinically significant celiac disease.
Elevated serum levels of IgA endomysial antibody and IgA
transglutaminase (tTG) antibody are present in about 80% of
patients with celiac disease on a high-gluten diet. These antibody
levels decline on a gluten-free diet.
In subacute thyroiditis, the ESR is markedly elevated while
antithyroid antibody titers are low, distinguishing it from autoimmune
thyroiditis. In suppurative thyroiditis, both the leukocyte count and
ESR are usually elevated.
With hyperthyroidism due to Hashimoto thyroiditis or subacute
thyroiditis, serum FT4 levels tend to be proportionally higher than T3
levels, since the hyperthyroidism is due to the passive release of
stored thyroid hormone, which is predominantly T4; this is in
contrast to Graves disease and toxic nodular goiter, where T3 is
relatively more elevated. Because T4 is less active than T3, the
hyperthyroidism seen in thyroiditis is usually less severe. Serum
levels of TSH are suppressed in hyperthyroidism due to thyroiditis.
C. Imaging
Ultrasound in cases of Hashimoto thyroiditis typically shows a gland
with 
characteristic 
diffuse 
heterogeneous 
density 
and
hypoechogenicity. Ultrasonography of the thyroid helps distinguish
thyroiditis from multinodular goiter or thyroid nodules that are
suspicious for malignancy. It is also helpful in guiding FNA biopsy
of small suspicious thyroid nodules. Color-flow Doppler ultra-
sonography can help distinguish thyroiditis from Graves disease,
since patients with Graves disease have a hypervascular thyroid
gland, whereas in thyroiditis there is normal or reduced vascularity.
RAI uptake and scan may be helpful in determining the cause of
hyperthyroidism, distinguishing thyroiditis from Graves disease,
since patients with subacute thyroiditis exhibit a very low RAI
uptake. In patients with chronic Hashimoto thyroiditis (euthyroid or
hypothyroid), RAI uptake may be normal or high with uneven
uptake on the scan; scanning is not useful in making the diagnosis.
[18F]Fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron 
emission 
tomography
(18FDG-PET) scanning frequently shows diffuse thyroid uptake of
isotope in cases of thyroiditis. About 3% of all 18FDG-PET scans
shows such uptake. However, discrete thyroid nodules can also be
discovered on 18FDG-PET scanning and are known as “thyroid
PET incidentalomas,” of which 50% are malignant.
D. Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis who have a thyroid nodule
should have an ultrasound-guided FNA biopsy, since the risk of
papillary thyroid cancer is about 8% in such nodules. When
suppurative thyroiditis is suspected, an FNA biopsy with Gram
stain and culture is required. FNA biopsy is usually not required for
subacute thyroiditis but shows characteristic giant multinucleated
cells.
 Complications
Hashimoto thyroiditis may lead to hypothyroidism or transient
thyrotoxicosis. Perimenopausal women with high serum levels of
antithyroperoxidase antibodies have a higher relative risk of
depression independently of ambient thyroid hormone levels.
Pregnant women with Hashimoto thyroiditis have an increased
risk of spontaneous miscarriage in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Hyperthyroidism may develop in patients with Hashimoto
thyroiditis, either due to the emergence of Graves disease or due to
the release of stored hormone by the thyroid, which is caused by
inflammation. The latter condition has variably been termed
“hashitoxicosis” or “painless sporadic thyroiditis;” it is known as
postpartum painless thyroiditis when it occurs in women after
delivery.
Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis have an increased risk of
other autoimmune conditions, such as Addison disease,
hypoparathyroidism, diabetes, pernicious anemia, biliary cirrhosis,
vitiligo, and celiac disease.
In the suppurative forms of thyroiditis, any of the complications of
infection may occur; the subacute and chronic forms of the disease
are complicated by the effects of pressure on the neck structures:
dyspnea and, in Riedel struma, vocal cord palsy. Papillary thyroid
carcinoma or thyroid lymphoma may rarely be associated with
chronic thyroiditis and must be considered in the diagnosis of
uneven painless enlargements that continue in spite of treatment;
such patients require FNA biopsy.
 Differential Diagnosis
Thyroiditis must be considered in the differential diagnosis of all
types of goiters, especially if enlargement is rapid. The very low
RAI uptake in subacute thyroiditis with elevated T4 and T3 is
helpful. Thyroid autoantibody tests have been of help in the
diagnosis of Hashimoto thyroiditis, but the tests are not specific and
may also be positive in patients with multinodular goiters,
malignancy (eg, thyroid carcinoma, lymphoma), and concurrent
Graves disease. The subacute and suppurative forms of thyroiditis
may resemble any infectious process in or near the neck structures.
Chronic thyroiditis, especially if the enlargement is uneven and if
there is pressure on surrounding structures, may resemble
carcinoma, and both disorders may be present in the same gland.
 Treatment
A. Hashimoto Thyroiditis
If hypothyroidism is present, levothyroxine should be given in the
usual replacement doses (0.05–0.2 mg orally daily). In patients with
a large goiter and normal or elevated serum TSH, an attempt is
made to shrink the goiter by administering levothyroxine in doses
sufficient to drive the serum TSH below the reference range while
maintaining clinical euthyroidism. Suppressive doses of T4 tend to
shrink the goiter an average of 30% over 6 months. If the goiter
does not regress, lower replacement doses of levothyroxine may be
given. If the thyroid gland is only minimally enlarged and the patient
is euthyroid, regular observation is in order, since hypothyroidism
may develop subsequently—often years later. (See Hypothyroidism
section.)
In one study involving 21 patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis and
subclinical hypothyroidism, simvastatin (20 mg orally daily)
improved thyroid function over 8 weeks, possibly by stimulating
apoptosis of certain types of lymphocytes. In another study,
selenium (200 mcg daily orally for 3 months) reduced the serum
levels of anti-thyroperoxidase antibodies by 49% versus a 10%
reduction in the placebo arm. The long-term effectiveness of
simvastatin or selenium therapy on the course of Hashimoto
thyroiditis is unknown.
B. Subacute Thyroiditis
All treatment is empiric and must be continued for several weeks.
Recurrence is common. The drug of choice is aspirin, which relieves
pain and inflammation. Thyrotoxic symptoms are treated with
propranolol, 10–40 mg every 6 hours. Iodinated contrast agents
cause a prompt fall in serum T3 levels and a dramatic improvement
in thyrotoxic symptoms. Sodium ipodate (Oragrafin, Bilivist) or
iopanoic acid (Telepaque) is given orally in doses of 500 mg orally
daily until serum FT4 levels return to normal. Transient
hypothyroidism is treated with T4 (0.05–0.1 mg orally daily) if
symptomatic.
C. Suppurative Thyroiditis
Treatment is with antibiotics and with surgical drainage when
fluctuation is marked.
D. Riedel Struma
The treatment of choice is tamoxifen, 20 mg orally twice daily,
which must be continued for years. Tamoxifen can induce partial to
complete remissions in most patients within 3–6 months. Its mode
of action appears to be unrelated to its antiestrogen activity. Short-
term corticosteroid treatment may be added for partial alleviation of
pain and compression symptoms. Surgical decompression usually
fails to permanently alleviate compression symptoms; such surgery
is difficult due to dense fibrous adhesions, making surgical
complications more likely.
 Prognosis
Hashimoto thyroiditis is occasionally associated with other
autoimmune disorders (diabetes mellitus, Addison disease,
pernicious anemia, etc). In general, however, patients with
Hashimoto thyroiditis have an excellent prognosis, since the
condition either remains stable for years or progresses slowly to
hypothyroidism, which is easily treated. Although 80% of women
with postpartum thyroiditis subsequently recover normal thyroid
function, permanent hypothyroidism eventually develops in about
50% within 7 years. Permanent hypothyroidism is more common in
women who are multiparous or who have had a spontaneous
abortion. In subacute thyroiditis, spontaneous remissions and
exacerbations are common; the disease process may smolder for
months. Papillary thyroid carcinoma carries a relatively good
prognosis when it occurs in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Boelaert K et al. Prevalence and relative risk of other autoimmune
diseases in subjects with autoimmune thyroid disease. Am J Med.
2010 Feb;123(2):183.e1–9. [PMID: 20103030]
 
Desailloud R et al. Viruses and thyroiditis: an update. Virol J. 2009
Jan 12;6:5. [PMID: 19138419]
 
Duntas LH. Environmental factors and autoimmune thyroiditis. Nat
Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;4(8):454–60. [PMID:
18607401]
 
Eschler DC et al. Cutting edge: the etiology of autoimmune thyroid
disease. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2011 Jan 14. [Epub ahead of
print] [PMID: 21234711]
 
Hadithi M et al. Coeliac disease in Dutch patients with
Hashimoto's thyroiditis. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Mar 12;
13(11):1715–22. [PMID: 17461476]
 
Tomer Y. Genetic susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid disease:
past, present, and future. Thyroid. 2010 Jul;20(7):715–25.
[PMID: 20604685]
 
Tran HA et al. The natural history of interferon-alpha induced
thyroiditis in chronic hepatitis C patients: a long term study.
Thyroid Res. 2011 Jan 8;4(1):2. [PMID: 21214950]
 
THYROID NODULES & MULTINODULAR GOITER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Single or multiple thyroid nodules are commonly found with
careful thyroid examinations.
 Thyroid function tests mandatory.
 Thyroid biopsy for single or dominant nodules or for a history of
prior head–neck or chest–shoulder radiation.
 Ultrasound examination useful for biopsy and follow-up.
 Clinical follow-up required.
 
 General Considerations
Thyroid nodules are common and palpable nodules are found in 5%
of women and 1% of men in iodine-sufficient areas of the world.
Palpable thyroid nodules are even more common in iodine-deficient
geographic areas (see Iodine Deficiency Disorder & Endemic
Goiter). Each year in the United States, about 275,000 thyroid
nodules are detected by palpation, of which 10% are malignant.
Palpable thyroid nodules are increasingly prevalent with age. On
high-resolution thyroid ultrasound, about 50% of palpable “solitary
nodules” are found to be just one nodule in a multinodular goiter.
In recent years, an increased general use of scanning (CT, MRI,
ultrasound, PET) has led to an increased rate of incidentally
detecting nonpalpable thyroid nodules. In fact, thyroid ultrasound
detects thyroid nodules in about 20% of randomly screened healthy
adults.
Although 90% of thyroid nodules are benign, the presence of a
thyroid nodule ≥1 cm diameter warrants follow-up and further
testing for function and malignancy. An occasional nodule <1 cm
diameter requires follow-up if it has high-risk characteristics on
ultrasound or if the patient has had prior head-neck radiation
therapy. Thyroid nodules that are incidentally discovered on
18FDG-PET scanning have a 33% risk for being malignant and
definitely require biopsy.
Most patients with a thyroid nodule are euthyroid, but there is a
high incidence of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Goiter may be
caused by numerous conditions, including multinodular goiter, iodine
deficiency, pregnancy (in areas of iodine deficiency), Graves
disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, subacute thyroiditis, or infections.
About 90% of thyroid nodules are benign adenoma, colloid nodule,
or cyst but may sometimes be a primary thyroid malignancy or (less
frequently) a metastatic neoplasm. Patients with multiple thyroid
nodules have the same overall risk of thyroid cancer as patients with
solitary nodules. The risk of a thyroid nodule being malignant is
higher among patients with a history of head–neck radiation, total
body radiation for bone marrow transplantation, exposure to
radioactive fallout as a child or teen, a family history of thyroid
cancer or a thyroid cancer syndrome (eg, Cowden syndrome,
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, familial polyposis, Carney
syndrome), or a personal history of another malignancy. The risk of
malignancy is also higher if there is hoarseness or vocal fold
paralysis, and if the thyroid nodule is large, adherent to the trachea
or strap muscles, or associated with lymphadenopathy. The
presence of Hashimoto thyroiditis does not reduce the risk of
malignancy; a nodule of ≥ 1 cm in a gland with thyroiditis carries an
8% chance of malignancy.
 Clinical Findings
Table 26–6 illustrates the approach to the evaluation of thyroid
nodules based on the index of suspicion for malignancy.
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most small thyroid nodules cause no symptoms. They may
sometimes be detected only by having the patient swallow during
careful inspection and palpation of the thyroid.
A thyroid nodule or multinodular goiter can grow to become
visible and of concern to the patient. Particularly large nodular
goiters can become a cosmetic embarrassment. Nodules can grow
large enough to cause discomfort, hoarseness, or dysphagia.
Retrosternal large multinodular goiters can cause dyspnea due to
tracheal compression. Large substernal goiters may cause superior
vena cava syndrome, manifested by facial erythema and jugular vein
distention that progress to cyanosis and facial edema when both
arms are kept raised over the head (Pemberton sign).
Depending on their cause, goiters and thyroid nodules may be
associated with hypothyroidism (Hashimoto thyroiditis, endemic
goiter) or hyperthyroidism (Graves disease, toxic nodular goiter,
subacute thyroiditis, and thyroid cancer with metastases).
B. Laboratory Findings
A serum TSH level (sensitive assay) should be obtained for all
patients with a thyroid nodule. Patients with a subnormal serum
TSH must have further assessment for hyper-thyroidism and have a
radionuclide thyroid scan (123I 
or 99mTc pertechnetate) to
determine whether the nodule is hyperfunctioning; hyperfunctioning
nodules are rarely malignant. Tests for antithyroperoxidase
antibodies and antithyroglobulin antibodies may also be helpful.
Very high antibody levels are found in Hashimoto thyroiditis.
However, thyroiditis frequently coexists with malignancy, so
suspicious nodules should always be biopsied. Serum calcitonin is
obtained if a medullary thyroid carcinoma is suspected in a family
member with a history of familial medullary thyroid carcinoma or
MEN type 2.
C. Imaging
Neck ultrasonography should be performed to measure the size of a
nodule and to determine whether a palpable nodule is part of a
multinodular goiter. The following ultra-sound characteristics of
thyroid nodules increase the likelihood of malignancy: irregular or
indistinct margins, heterogenous nodule echogenicity, intranodular
vascular images, microcalcifications, complex cyst, or diameter over
1 cm. Ultrasound is also useful for long-term surveillance of thyroid
nodules and multinodular goiter. Ultrasonography is generally
preferred over CT and MRI because of its accuracy, ease of use,
and lower cost.
 
Table 26–6. Clinical evaluation of thyroid nodules.1
 
1Clinically suspicious nodules should be evaluated with fine-needle
aspiration biopsy.
 
RAI (123I or 131I) scans have limited usefulness in the evaluation
of thyroid nodules. Hypofunctioning (cold) nodules have a
somewhat increased risk of being malignant but most are benign.
Hyperfunctioning (hot) nodules are ordinarily benign but may
sometimes be malignant. RAI uptake and scanning is helpful if a
patient is found to have evidence of hyperthyroidism. (See
Hyperthyroidism)
CT scanning is helpful for larger thyroid nodules and multinodular
goiter; it can determine the degree of tracheal compression and the
degree of extension into the mediastinum.
D. Incidentally Discovered Thyroid Nodules
Thyroid nodules are frequently discovered as an incidental finding,
with an incidence that depends on the imaging modality: MRI, 50%;
CT, 13%; and 18FDG-PET, 2%. When such scanning detects a
thyroid nodule, an ultrasound is performed to better determine the
nodule's risk for malignancy and the need for FNA biopsy, and to
establish a baseline for ultrasound follow-up. The malignancy risk is
about 17% for nodules discovered incidentally on CT or MRI, and
25–50% for nodules discovered incidentally by 18FDG-PET. For
incidentally discovered thyroid nodules of borderline concern,
follow-up thyroid ultrasound in 3–6 months may be helpful; growing
lesions may be biopsied or resected.
E. Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy is the best method to assess a
thyroid nodule for malignancy. FNA biopsy can be done while
patients continue taking anticoagulants or aspirin. For multinodular
goiters, the four largest nodules (≥ 1 cm diameter) should be
biopsied to minimize the risk of missing a malignancy. For solitary
thyroid nodules, FNA biopsy is indicated for the following: (1)
nodules > 5 mm diameter with a suspicious appearance on
ultrasound; (2) nodules associated with abnormal cervical lymph
nodes; (3) nodules ≥ 1 cm diameter that are solid or have
microcalcifications; (4) mixed cystic-solid nodules ≥ 1.5 cm
diameter with any suspicious features on ultrasound or ≥ 2 cm
diameter with benign features on ultrasound; (5) spongiform nodules
≥ 2 cm diameter. Pure cystic nodules are benign and do not require
FNA biopsy. Using ultrasound guidance for FNA biopsy improves
the diagnostic accuracy for both palpable and nonpalpable thyroid
nodules. The chance of an optimal tissue sampling is also improved
by having an experienced clinician perform the FNA biopsy and by
having the aspirate interpreted by a skilled cytopathologist.
In one review of thyroid FNA biopsies, about 70% were benign,
5% were malignant, 10% were “suspicious,” and 15% were
“nondiagnostic.” Nondiagnostic, bloody, or hypocellular FNA
biopsies should be repeated under ultra-sound guidance; nodules
that continue to have nondiagnostic cytology should be monitored
closely; those that are solid or that grow should be resected.
When FNA cytology is “suspicious” for papillary thyroid
carcinoma or Hürthle cell neoplasm, the risk of malignancy is 57%.
When FNA cytology yields a “suspicious” follicular lesion, the
overall risk of the lesion being malignant is about 20–25%. The risk
that a follicular lesion is malignant increases for patients who are
much younger or older than age 50. Most patients with suspicious
FNA cytology are advised to have surgery.
Cystic nodules yielding serous fluid are usually benign, but the
aspirate should be submitted for cytologic testing. Cystic nodules
yielding bloody fluid have a higher chance of being malignant.
False-positive thyroid FNA biopsy results occur at a rate of
about 4%. False-negative thyroid FNA biopsy results also occur at
an overall rate of about 4%, less commonly when performed under
ultrasound guidance and interpreted by cytopathologists. False-
negative results delay surgical excision and lead to an increased risk
of vascular and capsular invasion by the malignancy. Some false-
negative FNA biopsy results may not have actually been inaccurate,
since truly benign thyroid nodules can later become malignant.
Patients who have a negative thyroid FNA should have
observational follow-up, ideally with both palpation and ultrasound;
nodules that continue to grow should be rebiopsied or excised.
 Treatment
All thyroid nodules, including those that are benign, need to be
monitored by regular periodic palpation and ultra-sound and
rebiopsied if growth occurs. A toxic multinodular goiter and
hyperthyroidism, associated with the ingestion or intravenous
administration of large amounts of iodine, may develop in patients
with multinodular goiters. It is therefore prudent to minimize
excessive dietary iodine intake and intravenous iodinated contrast.
Patients found to have hyperthyroidism may have a RAI uptake and
scan for additional evaluation, especially if 131I is a therapeutic
consideration. Patients with toxic multinodular goiters may also be
treated with methimazole, propranolol, or surgery (see
Hyperthyroidism section).
A. Levothyroxine Suppression Therapy
Patients with elevated levels of serum TSH are treated with
levothyroxine replacement. Otherwise, for small benign thyroid
nodules, levothyroxine suppression therapy is not recommended.
For larger nodules (> 2 cm), if TSH levels are elevated or normal,
TSH suppression with levothyroxine (starting doses of 50 mcg
orally daily) can be considered. Thyroxine suppression therapy is
most successful in iodine-deficient areas of the world and less
successful in iodine-sufficient regions. Long-term levothyroxine
suppression of TSH tends to keep nodules from enlarging, but only
20% shrink more than 50%. In one 5-year study, thyroid nodule
size increased in 29% of patients treated with levothyroxine,
compared to growth in 56% of nodules in patients not receiving
levothyroxine. Levothyroxine suppression also reduces the
emergency of new nodules: 8% with levothyroxine and 29% without
levothyroxine. Levothyroxine suppression therapy is not usually
given to patients with cardiac disease, since it increases the risk for
angina and atrial fibrillation. Levothyroxine suppression causes a
small loss of bone density, particularly in post-menopausal women if
the serum TSH is suppressed to < 0.05 mU/L. Such patients are
advised to have bone density testing every 3–5 years.
Levothyroxine should not be administered if the baseline TSH is
low, since that is an indication of autonomous thyroid secretion,
such that levothyroxine therapy will be ineffective and liable to cause
clinical thyrotoxicosis.
Levothyroxine suppression needs to be carefully monitored, since
it carries a 17% risk of inducing symptoms of hyperthyroidism. This
can occur due to excessive levothyroxine dosing, the emergence of
an autonomous or toxic nodule or Graves disease, or a reduction in
thyroid binding globulin seen in early menopause or with
discontinuing oral estrogen therapy. Therefore, levothyroxine
suppression therapy is most suitable for younger patients. Patients
with thyroid nodules require careful clinical evaluation and thyroid
palpation or ultrasound examinations about every 6 months. After
several years of stability, yearly examinations are sufficient.
B. Surgery
Total thyroidectomy is required for thyroid nodules that are
malignant on FNA biopsy (see Thyroid Cancer section). More
limited thyroid surgery is indicated for benign nodules with
indeterminate or suspicious cytologic test results, compression
symptoms, discomfort, or cosmetic embarrassment. Surgery may
also be used to remove hyperfunctioning “hot” thyroid adenomas or
toxic 
multinodular 
goiter 
causing 
hyperthyroidism 
(see
Hyperthyroidism section).
C. Percutaneous Ethanol Injection
Thyroid cysts can be aspirated, but cystic fluid recurs in 75% of
patients. Percutaneous ethanol injection has been used to shrink
pure cysts; it must often be repeated, but the success rate is 80%.
Percutaneous ethanol injection can also be used to shrink benign
(biopsy proven) thyroid nodules. The complication rate is about
9%, but serious or permanent complications are rare.
D. Radioiodine (131I) Therapy
Radioactive 131I is a treatment option for hyperthyroid patients with
toxic thyroid adenomas, multinodular goiter, or Graves disease (see
Hyperthyroidism section). It may also be used to shrink benign
nontoxic thyroid nodules. Thyroid nodules shrink an average of
40% by 1 year and 59% by 2 years after 131I therapy. Nodules that
shrink after 131I therapy generally remain palpable and become
firmer; they may develop unusual cytologic characteristics on FNA
biopsy. 131I therapy may be used to shrink large multinodular goiter
but may rarely induce Graves disease. Hypothyroidism is a risk and
may occur years after 131I therapy, so it is advisable to assess
thyroid function every 3 months for the first year, every 6 months
thereafter, and immediately for symptoms of hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism.
 Prognosis
The great majority of thyroid nodules are benign. Benign thyroid
nodules may involute but usually persist or grow slowly. About 90%
of thyroid nodules will increase their volume by ≥ 15% over 5
years; cystic nodules are less likely to grow. Cytologically benign
nodules that grow are unlikely to be malignant; in one series, only 1
of 78 rebiopsied nodules was found to be malignant. The prognosis
for patients with thyroid nodules that prove to be malignant is
determined by the histologic type and other factors (see below).
Multinodular goiters tend to persist or grow slowly, even in iodine-
deficient areas where iodine repletion usually does not shrink
established goiters. Patients with very small, incidentally discovered,
nonpalpable thyroid nodules do require follow-up with thyroid
ultrasound every 1–2 years but are at low risk for malignancy.
Nodules that are malignant have a minor effect on morbidity and
mortality.
Banks ND et al. A diagnostic predictor model for indeterminate or
suspicious thyroid FNA samples. Thyroid. 2008 Sep;18(9): 933–
41. [PMID: 18788917]
 
Bastin S et al. Role of ultrasound in the assessment of nodular
thyroid disease. J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol. 2009 Apr;53(2):
177–87. [PMID: 19527364]
 
Kim DW et al. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of
thyroid nodules: comparison in efficacy according to nodule size.
Thyroid. 2009 Jan;19(1):27–31. [PMID: 19021460]
 
Luster M et al. Diagnostic imaging work up of multi-nodular goiter.
Minerva Endocrinol. 2010 Sep;35(3):153–9. [PMID: 20938418]
 
Mihai R et al. One in four patients with follicular thyroid cytology
(THY3) has a thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid. 2009 Jan;19(1):33–7.
[PMID: 18976164]
 
Yeung MJ et al. Management of the solitary thyroid nodule.
Oncologist. 2008 Feb;13(2):105–12. [PMID: 18305054]
 
THYROID CANCER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painless swelling in region of thyroid.
 Thyroid function tests usually normal.
 Past history of irradiation to head and neck region may be
present.
 Positive thyroid needle aspiration.
 
 General Considerations
The incidence of papillary and follicular (differentiated) thyroid
carcinomas increases with age. The overall female:male ratio is 3:1.
The yearly incidence of thyroid cancer has been increasing in the
United States, with the number of cases diagnosed annually
reaching 37,200, probably as a result of the wider use of CT, MRI,
PET, and ultrasound that incidentally find small thyroid malignancies.
Thyroid cancer mortality has been stable, accounting for about
1500 deaths in the United States annually. Thyroid microcarcinoma
(≤ 10 mm diameter) is found with the surprising frequency of 35%.
Clearly, most thyroid cancers remain microscopic and indolent.
However, larger thyroid cancers (palpable or ≥ 1 cm in diameter)
are more malignant and require treatment.
Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most common thyroid
malignancy (Table 26–7).
Pure papillary and mixed papillary-follicular carcinoma represent
about 80% of all thyroid cancers. It usually presents as a single
thyroid nodule, but it can arise out of a multinodular goiter. Papillary
thyroid carcinoma is commonly multifocal within the gland, with
other foci usually arising de novo rather than representing
intraglandular metastases. About 10% of cases present with
palpable cervical lymph node metastases from a small thyroid
cancer. Papillary thyroid carcinomas tend to grow slowly and often
remain confined to the thyroid and regional lymph nodes for years.
However, they may become more aggressive, especially in patients
over age 45 years, and most particularly in the elderly. The cancer
may invade the trachea and local muscles and may spread to the
lungs.
Papillary thyroid carcinoma is caused by genetic mutations or
translocations. Activating mutations of the ras oncogene can cause
benign thyroid adenomas or nodular goiter. Additional activating
mutations in BRAF or TRK genes can lead to papillary carcinoma.
About 45% of papillary thyroid carcinomas are caused by over
expression of the ret oncogene by the translocation of certain gene
promoters to it, producing retPTC-1, retPTC-2, or retPTC-3.
Radiation treatments to the head and neck region tend to cause
retPTC-1. Nuclear fallout exposure tends to cause retPTC-3,
resulting in more aggressive papillary thyroid carcinomas. Additional
loss of the p53 tumor suppressor gene can cause progression of
papillary thyroid carcinoma to anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
 
Table 26–7. Some characteristics of thyroid cancer.
 
 
Exposure to head and neck radiation therapy poses a particular
threat to children who then have an increased lifetime risk of
developing thyroid pathology, including papillary thyroid carcinoma;
thyroid malignancy may emerge between 10 and 40 years after
exposure, with a peak occurrence 20–25 years later. After an
explosion at the Chernobyl Nuclear Plant in the Ukraine in 1986,
the risk of developing papillary thyroid carcinoma was highest
among children who were under age 5 at the time of exposure to
radiation; emergence of more aggressive papillary thyroid
carcinoma occurred within 6–7 years after exposure.
Papillary thyroid carcinoma can occur in familial syndromes as an
autosomal dominant trait, caused by loss of various tumor
suppressor genes. Such syndromes (with associated features)
include familial papillary carcinoma (with papillary renal carcinoma);
familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma; familial polyposis (with
large intestine polyps and gastrointestinal tumors); Gardner
syndrome (with small and large intestine polyps, fibromas, lipomas,
osteomas); and Turcot syndrome (with large intestine polyps and
brain tumors). Older patients with multinodular goiter may rarely
develop a papillary thyroid carcinoma. Papillary carcinoma can
sometimes undergo a late anaplastic transformation into an
aggressive carcinoma.
Generally speaking, papillary carcinoma is the least aggressive
thyroid malignancy. However, the tumor spreads via lymphatics
within the thyroid, appearing to be multifocal in 60% of patients and
involving both lobes in 30% of patients. About 80% of patients
have microscopic metastases to cervical lymph nodes. Unlike other
forms of cancer, patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma who have
palpable lymph node metastases do not have a particularly
increased mortality rate; however, their risk of local recurrence is
increased.
Occult metastases to the lung occur in 10–15% of papillary
thyroid cancer. About 70% of small lung metastases resolve
following 131I therapy; however, larger pulmonary metastases have
only a 10% remission rate.
Microscopic “micropapillary” carcinoma (≤ 1 mm and invisible
even on thyroid ultrasound) is a variant of normal, being found in
24% of thyroidectomies performed for benign thyroid disease when
2-mm sections were carefully examined. It thus appears that the
overwhelming majority of these microscopic foci never become
clinically significant. The surgical pathology report of such a tiny
papillary carcinoma that is otherwise benign does not justify
aggressive follow-up or treatment because a cancer diagnosis is
unwarranted and harmful. All that may be required is yearly follow-
up with palpation of the neck and mild TSH suppression by
thyroxine.
Follicular thyroid carcinoma and its variants (eg, Hürthle cell
carcinoma) account for about 14% of thyroid malignancies;
follicular thyroid carcinoma is generally more aggressive than
papillary carcinoma. Rarely, some follicular carcinomas secrete
enough T4 to cause thyrotoxicosis if the tumor load becomes
significant. Metastases commonly are found in neck nodes, bones,
and lungs. Most follicular thyroid carcinomas avidly absorb iodine,
making possible diagnostic scanning and treatment with 131I after
total thyroidectomy. The follicular histopathologic features that are
associated with a high risk of metastasis and recurrence are poorly
differentiated and Hürthle cell (oncocytic) variants. The latter
variants do not take up RAI.
Follicular carcinoma results from certain gene mutations or
translocations. Aberrant DNA methylation, activation of the ras
oncogene, and mutations of the MEN1 gene can result in benign
follicular adenomas. Loss of function of PPARγ or the 3P tumor
suppressor gene can lead to follicular carcinoma, and additional loss
of the p53 tumor suppressor gene can produce anaplastic
carcinoma.
Follicular thyroid carcinoma and adenomas develop in patients
with Cowden disease, a rare autosomal dominant familial syndrome
caused by loss of a tumor suppressor gene; such patients tend to
have macrocephaly, multiple hamartomas, early-onset breast
cancer, intestinal polyps, facial papules, and other skin and mucosal
lesions.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma represents about 3% of thyroid
cancers. About one-third of cases are sporadic, one-third are
familial, and one-third are associated with MEN type 2. Medullary
thyroid carcinoma is often caused by an activating mutation of the
ret oncogene on chromosome 10. Mutation analysis of the ret
oncogene exons 10, 11, 13, and 14 detects 95% of the mutations
causing MEN 2A and 90% of the mutations causing familial
medullary thyroid carcinoma. Patients with MEN 2B have activating
mutations in exon 16 of the ret oncogene. These germline mutations
can be detected by DNA analysis of peripheral WBCs. Therefore,
discovery of a medullary thyroid carcinoma makes genetic analysis
mandatory. If a gene defect is discovered, related family members
must have genetic screening for that specific gene defect. When a
family member with MEN 2A or familial medullary thyroid
carcinoma does not have an identifiable ret oncogene mutation,
gene carriers may still be identified using family linkage analysis.
Even when no gene defect is detectable, family members should
have thyroid surveillance every 6 months. Somatic mutations of the
ret oncogene can be identified in the tumors of 30% of patients with
sporadic (nonfamilial) medullary thyroid carcinoma. (See Multiple
Endocrine Neoplasia.)
Medullary thyroid carcinoma arises from parafollicular thyroid
cells that can secrete calcitonin, prostaglandins, serotonin, ACTH,
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), and other peptides. These
peptides can cause symptoms and can be used as tumor markers.
Early local metastases are usually present, usually to adjacent
muscle and trachea as well as to local and mediastinal lymph nodes.
Eventually, late metastases may appear in the bones, lungs,
adrenals, or liver. Medullary thyroid carcinoma does not
concentrate iodine.
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma represents about 2% of thyroid
cancers. It usually presents in an older patient as a rapidly enlarging
mass in a multinodular goiter. It is the most aggressive thyroid
carcinoma and metastasizes early to surrounding nodes and distant
sites. Local pressure symptoms include dysphagia or vocal cord
paralysis. This tumor does not concentrate iodine.
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is caused by certain gene
mutations, including inactivating mutations of the p53 tumor
suppressor gene, as described above for papillary and follicular
thyroid carcinomas.
Other thyroid malignancies together represent about 3% of
thyroid cancers. Lymphoma of the thyroid is more common in
older women. Thyroid lymphomas are most commonly B cell
lymphomas (50%) or mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT;
23%); other types include follicular, small lymphocytic, and Burkitt
lymphoma and Hodgkin disease. Thyroidectomy is rarely required.
Other cancers may sometimes metastasize to the thyroid,
particularly bronchogenic, breast, and renal carcinomas and
malignant melanoma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Thyroid carcinoma usually presents as a palpable, firm, nontender
nodule in the thyroid. Most thyroid carcinomas are asymptomatic,
but large thyroid cancers can cause neck discomfort, dysphagia, or
hoarseness (due to pressure on the recurrent laryngeal nerve).
About 3% of thyroid malignancies present with a metastasis, usually
to local lymph nodes but sometimes to distant sites such as bone or
lung. Palpable lymph node involvement is present in 15% of adults
and 60% of youths. Metastatic functioning differentiated thyroid
carcinoma can sometimes secrete enough thyroid hormone to
produce thyrotoxicosis. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is more
apt to be advanced at the time of diagnosis, presenting with
dysphagia, hoarseness, dyspnea, and metastases to the lungs.
Occasionally, such carcinomas may be discovered while they are
still relatively small and localized.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma frequently causes flushing and
persistent diarrhea (30%), which may be the initial clinical feature.
Patients with metastases often experience fatigue as well as other
symptoms. Cushing syndrome develops in about 5% of patients
from secretion of ACTH or CRH. Signs of pressure or invasion of
surrounding tissues are present in anaplastic or large tumors;
recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy can occur.
Lymphoma usually presents as a rapidly enlarging, painful mass
arising out of a multinodular or diffuse goiter affected by
autoimmune thyroiditis, with which it may be confused
microscopically. About 20% of cases have concomitant
hypothyroidism.
B. Laboratory Findings
(FNA biopsy is discussed above in the section on Thyroid
Nodules.) Thyroid function tests are generally normal unless there is
concomitant thyroiditis. Follicular carcinoma may secrete enough T4
to suppress TSH and cause clinical hyperthyroidism.
Serum thyroglobulin is high in most metastatic papillary and
follicular tumors, making this a useful marker for recurrent or
metastatic disease. Caution must be exercised for the following
reasons: (1) Circulating antithyroglobulin antibodies can cause
erroneous thyroglobulin determinations. (2) Thyroglobulin levels
may be misleadingly elevated in thyroiditis, which often coexists with
carcinoma. (3) Certain thyroglobulin assays falsely report the
continued presence of thyroglobulin after total thyroidectomy and
tumor resection, causing undue concern about possible metastases.
Therefore, unexpected thyroglobulin levels should prompt a repeat
assay in another reference laboratory.
Serum calcitonin levels are usually elevated in medullary thyroid
carcinoma, making this a marker for meta-static disease. However,
serum calcitonin may be elevated in many other conditions, such as
thyroiditis; pregnancy; azotemia; hypercalcemia; and other
malignancies, including pheochromocytomas, carcinoid tumors, and
carcinomas of the lung, pancreas, breast, and colon.
In patients with medullary thyroid carcinoma, serum calcitonin
and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) determinations should be
obtained before surgery, then regularly in postoperative follow-up:
every 4 months for 5 years, then every 6 months for life. In patients
with extensive metastases, serum calcitonin should be measured in
the laboratory with serial dilutions. Calcitonin levels remain elevated
in patients with persistent tumor but also in some patients with
apparent cure or indolent disease. Therefore, rising levels of
calcitonin (or CEA) are the best indication for recurrence. Serum
calcitonin levels > 250 pg/mL are also an indication for recurrent or
metastatic medullary thyroid carcinoma. Serum CEA levels are
usually elevated with medullary carcinoma, making this a useful
second marker; however, it is not specific for this carcinoma.
C. Imaging
1. Ultrasound of the neck—Ultrasound of the neck should be
performed routinely on all patients with thyroid cancer for the initial
diagnosis and for follow-up. Ultrasound is useful in determining the
size and location of the malignancy as well as the location of any
neck metastases.
2. Radioactive iodine scanning—RAI (131I or 123I) thyroid and
whole-body scanning is used after thyroidectomy for surveillance as
described below, supplanting its previous use to determine whether
a nodule was “cold” as a sign of malignancy.
3. CT and MRI scanning—CT scanning may demonstrate
metastases and is particularly useful for localizing and monitoring
lung metastases. However, CT scanning is less sensitive than
ultrasound for detecting metastases within the neck. Iodinated
contrast should never be given prior to RAI scanning or RAI
therapy, since the large amounts of iodine in contrast media
competitively inhibit the uptake of RAI by the thyroid, greatly
reducing the effectiveness of subsequent RAI scanning and therapy.
Medullary carcinoma in the thyroid, nodes, and liver may calcify,
but lung metastases rarely do so. MRI is particularly useful for
imaging bone metastases.
4. PET scanning—PET scanning is particularly useful for detecting
thyroid cancer metastases that do not have sufficient iodine uptake
to be visible on RAI scans. Metastases are best detected using
18FDG-PET whole-body scanning. The sensitivity of 18FDG-PET
scanning for differentiated thyroid cancer is enhanced if the patient is
hypothyroid or receiving thyrotropin, which increases the metabolic
activity of differentiated thyroid cancer. Disadvantages of PET
scanning include its lack of specificity for thyroid cancer as well as
its expense and lack of availability in some locations. 18FDG-PET
scanning has prognostic implications, since differentiated thyroid
cancer metastases with low standard uptake value (SUV) scores
are associated with a better prognosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Neuroendocrine carcinomas may metastasize to the thyroid and be
confused with medullary thyroid carcinoma.
False-positive 131I scans are common with normal residual
thyroid tissue and have been reported with Zenker diverticulum,
struma ovarii, pleuropericardial cyst, gastric pull-up, and 131I-
contaminated bodily secretions. False-negative 131I scans are
common in early metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma but
occur also in more advanced disease, including 14% of bone
metastases.
 Complications
The complications vary with the type of carcinoma. Differentiated
thyroid carcinomas may have local or distant metastases. One-third
of medullary carcinomas may secrete serotonin and prostaglandins,
producing flushing and diarrhea, and may be complicated by the
coexistence of pheochromocytomas or hyperparathyroidism. The
risks of radical neck surgery include permanent hypoparathyroidism
and vocal cord palsy due to recurrent laryngeal nerve damage;
permanent hypothyroidism is expected after thyroidectomy and
should always be treated adequately.
 Treatment of Differentiated Thyroid
Carcinoma
A. Surgical Treatment
Surgical removal is the treatment of choice for thyroid carcinomas.
Neck ultrasound is obtained preoperatively, since suspicious
cervical lymphadenoapathy is detected in about 25%.
Intraoperative thyroid ultrasound by the surgeon also helps assess
the extent of the tumor and lymph node involvement, altering
surgical treatment in many cases. For differentiated papillary and
follicular carcinoma > 1 cm diameter, total thyroidectomy is
performed with limited removal of cervical lymph nodes. For
medullary thyroid carcinoma, repeated neck dissections are often
required.
For indeterminate nodules, surgery consists of a thyroid
lobectomy for an indeterminate “follicular lesion” that is ≤ 4 cm
diameter. If malignancy is diagnosed on pathology, a completion
thyroidectomy is performed. For indeterminate follicular lesions > 4
cm diameter that are at higher risk for being malignant, a bilateral
thyroidectomy is performed as the initial surgery. Higher risk lesions
include those with a FNA biopsy that shows marked atypia or that
are suspicious for papillary carcinoma and those that occur in
patients with a history of radiation exposure or a family history of
thyroid carcinoma.
For biopsies that are diagnostic of malignancy, surgery
involves lobectomy alone for papillary thyroid carcinomas < 1 cm
diameter in patients under age 45 years who have no history of
head and neck irradiation and no evidence of lymph node
metastasis on ultrasonography. Other patients should have a total or
near total thyroidectomy. The advantage of near-total
thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid carcinoma is that
multicentric foci of carcinoma are more apt to be resected. Also,
there is less normal thyroid tissue to compete with cancer for 131I
administered later for scans or treatment. A central neck lymph
node dissection is performed at the time of thyroidectomy for
patients with nodal metastases that are clinically evident. A lateral
neck dissection is performed for patients with biopsy-proven lateral
cervical lymphadenopathy. Neck muscle resections are usually
avoided for differentiated thyroid carcinoma. However, patients
with the Hürthle cell variant of follicular carcinoma may benefit from
a modified radical neck dissection. Metastases to the brain are best
treated surgically, since treatment with radiation or RAI is
ineffective. Levothyroxine is prescribed in doses of 0.05–0.1 mg
orally daily immediately postoperatively (see Thyroxine Suppression
and Chemotherapy, below). About 2–4 months after surgery,
patients require reevaluation and often require therapy with 131I (see
below).
Permanent injury to one recurrent laryngeal nerve occurs in
between 1–2% and 7% of patients, depending on the experience of
the surgeon. Bilateral nerve palsies are rare. Temporary recurrent
laryngeal nerve palsies occur in another 5% but often resolve within
6 months. After total thyroidectomy, temporary hypoparathyroidism
occurs in 20% and becomes permanent in about 2%. The incidence
of hypoparathyroidism may be reduced if accidentally resected
parathyroids are immediately autotrans-planted into the neck
muscles. Thyroidectomy requires at least an overnight hospital
admission, since late bleeding, airway problems, and tetany can
occur. Ambulatory thyroidectomy is potentially dangerous and
should not be done. Following surgery, staging (Table 26–8) should
be done to help determine prognosis and to plan therapy and
follow-up.
In pregnant women with thyroid cancer, surgery is usually
delayed until after delivery, except for fast-growing tumors that may
be resected after 24 weeks gestation; there has been no difference
in survival or tumor recurrence rates in women who underwent
surgery during or after their pregnancy. Differentiated thyroid
carcinoma does not behave more aggressively during pregnancy.
But there is a higher risk of complications in pregnant women
undergoing thyroid surgery, compared to nonpregnant women.
B. Thyroxine Suppression and Chemotherapy
Thyroxine suppression therapy is given to pregnant women whose
serum TSH is normal or elevated. Patients who have had a
thyroidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancer must take thyroxine
replacement for life. Oral thyroxine should be given in doses that
suppress serum TSH without causing clinical thyrotoxicosis. An
ultrasensitive TSH assay should be used; serum TSH should be
suppressed below 0.1 mU/L for patients with stage II disease and
below 0.05 mU/L for patients with stage III–IV disease. (See Table
26–8.) Although patients receiving thyroxine suppression therapy
(TSH < 0.05 mU/L) are at risk for a lower bone density than age-
matched controls, the adverse effect upon bone density and fracture
risk is relatively minor for patients who remain clinically euthyroid.
Nevertheless, patients receiving thyroxine suppression therapy are
advised to have periodic bone densitometry.
 
Table 26–8. Pathologic tumor-node-metastasis (ptnM) staging and
tumor-related approximate survival rates for adults with
appropriately treated differentiated (papillary) thyroid carcinoma
based upon patient age, primary tumor size and invasiveness (t),
lymph node involvement (n), and distant metastases (M).1
 
1Patients having a relatively worse prognosis include those with familial
differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
 
Zoledronic acid, an intravenous bisphosphonate, has proven
useful for osteolytic metastases from other solid tumors and has
been used for patients with thyroid bone metastases, but its
effectiveness is unknown.
Thyroid 
carcinomas 
are 
extraordinarily 
resistant 
to
chemotherapy. Sorafenib and sunitinib are tyrosine kinase inhibitors
that have shown some activity against metastatic differentiated
thyroid carcinomas that are radioiodine-resistant, with partial
responses in 20% and stable disease in 60%.
C. Radioactive Iodine (131I) Therapy
Differentiated thyroid cancers variably retain the normal thyroid's
ability to respond to TSH, secrete thyroglobulin, and concentrate
y
p
,
y g
,
iodine. There are two reasons to treat patients with 131I after
thyroidectomy: (1) thyroid remnant ablation and (2) treatment of
known or suspected thyroid cancer. 131I is usually administered 2–4
months after surgery. Treatment with 131I is repeated 9–12 months
later if surveillance RAI scanning shows evidence of metastatic
disease. (See Surveillance, below.)
Before starting 131I therapy, patients follow a low iodine diet for
at least 2 weeks. The low iodine diet consists of avoiding the
following: iodized table salt, sea salt, fish, shellfish, seaweed,
commercial bread, dairy products, processed meats, canned or
dried fruit, canned fruit juices, highly salted soups and snack foods,
black tea, instant coffee, food coloring with Red Dye #3, egg yolks,
multivitamins with iodine, or topical iodine. Patients must not be
given amiodarone or intravenous radiologic contrast dyes containing
iodine.
1. Thyroid remnant ablation—A small dose of 30 mCi (1110
MBq) 131I is given for “remnant ablation” of residual normal thyroid
tissues after surgery for differentiated thyroid cancer. This small
dose of 131I is given to patients with no lymph node involvement
who are at low risk for metastases. There are several advantages
for giving thyroid remnant ablation: (1) There is usually remnant
normal tissue that can produce thyroglobulin (a useful tumor
marker); (2) Remnant ablation using 131I may destroy microscopic
deposits of cancer; (3) The post-therapy scan may visualize
metastatic cancer that would otherwise have been invisible.
However, 131I remnant ablation has not been useful for patients with
stage I papillary thyroid carcinomas < 1 cm diameter that are
unifocal or multifocal. Such very low-risk patients may have close
surveillance without receiving remnant ablation.
2. Treatment of metastases—RAI therapy improves survival and
reduces recurrence rates for patients with stage III-IV cancer and
those with stage II cancer having gross extrathyroidal extension.
RAI therapy is also given to patients with stage II cancer who have
distant metastases, a primary tumor > 4 cm diameter, or primary
tumors 1–4 cm diameter with lymph node metastases or other high-
risk features. Brain metastases do not usually respond to 131I and
are best resected or treated with gamma knife radiosurgery (Table
26–8). A post-therapy whole-body scan is performed 2–10 days
after 131I therapy.
Staging with RAI scanning or 18FDG-PET/CT scanning assists
dosing decisions for 131I therapy. Radioiodine doses of 50–100
mCi are given to patients with large primary tumors or tumors at the
surgical margin. Patients with local lymph node involvement typically
receive 100 mCi of 131I; patients with more extensive neck node
involvement, regional or distant metastases receive 131I at a dose of
125–200 mCi (4625–7400 MBq). Unfortunately, about 35% of
patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma have poor uptake of
131I into metastases. Patients with asymptomatic, stable,
radioiodine-resistant metastases may be carefully monitored for
tumor progression.
Some patients have elevated serum thyroglobulin levels but a
negative whole-body radioiodine scan and a negative neck
ultrasound. In such patients, an 18F-FDG PET/CT scan is obtained.
If all scans are negative, empiric therapy with 131I is not useful.
Doses of 131I over 100 mCi (3800 MBq) can cause gastritis,
temporary oligospermia, sialadenitis, and xerostomia. RAI therapy
can cause neurologic decompensation in patients with brain
metastases; it is advisable to treat such patients with prednisone 30–
40 mg orally daily for several days before and after 131I therapy.
Cumulative doses of 131I over 500 mCi can cause infertility,
pancytopenia (4%), and leukemia (0.3%). The kidneys excrete
RAI. Patients receiving dialysis for kidney disease require a dosage
reduction to only 20% of the usual dose of 131I.
3. rhTSH-stimulated 131I therapy, thyroglobulin, and scan
—Recombinant human thyroid stimulating hormone (rhTSH,
Thyrogen) is given to increase the sensitivity of serum thyroglobulin
for residual cancer and to increase the uptake of 131I into residual
thyroid tissue (thyroid remnant “ablation”) or cancer. Thyrogen must
be kept refrigerated and is administered according to the following
protocol: Thyroxine replacement is held for 2 days before rhTSH
and for 3 days afterward. rhTSH 0.9 mg is administered
intragluteally (not intravenously) daily for 2 consecutive days. On
the third day, blood is drawn: serum TSH is assayed to confirm that
it is > 30 mcU/mL; serum hCG is measured in reproductive-age
women to screen for pregnancy; and serum thyroglobulin is
measured as a tumor marker. RAI is then administered at the
prescribed dose (see above).
Thyrogen should not be administered to patients with an intact
thyroid gland because it can cause severe thyroid swelling and
hyperthyroidism. Hyperthyroidism can also occur in patients with
significant metastases or residual normal thyroid. Other side effects
include nausea (11%) and headache (7%). Thyrotropin has caused
neurologic deterioration in 7% of patients with central nervous
system metastases.
4. 
Thyroxine-withdrawal 
stimulated 131I 
therapy,
thyroglobulin, and scan—Thyroxine withdrawal is sometimes
used because of its lower cost, despite the discomforts of becoming
hypothyroid. Thyroxine is withdrawn for 14 days and the patient is
allowed to become hypothyroid; high levels of endogenous TSH
stimulate the uptake of RAI and production of thyroglobulin by
thyroid cancer or residual thyroid. Just prior to 131I therapy, the
following blood tests are obtained: serum TSH to confirm it is > 30
mcU/mL, serum hCG in reproductive-age women to screen for
pregnancy, serum thyroglobulin as a tumor marker. Three days after
131I therapy, thyroxine therapy may be resumed at full replacement
dose.
5. Side effects and contraindications—National Cancer Institute
surveillance data for thousands of patients with thyroid cancer
indicate that patients with differentiated thyroid cancer, treated with
only surgery, have a 5% increased risk of developing a second non-
thyroid malignancy (especially breast cancer). Patients with thyroid
cancer who received 131I therapy have a 20% increased risk of
developing a second non-thyroid malignancy (especially leukemia
and lymphoma). The greatest risk of second cancers appeared
within 5 years of 131I therapy and was most significant for younger
patients.
Pregnant women may not receive RAI therapy. Women are
advised to avoid pregnancy for at least 4 months following 131I
therapy. Men have been found to have abnormal spermatozoa for
up to 6 months following 131I therapy and are advised to use
contraceptive methods during that time.
 
Treatment 
of 
Other 
Thyroid
Malignancies
Patients with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma are treated with local
resection and radiation. Lovastatin has been demonstrated to cause
differentiation and apoptosis of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cells in
vitro; however, clinical studies have not been performed. Anaplastic
thyroid carcinoma does not respond to 131I therapy and is resistant
to chemotherapy.
Patients with thyroid MALT lymphomas have a low risk of
recurrence after simple thyroidectomy. Patients with other thyroid
lymphomas are best treated with external radiation therapy;
chemotherapy is added for extensive lymphoma. Patients with
systemic lymphomas involving the thyroid are usually treated with
chemotherapy.
Patients with a ret protooncogene mutation should have a
prophylactic total thyroidectomy, ideally by age 6 years (MEN 2A)
or at age 6 months (MEN 2B). Medullary thyroid carcinoma is best
treated with surgery for the primary tumor and metastases. It does
not respond to 131I therapy and is generally resistant to
chemotherapy. In one study, vandetanib (100 mg orally once daily)
produced a partial remission in 16% and stable disease in 53% of
patients with locally advanced or metastatic medullary thyroid
carcinoma.
A. External Radiation Therapy
External radiation may be delivered to bone metastases, especially
those without radioiodine uptake. Local neck radiation therapy may
also be given to patients with ana-plastic thyroid carcinoma. Brain
metastases can be treated with gamma knife radiosurgery.
 Surveillance
Patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma must be observed
long-term for recurrent or metastatic disease. Patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma have traditionally required at
least two annual consecutively negative stimulated serum
thyroglobulin determinations < 1 ng/mL and normal RAI scans (if
done) and neck ultrasound before they are considered to be in
remission. The first surveillance occurs with stimulated
postoperative serum thyroglobulin, 131I therapy, and post-therapy
scanning about 2–4 months after surgery. (See Treatment, above.)
At 9–12 months postoperatively, patients usually receive another
stimulated serum thyroglobulin and radioiodine scan. Patients with
persistent RAI uptake restricted to the thyroid bed need not have
repeated 131I therapies if the neck ultrasound appears normal and
stimulated serum thyroglobulin is < 2 ng/mL. Further radioiodine or
other scans may be required for patients with more aggressive
differentiated thyroid cancer, prior metastases, rising serum
thyroglobulin levels, or other evidence of metastases.
1. Serum TSH suppression—Patients with differentiated thyroid
cancer are treated with thyroxine doses that are sufficient to
suppress the serum TSH below the normal range. For intermediate-
or high-risk patients, the serum TSH should be suppressed below
0.1 mU/L, while the target TSH for low-risk patients is 0.1–0.5
mU/mL. Patients who are considered cured should nevertheless be
treated with sufficient thyroxine to keep the serum TSH < 2 mU/L.
Follow-up must include physical examinations and laboratory testing
to ensure that patients remain clinically euthyroid with serum TSH
levels in the target range. To achieve suppression of serum TSH, the
required dose of thyroxine may be such that serum FT4 levels may
be slightly elevated; in that case, measurement of serum T3 or free
T3 can be useful to ensure the patient is not frankly hyperthyroid.
Thyrotoxicosis can be caused by overreplacement with thyroxine or
by the growth of functioning metastases.
2. Serum thyroglobulin—Thyroglobulin is produced by normal
thyroid tissue and by most differentiated thyroid carcinomas. It is
only after a total or near-total thyroidectomy and 131I remnant
ablation that thyroglobulin becomes a useful tumor marker for
patients with differentiated papillary or follicular thyroid cancer,
particularly for patients who do not have serum antithyroglobulin
antibodies.
Detectable thyroglobulin levels do not necessarily indicate the
presence of residual or metastatic thyroid cancer. Conversely,
baseline serum thyroglobulin levels are insensitive markers for
disease recurrence. However, baseline or stimulated serum
thyroglobulin levels ≥ 2 ng/mL indicate the need for a repeat neck
ultrasound and further scanning with RAI or 18FDG-PET. If serum
thyroglobulin levels remain ≥ 2 ng/mL in the presence of normal
scanning, it is prudent to repeat the serum thyroglobulin in a national
reference laboratory. In one series of patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer following thyroidectomy, there was a 21% incidence
of metastases in patients with serum thyroglobulin < 1 ng/mL (while
receiving thyroxine for TSH suppression). Therefore, baseline
serum thyroglobulin levels are inadequately sensitive and stimulated
serum thyroglobulin measurements should be used and always with
neck ultrasound. The usefulness of routinely doing a radio-iodine
scan (see below) in low-risk patients is controversial but continues
to be done in many centers during stimulation following either
rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal, according to described
protocols.
3. Neck ultrasound—Neck ultrasound should be used in all
patients with thyroid carcinoma to supplement neck palpation; it
should be performed preoperatively, 3 months postoperatively, and
regularly thereafter. Ultrasound is more sensitive for lymph node
metastases than either CT or MRI scanning. Small inflammatory
nodes may be detected postoperatively and do not necessarily
indicate metastatic disease, but follow-up is necessary. Ultrasound-
guided FNA biopsy should be performed on suspicious lesions.
4. Radioactive iodine (RAI: 131I or 123I) neck and whole-body
scanning—Despite its limitations, RAI scanning has traditionally
been used to detect metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer and to
determine whether the cancer is amenable to treatment with 131I.
RAI scanning is particularly useful for high-risk patients and those
with persistent antithyroglobulin antibodies that make serum
thyroglobulin determinations unreliable.
The 131I isotope may be used in scanning doses, given < 2
weeks before scheduled 131I treatment to avoid “stunning”
metastases such that they take up less of the RAI therapy dose. The
radioisotope 123I may also be used and does not stun tumors; it
allows single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) to
better localize metastases. Initial RAI scanning is typically
performed about 2–4 months following surgery for differentiated
thyroid carcinoma. Whole-body scanning should be performed for
at least 30 minutes for at least 140,000 counts and spot views of
the neck should be obtained for at least 35,000 counts.
About 65% of metastases are detectable by RAI scanning, but
only after optimal preparation: Patients should ideally have a total or
near-total thyroidectomy, since any residual normal thyroid
competes for RAI with metastases, which are less avid for iodine. It
is reasonable to perform a rhTSH-stimulated scan and thyroglobulin
level 2–3 months after the initial neck surgery; if the scan is negative
and the serum thyroglobulin is < 2 ng/mL, low-risk patients may not
require further scanning but should continue to be monitored with
neck ultrasound and serum thyroglobulin levels every 6–12 months.
For higher-risk patients, the rhTSH-stimulated thyroglobulin and
RAI scan may be repeated about 1 year after surgery and then
again if warranted. Serum thyroglobulin and radioiodine scanning
are stimulated by either rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal
according to the protocols described above for 131I treatment.
The combination of rhTSH-stimulated scanning and thyroglobulin
levels detects a thyroid remnant or cancer with a sensitivity of 84%.
However, the presence of antithyroglobulin antibodies renders the
serum thyroglobulin determination uninterpretable. In about 21% of
low-risk patients, rhTSH stimulates serum thyroglobulin to above 2
ng/mL; such patients have a 23% risk of local neck metastases and
a 13% risk of distant metastases. The rhTSH-stimulated radioiodine
neck and whole-body scan detects only about half of these
metastases because they are small or not avid for iodine. Some
patients have persistent radio-dine uptake in the neck on diagnostic
scanning but have no visible tumor on neck ultrasound; such patients
do not require additional radioiodine therapy, especially if the serum
thyroglobulin level is very low.
5. Positron emission tomography scanning—18FDGPET
scanning is particularly useful for detecting thyroid cancer
metastases in patients with a detectable serum thyroglobulin
(especially serum thyroglobulin levels >10 ng/mL and rising) who
have a normal whole-body RAI scan and an unrevealing neck
ultrasound. The patient should be fasting at least 6 hours prior to
18FDG-PET scanning; water is allowed, but no sweetened
beverages. Diabetic patients with blood sugars < 200 mg/dL may
be scanned. 18FDGPET scanning can be combined with a CT scan;
the resultant 18FDG-PET/CT fusion scan is 60% sensitive for
detecting metastases that are not visible by other methods. This
scan is less sensitive for small brain metastases. 18FDG-PET
scanning detects the metabolic activity of tumor tissue; for
differentiated thyroid carcinoma, this scan is more sensitive when
the patient's thyroid cancer is stimulated with rhTSH (Thyrogen) as
described above. One problem with 18FDG-PET scanning is its
lack of specificity. False-positives can occur with benign hepatic
tumors, sarcoidosis, radiation therapy, suture granulomas, reactive
lymph nodes, or inflammation at surgical sites that can persist for
months. False-positive uptake can also occur in muscles and brown
fat.
18FDG-PET scanning predicts survival better than standard
staging; the number, location, and SUVmax of metastases are all
significant prognostic factors. (See Prognosis.) 18FDG-PET
scanning is particularly sensitive for detecting medullary thyroid
carcinoma metastases, and prescan thyrotropin does not improve
the PET scan sensitivity for medullary thyroid carcinoma.
6. Other scanning—Thallium-201 (201Tl) scans may be useful for
detecting metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma when the 131I
scan is normal but serum thyroglobulin is elevated. MRI scanning is
particularly useful for imaging metastases in the brain, mediastinum,
or bones. CT scanning is useful for imaging and monitoring
pulmonary metastases.
 Prognosis
Staging and survival for papillary thyroid cancer is shown on
Table 26–8. There is generally a good prognosis, particularly for
adults under age 45 years, despite the fact that up to 40% of these
patients are found to harbor lymph node metastases when extensive
lymph node dissections are performed. The following characteristics
imply a worse prognosis: age over 45 years, male sex, bone or
brain metastases, large pulmonary metastases, and lack of 131I
uptake into metastases. Younger patients with pulmonary
metastases tend to respond better to 131I therapy than do older
adults. Certain papillary histologic types are associated with a higher
risk of recurrence: tall cell, columnar cell, and diffuse sclerosing
types. Brain metastases are detected in 1%; they reduce median
survival to 12 months, but the patient's prognosis is improved by
surgical resection. Patients with a follicular variant of papillary
carcinoma have a prognosis somewhere between that of papillary
and follicular thyroid carcinoma.
Patients with follicular carcinoma have a cancer mortality rate
that is 3.4 times higher than patients with papillary carcinoma. The
Hürthle cell variant of follicular carcinoma is even more
aggressive. Both follicular carcinoma and its Hürthle cell variant tend
to present at a more advanced stage than papillary carcinoma.
However, at a given stage, the different types of differentiated
thyroid carcinoma have a similar prognosis. Patients with primary
tumors > 1 cm in diameter who undergo limited thyroid surgery
(subtotal thyroidectomy or lobectomy) have a 2.2-fold increased
mortality over those having total or near-total thyroidectomies.
Patients who have not received 131I ablation have mortality rates
that are increased twofold by 10 years and threefold by 25 years
(over those who have received ablation). The risk of cancer
recurrence is twofold higher in men than in women and 1.7-fold
higher in multifocal than in unifocal tumors.
Patients with a normal 18FDG-PET scan have a 98% 5-year
survival, while those having > 10 metastases have a 20% 5-year
survival. Those with a SUVmax of 0.1-4.6 have a 5-year survival of
85%, while those with a SUVmax > 13.3 have a 5-year survival of
20%. Patients with only local metastases have a 5-year survival of
95%, while those with regional (supraclavicular, mediastinal)
metastases have a 5-year survival of 70%, and those with distant
metastases have a 5-year survival of 35%.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma is more aggressive than
differentiated thyroid cancer but is typically fairly indolent. The
overall 10-year survival rate is 90% when the tumor is confined to
the thyroid, 70% for those with metastases to cervical lymph nodes,
and 20% for those with distant metastases. Patients with sporadic
disease usually have lymph node involvement noted at the time of
diagnosis, whereas distal metastases may not be noted for years.
For patients with medullary thyroid carcinoma who have metastases
to lymph nodes, modified radical neck dissection is recommended.
Familial cases or those associated with MEN 2A tend to be less
aggressive; the 10-year survival rate is higher, in part due to earlier
detection. Medullary thyroid carcinoma that is seen in MEN 2B is
more aggressive, arises earlier in life, and carries a worse overall
prognosis. Women with medullary thyroid carcinoma who are under
age 40 years have a better prognosis. A better prognosis is also
obtained in patients undergoing total thyroidectomy and neck
dissection; radiation therapy reduces recurrence in patients with
metastases to neck nodes. The mortality rate is increased 4.5-fold
when primary or metastatic tumor tissue stains heavily for
myelomonocytic antigen M-1. Conversely, tumors with heavy
immunoperoxidase staining for calcitonin are associated with
prolonged survival even in the presence of significant metastases.
Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma carries a 1-year survival rate of
about 10% and a 5-year survival rate of about 5%. Patients with
fully localized tumors on MRI have a better prognosis.
Localized lymphoma carries a 5-year survival of nearly 100%.
Those with disease outside the thyroid have a 63% 5-year survival.
However, the prognosis is better for those with the MALT type.
Patients presenting with stridor, pain, laryngeal nerve palsy, or
mediastinal extension tend to fare worse.
Bible KC et al. Efficacy of pazopanib in progressive, radioiodine-
refractory, metastatic differentiated thyroid cancers: results of a
phase 2 consortium study. Lancet Oncol. 2010 Oct
11;11(10):962–72. [PMID: 20851682]
 
Brown AP et al. The risk of second primary malignancies up to
three decades after the treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Feb;93(2):504–15. [PMID:
18029468]
 
Cabanillas ME et al. Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors for
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer: the M.D. Anderson
experience. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2588–95.
[PMID: 20392874]
 
Dackiw AP. The surgical management of medullary thyroid cancer.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2010 Apr;43(2):365–74. [PMID:
20510719]
 
Haugen BR et al. Approach to the thyroid cancer patient with
extracervical metastases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
Mar;95(3):987–93. [PMID: 20203334]
 
Kim EY et al. Clinical outcomes of persistent radioiodine uptake in
the neck shown by diagnostic whole body scan in patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma after initial surgery and remnant
ablation. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Aug;73(2): 257–63. [PMID:
20105187]
 
Kim WG et al. Empiric high-dose 131-iodine therapy lacks
efficacy for treated papillary thyroid cancer patients with
detectable serum thyroglobulin, but negative cervical sonography
and 18F-flurodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scan. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Mar;95(3):1169–73. [PMID:
20080852]
 
Misra M et al. Case records of the Massachusetts General
Hospital: Case 38-2010: a 13-year-old girl with an enlarging neck
mass. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 16;363(25):2445–54. [PMID:
21158661]
 
Robinson BG et al. Vandetanib (100 mg) in patients with locally
advanced or metastatic hereditary medullary thyroid cancer. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2664–71. [PMID: 20371662]
 
IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDER & ENDEMIC
GOITER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Common in regions with low-iodine diets.
 High rate of congenital hypothyroidism and cretinism.
 Goiters may become multinodular and enlarge.
 Most adults with endemic goiter are found to be euthyroid;
however, some are hypothyroid or hyperthyroid.
 
 General Considerations
About 1 billion people are iodine deficient, having no access to
iodized salt and living in areas with iodine-depleted soil. Severe
iodine deficiency increases the risk of miscarriage and stillbirth.
About 0.5% of live births in iodine-deficient areas have full-blown
cretinism. Moderate iodine deficiency during gestation and infancy
cause other manifestations of congenital hypothyroidism, such as
deafness and short stature and permanently lowers a child's IQ by
10–15 points.
Populations in areas of iodine deficiency have a high incidence of
goiter. One such area is Pescopagano, Italy, where 60% of adults
have goiters. Hyperthyroidism (present or past) occurred in 2.9%;
hypothyroidism was overt in 0.2% and subclinical in 3.8%.
Although iodine deficiency is the most common cause of endemic
goiter, certain foods (eg, sorghum, millet, maize, cassava), mineral
deficiencies (selenium, iron), and water pollutants can themselves
cause goiter or aggravate a goiter proclivity caused by iodine
deficiency. In iodine-deficient patients, smoking can induce goiter
growth. Pregnancy aggravates iodine deficiency and is associated
with an increase in size of thyroid nodules and the emergence of
new nodules. Some individuals are particularly susceptible to goiter
owing to congenital partial defects in thyroid enzyme activity.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Endemic goiters may become multinodular and very large. Growth
often occurs during pregnancy and may cause compressive
symptoms.
Substernal goiters are usually asymptomatic but can cause
tracheal compression, respiratory distress and failure, dysphagia,
superior vena cava syndrome, gastrointestinal bleeding from
esophageal varices, palsies of the phrenic or recurrent laryngeal
nerves, or Horner syndrome. Cerebral ischemia and stroke can
result from arterial compression or thyrocervical steal syndrome.
Substernal goiters can rarely cause pleural or pericardial effusions.
The incidence of significant malignancy is < 1%.
Some patients with endemic goiter may become hypothyroid.
Others may become thyrotoxic as the goiter grows and becomes
more autonomous, especially if iodine is added to the diet.
B. Laboratory Findings
The serum T4 and TSH are generally normal. TSH falls in the
presence of hyperthyroidism if a multinodular goiter has become
autonomous in the presence of sufficient amounts of iodine for
thyroid hormone synthesis. TSH rises with hypothyroidism. Thyroid
RAI uptake is usually elevated, but it may be normal if iodine intake
has improved. Serum levels of antithyroid antibodies are usually
either undetectable or in low titers. Serum thyroglobulin is often
elevated.
 Differential Diagnosis
Endemic goiter must be distinguished from all other forms of nodular
goiter that may coexist in an endemic region (see above).
 Prevention
Adding iodine to commercial salt prevents iodine deficiency. In the
United States, potassium iodide is used. Some tropical countries
use potassium iodate, since it is more stable than potassium iodide
in hot and humid climates. Iodized salt contains iodine at about 20
mg per kg salt. The minimum dietary requirement for iodine is about
50 mcg daily, with optimal iodine intake being 150–300 mcg daily.
Iodine sufficiency is assessed by measurement of urinary iodide
excretion, the target being more than 10 mcg/dL. Initiating iodine
supplementation in an iodine-deficient area greatly reduces the
emergence of new goiters but causes an increased frequency of
hyperthyroidism during the first year.
 Treatment
The addition of potassium iodide to table salt greatly reduces the
prevalence of endemic goiter and cretinism but is less effective in
shrinking established goiter. Concurrent deficiencies in both vitamin
A and iodine increase the risk of endemic goiter and concurrent
repletion of both iodide and vitamin A reduces goiter in endemic
goiter regions.
Adults with large multinodular goiter may require thyroidectomy
for cosmesis, compressive symptoms, or thyrotoxicosis. Following
partial thyroidectomy in iodine-deficient geographic areas, there is a
high goiter recurrence rate, so near-total thyroidectomy is preferred
when surgery is indicated. Certain patients may be treated with 131I
for large compressive goiters.
 Complications
Dietary iodine supplementation increases the risk of autoimmune
thyroid dysfunction, which may cause hypothyroidism or
hyperthyroidism. Excessive iodine supplementation increases the
risk of goiter. Suppression of TSH by administering thyroxine
carries the risk of inducing hyperthyroidism, particularly in patients
with autonomous multinodular goiters; therefore, thyroxine
suppression should not be started in patients with a low TSH level.
Rarely, Graves disease can develop 3–10 months after 131I
treatment in patients with large multinodular goiters.
Laurberg P et al. Iodine intake as a determinant of thyroid
disorders in populations. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2010 Feb;24(1):13–27. [PMID: 20172467]
 
Zimmermann MB. Iodine deficiency. Endocr Rev. 2009
Jun;30(4):376–408. [PMID: 19460960]
 
Zimmermann MB. Iodine requirements and the risks and benefits
of correcting iodine deficiency in populations. J Trace Elem Med
Biol. 2008;22(2):81–92. [PMID: 18565420]
 
DISEASES OF THE
PARATHYROIDS
 
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) increases osteoclastic activity in bone,
increases the renal tubular reabsorption of calcium, and stimulates
the synthesis of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol by the kidney.
Meanwhile, PTH inhibits the absorption of phosphate and
bicarbonate by the renal tubule. All of these actions cause a net
increase in serum calcium.
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM &
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Tetany, carpopedal spasms, tingling of lips and hands, muscle
and abdominal cramps, psychological changes.
 Positive Chvostek sign and Trousseau phenomenon.
 Serum calcium low; serum phosphate high; alkaline phosphatase
normal; urine calcium excretion reduced.
 Low or low-normal serum PTH in presence of hypocalcemia.
 Serum magnesium may be low.
 
 General Considerations
Acquired hypoparathyroidism is most commonly seen following
thyroidectomy, when it is usually transient but may be permanent. It
may 
also 
occur 
after 
multiple 
parathyroidectomies.
Hypoparathyroidism may occur transiently after surgical removal of
a parathyroid adenoma for primary hyperparathyroidism due to
suppression of the remaining normal parathyroids and accelerated
remineralization of the skeleton (hungry bone syndrome). Neck
irradiation may rarely cause hypoparathyroidism.
Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism may be isolated or
combined with other endocrine deficiencies in polyglandular
autoimmunity (PGA), which is also known as auto-immune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).
PGA type 1 presents in childhood with at least two of the following
manifestations: candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, or Addison
disease. Cataracts, uveitis, alopecia, vitiligo, or autoimmune thyroid
disease may also develop. Fat malabsorption occurs in 20% of
patients with PGA-1 and may present as weight loss; diarrhea; or
malabsorption of vitamin D, a fat-soluble vitamin used to treat the
hypoparathyroidism. The fat malabsorption may be due to a
deficiency in the jejunal enteroendocrine cells that produce
cholecystokinin, causing a reduction in bile acid secretion.
Hypoparathyroidism can also occur in systemic lupus
erythematosus, caused by antiparathyroid antibodies.
Parathyroid deficiency may also be the result of damage from
heavy metals such as copper (Wilson disease) or iron
(hemochromatosis, transfusion hemosiderosis), granulomas, Riedel
thyroiditis, tumors, or infection.
Functional hypoparathyroidism may also occur as a result of
magnesium deficiency (malabsorption, chronic alcoholism), which
prevents the secretion of PTH. Correction of hypomagnesemia
results in rapid disappearance of the condition. Hypermagnesemia
can also suppress PTH secretion; it may occur in patients with
kidney disease who take magnesium supplements, laxatives, or
antacids.
I n congenital hypoparathyroidism, parathyroid cells have
calcium-sensing receptors (CaSR) that sense the serum calcium
concentration and suppress PTH secretion by way of G-protein-
coupled mechanisms. Gain-of-function mutations (constitutive
activation) of the CaSR gene suppress the parathyroid glands,
resulting in hypocalcemia without elevations in serum PTH levels.
Such mutations cause “autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with
hypercalciuria” (ADHH) from deficient secretion of PTH. The
prevalence of ADHH in the population is about 1 in 70,000, and it
typically presents in infancy with hypocalcemic seizures.
Hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia (HDR or
Barakat) syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition caused by
haploinsufficiency or mutations of the gene GATA3; the condition is
autosomal dominant. Hypocalcemia is present from birth but may
not be detected until the occurrence of mental retardation or
hypocalcemic tetany. Hypoparathyroidism may also be seen in
DiGeorge syndrome, along with congenital cardiac and facial
anomalies; hypocalcemia usually presents with tetany in infancy, but
some cases are not detected until adulthood.
Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism is caused by mutations in
various genes that encode the secretion of PTH or the embryologic
development of the parathyroid glands. Mutations in the TBCE
gene cause autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism with other
phenotypic abnormalities that are known as the Kenny-Caffey
syndrome or the Sanjad-Sakati syndrome. Various mutations in
genes that encode mitochondria have maternal inheritance and
cause hypoparathyroidism in association with other syndromes:
Kearns-Sayre (ophthalmoplegia, retinopathy, cardiomyopathy,
diabetes) and MELAS (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic
acidosis, stroke).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Acute hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcemia can cause tetany, with
muscle cramps, carpopedal spasm, irritability, altered mental status,
convulsions, and stridor; tingling of the circumoral area, hands, and
feet is almost always present. Symptoms of the chronic disease are
lethargy, personality changes, anxiety state, blurring of vision due to
premature cataracts, Parkinsonism, and mental retardation. Some
patients with chronic hypocalcemia are asymptomatic, even with
very low levels of serum calcium.
Chvostek sign (facial muscle contraction on tapping the facial
nerve in front of the ear) is positive, and Trousseau phenomenon
(carpal spasm after application of a sphygmomanometer cuff) is
present. Cataracts may occur; the nails may be thin and brittle; the
skin is dry and scaly, at times with fungus infection (candidiasis),
and there may be loss of eyebrows; and deep tendon reflexes may
be hyperactive. Papilledema and elevated cerebrospinal fluid
pressure are occasionally seen. Teeth may be defective if the onset
of the disease occurs in childhood.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum calcium is low, serum phosphate high, urinary calcium low,
and alkaline phosphatase normal. Serum calcium is largely bound to
albumin. In hypoalbuminemia, the serum ionized calcium may be
determined, but it has had surprisingly poor clinical utility.
Alternatively, the serum calcium level can be corrected for serum
albumin level as follows:
“Corrected” serum Ca2+ = Serum Ca2+ mg/dL
+ (0.8 × [4.0 − Albumin g/dL])
PTH levels are low. Hypomagnesemia may exacerbate
symptoms and decrease parathyroid function.
C. Imaging
Radiographs or CT scans of the skull may show basal ganglia
calcifications; the bones may be denser than normal. Cutaneous
calcification may occur.
D. Other Examinations
Slit-lamp examination may show early posterior lenticular cataract
formation. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows prolonged QT
intervals and T wave abnormalities. Patients with chronic
hypoparathyroidism tend to have increased bone mineral density,
particularly in the lumbar spine.
 Complications
Acute tetany with stridor, especially if associated with vocal cord
palsy, may lead to respiratory obstruction requiring tracheostomy.
Pseudotumor cerebri has been reported. Congestive heart failure
may rarely occur. The complications of chronic hypoparathyroidism
largely depend on the duration of the disease. There may be
associated autoimmunity causing sprue syndrome, pernicious
anemia, or Addison disease. In long-standing cases, cataract
formation and calcification of the basal ganglia are seen.
Occasionally, parkinsonian symptoms or choreoathetosis develop.
Ossification of the paravertebral ligaments may occur with nerve
root compression; surgical decompression may be required.
Seizures are common in untreated patients. Overtreatment with
vitamin D and calcium may produce nephrocalcinosis and
impairment of kidney function. Chronic hypocalcemia can cause
heart failure.
 Differential Diagnosis
Paresthesias, muscle cramps, or tetany due to respiratory alkalosis,
in which the serum calcium is normal, can be confused with
hypocalcemia. In fact, hyperventilation tends to accentuate
hypocalcemic symptoms.
At times hypoparathyroidism is misdiagnosed as idiopathic
epilepsy, choreoathetosis, or brain tumor (on the basis of brain
calcifications, convulsions, choked disks) or, more rarely, as
“asthma” (on the basis of stridor and dyspnea). In patients with
hypoalbuminemia, serum levels of ionized calcium are normal.
Hypocalcemia may also be due to malabsorption of calcium,
magnesium, or vitamin D; patients do not always have diarrhea.
Hypocalcemia may also be caused by certain drugs: loop diuretics,
plicamycin, phenytoin, alendronate, and foscarnet. In addition,
hypocalcemia may be seen in cases of rapid intravascular volume
expansion or due to chelation from transfusions of large volumes of
citrated blood. It is also observed in patients with acute pancreatitis.
Hypocalcemia may develop in some patients with certain
osteoblastic metastatic carcinomas (especially breast, prostate)
instead of the expected hypercalcemia. Hypocalcemia with
hyperphosphatemia (simulating hypoparathyroidism) is seen in
azotemia but may also be caused by large doses of intravenous,
oral, or rectal phosphate preparations and by chemotherapy of
responsive lymphomas or leukemias.
Hypocalcemia with hypercalciuria may be due to a familial
syndrome involving a mutation in the calcium-sensing receptor; such
patients have levels of serum PTH that are in the normal range,
distinguishing it from hypoparathyroidism. It is transmitted as an
autosomal dominant disorder. Such patients are hypercalciuric;
treatment with calcium and vitamin D may cause nephrocalcinosis.
Congenital pseudohypoparathyroidism is a group of
disorders characterized by resistance to PTH. There are several
subtypes caused by different mutations involving the PTH receptor
or its G protein or adenylyl cyclase. Renal tubular resistance to PTH
causes hypercalciuria with resultant hypocalcemia. PTH levels are
high and the PTH receptors in bone are typically not involved, such
that bony changes of hyperparathyroidism may be evident. In
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a, patients have hypocalcemia
and hyperphosphatemia with additional features known as Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy: mental retardation, short stature,
obesity, round face, short fourth metacarpals, ectopic bone
formation, hypothyroidism, and hypogonadism. Patients without
hypocalcemia but sharing the phenotypic abnormalities are said to
have “pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism.”
 Treatment
A. Emergency Treatment for Acute Attack (Hypoparathyroid Tetany)
This usually occurs after surgery and requires immediate treatment.
1. Airway—Be sure an adequate airway is present.
2. Intravenous calcium gluconate—Calcium gluconate, 10–20
mL of 10% solution intravenously, may be given slowly until tetany
ceases. Ten to 50 mL of 10% calcium gluconate may be added to 1
L of 5% glucose in water or saline and administered by slow
intravenous drip. The rate should be adjusted so that the serum
calcium is maintained between 8 mg/dL and 9 mg/dL.
3. Oral calcium—Calcium salts should be given orally as soon as
possible to supply 1–2 g of calcium daily. Liquid calcium carbonate,
500 mg/5 mL, may be especially useful. The dosage is 1–3 g
calcium daily. Calcium citrate contains 21% calcium, but a higher
proportion is absorbed with less gastrointestinal intolerance.
4. Vitamin D preparations—(Table 26–9.) Therapy should be
started as soon as oral calcium is begun. The active metabolite of
vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol), has a very
rapid onset of action and is not long-lasting if hypercalcemia occurs.
It is of great use in the treatment of acute hypocalcemia. Therapy is
commenced at a dosage of 0.25 mcg orally each morning with
upward dosage titration to near normocalcemia. Ultimately, doses
of 0.5–2 mcg/d are usually required. Calcifediol (25-hydroxyvitamin
D3), another option for treatment, has an intermediate onset and
duration of action; the usual starting dose is 20 mcg/d orally.
5. Magnesium—If hypomagnesemia is present (chronic
alcoholism, malnutrition, renal loss, drugs such as cisplatin, etc), it
must be corrected to treat the resulting hypocalcemia. Acutely,
magnesium sulfate is given intravenously, 1–2 g every 6 hours.
Long-term magnesium replacement may be given as magnesium
oxide tablets (600 mg), one or two per day, or as a combined
magnesium and calcium preparation (CalMag, others).
6. Transplantation of cryopreserved parathyroid tissue
removed during prior surgery—Transplantation restores
normocalcemia in about 23% of cases.
B. Maintenance Treatment
The goal should be to maintain the serum calcium in a slightly low
but asymptomatic range (8–8.6 mg/dL). This will minimize the
hypercalciuria that would otherwise occur and provides a margin of
safety against overdosage and hypercalcemia, which may produce
permanent damage to kidney function. Patients with mild,
asymptomatic hypocalcemia require no therapy. For others, calcium
supplementation (1 g/d) is given, along with a vitamin D preparation.
 
Table 26–9. Vitamin D preparations used in the treatment of
hypoparathyroidism.
 
 
Patients with chronic hypoparathyroidism must usually be treated
with some type of vitamin D (Table 26–9). Monitoring of serum
calcium at regular intervals (at least every 3 months) is mandatory.
Calcitriol, a short-acting preparation, is given in doses that range
from 0.25 mcg/d to 2.0 mcg orally daily. Ergocalciferol (vitamin
D2) is derived from plants and is commercially available. The usual
dose ranges from 25,000 to 150,000 units/d. It is a slow-acting
preparation that is stored in fat, giving it a long duration of action. If
toxicity develops, hypercalcemia—treatable with hydration and
prednisone—may persist for weeks after it is discontinued. Despite
this risk, ergocalciferol usually produces a more stable serum
calcium level than do the shorter-acting preparations.
Teriparatide (Forteo) is a recombinant preparation of human
PTH 1-34. Teriparatide is effective in treating patients with
hypoparathyroidism when given by subcutaneous injection at an
initial dose of 0.4 mcg/kg twice daily. The dose is adjusted to
produce normal serum calcium levels. The disadvantages of
teriparatide therapy include its extremely high cost and the necessity
for injections. Furthermore, teriparatide is not FDA-approved for
this indication because prolonged high doses in rats caused
osteosarcoma. Therefore, teriparatide therapy is reserved for
patients with severe hypoparathyroidism that fails to respond to
vitamin D.
Target serum calcium levels (albumin-corrected) should be 8.0–
8.5 mg/dL; these levels are mildly low to avoid hypercalciuria. It is
prudent to monitor urine calcium with “spot” urine determinations
and keep the level below 30 mg/dL if possible. Hypercalciuria may
respond to oral hydrochlorothiazide, usually given with a potassium
supplement.
Caution Phenothiazine drugs should be administered with
caution, since they may precipitate extrapyramidal symptoms in
hypocalcemic patients. Furosemide should be avoided, since it may
worsen hypocalcemia.
 Prognosis
The outlook is good if the diagnosis is made promptly and treatment
instituted. Any dental changes, cataracts, and brain calcifications are
permanent. Periodic blood chemical evaluation is required, since
changes in calcium levels may call for modification of the treatment
schedule. Hypercalcemia that develops in patients with seemingly
stable, treated hypoparathyroidism may be a presenting sign of
Addison disease.
Despite optimal therapy, patients with hypoparathyroidism have
been reported to have an overall reduced quality of life. Affected
patients have a high risk of having mood and psychiatric disorders
along with a reduced overall sense of well-being.
Bosworth M et al. Clinical inquiries: what is the best workup for
hypocalcemia? J Fam Pract. 2008 Oct;57(10):677–9. [PMID:
18842196]
 
Khan MI et al. Medical management of postsurgical
hypoparathyroidism. Endocr Pract. 2010 Dec;6:1–19. [PMID:
21134871]
 
Puig-Domingo M et al. Successful treatment of vitamin D
unresponsive hypoparathyroidism with multipulse subcutaneous
infusion of teriparatide. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;159(5): 653–
7. [PMID: 18703565]
 
Shoback D. Clinical practice. Hypoparathyroidism. N Engl J Med.
2008 Jul;359(4):391–403. [PMID: 18650515]
 
Wen HY et al. Parathyroid disease. Rheum Dis Clin North Am.
2010 Nov;36(4):647–64. [PMID: 21092844]
 
Winer KK et al. Long-term treatment of 12 children with chronic
hypoparathyroidism: a randomized trial comparing synthetic human
parathyroid hormone 1-34 versus calcitriol and calcium. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2680–8. [PMID: 20392870]
 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Frequently detected incidentally by screening.
 Renal calculi, polyuria, hypertension, constipation, fatigue, mental
changes.
 Bone pain; rarely, cystic lesions and pathologic fractures.
 Serum and urine calcium elevated; urine phosphate high with low
to normal serum phosphate; alkaline phosphatase normal to
elevated.
 Elevated PTH.
 
 General Considerations
Primary hyperparathyroidism is characterized by chronic poorly
regulated excessive secretion of PTH by one or more parathyroid
glands that results in hypercalcemia. It is present in up to 0.1% of
adult patients examined. It can be seen at any age but is more
frequent in persons over the age of 50 years and is three times more
common in women than in men.
The disease is caused by hypersecretion of PTH, usually by a
single parathyroid adenoma (80%), and less commonly by
hyperplasia by two or more parathyroid glands (20%), or
carcinoma (≤ 1%). However, when hyperparathyroidism presents
before age 30 years, there is a higher incidence of multiglandular
disease (36%) and carcinoma (5%). The size of the parathyroid
adenoma correlates with the serum PTH level.
Hyperparathyroidism is familial in about 10% of cases.
Parathyroid hyperplasia may arise in MEN types 1, 2A, and 2B. In
MEN 1, multiglandular hyperparathyroidism is usually the initial
manifestation and ultimately occurs in 90% of affected individuals.
Hyperparathyroidism in MEN 2A is less frequent that in MEN 1
and is usually milder. Familial hyperparathyroidism can also occur in
the hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome, a rare autosomal
dominant familial condition in which parathyroid cystic adenomas or
carcinomas are associated with ossifying fibromas of the mandible
and maxilla as well as renal lesions (cysts, hamartomas, Wilms
tumors). 
Affected individuals usually present with severe
hypercalcemia as teenagers or young adults; the pathology is usually
a single parathyroid adenoma. (See Table 26–17.)
Hyperparathyroidism results in the excessive excretion of calcium
and phosphate by the kidneys. PTH stimulates renal tubular
reabsorption of calcium; however, hyper-parathyroidism causes
hypercalcemia and an increase in calcium in the glomerular filtrate
that overwhelms tubular reabsorption capacity, resulting in
hypercalciuria. At least 5% of renal calculi are associated with this
disease. Diffuse parenchymal calcification (nephrocalcinosis) is seen
less commonly. Excessive PTH can cause cortical demineralization
that is particularly evident at the wrist and hip; trabecular bone is
usually spared as evidenced by relatively higher spinal bone density
compared to the wrist. Severe, chronic hyperparathyroidism can
cause diffuse demineralization, pathologic fractures, and cystic bone
lesions throughout the skeleton, a condition known as osteitis
fibrosa cystica.
In chronic kidney disease, hyperphosphatemia and decreased
renal production of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25[OH]2D3)
initially produce a decrease in ionized calcium. The parathyroid
glands are stimulated (secondary hyperparathyroidism) and may
enlarge, becoming autonomous (tertiary hyperparathyroidism). The
bone disease seen in this setting is known as renal
osteodystrophy. Parathyroid hyperplasia in uremia can result in
extremely high serum PTH levels that are associated with uremic
vascular calcification. Hypercalcemia often occurs after kidney
transplant.
Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of hyperparathyroidism but
is more common in patients with severe hypercalcemia. About 50%
of parathyroid carcinomas are palpable.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hypercalcemia of hyperparathyroidism is typically discovered
accidentally by routine chemistry panels. Many patients are
asymptomatic or have mild symptoms that may be elicited only
upon questioning. Parathyroid adenomas are usually so small and
deeply located in the neck that they are almost never palpable;
when a mass is palpated, it usually turns out to be an incidental
thyroid nodule.
Symptomatic patients are said to have problems with “bones,
stones, abdominal groans, psychic moans, with fatigue overtones.”
The manifestations are categorized as skeletal, urinary tract, and
those associated with hypercalcemia.
1. Skeletal manifestations—Hyperparathyroidism causes a loss
of cortical bone and a gain of trabecular bone. Low bone density is
typically most prominent at the wrist. Although significant bone
demineralization is uncommon in mild hyperparathyroidism, osteitis
fibrosa cystica may present as pathologic fractures or as “brown
tumors” or cysts of the jaw. More commonly, patients have bone
pain and arthralgias.
2. Manifestations of hypercalcemia—Mild hypercalcemia may
be asymptomatic. However, hypercalcemia has a variety of
manifestations that become progressively worse with more severe
hypercalcemia. Paresthesias, muscular weakness, and diminished
deep 
tendon 
reflexes 
are 
examples 
of neuromuscular
manifestations. Central nervous system manifestations include
malaise, fatigue, intellectual weariness, depression, increased sleep
requirement, progressing to cognitive impairment, disorientation,
psychosis, 
or 
stupor. Cardiovascular symptoms include
hypertension, prolonged P-R interval, shortened Q-T interval,
sensitivity to arrhythmic effects of digitalis, bradyarrhythmias, heart
block, and asystole. Renal manifestations include polyuria and
polydipsia, caused by hypercalcemia-induced nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus. Calcium-containing kidney stones are reported in about
18% of those with newly discovered primary hyperparathyroidism.
Nephrocalcinosis and kidney disease can occur. Gastrointestinal
symptoms include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain,
weight loss, constipation, and obstipation. Pancreatitis occurs in
3%. Pruritus may be present. Calcium may precipitate in the
corneas (“band keratopathy”). Calcium may also precipitate in
extravascular tissues as well as in small arteries, causing small vessel
thrombosis and skin necrosis (calciphylaxis).
3. Hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy—About 67% of
women with primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy
experience complications such as nephrolithiasis, hyperemesis,
pancreatitis, 
muscle 
weakness, 
cognitive 
changes, 
and
hypercalcemic crisis. About 80% of fetuses experience
complications of maternal hyperparathyroidism, including fetal
demise, preterm delivery, low birth weight, postpartum neonatal
tetany, and permanent hypoparathyroidism.
B. Laboratory Findings
The hallmark of primary hyperparathyroidism is the serum calcium >
10.5 mg/dL (Figure 26–1). In hyperproteinemic states, the total
serum calcium may be elevated but the ionized fraction is normal,
whereas in primary hyperparathyroidism, the ionized calcium is
almost always over 5.4 mg/dL (1.4 mmol/L). In practice, serum
ionized calcium determinations have not proved to be very helpful
clinically. The serum phosphate is often low (< 2.5 mg/dL). The
urine calcium excretion may be high or normal (averaging 250 mg/g
creatinine) but it is usually low for the degree of hypercalcemia.
There is an excessive loss of phosphate in the urine in the presence
of hypophosphatemia (25% of cases). (In secondary
hyperparathyroidism due to kidney disease, the serum phosphate is
high.) The alkaline phosphatase is elevated only if bone disease is
present. The plasma chloride and uric acid levels may be elevated.
Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with hyper-
parathyroidism, and it is prudent to screen for vitamin D deficiency
with a serum 25-OH vitamin D determination. Low serum 25-OH
vitamin D levels (< 20 mcg/L; < 50 nmol/L) can aggravate
hyperparathyroidism and its bone manifestations; vitamin D
replacement may be helpful in treating patients with
hyperparathyroidism.
Figure 26–1. Parathyroid hormone and calcium nomogram.
Relationship between serum intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) and
serum calcium levels in patients with hypoparathyroidism,
pseudohypoparathyroidism, nonparathyroid hypercalcemia, primary
hyperparathyroidism (HPt), and secondary hyperparathyroidism.
(Used with permission from GJ Strewler.)
 
Elevated serum levels of intact PTH (IRMA assay) confirm the
diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism. Patients with apparent
hyperparathyroidism should be screened for familial benign
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia with a 24-hour urine for calcium and
creatinine.
Patients should discontinue thiazide diuretics prior to this test.
Calcium excretion of < 50 mg/24 hours (or < 5 mg/dL on a random
urine) is not typical for primary hyperparathyroidism and indicates
possible familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
C. Imaging
Preoperative sestamibi-iodine subtraction scanning and neck
ultrasonography can locate parathyroid adenomas in an effort to
improve the outcome and limit the invasiveness of neck surgery.
Parathyroid imaging is crucial for patients who have had prior neck
surgery. However, the usefulness of preoperative parathyroid
localizing imaging studies for first neck explorations remains
controversial. Preoperative scanning does not improve the outcome
of initial bilateral neck explorations performed by a surgeon with
special expertise in parathyroid surgery. Therefore, preoperative
imaging has been used mainly to improve the outcome for limited
neck exploration, with only modest success. (See Surgery.) Imaging
is not useful for the diagnosis of hyper-parathyroidism, which must
be made by serum calcium and PTH determinations. Small benign
thyroid nodules are discovered incidentally in nearly 50% of patients
with hyperparathyroidism who have imaging with ultrasound or
MRI.
CT and MRI scanning are not ordinarily required or useful for
initial preoperative parathyroid localizing studies, since these
scanning techniques are less sensitive for identifying tiny parathyroid
adenomas. However, for repeat neck operations and when ectopic
parathyroid glands are suspected, MRI is preferred since it offers
better soft tissue contrast than CT scanning and is less adversely
affected by postoperative changes in the neck. Three-dimensional
technetium-99m sestamibi scanning can also help localize ectopic
parathyroid glands.
Bone density measurements by dual energy x-ray absorptiometry
(DXA) are helpful in determining the amount of bone loss in patients
with hyperparathyroidism. Bone loss occurs mostly in long bones,
and DXA should ideally include three areas: lumbar spine, hip, and
distal radius.
Bone radiographs are usually normal and are not required to
make the diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism. There may be
demineralization, subperiosteal resorption of bone (especially in the
radial aspects of the fingers), or loss of the lamina dura of the teeth.
There may be cysts throughout the skeleton, mottling of the skull
(“salt-and-pepper appearance”), or pathologic fractures. Articular
cartilage calcification (chondrocalcinosis) is sometimes found.
Patients with renal osteodystrophy may have ectopic
calcifications around joints or in soft tissue. Such patients may
exhibit radiographic changes of osteopenia, osteitis fibrosa, or
osteosclerosis, alone or in combination. Osteosclerosis of the
vertebral bodies is known as “rugger jersey spine.”
 Complications
Pathologic long bone fractures are more common in patients with
hyperparathyroidism than in the general population. Urinary tract
infection due to stone and obstruction may lead to kidney disease
and uremia. If the serum calcium level rises rapidly, clouding of
sensorium, kidney disease, and rapid precipitation of calcium
throughout the soft tissues may occur. Peptic ulcer and pancreatitis
may be intractable before surgery. Insulinomas or gastrinomas may
be associated, as well as pituitary tumors (MEN type 1).
Pseudogout may complicate hyperparathyroidism both before and
after surgical removal of tumors. Hypercalcemia during gestation
produces neonatal hypocalcemia.
In tertiary hyperparathyroidism due to chronic kidney disease,
high serum calcium and phosphate levels may cause disseminated
calcification in the skin, soft tissues, and arteries (calciphylaxis); this
can result in painful ischemic necrosis of skin and gangrene, cardiac
arrhythmias, and respiratory failure. The actual serum levels of
calcium and phosphate have not correlated well with calciphylaxis,
but a calcium (mg/dL) × phosphate (mg/dL) product over 70 is
usually present.
 Differential Diagnosis
A. Artifact
A report of hypercalcemia may be due to laboratory error or
excess tourniquet time and should always be repeated.
Hypercalcemia may be due to high serum protein concentrations; in
the presence of high or low serum albumin concentrations, a serum
ionized calcium is more dependable than the total serum calcium
concentration. Hypercalcemia may also be seen with dehydration;
spurious elevations in serum calcium have been reported with
severe hypertriglyceridemia, when the calcium assay uses
spectrophotometry.
B. Hypercalcemia of Malignancy
Many malignant tumors (breast, lung, pancreas, uterus,
hypernephroma, paraganglioma, etc) can produce hyper-calcemia.
In some cases (breast carcinoma especially), bony metastases are
present. In others, no metastases to bone can be demonstrated.
Most of these tumors secrete PTH-related protein (PTHrP), which
has tertiary structural homologies to PTH and causes bone
resorption and hypercalcemia similar to those of PTH. The clinical
features of the hyper-calcemia of cancer can closely simulate
hyperparathyroidism. Serum phosphate is often low, but the plasma
level of PTH is low. Serum PTHrP may be elevated.
Multiple myeloma is a common cause of hypercalcemia in the
older population. Many other hematologic cancers, such as
monocytic leukemia, T cell leukemia and lymphoma, and Burkitt
lymphoma, have also been associated with hypercalcemia. Multiple
myeloma causes kidney dysfunction; resultant increased levels of
carboxyl terminal PTH may cause it to be confused with
hyperparathyroidism if a carboxyl terminal PTH assay is used.
C. Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatous Disorders
Macrophages and perhaps other cells present in granulomatous
tissue have the ability to synthesize 1,25(OH)2D3. Hypercalcemia
has been reported in patients with sarcoidosis, tuberculosis,
berylliosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, leprosy, and even
foreign-body granuloma. Increased intestinal calcium absorption
and hypercalciuria are more common than hypercalcemia. Serum
levels of 1,25(OH)2D3 are elevated.
D. Calcium or Vitamin D Ingestion
Ingestion of large amounts of calcium or vitamin D can cause
hypercalcemia, especially in patients who concurrently take thiazide
diuretics, which reduce urinary calcium loss. Hypercalcemia is
reversible following withdrawal of calcium and vitamin D
supplements. If hypercalcemia persists, the possibility of associated
hyperparathyroidism should be strongly considered.
In vitamin D intoxication, patients may be taking large amounts of
vitamin D for unclear reasons, so a thorough review of all
medications is important. Hypercalcemia may persist for several
weeks. Serum levels of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25[OH]D3) are
helpful to confirm the diagnosis. A brief course of corticosteroid
therapy may be necessary if hypercalcemia is severe.
E. Familial Benign Hypocalciuric Hypercalcemia
Familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia can be easily mistaken
for mild hyperparathyroidism. It is a common autosomal dominant
inherited disorder (prevalence: 1 in 16,000) caused by a loss-of-
function mutation in the gene encoding the CaSR. CaSRs are found
on the surface of the parathyroid glands and allow the parathyroid
glands to vary PTH secretion according to serum calcium levels.
Reduced function of the CaSR causes the parathyroid glands to
falsely “sense” hypocalcemia and inappropriately release slightly
excessive amounts of PTH. At the same time, the renal tubule
CaSRs are also affected, causing hypocalciuria. Familial benign
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia is characterized by hypercalcemia,
hypocalciuria (usually < 50 mg/24 h), variable hypermagnesemia,
and normal or minimally elevated levels of PTH. These patients do
not normalize their hypercalcemia after subtotal parathyroid removal
and should not be subjected to surgery. The condition has an
excellent prognosis and is easily diagnosed with a family history and
urinary calcium clearance determination.
F. Vitamin D Deficiency
Secondary hyperparathyroidism predictably develops in patients
with a deficiency in vitamin D. Serum calcium levels are typically in
the normal range, but may rise to become borderline elevated with
time, due to parathyroid glandular hyperplasia. (See Osteomalacia
section.)
G. Adrenal Insufficiency
Hypercalcemia is common in untreated Addison disease. This is
partly due to disinhibition of calcium uptake by the renal tubule and
gut. Additionally, Addison disease can cause dehydration and
hyperproteinemia, resulting in higher levels of nonionized calcium.
H. Immobilization Hypercalcemia
Prolonged immobilization at bed rest commonly causes
hypercalcemia, particularly in adolescents, critically ill patients, and
patients with extensive Paget disease of bone. Hypercalcemia
develops in about one-third of acutely ill patients being treated in
intensive care units, particularly patients with acute kidney injury.
Serum calcium elevations are typically mild but may reach 15
mg/dL. Serum PTH levels are usually slightly elevated, consistent
with mild hyperparathyroidism, but may be suppressed or normal.
I. Other Causes of Hypercalcemia
Other causes of hypercalcemia are shown in Table 21–8. Modest
hypercalcemia is occasionally seen in patients taking thiazide
diuretics or lithium; such patients may have an inappropriately
nonsuppressed PTH level with hypercalcemia. Hyperthyroidism
causes increased turnover of bone and occasional hypercalcemia.
Bisphosphonates can increase serum calcium in 20% and serum
PTH becomes high in 10%, mimicking hyperparathyroidism.
 Treatment
A. Asymptomatic Primary Hyperparathyroidism
Patients with mild asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism may not need
therapy. Such patients are advised to keep active, avoid
immobilization, and drink adequate fluids. For postmenopausal
women with hyperparathyroidism, estrogen replacement therapy
reduces serum calcium by an average of 0.75 mg/dL and slightly
improves bone density.
Affected patients must avoid thiazide diuretics, large doses of
vitamin A, and calcium-containing antacids or supplements. Serum
calcium and albumin are checked about twice yearly, kidney
function and urine calcium once yearly, and three-site bone density
(distal radius, hip, and spine) every 2 years. Rising serum calcium
should prompt further evaluation and determination of PTH levels.
B. Surgical Parathyroidectomy
Parathyroidectomy is recommended for patients with symptomatic
hyperparathyroidism, kidney stones, bone disease, and pregnancy.
Some 
patients 
with 
seemingly 
asymptomatic 
hyper-
parathyroidism may be surgical candidates for other reasons such as
(1) serum calcium 1 mg/dL above the upper limit of normal with
urine calcium excretion > 50 mg/24 h (off thiazide diuretics), (2)
urine calcium excretion over 400 mg/24 h, (3) cortical bone density
(wrist, hip) ≥ 2 SD below normal, (4) relative youth (under age 50–
60 years), (5) difficulty ensuring medical follow-up, or (6)
pregnancy. During pregnancy, parathyroidectomy is performed in
the second trimester. Surgery for patients with “asymptomatic”
hyperparathyroidism may confer modest benefits in social and
emotional function, with improvements in anxiety and phobias being
reported in comparison to similar patients who are monitored
without surgery.
Preoperative parathyroid imaging has been used in an attempt to
allow unilateral minimally invasive neck surgery. The reported
success rates vary considerably. The usefulness of preoperative
parathyroid imaging was evaluated in a series of 350 patients with
sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism. A single gland was
predicted by sestamibi in 83%, by ultrasound in 85%, and by
concordance of both in 59% of patients. Unilateral neck
exploration, directed by these studies, resulted in success rate of
only 73%, 77%, and 82%, respectively, despite the intraoperative
quick PTH assay predicting success. Even in patients with
concordant sestamibi and ultrasound scans, and an intraoperative
PTH drop of > 50%, at least one additional abnormal parathyroid
gland is left behind in the contralateral neck in 15% of patients.
Bilateral neck exploration is usually advisable for all patients
without preoperative localization studies for the following: (1)
patients with a family history of hyperparathyroidism, (2) patients
with a personal or family history of MEN, and (3) patients wanting
an optimal chance of success with a single surgery. Patients
undergoing unilateral neck exploration can have the incision
widened for bilateral neck exploration if two abnormal glands are
found or if the serum quick PTH falls by < 50%. Parathyroid glands
are not uncommonly supernumerary (five or more) or ectopic (eg,
intrathyroidal, carotid sheath, mediastinum). The optimal surgical
management for patients with MEN type 1 is subtotal
parathyroidectomy that usually results in a cure, although recurrent
hyperparathyroidism develops in 18% and the rate of postoperative
hypoparathyroidism is high.
Parathyroid hyperplasia is commonly seen with secondary or
tertiary hyperparathyroidism associated with uremia. When surgery
is performed, a subtotal parathyroidectomy is optimal; three and
one-half glands are usually removed, and a metal clip is left to mark
the location of residual parathyroid tissue.
Parathyroid carcinoma can cause severe hypercalcemia
associated with very high serum levels of PTH. Preoperative
localizing studies usually detect a large invasive tumor. Therapy
consists of en bloc resection of the tumor and the ipsilateral thyroid
lobe. Metastases to local and to distant sites occur in about 50% of
patients. Reoperation for neck recurrence is usually necessary.
Adjuvant treatment includes radiation therapy. Cinacalcet is
administered initially in doses of 30 mg twice daily and increased as
needed up to 90 mg four times daily. Intravenous bisphosphonate
(zoledronic acid) is used as needed.
Complications—Serum PTH levels fall below normal in 70% of
patients within hours after successful surgery, commonly causing
hypocalcemic paresthesias or even tetany. Hypocalcemia tends to
occur the evening after surgery or on the next day. Therefore,
frequent postoperative monitoring of serum ionized calcium (or
serum calcium plus albumin) is advisable beginning the evening after
surgery. Once hypercalcemia has resolved, liquid or chewable
calcium carbonate is given orally to reduce the likelihood of
hypocalcemia. Symptomatic hypocalcemia is treated with larger
doses of calcium; calcitriol (0.25–1 mcg daily orally) may be added,
with the dosage depending on symptom severity. Magnesium salts
are sometimes required postoperatively, since adequate magnesium
is required for functional recovery of the remaining suppressed
parathyroid glands.
In about 12% of patients having successful parathyroid surgery,
PTH levels rise above normal (while serum calcium is normal or
low) 
by 
1 
week 
postoperatively. 
This 
secondary
hyperparathyroidism is probably due to “hungry bones” and is
treated with calcium and vitamin D preparations. Such therapy is
usually needed only for 3–6 months but is required long-term by
some patients.
Hyperthyroidism commonly occurs immediately following
parathyroid surgery. It is caused by release of stored thyroid
hormone during surgical manipulation of the thyroid. Short-term
treatment with propranolol may be required for several days.
C. Medical Measures
1. Fluids—Hypercalcemia is treated with a large fluid intake unless
contraindicated. Severe hypercalcemia requires hospitalization and
intensive hydration with intravenous saline. (See Chapter 21.)
2. Bisphosphonates—Intravenous bisphosphonates are potent
inhibitors of bone resorption and can temporarily treat the
hypercalcemia of hyperparathyroidism. Pamidronate in doses of
30–90 mg (in 0.9% saline) is administered intravenously over 2–4
hours. Zoledronic acid 2–4 mg is administered intravenously over
15 to 20 minutes. These drugs cause a gradual decline in serum
calcium over several days that may last for weeks to months. Such
intravenous bisphosphonates are used generally for patients with
severe hyperparathyroidism in preparation for surgery. Oral
bisphosphonates, such as alendronate, are not effective for treating
the hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria of hyperparathyroidism.
However, oral alendronate has been shown to improve bone
mineral density in the lumbar spine and hip (not distal radius) and
may be used for asymptomatic patients with hyperparathyroidism
who have a low bone mineral density.
3. Cinacalcet—Cinacalcet hydrochloride is a calcimimetic agent
that binds to sites of the parathyroid glands’ extracellular CaSRs to
increase their affinity for extracellular calcium, thereby decreasing
PTH secretion. Cinacalcet may be administered orally in doses of
30–250 mg daily. Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism have
also been treated successfully with cinacalcet in oral doses of 30–
50 mg twice daily, with 73% of patients achieving normocalcemia.
Administering cinacalcet for secondary hyperparathyroidism of
kidney disease causes a drop of serum PTH levels to <250 pg/mL
in 41% of patients receiving dialysis. Cinacalcet is given to patients
with severe hypercalcemia due to parathyroid carcinoma at initial
doses of 30 mg orally twice daily and increased progressively to 60
mg twice daily, then 90 mg twice daily to a maximum of 90 mg
every 6–8 hours. Cinacalcet is usually well tolerated but may cause
nausea and vomiting, which are usually transient. It is very
expensive.
4. Vitamin D and vitamin D analogs—
A. PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM—For patients with vitamin D
deficiency, careful vitamin D replacement may be beneficial to
patients with hyperparathyroidism. Aggravation of hypercalcemia
does not ordinarily occur. Serum PTH levels may fall with vitamin D
replacement in doses of 800–2000 international units daily.
Occasionally, larger doses are required to achieve normal 25-OH
vitamin D levels.
B. 
SECONDARY 
AND 
TERTIARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
ASSOCIATED WITH AZOTEMIA—Calcitriol, given orally or
intravenously after dialysis, suppresses parathyroid hyper-plasia of
kidney disease. For patients with near-normal serum calcium levels,
it is given orally in starting doses of 0.25 mcg on alternate days or
daily. Calcitriol often causes hypercalcemia, so that serum levels of
calcium and phosphate must be monitored to ensure that the serum
Ca2+ × PO4 product remains ≤ 70. When that occurs, the dose of
calcitriol is decreased or the patient is switched to therapy with
cinacalcet or vitaman D analogs.
The vitamin D analogs paricalcitol 
and doxercalciferol
suppress PTH secretion and cause less hypercalcemia than
calcitriol; however, they are very expensive. Paricalcitol (Zemplar)
is administered intravenously during dialysis three times weekly in
starting doses of 0.04–0.1 mcg/kg; the dosage is increased for
immunoradiometric PTH (iPTH) levels > 300 pg/mL to a maximum
dose of 0.24 mcg/kg three times weekly; paricalcitol is held if iPTH
levels drop to < 100 pg/mL. Dialysis patients receiving paracalcitrol
have improved survival compared with patients receiving calcitriol.
Doxercalciferol (Hectorol) is administered three times weekly
orally with hemodialysis to patients with azotemic secondary
hyperparathyroidism in the following doses according to serum
iPTH levels: give 10 mcg three times weekly for iPTH > 400 pg/mL
and increase the dose by 2.5 mcg every 8 weeks if iPTH remains >
300 pg/mL, to a maximum dose of 20 mcg three times weekly. If
iPTH drops to < 100 pg/mL, doxercalciferol is held for 1 week and
the dose is reduced by at least 2.5 mcg.
5. Other measures—Estrogen replacement, given to post-
menopausal women, reduces hypercalcemia slightly. Similarly,
raloxifene also reduces the hypercalcemia of hyperparathyroidism,
reducing serum calcium levels an average of 0.4 mg/dL. Propranolol
may be useful for preventing the adverse cardiac effects of
hypercalcemia.
Renal osteodystrophy is caused by secondary or tertiary
hyperparathyroidism during kidney disease. It can be prevented or
delayed by reducing hyperphosphatemia with phosphate binding
medication and dietary phosphate restriction.
 Prognosis
Completely asymptomatic patients with mild hypercalcemia (serum
calcium < 11.0 mg/dL) are usually observed and treated with oral
hydration 
and 
mobilization. 
However, 
compared 
with
normocalcemic peers, asymptomatic patients and patients who have
had a successful parathyroidectomy have an increased long-term
risk for all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, kidney stones,
and renal failure.
Surgical removal of apparently single sporadic parathyroid
adenomas is successful in 94%. Patients with MEN 1 undergoing
subtotal parathyroidectomy may experience long remissions, but
hyperparathyroidism frequently recurs. Despite treatment for
hyperparathyroidism, patients remain at increased risk for
complications from coronary and cerebrovascular disease and renal
failure, probably resulting from preoperative hypertension and
nephrolithiasis.
Spontaneous cure due to necrosis of the tumor has been
reported but is exceedingly rare. The bones, in spite of severe cyst
formation, deformity, and fracture, will heal if a parathyroid tumor is
successfully removed. The presence of pancreatitis increases the
mortality rate. Acute pancreatitis usually resolves with correction of
hypercalcemia, whereas subacute or chronic pancreatitis tends to
persist. Significant renal damage may progress even after removal of
an adenoma.
Parathyroid carcinoma tends to invade local structures and may
sometimes metastasize; repeat surgical resections and radiation
therapy can prolong life. Aggressive surgical and medical
management of parathyroid carcinoma can result in an 85% 5-year
survival rate and a 57% 10-year survival rate.
Habib Z et al. Primary hyperparathyroidism: an update. Curr Opin
Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010 Dec;17(6):554–60. [PMID:
20890202]
 
Khan A et al. Medical management of asymptomatic primary
hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of the third international
workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Feb;94(2):373–81.
[PMID: 19193912]
 
Peacock M et al. Cinacalcet treatment of primary
hyperparathyroidism: biochemical and bone densitometric
outcomes in a five-year study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009
Dec;94(12): 4860–7. [PMID: 19837909]
 
Rubin J et al. Stand UP! J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
May;95(5):2050–3. [PMID: 20444931]
 
Waldmann J et al. Surgery for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1-
associated primary hyperparathyroidism. Br J Surg. 2010
Oct;97(10):1523–34. [PMID: 20629112]
 
Yu N et al. A record linkage study of outcomes in patients with
mild primary hyperparathyroidism: the Parathyroid Epidemiology
and Audit Research Study (PEARS). Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010
Dec 15. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21158894]
 
METABOLIC BONE DISEASE
 
The term “metabolic bone disease” denotes those conditions
producing diffusely decreased bone density and diminished bone
strength. It is categorized by histologic appearance: osteoporosis
(bone matrix and mineral both decreased) and osteomalacia (bone
matrix intact, mineral decreased). Osteoporosis and osteomalacia
often coexist in the same patient.
OSTEOPOROSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fracture propensity of spine, hip, pelvis, and wrist from
demineralization.
 Serum PTH, calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase
usually normal.
 Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels often low as a comorbid
condition.
 
 General Considerations
Osteoporosis is a skeletal disorder characterized by a loss of bone
osteoid that reduces bone integrity, resulting in an increased risk of
fractures. In the United States, osteoporosis causes about 2 million
fractures annually, including 547,000 vertebral fractures, 300,000
hip fractures, and 135,000 pelvic fractures. White women have a
40% lifetime risk of sustaining one or more osteoporotic fractures.
The morbidity and indirect mortality rates are very high. The rate of
bone formation is often normal, whereas the rate of bone resorption
is increased.
Osteoporosis can be caused by a variety of factors, which are
listed in Table 26–10. The most common causes are aging; high-
dose corticosteroid administration; alcoholism; and sex hormone
deficiency, particularly meno-pause in women.
 
Table 26–10. Causes of osteoporosis.1
 
Hormone deficiency
     Estrogen (women)
     Androgen (men)
Hormone excess
     Cushing syndrome or
corticosteroid administration
     Thyrotoxicosis
     Hyperparathyroidism
Immobilization and microgravity
Tobacco
Alcoholism
Malignancy, especially multiple
myeloma
Medications
     Excessive vitamin D intake
     Excessive vitamin A intake
     Heparin therapy
     Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
     Rosiglitazone
Genetic disorders
     Aromatase deficiency
     Type I collagen
mutations
     Osteogenesis
imperfecta
     Idiopathic juvenile and
adult osteoporosis
     Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome
     Marfan syndrome
     Homocystinuria
Miscellaneous
     Celiac disease
     Anorexia nervosa
     Hyponatremia
(chronic)
     Protein-calorie
malnutrition
     Vitamin C deficiency
     Copper deficiency
     Liver disease
     Rheumatoid arthritis
     Uncontrolled diabetes
mellitus
     Systemic mastocytosis
1See Table 26–11 for causes of osteomalacia.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is caused by a major mutation in the
gene encoding for type I collagen, the major collagen constituent of
bone. This causes severe osteoporosis; spontaneous fractures occur
in utero or during childhood. Blue sclerae may be present. Certain
polymorphisms in the genes encoding type I collagen are common,
particularly in whites, resulting in collagen disarray and predisposing
to hypogonadal (eg, menopausal) or idiopathic osteoporosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Osteoporosis is usually asymptomatic until fractures occur. It may
present as backache of varying degrees of severity or as a
spontaneous fracture or collapse of a vertebra. Loss of height is
common. Once osteoporosis is identified, a carefully directed
history and physical examination must be performed to determine its
cause (Table 26–10).
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum calcium, phosphate, and PTH are normal. The alkaline
phosphatase is usually normal but may be slightly elevated,
especially following a fracture. Vitamin D deficiency is very
common and serum determination of 25-hydroxyvitamin D should
be obtained for every individual with low bone density. Serum 25-
hydroxyvitamin D levels below 20 ng/mL are considered frank
vitamin D deficiency. Lesser degrees of vitamin D deficiency (serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D levels between 20 ng/mL and 30 ng/mL) may
also increase the risk for hip fracture. (See Osteomalacia, below.)
Testing for thyrotoxicosis and hypogonadism may be required.
Celiac disease may be screened for with serum immunoglobulin A
(IgA) endomysial antibody and tissue transglutaminase antibody
determinations.
C. Bone Densitometry
DXA is used to determine the bone density of the lumbar spine and
hip. Bone densitometry should be performed on all patients who are
at risk for osteoporosis or osteomalacia or have pathologic
fractures or radiographic evidence of diminished bone density. This
test delivers negligible radiation, and the measurements are quite
accurate. However, bone densitometry cannot distinguish
osteoporosis from osteomalacia; in fact, both are often present.
Also, the bone mineral density does not directly measure bone
quality and is only fairly successful at predicting fractures. Vertebral
bone mineral density may be misleadingly high in compressed
vertebrae and in patients with extensive arthritis. DXA also
overestimates the bone mineral density of taller persons and
underestimates the bone mineral density of smaller persons.
Quantitative CT delivers more radiation but is more accurate in the
latter situations.
Bone mineral density in typically expressed in g/cm2, for which
there are different normal ranges for each bone and for each type of
DXA-measuring machine. The “T score” is a simplified way of
reporting bone density in which the patient's bone mineral density is
compared to the young normal mean and expressed as a standard
deviation score. The World Health Organization has established
criteria for defining osteoporosis in postmenopausal white women,
based on T score:
T score ≥ –1.0: Normal.
T score –1.0 to –2.5: Osteopenia (“low bone density”).
T score < –2.5: Osteoporosis.
T score < –2.5 with a fracture: Severe osteoporosis.
This classification is somewhat arbitrary and there really is no
bone mineral density fracture threshold; instead, the fracture risk
increases about twofold for each standard deviation drop in bone
mineral density. In fact, most women with fragility fractures have
bone densities above –2.5. Surveillance DXA bone densitometry is
recommended for postmenopausal women with a frequency
according to their T scores: obtain DXA every 5 years for T scores
–1.0 to –1.5, every 3–5 years for scores –1.5 to –2.0, and every
1–2 years for scores under –2.0.
The “Z score” is used to express bone density in premenopausal
women, younger men, and children, The Z score is a statistical term
that is used for expressing an individual's bone density as standard
deviation from age-matched, race-matched, and sex-matched
means.
 Differential Diagnosis
Osteopenia and fractures can be caused by osteomalacia (see
below) and bone marrow neoplasia such as myeloma or metastatic
bone disease. These conditions coexist in many patients.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
For prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, the diet should be
adequate in protein, total calories, calcium, and vitamin D.
Pharmacologic corticosteroid doses should be reduced or
discontinued if possible. Thiazides may be useful if hypercalciuria is
present. High-impact physical activity (eg, jogging) significantly
increases bone density in men and women. Stair-climbing increases
bone density in women. Patients who cannot exercise vigorously
should be encouraged to engage in other exercise regularly, thereby
increasing strength and reducing the risk of falling. Weight training is
helpful to increase muscle strength as well as bone density.
Measures should be taken to avoid falls at home (eg, adequate
lighting, handrails on stairs, handholds in bathrooms). Patients who
have weakness or balance problems must use a cane or a walker;
rolling walkers should have a brake mechanism. Balance exercises
can reduce the risk of falls. Patients should be kept active;
bedridden patients should be given active or passive exercises. The
spine may be adequately supported (though braces or corsets are
usually not well tolerated), but rigid or excessive immobilization
must be avoided. Alcohol and smoking should be avoided.
B. Specific Measures
Several treatment options are available, so a regimen is tailored to
each patient. Generally, treatment is indicated for all women with
osteoporosis (T scores below –2.5) and for all patients who have
had fragility fractures. Prophylactic treatment should also be
considered for patients with advanced osteopenia (T scores
between –2.0 and –2.5).
1. Vitamin D and calcium—Osteoporosis and osteomalacia often
coexist (see Osteomalacia section). Sun exposure and vitamin D
supplementation are useful in preventing and treating osteomalacia.
Vitamin D supplementation reduces the incidence of vertebral
fractures by 37% and may slightly reduce the incidence of
nonvertebral fractures. Oral vitamin D is given in doses of 800-
2000 international units daily. Vitamin D supplementation is
especially required during winter months and for patients having
prolonged hospitalization or nursing home care, for patients with
serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D below 20 ng/mL, and those
with intestinal malabsorption.
Calcium supplementation does not reduce the fracture risk in
otherwise healthy postmenopausal women. Also, one meta-analysis
concluded that calcium supplementation is associated with a 27%
increased risk of myocardial infarction. Therefore, calcium
supplementation is indicated principally for those with diets low in
calcium. More important is the assurance of adequate vitamin D
through sun exposure or oral vitamin D supplementation, and
calcium supplementation should include vitamin D. Calcium
supplementation may be given as calcium citrate (0.4–0.7 g
elemental calcium per day) or calcium carbonate (1–1.5 g elemental
calcium per day).
2. Bisphosphonates—Bisphosphonates all work similarly,
inhibiting osteoclast-induced bone resorption. They increase bone
density significantly and reduce the incidence of both vertebral and
nonvertebral fractures. Bisphosphonates have also been effective in
preventing corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis. To ensure intestinal
absorption, oral bisphosphonates must be taken in the morning with
at least 8 oz of plain water at least 40 minutes before consumption
of anything else. The patient must remain upright after taking
bisphosphonates to reduce the risk of esophagitis. These
medications are excreted in the urine. However, no dosage
adjustments are required for patients with creatinine clearances
above 35 mL/min. There has been little experience giving
bisphosphonates to patients with severe kidney disease; if given, the
dose would need to be greatly reduced and serum phosphate levels
monitored.
Bisphosphonates may be given orally once monthly or weekly.
Available oral preparations include alendronate, 70 mg orally once
weekly (tablet or solution), and rise-dronate, 35 mg orally once
weekly. Both these medications reduce the risk of both vertebral
and nonvertebral fractures. Studies sponsored by the manufacturer
of alendronate found that alendronate was significantly more potent
than 
risedronate 
and 
equally 
well 
tolerated. Another
bisphosphonate, ibandronate sodium, is taken once monthly in a
dose of 150 mg orally. Once-monthly ibandronate is convenient and
reduces the risk of vertebral fractures but not nonvertebral
fractures; its effectiveness has not been directly compared with
other bisphosphonates. Oral bisphosphonates can cause nausea,
chest pain, and hoarseness. Erosive esophagus can occur,
particularly in patients with hiatal hernia and gastroesophageal
reflux.
For patients who cannot tolerate oral bisphosphonates or for
whom oral bisphosphonates are contraindicated, intravenous
bisphosphonates are available. Zoledronic acid is a third-
generation bisphosphonate and a potent osteoclast inhibitor. It can
be given every 12 months in doses of 2–4 mg intravenously over at
least 15–30 minutes. Pamidronate can be given in doses of 30–60
mg by slow intravenous infusion in normal saline solution every 3–6
months.
Bisphosphonate therapy can cause several side effects that are
collectively known as the acute-phase response. Such a response
occurs in 42% of patients following the first infusion of zoledronic
acid and usually starts within the first few days following the
infusion. Among patients receiving their first infusion of zoledronic
acid, these adverse side effects have included fever, chills, or
flushing (20%); musculoskeletal pain (20%); nausea, vomiting, or
diarrhea (8%); nonspecific symptoms, such as fatigue, dyspnea,
edema, headache, or dizziness (22%); and eye inflammation
(0.6%). The acute-phase response is most commonly seen after the
first dose of bisphosphonate (particularly zoledronic acid) and tends
to diminish with time. Symptoms are transient, lasting several days
and usually resolving spontaneously but typically recurring with
subsequent doses. For patients experiencing a severe acute-phase
response with zoledronic acid, intravenous pamidronate can
substitute for zoledronic acid for subsequent treatment. Additionally,
patients who experience an especially severe acute-phase response
can be given prophylactic corticosteroids and ondansetron prior to
subsequent bisphosphonate infusions.
Osteonecrosis of the jaw is a rare complication of
bisphosphonate therapy for osteoporosis. A painful, necrotic,
nonhealing lesion of the jaw occurs, particularly after tooth
extraction. About 95% of jaw osteonecrosis cases have occurred
with high-dose therapy with zoledronic acid or pamidronate for
patients with myeloma or solid tumor osteolytic metastases. Only
about 5% of cases have occurred in patients receiving lower
bisphosphonate doses for osteoporosis. The incidence of
osteonecrosis is estimated to be about 1:100,000 patients treated
for osteoporosis and 1:100 patients being treated for cancer. In a
prospective 3-year trial of 7714 women who received intravenous
zoledronic acid 5 mg/year, there were no cases of osteonecrosis.
For patients with painful osteonecrotic exposed bone, treatment is
90% effective (without resolution of the exposed bone) using
antibiotics along with 0.12% chlorohexidine antiseptic mouthwash.
Patients receiving bisphosphonates must receive regular dental care
and try to avoid dental extraction.
Atypical “chalk-like” fractures of the femur have occurred in
patients 
taking 
bisphosphonates. Atypical 
fractures 
are
subtrochanteric or diaphyseal, occur with little trauma, and are
usually transverse as opposed to the more typical comminuted or
spiral femoral shaft fractures. Bilateral femoral fractures occur in
27%. About 70% of affected patients have had prodromal thigh
pain prior to the fracture. The risk for atypical femoral fractures is
particularly increased among patients concurrently taking high-dose
corticosteroids and those receiving treatment for more than 5 years.
This complication is fairly rare and the overall risk of hip fracture is
reduced among patients taking bisphosphonates for up to 5 years.
Patients taking oral bisphosphonates have an increased risk of
developing esophageal cancer. In North America and Europe, the
incidence of esophageal cancer at age 60–79 is about 1 per 1000
population over 5 years; this risk is estimated to increase to about 2
per 1000 with administration of oral bisphosphonates for 5 years or
longer.
In patients taking bisphosphonates, hypercalcemia is seen in 20%
and serum PTH levels increase above normal in 10%, mimicking
primary hyperparathyroidism. Hypocalcemia occurs frequently,
resulting in secondary hyperparathyroidism.
The half-life of alendronate in bone is 10 years. Therefore,
bisphosphonates may be discontinued after a 5-year course of
therapy. Repeat bone densitometry may be obtained after 3 years
of bisphosphonate therapy. Bone density falls in 18% of patients
during their first year of treatment with bisphosphonates, but 80% of
such patients have gain in bone density with continued
bisphosphonate treatment.
3. Sex hormones—Hypogonadal women who take estrogen
replacement therapy (ERT) have a lower risk of developing
osteoporosis. Postmenopausal estrogen replacement is valuable as
an osteoporosis prevention measure and this should be one factor in
the complex decision about whether to take ERT. Low doses of
estrogen appear to be adequate to prevent postmenopausal
osteoporosis (see Estrogen Replacement Therapy). Once
osteoporosis has developed, estrogen replacement is not an
effective treatment. Men with hypogonadism may be treated with
testosterone (see Male Hypogonadism).
4. Selective estrogen receptor modulators—Raloxifene, 60
mg/d orally, can be used by postmenopausal women in place of
estrogen for prevention of osteoporosis. Bone density increases
about 1% over 2 years in postmenopausal women versus 2%
increases with estrogen replacement. It reduces the risk of vertebral
fractures by about 40% but does not appear to reduce the risk of
nonvertebral fractures. Raloxifene produces a reduction in LDL
cholesterol but not the rise in high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol seen with estrogen. It has no direct effect on coronary
plaque. Unlike estrogen, raloxifene does not reduce hot flushes; in
fact, it often intensifies them. It does not relieve vaginal dryness.
Unlike estrogen, raloxifene does not cause endometrial hyperplasia,
uterine bleeding, or cancer, nor does it cause breast soreness. The
risk of breast cancer is reduced 76% in women taking raloxifene for
3 years. Since it is a potential teratogen, it is relatively
contraindicated in women capable of pregnancy.
Raloxifene increases the risk for thromboembolism and should
not be used by women with such a history. Leg cramps can also
occur.
5. Teriparatide—Teriparatide (Forteo, Parathar) is an analog of
PTH. Teriparatide stimulates the production of new collagenous
bone matrix that must be mineralized. Patients receiving teriparatide
must have sufficient intake of vitamin D and calcium. When
administered to patients with osteoporosis in doses of 20 mcg/d
subcutaneously for 2 years, teriparatide dramatically improves bone
density in most bones except the distal radius. The recommended
dose should not be exceeded, since teriparatide has caused
osteosarcoma in rats when administered in very high doses. Patients
with Paget disease of bone or patients with open epiphyses or
hypercalcemia should not use the drug. Patients with a past history
of osteosarcoma or chondrosarcoma should not use this
medication. Side effects may include dizziness and leg cramps.
Teriparatide is approved only for a 2-year course of treatment.
Teriparatide should be used with caution in patients if they
are also taking corticosteroids and thiazide diuretics along with
oral calcium supplementation because hypercalcemia may
develop.
Following a course of teriparatide, a course of bisphosphonates
should be considered in order to retain the improved bone density.
6. Calcitonin—A nasal spray of calcitonin-salmon (Miacalcin) is
available that contains 2200 units/mL in 2-mL metered-dose
bottles. The usual dose is one puff (0.09 mL, 200 international
units) once daily, alternating nostrils. Nasal administration causes
significantly less nausea and flushing than the parenteral route.
However, nasal symptoms such as rhinitis and epistaxis occur
commonly; other less common adverse reactions include flu-like
symptoms, allergy, arthralgias, back pain, and headache. Five years
of therapy increases bone 2–3% and reduces the number of new
vertebral fractures. Both nasal and parenteral calcitonin have
analgesic effects on bone pain from fractures; reduction of pain may
be noted within 2–4 weeks after commencing therapy. Calcitonin
reduces the incidence of vertebral fractures, but its effect upon
nonvertebral fractures has not been established.
7. Denosumab—This is a monoclonal antibody that inhibits the
proliferation and maturation of preosteoclasts into mature osteoclast
bone-resorbing cells. It does this by binding to the osteoclast
receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL).
Denosumab is administered in doses of 60 mg subcutaneously every
6 months. It increases bone mineral density more than oral
alendronate. It has been relatively well tolerated, with an 8%
incidence of flu-like symptoms. It can decrease serum calcium and
should not be administered to patients with hypocalcemia. Other
side effects include the development of eczema and dermatitis,
serious infections, new malignancies, and pancreatitis. Its efficacy is
comparable to bisphosphonates. However, its long-term safety
remains unknown, so it is reserved for patients with severe
osteoporosis who have not tolerated or not responded to
bisphosphonates. It is extremely expensive.
 Prognosis
Bone mineral density densitometries can detect whether progressive
osteopenia or frank osteoporosis is developing. Hypogonadal
women, especially those not receiving HRT, must ensure sufficient
intake of vitamin D to prevent osteomalacia. Bisphosphonates and
raloxifene can reverse progressive osteopenia and osteoporosis and
decrease fracture risk.
Hypogonadal men are also at risk for developing osteoporosis.
Testosterone administration can prevent osteoporosis. Men with
prostate cancer may not receive testosterone replacement and
should be monitored with bone densitometries. Bisphosphonate
therapy can reverse progressive osteopenia and osteoporosis in
men.
Bolland MJ et al. Effect of calcium supplements on risk of
myocardial infarctions and cardiovascular events: metaanalysis.
BMJ. 2010 Jul;341:c3691. [PMID: 20671013]
 
Bonura F. Prevention, screening, and management of osteoporosis:
an overview of the current strategies. Postgrad Med. 2009
Jul;121(4):5–17. [PMID: 19641263]
 
Brown JP et al. Comparison of the effect of denosumab and
alendronate on bone mineral density and biochemical markers of
bone turnover in postmenopausal women with low bone mass: a
randomized, blinded, phase 3 trial. J Bone Miner Res. 2009
Jan;24(1):153–61. [PMID: 18767928]
 
Cauley JA et al. Once-yearly zoledronic acid and days of
disability, bed rest and back pain: randomised controlled
HORIZON pivotal fracture trial. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Nov
18. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21089141]
 
Charopoulos I et al. The role and efficacy of denosumab in the
treatment of osteoporosis: an update. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2011
Mar;10(2):205–17. [PMID: 21208140]
 
Favus MJ. Bisphosphonates for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med.
2010 Nov 18;363(21):2027–35. [PMID: 21083387]
 
Green J et al. Oral bisphosphonates and risk of cancer of
oesophagus, stomach, and colorectum: case-control analysis within
a UK primary care cohort. BMJ. 2010 Sep 1;341:c4444. [PMID:
20813820]
 
Kennel KA et al. Adverse effects of bisphosphonates: implications
for osteoporosis management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009
Jul;84(7):632–7. [PMID: 19567717]
 
Kholsa S. Update in male osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2010 Jan;95(1):3–10. [PMID: 20056806]
 
Ryan CS et al. Osteoporosis in men: the value of laboratory
testing. Osteoporos Int. 2011 June;22(6):1845–53 [PMID:
20936403]
 
OSTEOMALACIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Painful proximal muscle weakness (especially pelvic girdle); bone
pain and tenderness.
 Decreased bone density from defective mineralization.
 Laboratory abnormalities may include increased alkaline
phosphatase, decreased 25-hydroxyvitamin D, hypocalcemia,
hypocalciuria, hypophosphatemia, secondary
hyperparathyroidism.
 Classic radiologic features may be present.
 
 General Considerations
Defective mineralization of the growing skeleton in childhood causes
permanent bone deformities (rickets). Defective skeletal
mineralization in adults is known as osteomalacia. It is caused by
any condition that results in inadequate calcium or phosphate
mineralization of bone osteoid.
 Etiology (Table 26–11)
A. Vitamin D Deficiency and Resistance
Vitamin D is consumed in the diet from plants (ergocalciferol, D2)
or animals/fish (cholecalciferol, D3). Vitamin D3 is also synthesized
in the skin during exposure to ultraviolet B light. Both forms of
vitamin D are converted in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(25OHD); 25OHD is subsequently converted in various tissues
(mainly kidney) to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH]2D), the
active hormone whose production is regulated by serum calcium,
phosphorus, and PTH. 1,25(OH)2D binds to cytoplasmic vitamin D
receptors, increasing the absorption of dietary calcium from the
intestine and increasing the reabsorption of calcium in the renal
tubule, thereby reducing calcium loss in the urine. 1,25(OH)2D also
stimulates bone osteo-blasts to release RANKL that stimulates
osteoclasts, which release calcium from bone.
Unexpectedly, vitamin D receptors have been found in most
tissues in the body (eg, brain, heart, breast, prostate) that have
nothing to do with calcium homeostasis. The function of these
vitamin D receptors is unknown. Much of the recent interest in
vitamin D has been sparked by epidemiology studies relating an
increased prevalence of cancer, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular
disease, and multiple sclerosis to lower serum levels of 25OHD.
Such association studies suffer from the fact that healthy individuals
have more sun exposure and a better diet, such that low serum
25OHD levels may be the result of the disease rather than the cause
of it.
 
Table 26–11. Causes of osteomalacia.1
 
Vitamin disorders
     Decreased availability of vitamin D
     Insufficient sunlight exposure
     Nutritional deficiency of vitamin D
     Malabsorption; aging, excess wheat bran, bariatric
surgery, pancreatic enzyme deficiency
     Nephrotic syndrome
     Vitamin D–dependent rickets type I
     Liver disease
     Chronic kidney disease
     Kidney transplantation
     Phenytoin, carbamazepine, or barbiturate therapy
Dietary calcium deficiency Phosphate deficiency
     Decreased intestinal absorption
     Nutritional deficiency of phosphorus
     Phosphate-binding antacid therapy
     Increased renal loss
        X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets
        Tumoral hypophosphatemic osteomalacia
        Association with other disorders, including
paraproteinemias,
          glycogen storage diseases, neurofibromatosis,
Wilson
          disease, Fanconi syndrome, renal tubular acidosis,
and
          alcoholism
Inhibitors of mineralization
     Aluminum
     Bisphosphonates
Disorders of bone matrix
     Hypophosphatasia
     Fibrogenesis imperfecta
     Axial osteomalacia
1See Table 26–10 for causes of osteoporosis.
 
Vitamin D deficiency is the most common cause of osteomalacia.
Significant vitamin D deficiency (serum 25OHD < 50 nmol/L or <
20 ng/mL) was found in 24.3% of postmenopausal women from 25
countries in the Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation
(MORE) study. The incidence varied: < 1% in Southeast Asia,
29% in the United States, and 36% in Italy. Severe vitamin D
deficiency (serum 25OHD < 25 nmol/L or < 10 ng/mL) was found
in 4% of these women; 3.5% in the United States and 12.5% in
Italy. Among US men over age 65 years, 25% have serum 25OHD
levels below 20 ng/mL; men over age 75 with such low vitamin D
levels have particularly accelerated bone loss. Vitamin D deficiency
is particularly common in the institutionalized elderly, with the
incidence exceeding 60% in some groups not receiving vitamin D
supplementation. Deficiency of vitamin D may arise from insufficient
sun exposure, malnutrition, or malabsorption (due to pancreatic
insufficiency, cholestatic liver disease, sprue, inflammatory bowel
disease, jejunoileal bypass, Billroth type II gastrectomy). Orlistat is
, j j
yp
,
yp
g
y)
a weight-loss medication that causes fat malabsorption and reduced
serum 25OHD levels. Cholestyramine binds bile acids necessary for
vitamin D absorption. Patients with severe nephrotic syndrome lose
large amounts of vitamin D–binding protein in the urine, and
osteomalacia may also develop.
Anticonvulsants (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, valproate,
phenobarbital) inhibit the hepatic production of 25OHD and
sometimes cause osteomalacia. Phenytoin can also directly inhibit
bone mineralization. Serum levels of 1,25(OH)2D are usually
normal.
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type I is caused by a rare
autosomal recessive disorder with a defect in the renal enzyme 1-α-
hydroxylase leading to defective synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D. It
presents in childhood with rickets and alopecia; osteomalacia
develops in adults with this condition unless treated with oral
calcitriol in doses of 0.5–1 mcg daily.
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type II (better known as hereditary
1,25[OH]2D-resistant rickets) is caused by a genetic defect in the
1,25(OH)2D receptor. Patients have hypocalcemia with childhood
rickets and adult osteomalacia. Alopecia is common. These patients
respond variably to oral calcitriol in very large doses (2–6 mcg
daily).
B. Deficient Calcium Intake
Rickets and osteomalacia continue to be common problems in many
tropical countries despite adequate exposure to sunlight. A
nutritional deficiency of calcium can occur in any severely
malnourished patient. Some degree of calcium deficiency is
common in the elderly, since intestinal calcium absorption declines
with age. Ingestion of excessive wheat bran also causes calcium
malabsorption.
C. Phosphate Deficiency
Clinical symptoms of phosphate deficiency include severe muscle
weakness and bone pain. Phosphate deficiency in childhood causes
classic rickets, whereas phosphate deficiency in adulthood causes
osteomalacia.
1. Genetic disorders—Fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF23) is a
phosphaturic factor (phosphatonin) that is secreted by bone
osteoblasts in response to elevated serum phosphate levels.
Families with autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets have a
gain-of-function mutation in the gene encoding FGF23 that makes it
resistant to proteolytic cleavage, thereby increasing serum FGF23
levels. In X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, there is a mutation in
the gene encoding PHEX endopeptidase, which fails to cleave
FGF23, resulting in elevated serum FGF23 levels. An autosomal
recessive form of hypophosphatemic rickets is caused by mutations
in DMP1, a transcription factor that regulates FGF23 production in
bone. All three conditions have high serum FGF23 levels causing
hypophosphatemia and bone mineral depletion.
Sodium-phosphate cotransporters (NPT2a or NPT2c) reabsorb
phosphate from the proximal renal tubule. Mutations in the genes
encoding them or in NHERF1 cause hypophosphatemia, bone
mineral depletion, and calcium-phosphate kidney stones.
2. Tumor-induced osteomalacia—A variety of mesenchymal
tumors (87% benign) secrete FGF23 (see above) and cause
marked hypophosphatemia due to renal phosphate wasting. Such
tumors are usually small and are often difficult to locate.
OctreoScan has been reported to detect many of these small
tumors. The condition is characterized by hypophosphatemia,
excessive phosphaturia, reduced or normal serum 1,25(OH)2D
concentrations, and osteomalacia.
3. Other causes of hypophosphatemia—Osteomalacia from
hypophosphatemia can be caused by poor nutrition, alcoholism, or
chelation of phosphate in the gut by aluminum hydroxide antacids,
calcium acetate (Phos-Lo), or sevelamer hydrochloride (Renagel).
Excessive renal phosphate losses are also seen in proximal renal
tubular acidosis and Fanconi syndrome.
D. Aluminum Toxicity
Bone mineralization is inhibited by aluminum. Osteomalacia may
occur in patients receiving long-term renal hemodialysis with tap
water dialysate or from aluminum-containing antacids used to
reduce phosphate levels. Osteomalacia may develop in patients
being maintained on long-term total parenteral nutrition if the casein
hydrolysate used for amino acids contains high levels of aluminum.
E. Hypophosphatasia
Hypophosphatasia, a deficiency of bone alkaline phosphatase
effect, is a rare genetic cause of osteomalacia that is commonly
misdiagnosed as osteoporosis. The incidence in the United States is
about 1 in 100,000 live births; about 1 in 300 adults is a carrier.
Many different mutations in the gene (designated ALPL) encoding
bone alkaline phosphatase have been described, and transmission
can be either autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant. The
phenotypic presentation of hypophosphatasia is extremely variable.
At its worst extreme, it can present as a stillborn without dentition
or calcified bones. At its mildest, hypophosphatasia can present in
middle age with premature loss of teeth, foot pain (due to metatarsal
stress fractures), thigh pain (due to femoral pseudofractures), or
arthritis (due to chondrocalcinosis). Serum alkaline phosphatase
(collected in a non-EDTA tube) is low for age in patients with
hypophosphatasia. To confirm the diagnosis, a 24-hour urine should
be assayed for phosphoethanolamine, a substrate for tissue-
nonspecific alkaline phosphatase, whose excretion is always
elevated in patients with hypophosphatasia. Prenatal genetic testing,
by way of chorionic villus biopsy, is available for the infantile form
of hypophosphatasia. There is no proven therapy for
hypophosphatasia, except for supportive care. Teriparatide, a useful
therapy for osteoporosis, has been administered to some patients
with hypophosphatasia, but its long-term efficacy is unknown.
F. Fibrogenesis Imperfecta Ossium
This rare condition sporadically affects middle-aged patients, who
present with progressive bone pain and pathologic fractures. Bones
have a dense “fishnet” appearance on radiographs. Serum alkaline
phosphatase levels are elevated. Some patients have a monoclonal
gammopathy, indicating a possible plasma cell dyscrasia causing an
impairment in osteoblast function and collagen disarray. Remission
has been reported after repeated courses of melphalan,
corticosteroids, and vitamin D analog over 3 years.
 Clinical Findings
The clinical manifestations of defective bone mineralization depend
on the age at onset and the severity. In adults, osteomalacia is
typically asymptomatic at first. Eventually, bone pain occurs, along
with muscle weakness due to calcium deficiency. Pathologic
fractures may occur with little or no trauma. Vitamin D deficiency
has also been associated with a possible increased risk of multiple
sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and diabetes mellitus (types 1 and 2).
 Diagnostic Tests
Serum is obtained for calcium, albumin, phosphate, alkaline
phosphatase, PTH, and 25[OH]D3 determinations. Bone
densitometry helps document the degree of osteopenia.
Radiographs may show diagnostic features.
In one series of biopsy-proved osteomalacia, alkaline
phosphatase was elevated in 94% of patients; the calcium or
phosphorus was low in 47% of patients; 25(OH) D3 was low in
29% of patients; pseudofractures were seen in 18% of patients; and
urinary calcium was low in 18% of patients. 1,25(OH)2D3 may be
low even when 25(OH) D2 levels are normal.
Bone biopsy is not usually necessary but is diagnostic of
osteomalacia if there is significant unmineralized osteoid.
 Differential Diagnosis
Osteomalacia is often seen together with osteoporosis, and its
presence can be inferred by finding low serum levels of 25(OH)
vitamin D, low serum calcium, or low serum phosphate. A high
serum alkaline phosphatase may be present in severe osteomalacia
but not osteoporosis. The relative contribution of the two entities to
diminished bone density may not be apparent until treatment, since a
dramatic rise in bone density is often seen with therapy for
osteomalacia. Phosphate deficiency must be distinguished from
hypophosphatemia seen in hyperparathyroidism.
 Prevention & Treatment
To obtain adequate sunshine vitamin D, the face, arms, hands, or
back must have sun exposure without sunscreen for 15 minutes at
least twice weekly. The main natural food source of vitamin D is
fish, particularly salmon, mackerel, cod liver oil, and sardines or
tuna canned in oil. Most commercial cow's milk is fortified with
vitamin D at about 400 international units per quart; however, skim
milk and other dairy products contain much less vitamin D. Vitamin
supplements containing vitamin D are widely available, but contain
plant-derived vitamin D2, which has less biologic availability than
once believed. In sunlight-deprived individuals (eg, veiled women,
confined patients, or residents of higher latitudes during winter), the
recommended daily allowance should be 1000 international units
daily. In such individuals, vitamin D supplements should be given
prophylactically. Patients receiving long-term phenytoin therapy may
be treated prophylactically with vitamin D, 50,000 international units
orally every 2–4 weeks.
Frank vitamin D deficiency is treated with ergocalciferol (D2),
50,000 international units orally once or twice weekly for 6–12
months, followed by 1000–2000 international units daily. Some
patients require long-term supplementation with ergocalciferol of up
to 50,000 international units weekly. In patients with intestinal mal-
absorption, oral doses of 25,000–100,000 international units of
vitamin D2 daily may be required. Some patients with steatorrhea
respond better to oral 25(OH) D3 (calcifediol), 50–100 mcg/d.
Beyond increasing the intestinal absorption of calcium, vitamin D
supplementation may have additional effects. Vitamin D
supplementation has been associated with improved muscle strength
and a reduced fall risk, factors that reduce the risk of bone fracture.
The addition of calcium supplements to vitamin D is probably not
necessary for the prevention of osteomalacia in the majority of
otherwise well-nourished patients. However, patients with
malabsorption or poor nutrition should receive calcium
supplementation. Recommended doses of calcium are as follows:
calcium citrate (eg, Citracal), 0.4–0.6 g elemental calcium per day,
or calcium carbonate (eg, OsCal, Tums), 1–1.5 g elemental calcium
per day. Calcium supplements are best administered with meals.
In hypophosphatemic osteomalacia, nutritional deficiencies are
corrected, aluminum-containing antacids are discontinued, and
patients with renal tubular acidosis are given bicarbonate therapy. In
patients 
with 
sporadic 
adult-onset 
hypophosphatemia,
hyperphosphaturia, and low serum 1,25(OH)2D levels, a search is
conducted for occult tumors that may be resected; whole-body
MRI scanning may be required.
For those with X-linked or idiopathic hypophosphatemia and
hyperphosphaturia, oral phosphate supplements must be given long-
term; calcitriol, 0.25–0.5 mcg/d, is given also to improve the
impaired calcium absorption caused by the oral phosphate. If
necessary, rhGH may be added to the above regimen to reduce
phosphaturia.
Bhan A et al. Osteomalacia as a result of vitamin D deficiency.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2010 Jun;39(2):321–31.
[PMID: 20511054]
 
Gallagher JC et al. Vitamin D insufficiency, deficiency, and bone
health. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2630–3. [PMID:
20525913]
 
Prentice A. Vitamin D deficiency: a global perspective. Nutr Rev.
2008 Oct;66(10 Suppl 2):S153–64. [PMID: 18844843]
 
Prié D et al. Genetic disorders of renal phosphate transport. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Jun 24;362(25):2399–409. [PMID: 20573928]
 
Schalin-Jäntii C et al. Parathyroid hormone treatment improves
pain and fracture healing in adult hypophosphatasia. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Dec;95(12):5174–9. [PMID:
20739387]
 
Woznowski M et al. Oncogenic osteomalacia, a rare paraneo-
plastic syndrome due to phosphate wasting–a case report and
review of the literature. Clin Nephrol. 2008 Nov;70(5):431–8.
[PMID: 19000546]
 
PAGET DISEASE OF BONE (Osteitis Deformans)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Often asymptomatic.
 Bone pain may be the first symptom.
 Kyphosis, bowed tibias, large head, deafness, and frequent
fractures.
 Serum calcium and phosphate normal; alkaline phosphatase
elevated; urinary hydroxyproline elevated.
 Dense, expanded bones on radiographs.
 
 General Considerations
Paget disease of bone is a common condition manifested by one or
more bony lesions having high bone turnover and disorganized
osteoid formation. Involved bones become vascular, weak, and
deformed. Paget disease is most common in the United Kingdom
but is also common in other areas of the world, particularly in those
with British ancestry. It is uncommon in Africa, Asia, and
Scandinavia. Paget disease is present in 1–2% of the population of
the United States and affects men more commonly than women. It
is usually diagnosed in patients over age 40 years and its prevalence
doubles with each decade thereafter, reaching an incidence of about
10% after age 80. It is usually discovered incidentally during
radiology imaging or because of incidentally discovered elevations in
serum alkaline phosphatase. The cause of Paget disease is
unknown. However, there is often a genetic component since about
15% of affected patients have a first-degree relative with the
disease. Similar familial disorders occur at an earlier age and their
genetics has been established.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Paget disease is often mild and asymptomatic. Only 27% of
affected individuals are symptomatic at the time of diagnosis. It can
involve just one bone (monostotic) or multiple bones (polyostotic),
particularly the skull, femur, tibia, pelvis, and humerus. The affected
bones are typically involved right away and the disease tends not to
involve additional bones during its course. Pain is the usual first
symptom. It may occur in the involved bone or in an adjacent joint,
which can be involved with degenerative arthritis. The bones can
become soft, leading to bowed tibias, kyphosis, and frequent
“chalkstick” fractures with slight trauma. If the skull is involved, the
patient may report headaches and an increased hat size. Deafness
may occur. Increased vascularity over the involved bones causes
increased warmth and can cause vascular “steal” syndromes.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serum alkaline phosphatase is usually markedly elevated. However,
some patients with limited monostotic involvement may have serum
alkaline phosphatase levels within the normal range. A serum bone-
specific alkaline phosphatase determination can be useful for
patients with a normal serum total alkaline phosphatase level and to
distinguish the source of an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase as
being from bone (rather than liver). Other markers of bone turnover
may be elevated. Serum C-telopeptide (CTx) is usually high.
Urinary hydroxypro-line is also elevated in active disease. Serum
calcium may be elevated, particularly if the patient is at bed rest. A
serum 25-OH vitamin D determination should be obtained to screen
for vitamin D deficiency, which can also present with an increased
alkaline phosphatase and bone pain. Also, any vitamin D deficiency
should be corrected before prescribing a bisphosphonate.
C. Imaging
On radiographs, the initial lesions are typically osteolytic, with focal
radiolucencies (“osteoporosis circumscripta”) in the skull or
advancing flame-shaped lytic lesions in long bones. Bone lesions
may subsequently become sclerotic and have a mixed lytic and
sclerotic appearance. The affected bones eventually become
thickened and deformed. Technetium pyrophosphate bone scans
are helpful in delineating activity of bone lesions even before any
radiologic changes are apparent.
 Differential Diagnosis
Certain rare familial osteoclastic bone disorders share phenotypic
homologies with Paget disease of bone. Familial expansile
osteolysis, familial early-onset Paget disease, and familial skeletal
hyperphosphatasia are autosomal dominant disorders caused by
different tandem duplications of the gene encoding RANK, resulting
in its constitutive activation. Juvenile Paget disease is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by an inactivating mutation in the gene
encoding osteoprotegerin. The syndrome of Paget disease, inclusion
body myopathy, and frontotemporal dementia is caused by a
mutation in the gene that encodes valosin-containing protein.
Paget disease must be differentiated from primary bone lesions
such as osteogenic sarcoma, multiple myeloma, and fibrous
dysplasia and from secondary bone lesions such as metastatic
carcinoma and osteitis fibrosa cystica. Fibrogenesis imperfecta
ossium is a rare symmetric disorder that can mimic the features of
Paget disease; alkaline phosphatase is likewise elevated. If serum
calcium is elevated, hyperparathyroidism may be present in some
patients as well.
 Complications
If immobilization occurs, hypercalcemia and renal calculi may
develop. Vertebral collapse may lead to spinal cord compression.
The increased vascularity may give rise to high-output cardiac
failure. Arthritis frequently develops in joints adjacent to involved
bone.
Extensive skull involvement may cause cranial nerve palsies from
impingement of the neural foramina. Involvement of the petrous
temporal bone frequently causes hearing loss (mixed sensorineural
and conductive) and occasionally tinnitus or vertigo. Vertebral
involvement can cause compression of spinal nerves, resulting in
radiculopathy or paralysis. The affected bones have a high blood
flow and can thereby cause a vascular “steal” syndrome. Skull
involvement can cause a vascular steal syndrome with somnolence
or ischemic neurologic events; the optic nerve may be affected,
resulting in loss of vision. Vertebral involvement can cause a
vascular steal syndrome with paralysis. Jaw involvement can cause
the teeth to spread intraorally and become misaligned.
Osteosarcoma may develop in long-standing lesions but is rare
(< 1%). Sarcomatous change is suggested by a marked increase in
bone pain, sudden rise in alkaline phosphatase, and appearance of a
new lytic lesion.
 Treatment
Asymptomatic patients may require only clinical surveillance and no
treatment. However, treatment should be considered for
asymptomatic patients who have extensive involvement of the skull,
long bones, or vertebrae. Patients must be monitored carefully
before, during, and after treatment with clinical examinations and
serial serum alkaline phosphatase determinations.
A. Bisphosphonates
Bisphosphonates are the treatment of choice for Paget disease.
Bisphosphonates are usually given cyclically. Therapy is given until a
therapeutic response occurs, as evidenced by normalization of the
serum alkaline phosphatase. After a course of therapy, patients are
given a break for about 3 months or until the serum alkaline
phosphatase begins rising again; another cycle is then commenced.
Patients frequently experience a paradoxical increase in pain
soon after commencing bisphosphonate therapy; this is the “first
dose effect” and the pain usually subsides with further treatment.
Flu-like symptoms occur fairly frequently. Osteonecrosis,
particularly of the jaw, is rare but can occur spontaneously or after
tooth extraction.
The oral bisphosphonates should all be taken with 8 oz of plain
water only; they are relatively contraindicated in patients with a
history of esophagitis, esophageal stricture, dysphagia, hiatal hernia,
or achalasia. Alendronate, 40 mg orally daily for 3–6 month
cycles, must be taken in the morning with water only, at least 30-40
minutes before any other food, liquids, or medications. Patients
should not lie down for at least 30 minutes after taking alendronate
to reduce the risk of esophagitis. Tiludronate, 400 mg orally daily
for 3-month cycles, should not be taken within 2 hours of meals,
aspirin, indomethacin, calcium, magnesium, or aluminum-containing
antacids. Esophagitis is uncommon, but it is still advisable to avoid
recumbency for 30 minutes after dosing; but the drug may be taken
in the evening as well as during the day. The most common side
effects have been gastrointestinal, including abdominal pain in 13%
and nausea in 9%. Risedronate, 30 mg orally daily for 2-month
cycles, must be taken in the morning with water only, at least 30–40
minutes before any other food, liquids, or medications. Patients
should not lie down for at least 30 minutes after taking risedronate
to reduce the risk of esophagitis.
Parenteral bisphosphonates are particularly useful for patients
who 
cannot 
tolerate 
oral 
bisphosphonates. 
Intravenous
bisphosphonates can produce clinical improvements that last several
months. Serum alkaline phosphatase levels may continue to drop for
6 months after treatment. They appear to be more effective than
oral bisphosphonates but have more systemic side effects.
Postinfusion fever, fatigue, myalgia, bone pain, and ocular problems
occur commonly and may sometimes be severe. Serious side effects
are rare but include uveitis and acute kidney disease. Hypocalcemia
is common and may be severe, especially if intravenous
bisphosphonates are given along with loop diuretics. It is advisable
to administer calcium and vitamin D supplements, especially during
the first 2 weeks following treatment. Asthma may occur in aspirin-
sensitive patients. Pamidronate, 30–60 mg is infused intravenously
over 2–4 hours. Depending on the disease severity, one to three
additional doses may be given days or weeks apart. Zoledronic
acid can be given every 6–12 months in doses of 2–5 mg
intravenously over 20 minutes. Six months following a single infusion
of zoledronic acid, patients had a clinical response rate of 96%,
compared with 74% in patients receiving daily oral risedronate.
Intravenous zoledronic acid has been demonstrated to be
significantly more effective than daily risedronate. Bisphosphonates
have significant side effects (see Osteoporosis, above).
B. Nasal Calcitonin-Salmon
Calcitonin-salmon, 200 international units/unit dose spray, is
administered as one spray daily, alternating nostrils. It is just as
effective as the parenteral preparation and is associated with fewer
side effects. Nasal irritation may occur, as may occasional epistaxis.
However the use of calcitonin has declined dramatically with the
introduction of more potent bisphosphonates.
 Prognosis
The prognosis in general is good, but sarcomatous changes (in 1–
3%) can alter it unfavorably. In general, the prognosis is worse the
earlier in life the disease starts. Fractures usually heal well. In the
severe forms, marked deformity, intractable pain, and cardiac
failure are found. These complications should become rare with
prompt bisphosphonate treatment.
Colina M et al. Paget's disease of bone: a review. Rheumatol Int.
2008 Sep;28(11):1069–75. [PMID: 18592244]
 
Mahmood W et al. Proposed new approach for treating Paget's
disease of bone. Ir J Med Sci. 2011 Mar;180(1):121–4. [PMID:
21132539]
 
Ralston SH. Pathogenesis of Paget's disease of bone. Bone. 2008
Nov;43(5):819–25. [PMID: 18672105]
 
Reid IR et al. Bisphosphonates in Paget's disease. Bone. 2010
Sep 9. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 20832512]
 
Silverman SL. Paget disease of bone: therapeutic options. J Clin
Rheumatol. 2008 Oct;14(5):299–305. [PMID: 18838910]
 
DISEASES OF THE ADRENAL
CORTEX
 
ACUTE ADRENOCORTICAL INSUFFICIENCY (Adrenal
Crisis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Weakness, abdominal pain, fever, confusion, nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea.
 Low blood pressure, dehydration; skin pigmentation may be
increased.
 Serum potassium high, sodium low, BUN high.
 Cosyntropin (ACTH1–24) unable to stimulate an increase in
serum cortisol to ≥ 20 mcg/dl.
 
 General Considerations
Acute adrenal insufficiency is an emergency caused by insufficient
cortisol. Crisis may occur in the course of treatment of chronic
insufficiency, or it may be the presenting manifestation of adrenal
insufficiency. Acute adrenal crisis is more commonly seen in primary
adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease) than in disorders of the
pituitary gland causing secondary adrenocortical hypofunction.
Adrenal crisis may occur in the following situations: (1) during
stress, (eg, trauma, surgery, infection, hyperthyroidism, or
prolonged fasting) in a patient with latent or treated adrenal
insufficiency; (2) following sudden withdrawal of adrenocortical
hormone in a patient with chronic insufficiency or in a patient with
temporary insufficiency due to suppression by exogenous
corticosteroids or megestrol; (3) following bilateral adrenalectomy
g
; ( )
g
y
or removal of a functioning adrenal tumor that had suppressed the
other adrenal; (4) following sudden destruction of the pituitary gland
(pituitary necrosis), or when thyroid hormone is given to a patient
with hypoadrenalism; and (5) following injury to both adrenals by
trauma, hemorrhage, anticoagulant therapy, thrombosis, infection or,
rarely, metastatic carcinoma; (6) following administration of
etomidate, which is used intravenously for rapid anesthesia induction
or intubation.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The patient complains of headache, lassitude, nausea and vomiting,
abdominal pain, and often diarrhea. Confusion or coma may be
present. Fever may be 40.6 °C or more. The blood pressure is low.
Recurrent hypoglycemia and reduced insulin requirements may
present in patients with preexisting type 1 diabetes mellitus. Other
signs may include cyanosis, dehydration, skin hyperpigmentation,
and sparse axillary hair (if hypogonadism is also present).
Meningococcemia may be associated with purpura and adrenal
insufficiency secondary to adrenal infarction (Waterhouse–
Friderichsen syndrome).
Au: Add Fahren- heit?
B. Laboratory Findings
The eosinophil count may be high. Hyponatremia or hyperkalemia
(or both) are usually present. Hypoglycemia is frequent.
Hypercalcemia may be present. Blood, sputum, or urine culture
may be positive if bacterial infection is the precipitating cause of the
crisis.
The diagnosis is made by a simplified cosyntropin stimulation test,
which is performed as follows: (1) Synthetic ACTH1–24
(cosyntropin), 0.25 mg, is given intramuscularly. (2) Serum is
obtained for cortisol between 30 and 60 minutes after cosyntropin
is administered. Normally, serum cortisol rises to at least 20
mcg/dL. For patients receiving corticosteroid treatment,
hydrocortisone must not be given for at least 8 hours before the
test. Other corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, dexamethasone) do not
interfere with specific assays for cortisol.
Plasma ACTH is markedly elevated if the patient has primary
adrenal disease (generally > 200 pg/mL).
 Differential Diagnosis
Acute adrenal insufficiency must be distinguished from other causes
of shock (eg, septic, hemorrhagic, cardiogenic). Hyperkalemia is
also seen with gastrointestinal bleeding, rhabdomyolysis,
hyperkalemic paralysis, and certain drugs (eg, angiotensin-
converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors, spironolactone). Hyponatremia
is seen in many other conditions (eg, hypothyroidism, diuretic use,
heart failure, cirrhosis, vomiting, diarrhea, severe illness, or major
surgery). Acute adrenal insufficiency must be distinguished from an
acute abdomen in which neutrophilia is the rule, whereas adrenal
insufficiency is characterized by a relative lymphocytosis and
eosinophilia.
More than 90% of serum cortisol is protein bound and low
serum levels of binding proteins result in misleadingly low serum
cortisol determinations by most assays. Nearly 40% of critically ill
patients, with serum albumin <2.5 g/dL, have low serum total
cortisol levels but normal serum free cortisol or salivary cortisol
levels and normal adrenal function.
 Treatment
A. Acute Phase
If the diagnosis is suspected, draw a blood sample for cortisol
determination and treat with hydrocortisone, 100–300 mg
intravenously, and saline immediately, without waiting for the
results. 
Thereafter, 
give 
hydrocortisone 
phosphate 
or
hydrocortisone sodium succinate, 100 mg intravenously
immediately, and continue intravenous infusions of 50–100 mg
every 6 hours for the first day. Give the same amount every 8 hours
on the second day and then adjust the dosage in view of the clinical
picture.
Since bacterial infection frequently precipitates acute adrenal
crisis, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be administered
empirically while waiting for the results of initial cultures.
Hypoglycemia should be vigorously treated while serum
electrolytes, BUN, and creatinine are monitored.
B. Convalescent Phase
When the patient is able to take food by mouth, give oral
hydrocortisone, 10–20 mg every 6 hours, and reduce dosage to
maintenance levels as needed. Most patients ultimately require
hydrocortisone twice daily (AM, 10–20 mg; PM, 5–10 mg).
Mineralocorticoid therapy is not needed when large amounts of
hydrocortisone are being given, but as the dose is reduced it is
usually necessary to add fludrocortisone acetate, 0.05–0.2 mg
orally daily. Some patients never require fludrocortisone or become
edematous at doses of more than 0.05 mg once or twice weekly.
Once the crisis has passed, the patient must be evaluated to assess
the degree of permanent adrenal insufficiency and to establish the
cause if possible.
 Prognosis
Rapid treatment will usually be lifesaving. However, acute adrenal
insufficiency is frequently unrecognized and untreated since its
manifestations mimic more common conditions; lack of treatment
leads to shock that is unresponsive to volume replacement and
vasopressors, resulting in death.
Hahner S et al. Therapeutic management of adrenal insufficiency.
Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;23(2): 167–79.
[PMID: 19500761]
 
Marik PE. Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency.
Chest. 2009 Jan;135(1):181–93. [PMID: 19136406]
 
Marik PE et al. Requirement of perioperative stress doses of
corticosteroids: a systematic review of the literature. Arch Surg.
2008 Dec;143(12):1222–6. [PMID: 19075176]
 
Maxime V et al. Adrenal insufficiency in septic shock. Clin Chest
Med. 2009 Mar;30(1):17–27. [PMID: 19186278]
 
CHRONIC ADRENOCORTICAL INSUFFICIENCY
(Addison Disease)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Weakness, fatigability, anorexia, weight loss; nausea and
vomiting, diarrhea; abdominal pain, muscle and joint pains;
amenorrhea.
 Sparse axillary hair; increased skin pigmentation, especially of
creases, pressure areas, and nipples.
 Hypotension, small heart.
 Serum sodium may be low; potassium, calcium, and BUN may
be elevated; neutropenia, mild anemia, eosinophilia, and relative
lymphocytosis may be present.
 Plasma cortisol levels are low or fail to rise after administration of
corticotropin.
 Plasma ACTH level is elevated.
 
 General Considerations
Addison disease is an uncommon disorder with a prevalence of
about 140 per million and an annual incidence of about 4 per million
in the United States. It is caused by destruction or dysfunction of
the adrenal cortices. Addison disease is characterized by chronic
deficiency of cortisol, with consequent elevation of serum ACTH
causing skin pigmentation that can be subtle or strikingly dark.
Patients with destruction of the adrenal cortices or with classic 21-
hydroxylase deficiency also have mineralocorticoid deficiency with
hyponatremia, volume depletion, and hyperkalemia. In contrast,
mineralocorticoid deficiency is not present in patients with familial
glucocorticoid deficiency and Allgrove syndrome (see below). Also,
if chronic adrenal insufficiency is secondary to pituitary failure,
mineralocorticoid production (controlled by the renin–angiotensin
system) persists and hyperkalemia is not present. Furthermore, if
ACTH is not elevated, skin pigmentary changes are not
encountered.
 Etiology
Autoimmune destruction of the adrenals is the most common cause
of Addison disease in the United States (accounting for about 80%
of spontaneous cases). With such autoimmunity, adrenal function
decreases over several years as it progresses to overt adrenal
insufficiency. It may occur alone or as part of a polyglandular
autoimmune (PGA) syndrome. Type 1 PGA is also known as
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) syndrome and is caused by a defect in T cell-mediated
immunity inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Type 1 PGA
usually presents in early childhood with mucocutaneous candidiasis,
followed by hypoparathyroidism and dystrophy of the teeth and
nails; Addison disease usually appears by age 15 years. Partial or
late expression of the syndrome is common. A varied spectrum of
associated diseases may be seen in adulthood, including
hypogonadism, hypothyroidism, pernicious anemia, alopecia,
vitiligo, hepatitis, malabsorption, and Sjögren syndrome.
Type 2 PGA usually presents in young adults age 20–40 years,
usually women (female:male ratio is 3:1). The following conditions
may be presentations of type 2 PGA: autoimmune adrenal
insufficiency, type 1 diabetes mellitus, or autoimmune thyroid
disease (usually hypothyroidism, sometimes hyperthyroidism). The
combination of Addison disease and hypothyroidism is known as
Schmidt syndrome. Patients may also have vitiligo, alopecia areata,
Sjögren syndrome, or celiac sprue. Type 2 PGA is also associated
with autoimmune primary ovarian failure; testicular failure (5%);
pernicious anemia (4%); and, rarely, autoimmune hypophysitis,
encephalitis, or hypoparathyroidism (late-onset).
Tuberculosis as a leading cause of Addison disease is relatively
rare in the United States but common where tuberculosis is more
prevalent.
Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage may occur during sepsis,
heparin-associated thrombocytopenia or anticoagulation, or with
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. It may occur in association
with major surgery or trauma, presenting about 1 week later with
pain, fever, and shock. It may also occur spontaneously.
Adrenoleukodystrophy is an X-linked peroxisomal disorder
causing accumulation of very long-chain fatty acids in the adrenal
cortex, testes, brain, and spinal cord. It may present at any age and
accounts for one-third of cases of Addison disease in boys.
Aldosterone deficiency occurs in 9%. Hypogonadism is common.
Psychiatric symptoms often include mania, psychosis, or cognitive
impairment. Neurologic deterioration may be severe or mild
(particularly in heterozygote women), mimics symptoms of multiple
sclerosis, and can occur years after the onset of adrenal
insufficiency.
Rare causes of adrenal insufficiency include lymphoma,
metastatic 
carcinoma, 
coccidioidomycosis, 
histoplasmosis,
cytomegalovirus infection (more frequent in patients with AIDS),
syphilitic 
gummas, 
scleroderma, 
amyloid 
disease, 
and
hemochromatosis.
Congenital adrenal insufficiency occurs in several conditions.
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency is caused by a mutation in the
gene encoding the adrenal ACTH receptor. Triple A (Allgrove)
syndrome is characterized by variable expression of the following:
adrenal ACTH resistance with cortisol deficiency, achalasia,
alacrima, nasal voice, and neuromuscular disease of varying severity
(hyperreflexia to spastic paraplegia). Cortisol deficiency usually
presents in infancy but may not occur until the third decade of life.
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia causes adrenal insufficiency due
to absence of the adrenal cortex; patients may also have
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, myopathy, and high-frequency
hearing loss. Patients with hereditary defects in adrenal enzymes for
cortisol synthesis develop congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to
ACTH stimulation. The most common enzyme defect is P450c21
(21-hydroxylase). Patients with severely defective P450c21
enzymes manifest deficiency of mineralocorticoids (salt wasting) in
addition to deficient cortisol and excessive androgens. Women with
milder enzyme defects have adequate cortisol but develop hirsutism
in adolescence or adulthood and are said to have “late-onset”
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. (See Hirsutism section.)
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The symptoms may include weakness and fatigability, weight loss,
myalgias, arthralgias, fever, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, anxiety,
and mental irritability. Some of these symptoms may be due to high
serum levels of IL-6. Pigmentary changes consist of diffuse tanning
over non-exposed as well as exposed parts or multiple freckles;
hyperpigmentation is especially prominent over the knuckles,
elbows, knees, and posterior neck and in palmar creases. Nail beds
may develop longitudinal pigmented bands. Nipples and areolas
tend to darken. The skin in pressure areas such as the belt or
brassiere lines and the buttocks also darkens. New scars are
pigmented. Some patients have associated vitiligo (10%). Emotional
changes are common. Hypoglycemia, when present, may worsen
the patient's weakness and mental functioning, rarely leading to
coma. Manifestations of other autoimmune disease (see above) may
be present. Patients tend to be hypotensive and orthostatic; about
90% have systolic blood pressures under 110 mm Hg; blood
pressure over 130 mm Hg is rare. Other findings may include a
small heart, hyperplasia of lymphoid tissues, and scant axillary and
pubic hair (especially in women).
Patients with adult-onset adrenoleukodystrophy may present with
neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, 
sometimes 
without 
adrenal
insufficiency.
B. Laboratory Findings
The WBC count usually shows moderate neutropenia,
lymphocytosis, and a total eosinophil count over 300/mcL. Among
patients with chronic Addison disease, the serum sodium is usually
low (90%) while the potassium is elevated (65%). Patients with
diarrhea may not be hyper-kalemic. Fasting blood glucose may be
low. Hypercalcemia may be present. Young men with idiopathic
Addison disease are screened for adrenoleukodystrophy by
determining plasma very long-chain fatty acid levels; affected
patients have high levels.
Low plasma cortisol (< 3 mcg/dL) at 8 am is diagnostic,
especially if accompanied by simultaneous elevation of the plasma
ACTH level (usually > 200 pg/mL). The diagnosis is made by a
simplified cosyntropin stimulation test, which is performed as
follows: (1) Synthetic ACTH1–24 (cosyntropin), 0.25 mg, is given
intramuscularly. (2) Serum is obtained for cortisol between 30 and
60 minutes after cosyntropin is administered. Normally, serum
cortisol rises to at least 20 mcg/dL. For patients receiving
corticosteroid treatment, hydrocortisone must not be given for at
least 8 hours before the test. Other corticosteroids (eg, prednisone,
dexamethasone) do not interfere with specific assays for cortisol.
Serum DHEA levels are under 1000 ng/mL in 100% of patients
with Addison disease and a serum DHEA above 1000 ng/mL
excludes the diagnosis. However, serum DHEA levels below 1000
ng/mL are not helpful, since about 15% of the general population
have such low DHEA levels, particularly children and elderly
individuals. Antiadrenal antibodies are found in the serum in about
50% of cases of autoimmune Addison disease. Antibodies to
thyroid (45%) and other tissues may be present.
Elevated plasma renin activity (PRA) indicates the presence of
depleted intravascular volume and the need for higher doses of
fludrocortisone replacement. Serum epinephrine levels are low in
patients with adrenal insufficiency, since these patients do not have
the high local concentrations of cortisol that are required to induce
the enzyme PNMT in adrenal medulla for the synthesis of
epinephrine from norepinephrine.
C. Imaging
When Addison disease is not clearly autoimmune, a chest
radiograph is obtained to look for tuberculosis, fungal infection, or
cancer as possible causes. CT scan of the abdomen will show small
noncalcified adrenals in autoimmune Addison disease. The adrenals
are enlarged in about 85% of cases due to metastatic or
granulomatous disease. Calcification is noted in about 50% of cases
of tuberculous Addison disease but is also seen with hemorrhage,
fungal infection, pheochromocytoma, and melanoma.
 Differential Diagnosis
Addison disease should be considered in any patient with
unexplained hypotension, but shock is usually caused by more
common conditions such as gastrointestinal bleeding or sepsis.
Hyponatremia or hyperkalemia may be seen in numerous other
conditions 
(see Chapter 21). Drospirenone, the progestin
component in certain oral contraceptives, may cause hyperkalemia.
Unexplained weight loss, weakness, and anorexia may be
mistaken for occult cancer. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain may be misdiagnosed as intrinsic gastrointestinal
disease. The hyperpigmentation may be confused with that due to
ethnic or racial factors. Weight loss may simulate anorexia nervosa.
The neurologic manifestations of Allgrove syndrome and
adrenoleukodystrophy (especially in women) may mimic multiple
sclerosis. Hemochromatosis also enters the differential diagnosis of
skin hyperpigmentation, but it should be remembered that it may
truly be a cause of Addison disease as well as diabetes mellitus and
hypoparathyroidism. Serum ferritin is increased in most cases of
hemochromatosis and is a useful screening test. About 17% of
patients with AIDS have symptoms of cortisol resistance. AIDS can
also cause frank adrenal insufficiency.
Hyperkalemia can be caused by isolated hypoaldosteronism and
is seen in various conditions. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism can
be caused by renal tubular acidosis type IV and is commonly seen
with 
diabetic 
nephropathy, 
hypertensive 
nephrosclerosis,
tubulointerstitial 
diseases, 
and 
AIDS 
(see Chapter 21).
Hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism can be seen in patients with
myotonic dystrophy, aldosterone synthase deficiency, and
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Hyperkalemia, hypertension, and
hypogonadism may present as delayed adolescence or in adulthood
in some patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CYP17
deficiency); cortisol deficiency is also usually present but may not be
clinically evident.
 Complications
Any of the complications of the underlying disease (eg, tuberculosis)
are more likely to occur, and the patient is susceptible to
intercurrent infections that may precipitate crisis. Associated
autoimmune diseases are common (see above).
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Patients with Addison disease must be thoroughly informed about
their condition. All infections should be treated immediately and
vigorously, with the dose of hydrocortisone increased appropriately
(see below). Patients are advised to wear a medical alert bracelet
or medal reading, “Adrenal insufficiency—takes hydrocortisone.”
B. Specific Therapy
Replacement therapy should include a combination of
corticosteroids and mineralocorticoids. In mild cases, hydro-
cortisone alone may be adequate.
Hydrocortisone is the drug of choice. Most addisonian patients
are well maintained on 15–30 mg of hydrocortisone orally daily in
two divided doses, two-thirds in the morning and one-third in the
late afternoon or early evening. Some patients respond better to
prednisone in a dosage of about 2–4 mg orally in the morning and
1–2 mg in the evening. Adjustments in dosage are made according
to the clinical response. A proper dose usually results in a normal
WBC count differential.
The dose of corticosteroid should be raised in case of infection,
trauma, surgery, stressful diagnostic procedures, or other forms of
stress. The maximum hydrocortisone dose for severe stress is 50
mg intravenously or intramuscularly every 6 hours. Lower doses,
oral or parenteral, are used for less severe stress. The dose is
reduced back to normal as the stress subsides.
Fludrocortisone acetate has a potent sodium-retaining effect.
The dosage is 0.05–0.3 mg orally daily or every other day. In the
presence of postural hypotension, hyponatremia, or hyperkalemia,
the dosage is increased. Similarly, in patients with fatigue, elevated
PRA indicates the need for a higher replacement dose of
fludrocortisone. If edema, hypokalemia, or hypertension ensues, the
dose is decreased.
DHEA is given to some patients with adrenal insufficiency. In a
double-blind clinical trial, patients taking DHEA 50 mg orally each
morning have experienced an improvement in their overall sense of
well-being, an increase in muscle mass, and a reversal in bone loss
at the femoral neck. DHEA replacement did not improve fatigue or
sexual dysfunction; however, its placebo effect may be significant in
that regard. Older women who receive DHEA should be monitored
for androgenic effects. Because over-the-counter preparations of
DHEA have variable potencies, it is best to have the pharmacy
formulate this with pharmaceutical-grade micronized DHEA.
 Prognosis
The life expectancy of patients with Addison disease has been
considered reasonably normal, as long as they are very compliant
with taking their medications and are knowledgeable about their
condition. However, a retrospective Swedish study of 1675
patients with Addison disease found an unexpected increase in all-
cause mortality, mostly from cardiovascular disease, malignancy,
and infectious causes. Associated conditions can pose additional
health risks. For example, patients with adrenoleukodystrophy or
Allgrove syndrome may suffer from neurologic disease. Patients
with adrenal tuberculosis may have a serious systemic infection that
requires treatment. Adrenal crisis can occur in patients who stop
their medication or who experience stress such as infection, trauma,
or surgery without appropriately higher doses of corticosteroids.
Patients who take excessive doses of corticosteroid replacement
can develop Cushing syndrome, which imposes its own risks.
Many patients with treated Addison disease complain of chronic
low-grade fatigue.
Many patients with Addison disease do not feel entirely normal,
despite glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement. This may
be due, in part, to the inadequacy of oral replacement to duplicate
cortisol's normal circadian rhythm. Also, patients with Addison
disease are deficient in epinephrine, but replacement epinephrine is
not available. Fatigue may also be an indication of suboptimal
dosing of medication, electrolyte imbalance, or concurrent problems
such as hypothyroidism or diabetes mellitus. However, most
patients with Addison disease are able to live fully active lives.
Arlt W. The approach to the adult with newly diagnosed adrenal
insufficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;944:1059–67.
[PMID: 19349469]
 
Bensing S et al. Increased death risk and altered cancer incidence
pattern in patients with isolated or combined autoimmune primary
adrenocortical insufficiency. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008
Nov;69(5):697–704. [PMID: 18727712]
 
Bornstein SR. Predisposing factors for adrenal insufficiency. N
Engl J Med. 2009 May 28;360(22):2328–39. [PMID: 19474430]
 
Chakera AJ et al. Addison disease in adults: diagnosis and
management. Am J Med. 2010 May;123(5):409–13. [PMID:
20399314]
 
Gurnell EM et al. Long-term DHEA replacement in primary
adrenal insufficiency: a randomized, controlled trial. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Feb;93(2):400–9. [PMID: 18000094]
 
Neary N et al. Adrenal insufficiency: etiology, diagnosis and
treatment. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010
Jun;17(3):217–23. [PMID: 20375886]
 
Speiser PW et al. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to steroid
21-hydroxylase deficiency: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Sep;95(9): 4133–60.
[PMID: 20823466]
 
CUSHING SYNDROME (Hypercortisolism)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Central obesity, muscle wasting, thin skin, hirsutism, purple striae.
 Psychological changes.
 Osteoporosis, hypertension, poor wound healing.
 Hyperglycemia, glycosuria, leukocytosis, lymphocytopenia,
hypokalemia.
 Elevated serum cortisol and urinary free cortisol. Lack of normal
suppression by dexamethasone.
 
 General Considerations
The term Cushing “syndrome” refers to the manifestations of
excessive corticosteroids, commonly due to supraphysiologic doses
of corticosteroid drugs and rarely due to spontaneous production of
excessive corticosteroids by the adrenal cortex. Cases of
spontaneous Cushing syndrome are rare (2.6 new cases yearly per
million population) and have several possible causes.
About 40% of cases are due to Cushing “disease,” by which is
meant the manifestations of hypercortisolism due to ACTH
hypersecretion by the pituitary. Cushing disease is caused by a
benign pituitary adenoma that is typically very small (< 5 mm) and
usually located in the anterior pituitary (98%) or in the posterior
pituitary (2%). It is at least three times more frequent in women than
men.
About 10% of cases are due to nonpituitary ACTH-secreting
neoplasms (eg, small cell lung carcinoma), which produce excessive
amounts of ectopic ACTH. Hypokalemia and hyperpigmentation
are commonly found in this group.
About 15% of cases are due to ACTH from a source that cannot
be initially located.
About 30% of cases are due to excessive autonomous secretion
of cortisol by the adrenals—independently of ACTH, serum levels
of which are usually low. Most such cases are due to a unilateral
adrenal tumor. Benign adrenal adenomas are generally small and
produce mostly cortisol; adrenocortical carcinomas are usually large
when discovered and can produce excessive cortisol as well as
androgens, with resultant hirsutism and virilization. ACTH-
independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia can also produce
hypercortisolism due to the adrenal cortex cells’ abnormal
stimulation by hormones such as catecholamines, arginine
vasopressin, serotonin, hCG/LH, or gastric inhibitory polypeptide;
in the latter case, hypercortisolism may be intermittent and food
dependent and serum ACTH may not be completely suppressed.
Pigmented bilateral adrenal macronodular adrenal hyper-plasia is a
rare cause of Cushing syndrome in children and young adults; it may
be an isolated condition or part of the Carney complex.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with Cushing syndrome usually have central obesity with a
plethoric “moon face,” “buffalo hump,” supraclavicular fat pads,
protuberant abdomen, and thin extremities; oligomenorrhea or
amenorrhea (or erectile dysfunction in the male); weakness,
backache, and headache; hypertension; osteoporosis; avascular
bone necrosis; and acne and superficial skin infections. Patients may
have thirst and polyuria (with or without glycosuria), renal calculi,
glaucoma, purple striae (especially around the thighs, breasts, and
abdomen), and easy bruisability. Wound healing is impaired. Mental
symptoms may range from diminished ability to concentrate to
increased lability of mood to frank psychosis. Patients are
susceptible to opportunistic infections.
B. Laboratory Findings
Glucose tolerance is impaired as a result of insulin resistance.
Polyuria is present as a result of increased free water clearance;
diabetes mellitus with glycosuria may worsen it. Patients with
Cushing syndrome often have leukocytosis with relative
granulocytosis and lymphopenia. Hypokalemia may be present,
particularly in cases of ectopic ACTH secretion.
 Tests for Hypercortisolism
The easiest screening test for Cushing syndrome is the
dexamethasone suppression test: dexamethasone 1 mg is given
orally at 11 pm and serum is collected for cortisol determination at
about 8 AM the next morning; a cortisol level < 5 mcg/dL (< 135
nmol/L, fluorometric assay) or < 2 mcg/dL (< 54 nmol/L, high-
performance liquid chromatography [HPLC] assay) excludes
Cushing syndrome with some certainty. However, 8% of
established patients with pituitary Cushing disease have
dexamethasone-suppressed cortisol levels < 2 mcg/dL. Therefore,
when other clinical criteria suggest hypercortisolism, further
evaluation is warranted even in the face of normal dexamethasone-
suppressed serum cortisol. Antiseizure drugs (eg, phenytoin,
phenobarbital, primidone) and rifampin accelerate the metabolism of
dexamethasone, causing a lack of cortisol suppression by
dexamethasone. Estrogens—during pregnancy or as oral
contraceptives or ERT—may also cause lack of dexamethasone
suppressibility.
Patients with an abnormal dexamethasone suppression test
require further investigation, which includes a 24-hour urine
collection for free cortisol and creatinine. An abnormally high 24-
hour urine free cortisol (or free cortisol to creatinine ratio of > 95
mcg cortisol/g creatinine) helps confirm hypercortisolism. A
misleadingly high urine free cortisol excretion occurs with high fluid
intake. In pregnancy, urine free cortisol is increased, while 17-
hydroxycorticosteroids remain normal and diurnal variability of
serum cortisol is normal. Carbamazepine and fenofibrate cause false
elevations of urine free cortisol when determined by HPLC.
A midnight serum cortisol level > 7.5 mcg/dL is indicative of
Cushing syndrome and distinguishes it from other conditions
associated with a high urine free cortisol (pseudo-Cushing states).
Requirements for this test include being in the same time zone for at
least 3 days, being without food for at least 3 hours, and having an
indwelling intravenous line established in advance for the blood
draw.
Late-night salivary cortisol assays are useful due to the
inconvenience of obtaining a midnight blood specimen for serum
cortisol. Assays are available that use liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry. Midnight salivary cortisol levels are
normally < 0.15 mcg/dL (4.0 nmol/L). Midnight salivary cortisol
levels that are consistently > 0.25 mcg/dL (7.0 nmol/L) are
considered very abnormal. The late-night salivary cortisol test has a
high sensitivity and specificity for Cushing syndrome, but false-
positive and false-negative tests have occurred.
Interestingly, hypercortisolism without Cushing syndrome can
occur in several conditions, such as severe depression, anorexia
nervosa, alcoholism, and familial cortisol resistance.
 Finding the Cause of Hypercortisolism
Once hypercortisolism is confirmed, a plasma or serum ACTH is
obtained. It must be collected properly in a plastic tube on ice and
processed quickly by a laboratory with a reliable, sensitive assay. A
level of ACTH below about 20 pg/mL indicates a probable adrenal
tumor, whereas higher levels are produced by pituitary or ectopic
ACTH-secreting tumors.
 Localizing Techniques
In ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, MRI of the pituitary
demonstrates a pituitary lesion in about 50% of cases. Premature
cerebral atrophy is often noted. When the pituitary MRI is normal
or shows a tiny (< 5 mm diameter) irregularity that may be
incidental, selective catheterization of the inferior petrosal sinus veins
draining the pituitary is performed. ACTH levels in the inferior
petrosal sinus that are more than twice the simultaneous peripheral
venous ACTH levels are indicative of pituitary Cushing disease.
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling is also done during CRH
administration, which ordinarily causes the ACTH levels in the
inferior petrosal sinus to be over three times the peripheral ACTH
level when the pituitary is the source of ACTH.
When inferior petrosal sinus ACTH concentrations are not above
the requisite levels, a search for an ectopic source of ACTH is
undertaken. Location of ectopic sources of ACTH commences with
CT scanning of the chest and abdomen, with special attention to the
lungs (for carcinoid or small cell carcinomas), the thymus, the
pancreas, and the adrenals. In patients with ACTH-dependent
Cushing syndrome, chest masses should not be assumed to be the
source of ACTH, since opportunistic infections are common, so it is
prudent to biopsy a chest mass to confirm the pathologic diagnosis
prior to resection.
CT scanning fails to detect the source of ACTH in about 40% of
patients with ectopic ACTH secretion. 111Inoctreotide (OCT,
somatostatin receptor scintigraphy) scanning is also useful in
detecting occult tumors. A low-dose scan with 6 mCi OCT is used
first; a high-dose scan with 12 mCi OCT may be used if the low-
dose scan gives equivocal results. 18FDG-PET scanning is not
usually helpful. Some ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors elude
discovery, necessitating bilateral adrenalectomy. The ectopic source
of ACTH should continue to be sought, since they may become
detectable by OCT or CT scanning at a later date.
In non-ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome, a CT scan of the
adrenals can localize the adrenal tumor in most cases.
 Differential Diagnosis
Alcoholic patients can have hypercortisolism and many clinical
manifestations of Cushing syndrome. Regular use of the “party
drug” gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB, sodium oxybate) has been
reported to cause reversible ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome.
Depressed patients also have hypercortisolism that can be nearly
impossible to distinguish biochemically from Cushing syndrome but
without clinical signs of Cushing syndrome. Some adolescents
develop violaceous striae on the abdomen, back, and breasts; these
are known as “striae distensae” and are not indicative of Cushing
syndrome. Cushing syndrome can be misdiagnosed as anorexia
nervosa (and vice versa) owing to the muscle wasting and
extraordinarily high urine free cortisol levels found in anorexia.
Patients with severe obesity frequently have an abnormal
dexamethasone suppression test, but the urine free cortisol is usually
normal, as is diurnal variation of serum cortisol. Patients with familial
cortisol resistance have hyperandrogenism, hypertension, and
hypercortisolism without actual Cushing syndrome. Patients with
familial partial lipodystrophy type I develop central obesity and
moon facies, along with thin extremities due to atrophy of
subcutaneous fat. However, these patients’ muscles are strong and
may be hypertrophic, distinguishing this condition from Cushing
syndrome. Patients receiving antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1
infection frequently develop partial lipodystrophy with thin
extremities and central obesity with a dorsocervical fat pad (“buffalo
hump”) that may mimic Cushing syndrome.
 Complications
Cushing syndrome, if untreated, produces serious morbidity and
even death. The patient may suffer from any of the complications of
hypertension or of diabetes. Susceptibility to infections is increased.
Compression fractures of the osteoporotic spine and aseptic
necrosis of the femoral head may cause marked disability.
Nephrolithiasis and psychosis may occur. Following bilateral
adrenalectomy for Cushing disease, a pituitary adenoma may
enlarge progressively, causing local destruction (eg, visual field
impairment) and hyperpigmentation; this complication is known as
Nelson syndrome.
 Treatment
Cushing disease is best treated by transsphenoidal selective
resection of the pituitary adenoma. After pituitary surgery, the rest
of the pituitary usually returns to normal function; however, the
pituitary corticotrophs remain suppressed and require 6–36 months
to recover normal function. Hydrocortisone or prednisone
replacement therapy is necessary in the meantime. Patients who do
not have a remission (or who have a recurrence) should be treated
by bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Another treatment option
for patients with ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors is stereotactic
pituitary radiosurgery (gamma knife or cyberknife), which
normalizes urine free cortisol in two-thirds of patients within 12
months. Conventional radiation therapy results in a 23% cure rate.
Pituitary radiosurgery can also be used to treat Nelson
syndrome, the progressive enlargement of ACTH-secreting pituitary
tumors following bilateral adrenalectomy. Patients who are not
surgical candidates may be given a trial of ketoconazole in doses of
about 200 mg orally every 6 hours; liver enzymes must be
monitored for progressive elevation.
Adrenal 
neoplasms 
secreting 
cortisol 
are 
resected
laparoscopically, if they are < 6 cm diameter. The contralateral
adrenal is suppressed, so postoperative hydrocortisone replacement
is required until recovery occurs.
Patients with metastatic adrenocortical carcinoma have
detectable cortisol levels following removal of the primary tumor.
Metastases may not be visible on scanning. Patients with adrenal
carcinoma should be treated with mitotane for a course of 2–5
years, since it appears to improve prognosis (see below). Mitotane
is given, beginning with 0.5 g twice daily with meals and increasing
to 1 g twice daily within 2 weeks. The doses of mitotane are
adjusted every 2–3 weeks ideally to reach serum levels of 14–20
mcg/mL; however, only about half the patients can tolerate mitotane
levels above 14 mcg/mL. Mitotane side effects include CNS
depression, 
lethargy, 
hypogonadism, 
hypercholesterolemia,
hepatotoxicity, leukopenia, hypertension, nausea, rash, TSH
suppression with hypothyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency.
Replacement hydrocortisone or prednisone should be started when
mitotane doses reach 2 g daily. The replacement dose of
hydrocortisone starts at 15 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the
afternoon, but must often be doubled or tripled because mitotane
increases cortisol metabolism and cortisol binding globulin levels;
the latter can artifactually raise serum cortisol levels. Ketoconazole
or metyrapone can help suppress hypercortisolism in unresectable
adrenal carcinoma. The thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone has slowed
the growth of adrenal carcinomas in xenograft mouse models, but
clinical trials are lacking.
Ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors should be located, when
possible, and surgically resected. If that cannot be done,
laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy is recommended. Medical
treatment with ketoconazole or metyrapone may partially suppress
the hypercortisolism. The somatostatin analog octreotide, given
parenterally, suppresses ACTH secretion in about one-third of such
cases.
Patients who are successfully treated for Cushing syndrome
typically develop “cortisol withdrawal syndrome,” even when given
replacement corticosteroids for adrenal insufficiency. Manifestations
can include hypotension, nausea, fatigue, arthralgias, myalgias,
pruritus, and flaking skin. Increasing the hydrocortisone replacement
to 30 mg twice orally daily can improve these symptoms; the
dosage is then reduced as tolerated. Patients with Cushing
syndrome are prone to develop osteoporosis. Bone densitometry is
recommended for all patients and treatment is commenced for
patients with osteoporosis. (See Osteoporosis section, above.)
 Prognosis
The manifestations of Cushing syndrome regress with time, but
patients are often left with residual mild cognitive impairment,
muscle weakness, osteoporosis, and sequelae from vertebral
fractures. Younger patients have a better chance for recovery and
children with short stature may have catch-up growth following
cure.
Patients with Cushing syndrome from a benign adrenal adenoma
experience a 5-year survival of 95% and a 10-year survival of
90%, following a successful adrenalectomy. Patients with Cushing
disease from a pituitary adenoma experience a similar survival if
their pituitary surgery is successful. However, transsphenoidal
surgery incurs a failure rate of about 10–20%, often due to the
adenoma's ectopic position or invasion of the cavernous sinus.
Those patients who have a complete remission after transsphenoidal
surgery have about a 15–20% chance of recurrence over the next
10 years. Patients with failed pituitary surgery may require pituitary
radiation therapy, which has its own morbidity. Laparoscopic
bilateral adrenalectomy may be required; recurrence of
hypercortisolism may occur as a result of growth of an adrenal
remnant stimulated by high levels of ACTH. The prognosis for
patients with ectopic ACTH-producing tumors depends on the
aggressiveness and stage of the particular tumor. Patients with
ACTH of unknown source have a 5-year survival rate of 65% and
a 10-year survival rate of 55%.
In patients with adrenocortical carcinoma, the prognosis depends
on the stage of the tumor at the time of surgery. In patients with
stage I–II disease, confined to the adrenal by surgical inspection
and scan, the median 5-year survival is about 60% and long-term
survival does occur. However, despite apparent complete resection
in stage I–III tumors, visible metastases develop in about 40% of
patients within 2 years. Adjuvant therapy with mitotane appears to
improve the prognosis, with patients receiving mitotane having a 5-
year survival of 87% versus 53% in those not receiving mitotane.
Patients with advanced stage IV disease at the time of surgery have
a poorer prognosis, but debulking surgery and therapy with
mitotane may be beneficial.
Boscaro M et al. Approach to the patient with possible Cushing's
syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Sep;94(9):3121–31.
[PMID: 19734443]
 
Doi M et al. Clinical features and management of ectopic ACTH
syndrome at a single institute in Japan. Endocr J. 2010;
57(12):1061–9. [PMID: 21076235]
 
Fassnacht M et al; German ACC Registry Group. Improved
survival in patients with stage II adrenocortical carcinoma followed
up prospectively by specialized centers. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2010 Nov;95(11):4925–32. [PMID: 20668036]
 
Lacroix A. Approach to the patient with adrenocortical carcinoma.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;95(11):4812–22. [PMID:
21051577]
 
Nieman LK. Approach to the patient with an adrenal
incidentaloma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Sep;95(9):4106–
13. [PMID: 20823463]
 
Toniato A et al. Surgical versus conservative management for
subclinical Cushing syndrome in adrenal incidentalomas: a
prospective randomized study. Ann Surg. 2009 Mar; 249(3):388–
91. [PMID: 19247023]
 
Zerikly RK et al. Diagnostic characteristics of late-night salivary
cortisol using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Oct;95(10):4555–9. [PMID:
20631023]
 
HIRSUTISM & VIRILIZATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hirsutism, acne, menstrual disorders.
 Virilization: increased muscularity, androgenic alopecia,
deepening of the voice, clitoromegaly.
 Rarely, a palpable pelvic tumor.
 Urinary 17-ketosteroids and serum DHEAS and
androstenedione elevated in adrenal disorders; variable in others.
 Serum testosterone is often elevated.
 
 General Considerations
Hirsutism is defined as cosmetically unacceptable terminal hair
growth that appears in women in a male pattern. Some degree of
hirsutism affects about 5–10% of non-Asian women of reproductive
age. The amount of hair growth deemed unacceptable depends on a
woman's ethnicity and familial and cultural norms. Hirsutism is
quantitated using the Ferriman-Gallwey score in which hirsutism is
graded from 0 (none) to 4 (severe) in nine areas of the body with a
maximum possible score of 36; scores 8–15 indicate moderate
hirsutism, while scores over 15 indicate severe hirsutism.
 Etiology
Hirsutism may be idiopathic or familial or be caused by the
following disorders: polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS),
steroidogenic enzyme defects, neoplastic disorders; or rarely by
medications, acromegaly, or ACTH-induced Cushing disease.
A. Idiopathic or Familial
Most women with hirsutism or androgenic alopecia have no
detectable hyperandrogenism. Patients often have a strong familial
predisposition to hirsutism that may be considered normal in the
context of their genetic background. Such patients may have
elevated serum levels of androstenediol glucuronide, a metabolite of
dihydrotestosterone that is produced by skin in cosmetically
unacceptable amounts.
B. Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (Hyperthecosis, Stein–Leventhal Syndrome)
PCOS is a common functional disorder of the ovaries, affecting
about 4–6% of premenopausal women in the United States and
accounting for at least 50% of all cases of hirsutism associated with
elevated testosterone levels. It is familial and transmitted as a
modified autosomal dominant trait. Affected women have elevated
serum testosterone or free testosterone levels. Affected women
have signs of androgen excess, including hirsutism, acne, and male-
pattern thinning of scalp hair. About 50% of affected women have
oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea with anovulation. Despite the
syndrome's name, the presence of ovarian cysts is not helpful
diagnostically and is actually a misnomer, since about 30% of
women with PCOS do not have cystic ovaries and 25–30% of
normal menstruating women have cystic ovaries. Obesity and high
serum insulin levels (due to insulin resistance) contribute to the
syndrome in 70% of women. The serum LH:FSH ratio is often >
2.0. Both adrenal and ovarian androgen hypersecretion are
commonly present. Women with PCOS have a 35% risk of
depression, compared with 11% in age-matched controls. Diabetes
mellitus is present in about 13% of cases. Untreated women with
amenorrhea have a slightly increased risk of endometrial carcinoma.
Hypertension and hyperlipidemia are often present, increasing the
risk of cardiovascular disease. Women frequently regain normal
menstrual cycles with aging.
C. Steroidogenic Enzyme Defects
Baby girls with “classic” 21-hydroxylase deficiency have ambiguous
genitalia and may become virilized unless treated with corticosteroid
replacement; about 50% of such patients have clinically evident
mineralocorticoid deficiency (salt-wasting) as well.
About 2% of patients with adult-onset hirsutism have been found
to have a partial defect in adrenal 21-hydroxylase, whose
phenotypic expression is delayed until adolescence or adulthood;
such patients do not have salt-wasting. Polycystic ovaries and
adrenal adenomas are more likely to develop in these women.
Some rare patients with hyperandrogenism and hyper-tension
have 11-hydroxylase deficiency. This is distinguished from cortisol
resistance by high cortisol serum levels in the latter and by high
serum 11-deoxycortisol levels in the former.
Patients with an XY karyotype and a deficiency in 17β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 or a deficiency in 5α-reductase-2
may present as phenotypic girls in whom virilization develops at
puberty.
D. Neoplastic Disorders
Ovarian tumors are very uncommon causes of hirsutism (0.8%) and
include 
arrhenoblastomas, 
Sertoli-Leydig 
cell 
tumors,
dysgerminomas, and hilar cell tumors. Adrenal carcinoma is a rare
cause of Cushing syndrome and hyper-androgenism that can be
quite virilizing. Pure androgen-secreting adrenal tumors occur very
rarely; about 50% are malignant.
E. Rare Causes of Hirsutism
Acromegaly and ACTH-induced Cushing syndrome can cause
hirsutism. Maternal virilization during pregnancy may occur as a
result of a luteoma of pregnancy, hyperreactio luteinalis, or
polycystic ovaries. In postmenopausal women, diffuse stromal
Leydig cell hyperplasia is a rare cause of hyperandrogenism.
Acquired hypertrichosis lanuginosa is manifested by the appearance
of diffuse fine lanugo hair growth on the face and body along with
stomatologic symptoms; the disorder is usually associated with an
internal malignancy, especially colorectal cancer, and may regress
after tumor removal. Pharmacologic causes include minoxidil,
cyclosporine, phenytoin, anabolic steroids, diazoxide, and certain
progestins.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Modest androgen excess from any source increases sexual hair
(chin, upper lip, abdomen, and chest) and increases sebaceous
gland activity, producing acne. Menstrual irregularities, anovulation,
and amenorrhea are common. If androgen excess is pronounced,
defeminization (decrease in breast size, loss of feminine adipose
tissue) and virilization (frontal balding, muscularity, clitoromegaly,
and deepening of the voice) occur. Virilization implicates the
presence of an androgen-producing neoplasm.
Hypertension may be seen in rare patients with Cushing
syndrome, adrenal 11-hydroxylase deficiency, or cortisol resistance
y
,
y
y
y,
syndrome.
A pelvic examination may disclose clitoromegaly or ovarian
enlargement that may be cystic or neoplastic.
B. Laboratory Testing and Imaging
Serum androgen testing is mainly useful to screen for rare occult
adrenal or ovarian neoplasms. Some general guidelines are
presented here, though exceptions are common.
Serum is assayed for total testosterone and free testosterone. A
serum testosterone level > 200 ng/dL or free testosterone > 40
ng/dL indicates the need for pelvic examination and ultrasound. If
that is negative, an adrenal CT scan is performed.
Most radioimmunoassays and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) for testosterone are inaccurate below serum
testosterone levels of 300 ng/dL. The more accurate testosterone
assays rely upon extraction and chromatography, followed by mass
spectrometry or immunoassay. Free testosterone is best measured
by calculation, using accurate assays for testosterone and sex
hormone binding globulin.
A serum androstenedione level > 1000 ng/dL also implicates an
ovarian or adrenal neoplasm.
Patients with milder elevations of serum testosterone or
androstenedione usually are treated with an oral contraceptive.
Patients with very elevated serum DHEAS (> 700 mcg/dL) have
an adrenal source of androgen. This usually is due to adrenal
hyperplasia and rarely to adrenal carcinoma. An adrenal CT scan is
performed.
No firm guidelines exist as to which patients (if any) with
hyperandrogenism should be screened for “late-onset” 21-
hydroxylase deficiency. The evaluation requires levels of serum 17-
hydroxyprogesterone to be drawn at baseline and at 30–60 minutes
after the intramuscular injection of 0.25 mg of cosyntropin
(ACTH1–24). This test should ideally be done during the follicular
phase of a woman's menstrual cycle. Patients with congenital
adrenal hyperplasia will usually have a baseline 17-
hydroxyprogesterone level over 300 ng/dL or a stimulated level
over 1000 ng/dL. Patients with any clinical signs of Cushing
syndrome should receive a screening test. (See Cushing Syndrome.)
Serum levels of FSH and LH are elevated if amenorrhea is due
to ovarian failure. An LH:FSH ratio > 2.0 is common in patients
with PCOS. On abdominal ultrasound, about 25–30% of normal
young women have polycystic ovaries, so the appearance of
ovarian cysts on ultrasound is not helpful. Pelvic ultrasound or MRI
can usually detect virilizing tumors of the ovary. However, small
virilizing ovarian tumors may not be detectable on imaging studies;
selective venous sampling for testosterone may be used for
diagnosis in such patients.
 Treatment
Postmenopausal women with severe hyperandrogenism should
undergo laparoscopic bilateral oophorectomy (if CT scan of the
adrenals and ovaries is normal), since small hilar cell tumors of the
ovary may not be visible on scans. Girls with classic salt-wasting
congenital adrenal hyperplasia and infertility or treatment-resistant
hyperandrogenism may be treated with laparoscopic bilateral
adrenalectomy. Any drugs causing hirsutism are stopped.
Spironolactone may be taken in doses of 50–100 mg orally
twice daily on days 5–25 of the menstrual cycle or daily if used
concomitantly with an oral contraceptive. Hyperkalemia and other
side effects are uncommon.
Finasteride inhibits 5α-reductase, the enzyme that converts
testosterone to active dihydrotestosterone in the skin. Given as 2.5-
mg doses orally daily, it provides modest reduction in hirsutism over
6 months—somewhat less than that achieved with spironolactone.
Finasteride is ineffective for androgenic alopecia in women. Side
effects are rare.
Flutamide inhibits testosterone binding to androgen receptors
and also suppresses serum testosterone. It is given orally in a
dosage of 250 mg/d for the first year and then 125 mg/d for
maintenance. Used with an oral contraceptive, it appears to be
more effective than spironolactone in improving hirsutism, acne, and
male pattern baldness. Women with congenital adrenal hyperplasia
who take replacement hydrocortisone experience decreased renal
cortisol clearance when treated with flutamide, resulting in lower
hydrocortisone dosage requirements; corticosteroid replacement
doses should be reduced when flutamide is added for treatment of
hirsutism. Hepatotoxicity has been reported but is rare.
Oral contraceptives stimulate menses (if that is desired) and
reduce acne vulgaris, but are less effective for hirsutism.
Contraceptives containing antiandrogen progestins include
desogestrel (Azurette, Kariva), drospirenone (Gianvi), or
norgestimate (Ortho Tri-Cyclen Lo). Cyproterone is a particularly
potent antiandrogen that is not available in the United States but is
available as Diane-35 in Canada and the United Kingdom. These
preparations may be more effective for treating hirsutism but are
associated with an increased risk of deep venous thrombosis.
Metformin may improve menstrual function in women with
PCOS and amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea but is less effective than
oral contraceptives. Metformin is not effective in promoting fertility
or in improving hirsutism in women with PCOS. Metformin therapy
is usually given with meals and is started at a dose of 500 mg/d with
breakfast for 1 week, then 500 mg with breakfast and dinner for 1
week, then 500 mg with breakfast and 1000 mg with dinner for 1
week, then 850–1000 mg with breakfast and dinner. The most
common side effects are dose-related gastrointestinal upset and
diarrhea. Patients are advised to take the highest tolerated dosage.
Metformin appears to be nonteratogenic. Although metformin
reduces insulin resistance, it does not cause hypoglycemia in
nondiabetics. Metformin is contraindicated in renal and hepatic
disease.
Simvastatin can reduce hirsutism in women with PCOS. In one
study, simvastatin 20 mg orally daily was given to women receiving
an oral contraceptive for PCOS. Besides improving their serum
lipid profiles, women receiving simvastatin had greater decreases in
hirsutism and serum free testosterone levels than the women
receiving an oral contraceptive alone.
Clomiphene is the treatment of choice for women with PCOS
and infertility. Over 6 months, clomiphene therapy resulted in a
22.5% rate of conception with live births. The rate of pregnancy
with multiple fetuses is 6%.
Women with classic congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-
hydroxylase deficiency) have hirsutism and adrenal insufficiency that
requires glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement.
However, women with partial “late onset” 21-hydroxylase
deficiency do not require hormone replacement. Treating such
women with dexamethasone risks iatrogenic Cushing syndrome and
is not particularly more effective than the other treatments for
hirsutism listed below.
Local treatment by shaving or depilatories, waxing, electrolysis,
or bleaching should be encouraged. Eflornithine (Vaniqa 13.9%)
topical cream retards hair growth when applied twice daily to
unwanted facial hair; improvement is noted within 4–8 weeks.
However, local skin irritation may occur. Hirsutism returns with
discontinuation. Laser therapy (photoepilation) is a fairly effective
treatment for facial hirsutism, particularly for women with dark hair
and light skin; longer-wavelength lasers are used for women with
darker skin. Complications of laser therapy include skin
hypopigmentation (rare) and hyper-pigmentation, which occurs in
20% but usually resolves; a paradoxical increase in hair growth
occurs infrequently. Repeated laser treatments are usually required.
Topical minoxidil, 2% solution applied twice daily to a dry
scalp, may be used to effectively treat women with androgenic
alopecia. Hypertrichosis is an unwanted side effect of topical
minoxidil, occurring in 3–5% of treated women; it may affect the
forehead, cheeks, upper lip, or chin. Hypertrichosis resolves within
1–6 months after the drug is stopped.
Antiandrogen treatments must be given only to non-pregnant
women. Women must be counseled to take oral contraceptives,
when indicated, and avoid pregnancy, since use during pregnancy
causes malformations and pseudo-hermaphroditism in male infants.
Banaszewska B et al. Effects of simvastatin and oral contraceptive
agent on polycystic ovary syndrome: prospective, randomized,
crossover trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Feb;92(2):456–61.
[PMID: 17105841]
 
Escobar-Morreale HF. Diagnosis and management of hirsutism.
Ann NY Acad Sci. 2010 Sep;1205:166–74. [PMID: 20840269]
 
Harrison S et al. Update on the management of hirsutism. Cleve
Clin J Med. 2010 Jun;77(6):388–98. [PMID: 20516250]
 
Koulouri O et al. Management of hirsutism. BMJ. 2009 Mar
27;338:b847. [PMID: 19329515]
 
Nestler JE. Metformin for the treatment of the polycystic ovary
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan;358(1):47–54. [PMID:
18172174]
 
Nouri K et al. Photoepilation: a growing trend in laser-assisted
cosmetic dermatology. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2008 Mar;7(1): 61–7.
[PMID: 18254814]
 
PRIMARY ALDOSTERONISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hypertension that may be severe or drug-resistant.
 Hypokalemia (in minority of patients) may cause polyuria,
polydipsia, muscle weakness.
 Elevated plasma and urine aldosterone levels and low plasma
renin level.
 
 General Considerations
Primary aldosteronism (hyperaldosteronism) is common and is
believed to account for 5–10% of all cases of hyper-tension.
Patients of all ages may be affected, but the peak incidence is
between 30–60 years. Excessive aldosterone production increases
sodium retention and suppresses plasma renin. It increases renal
potassium excretion, which can lead to hypokalemia.
Cardiovascular events are more prevalent in patients with
aldosteronism (35%) than in those with essential hypertension
(11%). Primary aldosteronism is most commonly caused by an
adrenal adenoma (Conn syndrome), and unilateral or bilateral
adrenal hyperplasia. Bilateral aldosteronism may be corticosteroid
suppressible, due to an autosomal-dominant genetic defect allowing
ACTH stimulation of aldosterone production.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients have hypertension that is typically moderate. Some patients
have only diastolic hypertension, without other symptoms and signs.
Edema is rarely seen in primary aldosteronism. About 37% of
patients have hypokalemia and may consequently have symptoms of
muscular weakness (at times with paralysis simulating periodic
paralysis), paresthesias with frank tetany, headache, polyuria, and
polydipsia.
B. Laboratory Findings
Screening for hyperaldosteronism is usually with PRA. About 20%
of hypertensive patients have a low PRA, and a significant portion
of these patients have primary aldosteronism. Initial screening can
also include both PRA and aldosterone to determine a
renin:aldosterone ratio (see below).
Plasma potassium should also be determined in hyper-tensive
individuals. However, hypokalemia, once thought to be the hallmark
of hyperaldosteronism, is present in only 37% of affected patients:
50% of those with an adrenal adenoma and 17% of those with
adrenal hyperplasia. Proper phlebotomy technique is important to
avoid spurious increases in potassium. The blood should be drawn
slowly with a syringe and needle (rather than a vacutainer) at least 5
seconds after tourniquet release and without fist-clenching. Plasma
potassium, rather than the routine serum potassium, should be
measured in cases of unexpected hyperkalemia, with the separation
of plasma from cells within 30 minutes of collection. Besides
hypokalemia, many patients with primary aldosteronism have
metabolic alkalosis with an elevated serum bicarbonate (HCO–3)
concentration.
Testing for primary aldosteronism should be done for all
hypertensive patients with hypokalemia, whether spontaneous or
diuretic induced. But since only a minority of affected patients have
hypokalemia, testing should also be considered for normokalemic
hypertensive patients with (1) treatment-resistant hypertension
(despite three drugs); (2) severe hypertension: > 160 mm Hg
systolic or > 100 mm Hg diastolic; (3) early-onset hypertension; (4)
low-renin hypertension; (5) hypertension with an adrenal mass; and
(6) family history of aldosteronism.
For a patient to be properly tested for primary aldosteronism,
certain antihypertensive medications should ideally be held.
Diuretics should be discontinued for 3 weeks. Dihydropyridine
calcium channel blockers can normalize aldosterone secretion, thus
interfering with the diagnosis. β-Blockers suppress PRA in patients
with essential hyper-tension. ACE inhibitors and α-blockers are less
likely to affect testing. Antihypertensive medications that have
minimal effects on the plasma aldosterone:renin ratio include
verapamil, hydralazine, prazosin, doxazosin, and terazosin.
However, it may be impractical to hold or change antihypertensive
medicines; in such cases, testing should proceed.
During the testing period, the patient should have an unrestricted
high sodium intake. The patient should be out of bed for at least 2
hours and seated for 5–15 minutes before the blood draw, which
should preferably be obtained between 8 AM and 10 AM. Renin is
measured as either PRA or direct renin concentration. Serum
aldosterone should ideally be measured with a tandem mass
spectrometry assay.
For patients who have not been receiving diuretics for at least 3
weeks, a plasma renin activity (PRA) that is normal or elevated
makes primary aldosteronism very unlikely. However, a low plasma
renin is insufficient to establish the presence of primary
aldosteronism, since many patients with essential hypertension have
a low PRA. A plasma aldosterone:renin ratio is a sensitive screening
test. Plasma aldosterone (ng/dL):PRA (ng/mL/h) ratios < 24
exclude primary aldosteronism, whereas ratios between 24 and 67
are suspicious and ratios > 67 are very suggestive of primary
aldosteronism. Such elevated ratios are not diagnostic; rather, they
indicate the need to document increased aldosterone secretion with
a 24-hour urine collection. Another problem with the
aldosterone:renin ratio is the use of different units and
measurements. For aldosterone, 1 ng/dL converts to 27.7 pmol/L.
For renin, a PRA of 1 ng/mL/h (12.8 pmol/L/min) converts to a
direct renin concentration of 5.2 ng/L (8.2 mU/L).
When the aldosterone:renin ratio is high, a 24-hour urine
collection is assayed for aldosterone, free cortisol, and creatinine. A
low PRA (< 5 mcg/L/h) with a urine aldosterone over 20 mcg/24 h
indicates primary aldosteronism.
Once primary aldosteronism is diagnosed, unilateral adrenal
aldosteronism may be distinguished from bilateral adrenal
aldosteronism by adrenal vein sampling and by further biochemical
testing. Plasma may be assayed for 18-hydroxycorticosterone; a
level > 100 ng/dL is seen with adrenal neoplasms, whereas levels <
100 ng/dL are non-diagnostic. In addition, a posture stimulation test
may be performed, but this requires overnight hospitalization. The
test is performed by drawing blood for aldosterone at 8 AM while
the patient is supine after overnight recumbency and again after the
patient is upright for 4 hours. Patients with a unilateral adrenal
adenoma usually have a baseline plasma aldosterone level > 20
ng/dL that does not rise. Patients with bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
typically have a baseline plasma aldosterone level < 20 ng/dL that
rises during upright posture. The accuracy of the posture stimulation
test is about 85%.
C. Imaging
All patients with biochemically confirmed primary aldosteronism
require a thin-section CT scan of the adrenals to screen for a rare
adrenal carcinoma. In the absence of a large adrenal carcinoma,
adrenal CT scanning cannot reliably distinguish unilateral from
bilateral aldosterone excess, having a sensitivity of 78% and a
specificity of 78% for unilateral aldosteronism. Therefore, the
decision to perform a unilateral adrenalectomy should not be based
solely on an adrenal CT scan. Instead, patients with primary
aldosteronism should be considered for a trial of medical therapy
with spironolactone or eplerenone. If medical therapy is ineffective
or if surgery is desired for an apparent adrenal adenoma, further
evaluation for surgical candidacy should be done with laboratory
testing. However, since CT scanning and laboratory testing are
often inconclusive, adrenal vein sampling is often required.
D. Adrenal Vein Sampling
Bilateral selective adrenal vein sampling is the most accurate way to
determine whether primary aldosteronism is due to unilateral
aldosterone excess, which can be treated by adrenalectomy. It is
indicated only to direct the surgeon to the correct adrenal and
should be performed only if surgery is contemplated. It is
particularly useful for patients who are not hypokalemic, who are
over age 40 years, or who have an adrenal adenoma < 1 cm
diameter. It is particularly difficult to catheterize the right adrenal
vein. Therefore, the venous samples are assayed for both
aldosterone and cortisol during a cosyntropin (ACTH1–24) infusion
to be sure that the sampling has included both adrenal veins. The
procedure has a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 100% but
only when performed by an experienced radiologist. The
complication rate is 2.5%. Risks can be minimized if the radiologist
avoids adrenal venography and limits the use of contrast.
 Screening
Hyperaldosteronism is the most common cause of refractory
hypertension in youth and middle-aged adults. The Endocrine
Society's Clinical Practice Guidelines recommend screening for
hyperaldosteronism in patients who have any of the following: (1)
blood pressure > 160/100 mm Hg; (2) drug-resistant hypertension;
(3) hypertension with spontaneous or diuretic-induced hypokalemia;
(4) hyper-tension with adrenal incidentaloma; (5) hypertension with
a family history of early-onset hypertension or cerebrovascular
accident before age 40 years; (6) hypertension and a first-degree
relative with primary aldosteronism.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of primary aldosteronism includes other
causes of hypokalemia (see Chapter 21) in patients with essential
hypertension, especially diuretic therapy. Chronic depletion of
intravascular volume stimulates renin secretion and secondary
hyperaldosteronism. Thus, it is important to discontinue diuretics
and ensure adequate hydration and sodium intake when assessing a
patient for primary hyperaldosteronism.
Excessive ingestion of real licorice (black and derived from anise)
or Sambuca (an Italian liqueur) can cause hypertension and
hypokalemia. Licorice and Sambuca contains glycyrrhizinic acid,
which has a metabolite that inhibits the adrenal enzyme 11β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, thereby blocking the production of
cortisol and causing accumulation of the precursor mineralocorticoid
deoxycorticosterone. Oral contraceptives may increase aldosterone
secretion in some patients. Renal vascular disease can cause severe
hypertension with hypokalemia; PRA is high, distinguishing it from
primary aldosteronism.
Excessive adrenal secretion of other corticosteroids (besides
aldosterone) may also cause hypertension with hypokalemia. This
occurs with certain congenital adrenal enzyme disorders such as
P450c11 deficiency (increased deoxycorticosterone with virilization
and deficient cortisol) or P450c17 deficiency (increased
deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, and progesterone but deficient
estradiol and testosterone). P450c17 deficiency results from a
defect in the 17-hydroxylase enzyme in both the adrenal and
ovarian steroidogenic pathways. Presenting signs include
hypertension and ambiguous genitalia or primary amenorrhea.
Urinary aldosterone secretion is < 20 mcg/24 h and plasma renin is
low in both P450c11 and P450c17 deficiencies. Primary cortisol
resistance can cause hypertension and hypokalemia; renin and
aldosterone are suppressed, while plasma levels of cortisol, ACTH,
and deoxycorticosterone are high. Liddle syndrome is an autosomal
dominant cause of hypertension and hypokalemia resulting from
excessive sodium absorption from the renal tubule; renin and
aldosterone levels are low. Thyrotoxicosis and familial periodic
paralysis may also present with hypokalemia. Hyperaldosteronism
may rarely be due to a malignant ovarian tumor.
 Complications
The incidence of cardiovascular complications from hyper-tension
are higher in primary aldosteronism than in idiopathic hypertension.
Following unilateral adrenalectomy for Conn syndrome, suppression
of the contralateral adrenal may result in temporary postoperative
hypoaldosteronism, 
characterized 
by 
hyperkalemia 
and
hypotension.
 Treatment
Conn syndrome (unilateral aldosterone-secreting adrenal adenoma)
is treated by laparoscopic adrenalectomy, though long-term therapy
with spironolactone or eplerenone is an option. Bilateral adrenal
hyperplasia is best treated with spironolactone or eplerenone.
Spironolactone also has anti-androgen activity and frequently
causes breast tenderness, gynecomastia, or reduced libido; it is
given at initial doses of 12.5–25 mg orally once daily. Eplerenone is
becoming favored for men since it does not have anti-androgen
effects; it is usually given in doses of 25–50 mg orally twice daily.
Blood pressure must be monitored daily when beginning these anti-
mineralocorticoid medications; significant drops in blood pressure
have occurred when these drugs are added to other
antihypertensives. Other antihypertensive drugs may also be
required. Glucocorticoidremediable aldosteronism is very rare but
may respond well to suppression with low-dose dexamethasone.
 Prognosis
The hypertension is reversible in about two-thirds of cases but
persists or returns in spite of surgery in the remainder. The
prognosis is much improved by early diagnosis and treatment. Only
2% of aldosterone-secreting adrenal tumors are malignant.
Quinkler M et al. Treatment of primary aldosteronism. Best Pract
Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Dec;24(6):923–32. [PMID:
21115161]
 
Reimel B et al. The management of aldosterone-producing adrenal
adenomas—does adrenalectomy increase costs? Surgery. 2010
Dec;148(6):1178–85. [PMID: 21134549]
 
Rossi GP. Prevalence and diagnosis of primary aldosteronism.
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2010 Oct;12(5):342–8. [PMID: 20665130]
 
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA & PARAGANGLIOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 “Attacks” of headache, perspiration, palpitations, anxiety.
 Hypertension, frequently sustained but often paroxysmal,
especially during surgery or delivery.
 Elevated urinary catecholamines or their metabolites. Normal
serum T4 and TSH.
 
 General Considerations
Both pheochromocytomas and non–head-neck paragangliomas are
tumors of the sympathetic nervous system. Pheochromocytomas
arise from the adrenal medulla and usually secrete both epinephrine
and 
norepinephrine. 
Paragangliomas 
(“extra-adrenal
pheochromocytomas”) arise from sympathetic paraganglia, often
metastasize, and secrete norepinephrine or are nonsecretory.
Excessive levels of norepinephrine or neuropeptide Y cause
hypertension, while epinephrine causes tachyarrhythmias. These
tumors may be located in either or both adrenals or anywhere along
the sympathetic nervous chain, and rarely in such aberrant locations
as the mediastinum, heart, or bladder.
These rare tumors are deceptive and deadly. They are a rare
cause of hypertension, being found in < 0.3% of hyper-tensive
individuals. The incidence is higher in patients with moderate to
severe hypertension. About two to three new cases per million
population are diagnosed annually. However, in autopsy cases, the
incidence of pheochromocytoma is 250–1300 cases per million,
indicating that most cases are not diagnosed during life.
About 
25% 
of 
patients 
with
pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas harbor germline mutations
making them prone to develop the tumor. The chance of harboring
a germline mutation is nearly 100% in patients with a family history
of pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas and 17% in patients
without 
any 
known 
family 
history 
of
pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas.
Pheochromocytomas develop in about 20% of patients with type
2 von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) disease (hemangiomas of the retina,
cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord; hyperparathyroidism;
pancreatic cysts; endolymphatic sac tumors; cystadenomas of the
adnexa or epididymis; renal cysts, adenomas, and carcinomas);
inheritance is autosomal dominant. Patients with VHL develop
pheochromocytomas that are less likely to be malignant or extra-
adrenal, more likely to be bilateral, and more likely to present at an
early age. Pheochromocytomas that arise in patients with VHL
secrete 
exclusively 
norepinephrine 
and 
its 
metabolite
normetanephrine. Therefore, individuals who carry type 2 VHL
mutations should be screened for pheochromocytoma with plasma
normetanephrine levels.
MEN 2A is associated with pheochromocytomas and medullary
thyroid 
carcinoma. MEN 
2B 
is 
associated 
with
pheochromocytomas, aggressive medullary thyroid carcinoma,
mucosal neuromas, and marfinoid habitus. von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) is associated with an increased
risk of pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas as well as cutaneous
neurofibromas, optic gliomas, vascular anomalies, hamartomas,
malignant nerve sheath tumors, and smooth-bordered café au lait
spots. Familial paraganglioma can be caused by mutations in the
genes encoding suscinate dehydrogenase (SDH) subunits B, C, or
D. Patients with such germline mutations are more apt to have
bilateral pheochromocytomas or multicentric paragangliomas.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs (Table 26–12)
Pheochromocytomas can be lethal unless they are diagnosed and
treated appropriately. Catastrophic hypertensive crisis and fatal
cardiac arrhythmias can occur spontaneously or may be triggered
by intravenous contrast dye or glucagon injection, needle biopsy of
the mass, anesthesia, or surgical procedures. Paroxysms can be
triggered by exercise, bending, lifting, or emotional stress. Certain
drugs can precipitate attacks: monoamine oxidase (MAO)
inhibitors, caffeine, nicotine, decongestants, amphetamines, cocaine,
ionic intravenous contrast, and epinephrine. Bladder paragangliomas
may present with paroxysms during micturition.
 
Table 26-12. Clinical manifestations of pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma.
 
Blood pressure
Hypertension: severe or mild, paroxysmal
or sustained; orthostasis;
hypotension/shock; normotension
 
Vasospasm
Cyanosis, Raynaud syndrome, gangrene;
severe radial artery vasospasm with
thready pulse; falsely low blood pres-sure
by radial artery transducer
 
Multisystem
crisis
Severe hypertension/hypotension, fever,
encephalopathy, renal failure, ARDS,
death
 
Cardiovascular
Palpitations, dysrhythmias, chest pain,
acute coronary syndrome,
cardiomyopathy, heart failure, cardiac
paragan-gliomas
 
Gastrointestinal
Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting,
weight loss, intestinal ischemia;
pancreatitis, cholecystitis, jaundice;
rupture of abdominal aneurysm;
constipation, toxic megacolon
 
Metabolic
Hyperglycemia/diabetes, lactic acidosis,
fevers
 
Neurologic
Headache, paresthesias, numbness,
dizziness, CVA, TIA, hemiplegia,
hemianopsia, seizures, hemorrhagic
stroke; skull metastases may impinge on
brain structures, optic nerve, or other
cranial nerves; spinal metastases may
impinge on cord or nerve roots
 
Pulmonary
Dyspnea; hypoxia from ARDS
 
Psychiatric
Anxiety (attacks or constant); depression;
chronic fatigue; psychosis
 
Renal
Renal insufficiency, nephrotic syndrome,
malignant nephrosclerosis; large tumors
often involve the kidneys and renal
vessels
 
Skin
Apocrine sweating during paroxysms,
drenching sweats as attack subsides;
eczema; mottled cyanosis during
paroxysm
 
Ectopic
hormones
ACTH (Cushing syndrome); VIP (Verner-
Morrison syndrome); PTHrP
(hypercalcemia); erythropoietin
(erythrocytosis)
 
Children
More commonly have sustained
hypertension, diaphoresis, visual
changes, polyuria/polydipsia, seizures,
edematous or cyanotic hands; more
commonly harbor germline mutations,
multiple tumors, and paragangliomas
 
Women
More symptomatic than men: more
frequent headache, weight loss,
numbness, dizziness, tremor, anxiety,
and fatigue
 
Pregnancy
Hypertension mimicking eclampsia;
hypertensive multisystem crisis during
vaginal delivery; postpartum shock or
fever; high mortality
 
General
laboratory
Leukocytosis, erythrocytosis,
eosinophilia
 
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; ARDS, acute respiratory distress
syndrome; CVA, cerebrovascular accident; PTHrp, parathyroid hormone–
related protein; TIA, transient ischemic attack; VIP, vasoactive intestinal
peptide.
Used, with permission, from Gardner D, Shoback D (editors). Greenspan's
Basic and Clinical Endocrinology. 9th edition, McGraw-Hill, NY, 2011.
Paroxysms typically produce hypertension (90%) and such
symptoms as severe headache (80%), perspiration (70%), and
palpitations (60%); other symptoms may include anxiety (50%), a
sense of impending doom, or tremor (40%). Vasomotor changes
during an attack cause mottled cyanosis and facial pallor; as the
attack subsides, facial flushing may occur as a result of reflex
vasodilation. 
Epinephrine 
secretion 
by 
an 
adrenal
pheochromocytoma may cause episodic tachyarrhythmias,
hypotension, or even syncope. Acute coronary syndrome can be
caused by coronary vasoconstriction. Confusion, psychosis,
seizures, transient ischemic attacks, or stroke may occur with
cerebrovascular vasoconstriction or hemorrhagic stroke. Aortic
aneurysms may dissect and rupture. Abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, and even ischemic bowel can be due to splanchnic
vasoconstriction. Large or hemorrhagic abdominal tumors can also
cause abdominal pain. Peripheral vasoconstriction can cause
Raynaud phenomenon or even gangrene. Patients may experience
nervousness and irritability, increased appetite, and loss of weight.
Other patients have pulmonary edema and heart failure due to
cardiomyopathy. Cytokine release can cause nephrotic syndrome
or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Although most
patients are symptomatic, some patients are normotensive and
asymptomatic, particularly when the tumor is nonsecretory or
discovered at an early stage.
B. Laboratory Findings
Plasma fractionated free metanephrines is the single most sensitive
test for secretory pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas.
Normal levels rule out pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma with
some certainty and the work-up can usually end there. However,
misleading elevations in metanephrines or normetanephrines can be
caused by factors such as physical or emotional stress, sleep apnea,
and MAO inhibitors. Therefore, patients with elevated plasma
metanephrines or normetanephrines levels require further evaluation.
Assay of urinary fractionated metanephrines and creatinine
effectively confirms most pheochromocytomas that were detected
by elevated plasma fractionated meta-nephrines. A 24-hour urine
specimen is usually obtained, although an overnight or shorter
collection may be used; patients with pheochromocytomas generally
have more that 2.2 mcg of total metanephrine per milligram of
creatinine, and more than 135 mcg total catecholamines per gram
creatinine. Urinary assay for total metanephrines is about 97%
sensitive for detecting functioning pheochromocytomas. Urinary
assay for vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) is not usually required.
 
Table 26–13. Factors potentially causing misleading catecholamine
results: High-performance liquid chromatography with
electrochemical detection (HPLC-ECD).
 
1Increases catecholamine excretion.
2May cause confounding peaks on HPLC chromatograms.
3Decreases catecholamine excretion.
Some drugs and foods can interfere with certain assays for
catecholamines, and stresses can also cause misleading elevations in
catecholamine excretion (Table 26–13). About 10% of
hypertensive patients have a misleadingly elevated level of one or
more tests.
Serum chromogranin A is elevated in 90% of patients with
pheochromocytoma and the levels correlate with tumor size, being
higher in patients with metastatic disease. Serum chromogranin A
levels can be misleadingly elevated in patients with azotemia or
hypergastrinemia, and in those treated with corticosteroids or
proton pump inhibitors. Serum may also be assayed for neuron-
specific 
enolase; 
high 
levels 
implicate 
a 
malignant
pheochromocytoma, while normal levels are nonspecific.
Pharmacologic provocative and suppressive tests that evaluate
the rise or fall in blood pressure are usually not required or
recommended.
Hyperglycemia is present in about 35% of patients but is usually
mild. Leukocytosis is common. The ESR is sometimes elevated.
PRA may be increased by catecholamines.
Genetic testing should ideally be performed on all patients with
pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. Testing for VHL, ret
protooncogene, and SDHB/SDHD mutations is advisable. Family
members may then be screened for the specific gene mutation.
C. Imaging
1. CT and MRI scanning—Imaging should not usually replace
biochemical testing, since incidental adrenal adenomas are common
(2–4% of scans) and can be misleading. When a
pheochromocytoma is suspected because of biochemical testing or
a genetic condition predisposing to pheochromocytoma, a CT scan
of the abdomen is performed, with thin sections through the
adrenals. A noncontrast CT should be followed by a CT scan
using nonionic contrast, which reduces the risk of
catecholamine release from a pheochromocytoma and a
hypertensive crisis. Glucagon should not be used during scanning,
since it can provoke hypertensive crisis; similarly, intravenous
contrast can precipitate hypertensive crisis, particularly in patients
whose hypertension is uncontrolled.
MRI scanning has the advantage of not requiring intravenous
contrast dye; its lack of radiation makes it the imaging of choice
during pregnancy and childhood. Both CT and MRI scanning have
a sensitivity of about 90% for adrenal pheochromocytoma and a
sensitivity of 95% for adrenal tumors over 0.5 cm in diameter.
However, both CT and MRI are less sensitive for detecting
recurrent tumors, metastases, and extra-adrenal paragangliomas. If
no adrenal tumor is found, the scan is extended to include the entire
abdomen, pelvis, and chest.
2. 
Nuclear 
imaging—A 
whole-body 123I-meta-
iodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scan can localize tumors with a
sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 92%. It is less sensitive for
MEN 2A- or MEN 2B-related pheochromocytomas and for
metastases. 
Preoperative 123I-MIBG scanning is not usually
required to confirm that a unilateral adrenal mass is a
pheochromocytoma in a patient with classic clinical and biochemical
presentation. Preoperative whole-body 123I-MIBG scanning can be
useful when the CT scan cannot locate a suspected
pheochromocytoma, making a paraganglioma more likely; it can
also be useful when the CT scan is ambiguous for
pheochromocytoma. It is prudent to perform a whole-body 123I-
MIBG scan about 3 months postoperatively to determine if
metastatic or recurrent tumor is present. Drugs that reduce 123I-
MIBG uptake should be avoided, including tricyclic antidepressants
and 
cyclobenzaprine 
(6 
weeks), 
amphetamines, 
nasal
decongestants, phenothiazines, haloperidol, diet pills, labetalol, and
cocaine (2 weeks).
Somatostatin receptor imaging using 111In-labeled octreotide is
only 25% sensitive for detecting an adrenal pheochromocytoma.
However, 111In-labeled octreotide scanning is quite sensitive for
detecting extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas (paragangliomas) and
metastatic pheochromocytomas, sometimes locating tumors that
were missed by 123I-MIBG scanning.
PET scanning usually detects tumors using 18F-labeled
deoxyglucose (18FDG-PET) or 18F-labeled dopamine (18FDA-
PET), and may demonstrate tumors that are not visible on 123I-
MIBG scanning. Combining PET scan with noncontrast CT
produces a PET/CT fusion scan with exceptional sensitivity.
 Differential Diagnosis
Pheochromocytoma may be misdiagnosed as thyrotoxicosis,
essential hypertension, myocarditis, glomerulonephritis or other
renal lesions, toxemia of pregnancy, eclampsia, and psychoneurosis
(anxiety attack). It can sometimes be mistaken for an acute
abdomen.
Conditions that have manifestations similar to those of
pheochromocytoma include the following: essential labile
hypertension, renal hypertension, anxiety attacks, thyrotoxicosis,
toxemia of pregnancy, acute intermittent porphyria, hypogonadal
vascular instability (hot flushes), cocaine or amphetamine use, and
clonidine withdrawal. Patients taking nonselective MAO inhibitor
antidepressants can have hypertensive crisis after eating foods that
contain tyramine (eg, fermented cheeses, aged wines, certain beers,
fava beans, vegemite, marmite). Patients with erythromelalgia can
have hypertensive crises; their episodic painful flushing and leg
swelling are relieved by cold, distinguishing this condition from
pheochromocytoma. Pheochromocytomas can cause chest pain and
ECG changes that mimic acute cardiac ischemia. Renal artery
stenosis can cause severe hypertension and may coexist with
pheochromocytoma.
False-positive testing for catecholamines and metabolites occurs
in about 10% of hypertensives, but levels are usually < 50% above
normal and typically normalize with repeat testing.
 Complications
All of the complications of severe hypertension may be
encountered. In addition, a catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy
may develop. Severe heart failure and cardiovascular collapse may
develop in patients during a paroxysm. Sudden death may occur
due to cardiac arrhythmia. ARDS has been reported. Hypertensive
crises with sudden blindness or cerebrovascular accidents are not
uncommon. Paroxysms may be spontaneous or precipitated by
sudden movement, exertion, manipulation, vaginal delivery,
emotional stress, trauma, or surgical removal of the tumor.
,
,
g
Decongestant medications, fluoxetine, and other selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors may induce hypertensive paroxysms and death.
Occasionally, the initial manifestation of pheochromocytoma may be
hypotension or even shock.
After removal of the tumor, a state of severe hypotension and
shock (resistant to epinephrine and norepinephrine) may ensue with
precipitation of kidney disease or myocardial infarction.
Hypotension and shock may occur from spontaneous infarction or
hemorrhage of the tumor.
On rare occasions, a patient dies as a result of the complications
of diagnostic tests or during surgery. During surgery,
pheochromocytoma cells may be seeded within the peritoneum,
resulting in multifocal recurrent tumors.
 Medical Treatment
Patients must receive adequate treatment for hypertension and
tachyarrhythmias 
prior 
to 
surgery 
for
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma. Patients are advised to use a
portable sphyngomanometer and measure their blood pressures
daily and immediately during paroxysms.
α -Blockers are typically administered preparatory to surgery.
Phenoxybenzamine is a long-acting nonselective α-blocker with a
half-life of 24 hours; it is given initially in a dosage of 10 mg orally
every 12 hours, increasing gradually by about 10 mg/d about every
3 days until hypertension is controlled. Maintenance doses range
from 10 mg/d to 120 mg/d. Selective α1-blockers may be used:
doxazosin (half-life 22 hours), terazosin (half-life 12 hours), or
prazosin (half-life 3 hours). Patients given preoperative
phenoxybenzamine experience less intraoperative hypertension but
greater post-resection hypotension than patients given preoperative
selective α1-blockers. Optimal α-blockade is achieved when supine
arterial pressure is below 140/90 mm Hg or as low as possible for
the patient to have a standing arterial pressure above 80/45 mm Hg.
Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine ER or nicardipine ER)
are very effective and may be used with or without α-blockers.
They are superior to phenoxybenzamine for long-term use, since
they cause less fatigue, nasal congestion, and orthostatic
hypotension. For acute hypertensive crisis (systolic blood pressure
> 170 mm Hg) a nifedipine 10-mg capsule may be chewed and
swallowed. Nifedipine is quite successful for treating acute
hypertension in patients with pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma,
even at home; it is reasonably safe as long as the blood pressure is
monitored.
β -Blockers (eg, metoprolol XL) are required by most patients
after institution of α-blockade or calcium channel blockade. The use
of a β-blocker as initial antihypertensive therapy has resulted in
“unopposed alpha” that causes paradoxical worsening of
hypertension. Labetalol has combined α- and β-blocking activity
and is an effective agent but can cause paradoxical hypertension if
used as the initial antihypertensive agent. Labetalol can also interfere
with catecholamine determinations in some laboratories and reduces
the tumor's uptake of radioisotopes, such that it must be
discontinued for at least 4–7 days before diagnostic scanning with
123I-MIBG or 18FDA-PET or 131I-MIBG therapy.
 Surgical Treatment
Surgical 
removal 
of 
pheochromocytomas 
or 
abdominal
paragangliomas is the treatment of choice. For surgery, a team
approach—endocrinologist, anesthesiologist, and surgeon—is
critically important. Laparoscopic surgery is preferred, but large and
invasive tumors require open laparotomy. Patients with small familial
or bilateral pheochromocytomas may undergo selective resection of
the tumors, sparing the adrenal cortex; however, there is a
recurrence rate of 10% over 10 years.
Prior to surgery, blood pressure control should be maintained for
a minimum of 4–7 days or until optimal cardiac status is established.
The ECG should be monitored until it becomes stable. (It may take
a week or even months to correct ECG changes in patients with
catecholamine myocarditis, and it may be prudent to defer surgery
until then in such cases.) Patients must be very closely monitored
during surgery to promptly detect sudden changes in blood pressure
or cardiac arrhythmias.
Intraoperative severe hypertension is managed with continuous
intravenous nicardipine (a short-acting calcium channel blocker), 2–
6 mcg/kg/min, or nitroprus-side, 0.5–10 mcg/kg/min. Prolonged
nitroprusside 
administration 
can 
cause 
cyanide 
toxicity.
Tachyarrhythmia is treated with intravenous atenolol (1 mg boluses),
esmolol, or lidocaine.
Autotransfusion of 1–2 units of blood at 12 hours preoperatively
plus generous intraoperative volume replacement reduces the risk of
postresection hypotension caused by desensitization of the vascular
α1-receptors. Shock may therefore occur following removal of the
pheochromocytoma. It is treated with intravenous saline or colloid
and high doses of intravenous norepinephrine. Intravenous 5%
dextrose is infused postoperatively to prevent hypoglycemia.
Surgical histopathology for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
cannot reliably determine whether a tumor is malignant. Therefore,
all pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas must be approached
as possibly malignant. Even if no metastases are visible at the time
of surgery, patients require lifetime follow-up. Therefore, it is
essential to recheck plasma fractionated metanephrine levels
postoperatively, at least 2–4 weeks after surgery and when the
patient has minimal residual pain. It is also prudent to perform a
whole-body 123I-MIBG scan about 3 months postoperatively, since
previously undetected metastases may become visible. Thereafter,
blood pressure and symptoms must be rechecked regularly for life;
plasma fractionated metanephrines are also rechecked regularly, at
least every 6 months for 5 years, and immediately if hypertension or
symptoms recur or if metastases become evident.
For inoperable or metastatic tumors, metyrosine reduces
catecholamine synthesis; the initial dosage is 250 mg four times
daily, increased daily by increments of 250–500 mg to a maximum
of 4 g/d. Metyrosine causes central nervous system side effects and
crystalluria; 
hydration 
must 
be 
ensured. 
Metastatic
pheochromocytomas 
may 
be 
treated 
with 
combination
chemotherapy (eg, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine)
or with high doses of 131I-MIBG.
 Prognosis
The malignancy of a pheochromocytoma cannot be determined by
histologic examination. A tumor is considered malignant if
metastases are present; this may take many years to become
clinically evident. Therefore, lifetime surveillance is required.
Malignancy is more likely for paragangliomas and for large
pheochromocytomas (> 7 cm in diameter). The prognosis is good
for patients with smaller, benign pheochromocytomas that are
resected before causing cardiovascular damage. Hypertension
usually resolves after successful surgery but may persist or return in
25% of patients despite successful surgery. Although this may be
essential hypertension, biochemical reevaluation is then required,
looking for a second or metastatic pheochromocytoma.
Before the advent of blocking agents, the surgical mortality rate
was as high as 30%, but this has rapidly decreased. With optimal
management, the surgical mortality rate is < 3%.
Patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma
have a 5-year survival rate of 44% after surgery; patients who have
their primary tumor resected and subsequently receive high-dose
131I-MIBG therapy have been reported to have a 5-year survival
rate of 75%. Patients with a heavy and increasing tumor burden and
distant metastases have a worse prognosis; patients with multiple
pulmonary metastases have limited survival. Those with metastases
limited to the abdomen have a better prognosis. Some patients have
an indolent malignancy and experience a prolonged survival.
De Jong WH et al. Elevated urinary free and deconjugated
catecholamines after consumption of a catecholamine-rich diet. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2851–5. [PMID:
20382681]
 
Jacobson AF et al. 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy for
the detection of neuroblastoma and pheochromocytoma: results of
a meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2596–
606. [PMID: 20392867]
 
Lenders JW. Biochemical diagnosis of pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2009 Jun;70(3):161–5.
[PMID: 19296926]
 
Shen WT et al. One hundred two patients with
pheochromocytoma treated at a single institution since the
introduction of laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Arch Surg. 2010
Sep;145(9): 893–7. [PMID: 20855761]
 
Weingarten TN et al. Comparison of two preoperative medical
management strategies for laparoscopic resection of
pheochromocytoma. Urology. 2010 Aug;76(2):508.e6–11.
[PMID: 20546874]
 
PANCREATIC & DUODENAL
NEUROENDOCRINE TUMORS*
 
ISLET CELL TUMORS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Half the tumors are nonsecretory; weight loss, abdominal pain, or
jaundice may be presenting signs.
 Secretory tumors cause a variety of manifestations depending on
the hormones secreted.
 
 General Considerations
The pancreatic islets are composed of several types of cells, each
with distinct chemical and microscopic features: the A cells (20%)
secrete glucagon, the B cells (70%) secrete insulin, and the D cells
(5%) secrete somatostatin or gastrin. F cells secrete “pancreatic
polypeptide.”
*Diabetes mellitus and hyperglycemia are discussed in Chapter 27.
 
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors constitute about 2% of all
pancreatic tumors. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors are rare, with
an incidence of about 10 per million yearly. About 60% are
nonfunctioning. Although most pancreatic and duodenal
neuroendocrine tumors arise spontaneously, they may occur as part
four different inherited disorders: MEN 1, von Hippel-Lindau
disease (VHL), neurofibromatosis 1 (NF-1) and the rare tuberous
sclerosis complex (TSC).
Insulinomas are usually benign (about 90%) and secrete
excessive amounts of insulin (as well as proinsulin and C-peptide),
which causes hypoglycemia. Insulinomas are solitary in 95% of
sporadic cases but are multiple in about 90% of cases arising in
MEN 1. (See Chapter 27.)
Gastrinomas secrete excessive quantities of the hormone gastrin
(as well as “big” gastrin), which stimulates the stomach to
hypersecrete acid, thereby causing hyper-plastic gastric rugae and
peptic ulceration (Zollinger–Ellison syndrome). About 50% of
gastrinomas are malignant and metastasize to the liver. Gastrinomas
are typically found in the duodenum (49%), pancreas (24%), or
lymph nodes (11%). Sporadic Zollinger–Ellison syndrome is rarely
suspected at the onset of symptoms; typically, there is a 5-year
delay in diagnosis. About 22% of patients have MEN 1. In patients
with MEN 1, gastrinomas usually present at a younger age;
hyperparathyroidism may occur from 14 years preceding the
Zollinger–Ellison diagnosis to 38 years afterward.
Glucagonomas are usually malignant; liver metastases are
ordinarily present by the time of diagnosis. They usually secrete
other hormones besides glucagon, often gastrin.
Somatostatinomas are very rare and are associated with weight
loss, diabetes mellitus, malabsorption, and hypochlorhydria.
Other rare neuroendocrine tumors secrete excessive amounts of
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), a substance that causes
profuse watery diarrhea (Verner–Morrison syndrome).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Presenting symptoms and signs of gastrinomas include abdominal
pain (75%), diarrhea (73%), heartburn (44%), bleeding (25%), or
weight loss (17%). Endoscopy usually discovers prominent gastric
folds (94%).
The 5-, 10-, and 20-year survival rates with MEN 1 are 94%,
75%, and 58%, respectively, while the survival rates for sporadic
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome are 62%, 50%, and 31%, respectively.
(See Chapter 15.)
Initial symptoms of glucagonoma often include weight loss,
diarrhea, nausea, peptic ulcer, or necrolytic migratory erythema.
About 35% of patients ultimately develop diabetes Mellitus. The
median survival is 34 months after diagnosis.
Islet cell tumors can secrete ectopic hormones in addition to
native hormones, often in combinations producing a variety of
clinical syndromes. They may secrete ACTH, producing Cushing
syndrome. Secretion of serotonin can produce an atypical carcinoid
syndrome manifested by pain, diarrhea, and weight loss; skin
flushing occurs in 39% of patients. Pancreatic carcinoid tumors
grow slowly but usually metastasize to local and distant sites,
particularly to other endocrine organs.
B. Imaging
Localization of noninsulinoma pancreatic islet cell tumors and their
metastases is best done with somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
(SRS); SRS detects about 75% of noninsulinomas. CT and MRI
are also useful. Insulinomas can usually be located preoperatively by
endoscopic ultra-sonography. For insulinomas, preoperative
localization studies are less successful and have the following
sensitivities: ultrasonography 25%, CT 25%, endoscopic ultra-
sonography 27%, transhepatic portal vein sampling 40%,
arteriography 
45%, 
intraoperative 
palpation 
55%, 
and
intraoperative pancreatic ultrasound 75%. Nearly all insulinomas
can be successfully located at surgery by intraoperative palpation
and ultrasound. An abdominal CT scan is usually obtained, but
extensive preoperative localization procedures, especially with
invasive methods, are not required. Tumors may be located in the
pancreatic head or neck (57%), body (15%), or tail (19%) or in the
duodenum (9%).
 Treatment
Direct resection of the tumor (or tumors), which often spread
locally, is the primary form of therapy for all types of islet cell
neoplasms. In Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, gastrinomas are most
commonly found in the duodenum but also in the pancreas. Gastric
hyperacidity in Zollinger–Ellison syndrome is treated with a proton
pump inhibitor at quadruple the usual doses. Proton pump inhibitors
increase serum gastrin, which is the tumor marker for gastrinomas;
hypercalcemia also stimulates gastrin release. Insulinomas are
resected. However, in MEN 1, insulinomas are rarely cured by
surgery, with the exception of total pancreatectomy. The
hypoglycemia caused by insulinomas may be counteracted by
verapamil or diazoxide.
Octreotide LAR is useful in the therapy of islet cell tumors with
the exception of insulinoma; subcutaneous injections of 20–30 mg
are required every 4 weeks. Treatment with octreotide LAR
improves the symptoms caused by excessive VIP but does not halt
tumor growth. Selective radioembolization of hepatic metastases
can be accomplished with the use of yttrium-90(Y)-labeled resin or
glass microspheres. The use of streptozocin, doxorubicin, and
asparaginase, especially for malignant insulinoma, has produced
some encouraging results, though these drugs are quite toxic.
Combined chemotherapy with 5-fluouracil, dacarbzine, and
epirubicin has also been effective (see Table 39–11).
The prognosis in these neoplasms is variable. The surgical
complication rate is about 40%, with patients commonly developing
fistulas and infections. Extensive pancreatic resection may cause
diabetes mellitus. The overall 5-year survival is higher with
functional tumors (77%) than with nonfunctional ones (55%) and
higher with benign tumors (91%) than with malignant ones (55%).
Ehehalt F et al. Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas.
Oncologist. 2009 May;14(5):456–67. [PMID: 19411317]
 
Ekeblad S. Islet cell tumours. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;654:771–
89. [PMID: 20217524]
 
Imamura M. Recent standardization of treatment strategy for
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. World J Gastroenterol. 2010
Sep 28;16(36):4519–25. [PMID: 20857521]
 
Smith JK et al. Complications after pancreatectomy for
neuroendocrine tumors: a national study. J Surg Res. 2010
Sep;163(1): 63–8. [PMID: 20599224]
 
Walter T et al. Evaluation of the combination of 5-fluouracil,
dacarbazine, and epirubicin in patients with advanced well-
differentiated neuroendocrine tumors. Clin Colorectal Cancer.
2010 Oct;9(4):248–54. [PMID: 20920998]
 
DISEASES OF THE TESTES &
MALE BREAST
 
MALE HYPOGONADISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Diminished libido and erections.
 Fatigue, depression, reduced exercise endurance.
 Decreased growth of body hair.
 Testes may be small or normal in size.
 Serum testosterone or free testosterone is decreased.
 Serum gonadotropins (LH and FSH) are decreased or normal in
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; they are increased in testicular
failure (hypergonadotropic hypogonadism).
 
 General Considerations
Male hypogonadism is caused by deficient testosterone secretion by
the testes. It may be classified according to whether it is due to (1)
insufficient 
gonadotropin 
secretion 
by 
the 
pituitary
(hypogonadotropic); (2) pathology in the testes themselves
(hypergonadotropic); (3) both (Table 26–14). Partial male
hypogonadism may be difficult to distinguish from the physiologic
reduction in serum testosterone seen in normal aging, obesity, and
illness.
 Etiology
A. Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism
A deficiency in FSH and LH may be isolated or associated with
other pituitary hormonal abnormalities. (See Hypopituitarism.)
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be primary (failure to enter
puberty) or acquired. Causes of acquired hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism include pituitary or hypothalamic tumors,
granulomatous 
diseases, 
lymphocytic 
hypophysitis, 
or
hemochromatosis. Other causes of acquired hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism include Cushing syndrome, adrenal insufficiency, and
thyroid hormone excess or deficiency. Genetic conditions (eg,
Kallman syndrome or PROKR2 mutations) account for about 40%
of cases of acquired hypogonadotropic hypogonadism that is
isolated, severe (serum testosterone < 150 ng/dL), and apparently
idiopathic.
 
Table 26–14. Causes of male hypogonadism.
 
Hypogonadotropic (Low or
Normal LH)
Hypergonadotropic (High
LH)
Aging
Alcohol
Chronic illness
Congenital syndromes
Constitutional delay
Cushing syndrome
Drugs
     Estrogen
     GnRH agonist (leuprolide)
     Ketoconazole
     Marijuana
     Prior androgens
     Spironolactone
Hemochromatosis
Hypopituitarism
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic
Kallmann syndrome
17-Ketosteroid reductase
Aging
Antitumor chemotherapy
Bilateral anorchia
Idiopathic
Klinefelter syndrome
Leprosy
Lymphoma
Male climacteric
Mumps
Myotonic dystrophy
Noonan syndrome 
Orchitis
Radiation therapy
Sertoli cell-only
syndrome
Testicular trauma
deficiency
Malnourishment
Major medical or surgical
illnesses
Obesity (BMI > 30)
Prader-Willi syndrome
Testicular trauma
Tuberculosis
Uremia
BMI, body mass index; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; LH,
luteinizing hormone.
The main causes of male partial acquired hypogonado-tropic
hypogonadism (serum testosterone 150–300 ng/dL) are functional
and include obesity, poor health, or normal aging. Spermatogenesis
is usually preserved. After age 40, serum total testosterone declines
variably by an average of 1–2% per year; serum free testosterone
levels decline even faster, since sex hormone binding globulin
increases with age. After age 70 years, 28% of men have low
serum total testosterone and 68% have low serum free testosterone
levels, compared with the levels found in young men. Serum levels
of free testosterone are lower in men aged 40–70 compared with
younger men, without any increase in serum LH. After age 70, LH
levels tend to rise, indicating a contribution of primary gonadal
dysfunction with advanced age.
There is considerable clinical and laboratory overlap between
patients with partial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and those
with normal aging, obesity, or illness. A multicenter European study
concluded that the diagnosis of testosterone deficiency in older men
should include a serum testosterone <320 ng/mL and at least three
of the following six symptoms: erectile dysfunction, poor morning
erection, low libido, depression, fatigue, and inability to perform
vigorous activity. Such men are most likely to benefit from
testosterone replacement.
B. Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism (Testicular Failure)
A failure in testicular secretion of testosterone causes a rise in LH. If
testicular Sertoli cell function is deficient, FSH will be elevated.
Conditions that can cause testicular failure include viral infection (eg,
mumps), irradiation, cancer chemotherapy, autoimmunity, myotonic
dystrophy, uremia, XY gonadal dysgenesis, partial 17-ketosteroid
reductase deficiency, Klinefelter syndrome, and male climacteric.
Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY and its variants) is the most
common chromosomal abnormality among males, with an incidence
of about 1:500. It is caused by the expression of an abnormal
karyotype, classically 47,XXY. Other forms are common, eg,
46,XY/47,XXY mosaicism, 48,XXYY, 48,XXXY, or 46,XX
males.
The manifestations of Klinefelter syndrome are variable. Testes
feel normal during childhood, but during adolescence they usually
become firm, fibrotic, small, and nontender to palpation. Although
puberty occurs at the normal time, the degree of virilization is
variable. About 85% of patients have some gynecomastia at
puberty. All causes of gynecomastia (Table 26–15) must be
differentiated from Klinefelter syndrome. Other common findings
include tall stature and abnormal body proportions that are unusual
for hypogonadal men (height greater than arm span; crown-pubis
length greater than pubis-floor). Patients with multiple X or Y
chromosomes are more apt to have mental deficiency and other
abnormalities such as clino-dactyly or synostosis. They may also
exhibit problems with coordination and social skills. Other problems
include a higher incidence of breast cancer, chronic pulmonary
disease, varicosities of the legs, and diabetes mellitus (8% of
patients); impaired glucose tolerance occurs in an additional 19% of
patients.
The diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome is confirmed by
karyotyping or by determining the presence of RNA for X-inactive-
specific transcriptase (XIST) in peripheral blood leukocytes by
polymerase chain reaction.
On semen analysis, most men (about 95%) with classic
Klinefelter syndrome have azoospermia, although some sperm
production is often present in their early teens. Men with
46,XY/47,XXY mosaicism may have spontaneous fertility. Also,
testicular biopsy reveals sperm in up to 50% of affected patients,
allowing some of them to be fertile with the use of in vitro
fertilization using intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI).
XY gonadal dysgenesis describes several conditions that result
in the failure of the testes to develop normally. SRY is a gene on the
Y chromosome that initiates male sexual development. Mutations in
SRY result in testicular dysgenesis. Affected individuals lack
testosterone, which results in sex reversal: female external genitalia
with a blind vaginal pouch, no uterus, and intra-abdominal
dysgenetic gonads. Affected individuals are raised as girls and
appear normal until their lack of pubertal development and
amenorrhea leads to the diagnosis. Intra-abdominal rudimentary
testes have an increased risk of developing a malignancy and are
usually resected. Patients are considered women and receive
estrogen replacement therapy.
 
Table 26–15. Causes of gynecomastia.
 
Idiopathic
Busulfan
Chorionic
gonadotropin
Physiologic causes
     Neonatal period
     Puberty
     Aging
     Obesity
Cimetidine
Clomiphene
Cyclophosphamide
Diazepam
Diethylstilbestrol
Digitalis preparations
Endocrine diseases
     Androgen resistance
syndromes
     Aromatase excess syndrome
(sporadic or familial)
     Diabetic lymphocytic mastitis
     Hyperprolactinemia
     Hyperthyroidism
     Klinefelter syndrome
     Male hypogonadism
     Partial 17-ketosteroid
     reductase deficiency
Estrogens (oral or
topical)
Ethionamide
Finasteride
Flutamide
Goserelin
HAART (highly active
antiretroviral therapy)
Haloperidol
Hydroxyzine
Isoniazid
Ketoconazole
Lavender oil (topical)
Leuprolide
Systemic diseases
     Androgen insensitivity
     Chronic liver disease
     Chronic kidney disease
     Neurologic disorders
     Refeeding after starvation
     Spinal cord injury
Marijuana
Meprobamate
Methadone
Methyldopa
Metoclopramide
Mirtazapine
Molindone
Nilutamide
Neoplasms
     Adrenal tumors
     Bronchogenic carcinoma
     Carcinoma of the breast
     Ectopic hCG: lung,
hepatocellular, gastric, renal
carcinomas
     Testicular tumors
Omeprazole
Opioids
Penicillamine
Phenothiazines
Progestins
Protease inhibitors
Reserpine
Risperidone
Drugs (partial list)
     Alcohol
     Alkylating agents
     Amiodarone
     Anabolic steroids
     Androgens
     Bicalutamide
Somatropin (growth
hormone)
Soy ingestion
Spironolactone
Tea tree oil (topical)
Testosterone
Thioridazine
Tricyclic
antidepressants
C. Androgen Insensitivity
Partial resistance to testosterone is a rare condition in which
phenotypic males have variable degrees of apparent hypogonadism,
hypospadias, cryptorchism, and gynecomastia. Serum testosterone
levels are normal.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hypogonadism that is congenital or acquired during childhood
presents as delayed puberty. Men with acquired hypogonadism
have variable manifestations. Most men experience decreased
libido. Others complain of erectile dysfunction, poor morning
erection, or hot sweats. Men often have depression, fatigue, or
decreased ability to perform vigorous physical activity. The
presenting complaint may also be infertility, gynecomastia,
headache, fracture, or other symptoms related to the cause or result
of the hypogonadism. The patient's history often gives a clue to the
cause (Table 26–14).
Physical signs associated with hypogonadism may include
decreased body, axillary, beard, or pubic hair; such diminished
sexual hair growth is not reliably present except after years of
severe hypogonadism. Men in whom hypogonadism develops tend
to lose muscle mass and gain weight due to an increase in
subcutaneous fat. Examination should include measurements of arm
span and height. Testicular size should be assessed with an
orchidometer (normal volume is about 10–25 mL; normal length is
usually over 6 cm). Testicular size may decrease but usually remains
within the normal range in men with postpubertal hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, but it may be diminished with testicular injury or
Klinefelter syndrome. The testes must also be carefully palpated for
masses, since Leydig cell tumors may secrete estrogen and present
with hypogonadism. The testicles must be carefully examined for
evidence of trauma, infiltrative lesions (eg, lymphoma), or ongoing
infection (eg, leprosy, tuberculosis).
B. Laboratory Findings
The evaluation for hypogonadism begins with a morning serum
testosterone or free testosterone measurement (or both) using a
reliable assay. Most radioimmunoassays and ELISAs for
testosterone are inaccurate when serum testosterone levels are
<300 ng/dL. More accurate testosterone assays rely on extraction
and chromatography, followed by mass spectrometry or
immunoassay. Serum testosterone levels are considered low if they
are confirmed to be <320 ng/dL (11 nmol/L). Free testosterone is
best measured by calculation, using accurate assays for testosterone
and sex hormone binding globulin. Serum free testosterone levels
are considered low if they are confirmed to be <64 pg/mL (220
pmol/L).
Normal ranges for serum testosterone have been derived from
nonfasting morning blood specimens, which tend to be the highest of
the day. Later in the day, serum testosterone levels can be 25–50%
lower. Therefore, a serum testosterone drawn fasting or late in the
day may be misleadingly below the “normal range.” Serum
testosterone levels in men are highest at age 20–30 years and
slightly lower at age 30–40 years; testosterone falls gradually but
progressively after age 40 years. Testing for serum free testosterone
is especially important for detecting hypogonadism in elderly men,
who generally have high levels of sex hormone binding globulin. A
low serum testosterone should be verified with a repeat assay and
further evaluated with serum LH and FSH levels. LH and FSH tend
to be high in patients with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism but
low or inappropriately normal in men with hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism or normal aging. Patients with low gonadotropins
may be further evaluated for other pituitary abnormalities, including
hyperprolactinemia.
Testosterone stimulates erythropoiesis in men, causing the normal
red blood count range to be higher in men than in women; mild
anemia is common in men with hypogonadism, with red blood
counts below the normal male range. For men with long-standing
male hypogonadism, bone densitometry is recommended. Men with
severe osteoporosis may require treatment with bisphosphonates
and vitamin D, in addition to testosterone replacement therapy. (See
Osteoporosis section.)
1. 
Hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism—A 
serum 
PRL
determination is obtained but may be elevated for many reasons
(see Table 26–2). Men with gynecomastia may be screened for
partial 
17-ketosteroid 
reductase 
deficiency 
with 
serum
determinations for androstenedione and estrone, which are elevated
in this condition. X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia is a rare
condition 
in 
which 
a DAX-1 
gene 
mutation 
causes
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and azoospermia, which usually
presents in adolescence; the associated primary adrenal
insufficiency usually presents in childhood, but it may remain
undiagnosed into adulthood. The serum estradiol level may be
elevated in patients with cirrhosis and in rare cases of estrogen-
secreting tumors (testicular Leydig cell tumor or adrenal carcinoma).
Men with no discernible definite cause for hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism should be screened for hemochromatosis and have
an MRI of the pituitary and hypothalamic region to look for a tumor
or other lesion. (See Hypopituitarism.)
2. 
Hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism—Men 
with
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism have low serum testosterone
levels with a compensatory increase in FSH and LH. Klinefelter
syndrome can be confirmed by karyotyping or by measurement of
leukocyte XIST. Testicular biopsy is usually reserved for younger
patients in whom the reason for primary hypogonadism is unclear.
 Treatment
Testosterone replacement is beneficial to most men with
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism or severe hypogonado-tropic
hypogonadism. Men with symptoms of hypogonadism (see above)
and a repeatedly low serum testosterone or free testosterone can
also benefit from testosterone replacement. For men with borderline
low serum testosterone levels and marginal hypogonadal symptoms,
the decision to treat should consider the potential benefits versus
risks (see below). Such men may be given a trial of testosterone
therapy for several months while monitoring their response.
Testosterone therapy should not be administered to men with
active prostate or breast cancer, or erythrocytosis. In men over age
50 years, a digital prostate examination and serum prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) level should be done before beginning testosterone
therapy. Men with symptoms of prostatic hypertrophy, a palpable
prostate nodule, or a PSA > 4 ng/mL (> 3 ng/mL in men of African
ancestry) should have a urologic evaluation prior to treatment.
Serum PSA should be measured yearly during therapy. Similarly,
testosterone therapy is not given to men with untreated sleep apnea
or congestive heart failure. In men who have coronary risk factors
or are over age 65, special attention should be given to improving
cardiac risk factors (eg, controlling hypertension or hyperlipidemia)
and administering low-dose aspirin while receiving testosterone
replacement.
Topical testosterone gel is the preferred method for administering
testosterone. Topical 1% testosterone gel is commercially available
as Androgel or Testim (2.5-g and 5-g packets); Androgel is
odorless, while Testim has a musky odor. Both are available in 5 g
packets of gel. Androgel is also available in a pump bottle that
administers 1.25 g per activation. The starting dose is 5 g (50 mg
testosterone) applied once daily to clean, dry skin of the shoulders,
upper arms, or abdomen. The skin serves as a reservoir that slowly
releases about 10% of the testosterone into the blood; serum
testosterone levels reach a steady state in 1–3 days. The gel should
not be applied to the genitals. The entire contents of a packet are
squeezed onto the palm and then immediately applied. After the
application of testosterone gel, the hands should be washed. The
application site should be allowed to dry for 5–10 minutes before
donning a shirt to prevent the gel from rubbing off the skin. A shirt
must be worn during close contact with women or children to
prevent transfer of testosterone to them. The serum testosterone
level should be determined about 14 days after starting therapy; if
the level remains below normal or the clinical response is
inadequate, the daily dose may be increased to 7.5 g or 10 g.
Testosterone transdermal systems (skin patches) are available in
two formulations for application to nongenital skin. Testoderm II, 5
mg/d leaves a sticky residue but causes little skin irritation.
Androderm, 5–10 mg rightly, adheres more tightly to the skin but
may cause more skin irritation. Both produce reliable serum levels
of testosterone that are somewhat lower that those achieved with
injections. The patch systems also suffer from being rather
inconvenient and expensive.
Parenteral testosterone (enanthate or cypionate) is often used
and has the advantage of low cost. The usual dose is 200 mg every
2 weeks or 300 mg every 3 weeks. The preparation is oil based
and is usually given intramuscularly in the gluteal area. The dose is
adjusted according to the patient's response.
Testosterone buccal tablets (Striant) are placed between the
upper lip and gingivae. One or two 30-mg tablets are thus retained
and changed every 12 hours. They should not be chewed or
swallowed.
Oral androgen preparations include methyltestosterone and
fluoxymesterone. These oral preparations have rarely caused liver
tumors or peliosis hepatis with long-term use. Cholestatic jaundice
occurs in 1–2% of patients but usually remits after the medication is
discontinued. The oral androgens are not as effective as parenteral
testosterone.
A. Benefits of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Testosterone therapy usually benefits men with low serum
testosterone and at least three manifestations of hypogonadism as
noted above. Testosterone therapy can improve overall mood,
sense of well-being, sexual desire, and erectile function. It also
increases physical vigor and muscle strength as manifested in
measurements of leg-press and chest-press strength. Testosterone
replacement also improves exercise endurance and stair climbing
ability.
B. Risks of Testosterone Replacement Therapy
Testosterone replacement therapy appears to increase the risk of
cardiovascular events in men older than age 65 with cardiac risk
factors or preexisting angina. This increased risk may be due to the
decrease in serum HDL that can occur with testosterone therapy.
Testosterone therapy can aggravate benign prostatic hypertrophy
(BPH). However, aggravation of voiding problems is uncommon. In
men with BPH, finasteride may be coadministered with testosterone
to reduce prostate size. The incidence of prostate cancer does not
appear to be increased by testosterone therapy. However,
testosterone therapy is contraindicated in the presence of active
prostate cancer. Hypogonadal men who have had a prostatectomy
for low-grade prostate cancer, and who have remained in complete
remission for several years, may have testosterone therapy given
cautiously while monitoring sensitive serum PSA levels.
Erythrocytosis develops in some men who are treated with
testosterone. Erythrocytosis is more common with intramuscular
injections of testosterone enanthate than with transcutaneous
testosterone. However, no increase in the incidence of
thromboembolic events has been reported.
Testosterone therapy tends to aggravate sleep apnea in older
men, likely through central nervous system effects. Surveillance for
sleep apnea is recommended during testosterone therapy and a
formal evaluation with nocturnal pulse oximetry recording is
recommended for all high-risk patients with snoring, obesity,
partner's report of apneic episodes, nocturnal awakening,
unrefreshing sleep with daytime fatigue, or hypertension.
Men who are treated with testosterone frequently experience
some increase in acne that is usually mild and tolerated; topical
antiacne therapy or a reduction in testosterone replacement dosage
may be required. Increases in intraocular pressure have occurred
during testosterone therapy. During the initiation of testosterone
replacement therapy, gynecomastia develops in some men, which
usually is mild and tends to resolve spontaneously; switching from
testosterone injections to testosterone transdermal gel may help this
condition.
 Prognosis of Male Hypogonadism
If hypogonadism is due to a pituitary lesion, the prognosis is that of
the primary disease (eg, tumor, necrosis). The prognosis for
restoration of virility is good if testosterone is given.
Basaria S et al. Adverse events associated with testosterone
administration. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 8;363(2):109–22. [PMID:
20592293]
 
Bhasin S et al. Testosterone therapy in men with androgen
deficiency syndrome: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):2536–59.
[PMID: 20525905]
 
Dwyer AA et al. The long-term clinical follow-up and natural
history of men with adult-onset idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Sep;95(9): 4235–
43. [PMID: 20591981]
 
Mäkinen JI et al. Androgen replacement therapy in late-onset
hypogonadism: current concepts and controversies. Gerontology.
2011;57(3):193–202. [PMID: 20689266]
 
Wu FC et al; EMAS Group. Identification of late-onset
hypogonadism in middle-aged and elderly men. N Engl J Med.
2010 Jul 8;363(2):125–35. [PMID: 20554979]
 
TESTICULAR TUMORS IN ADULTS (See also Chapter
39)
About 95% of testicular tumors are germ cell tumors (seminomas or
nonseminomas). Seminomas do not produce α-fetoprotein, but
about 5–10% produce some hCG. Nonseminomas, on the other
hand, produce increased serum levels of one or both of these
markers in about 90% of cases. Men with liver disease may have
misleadingly high levels of α-fetoprotein. Most germ cell tumors are
sensitive to cisplatin-based combined pre-chemotherapy. Sperm
banking is advised.
About 5% of testicular tumors are Leydig or Sertoli cell tumors.
Leydig cell tumors tend to produce estrogen (75%) and cause
gynecomastia and impotence on that basis; they may sometimes
produce androgens that can cause pseudo-precocious puberty in
boys. Sertoli cell tumors may also produce estrogen (30%) with
feminization; gynecomastia may be due to hCG secretion (25%).
Some testicular tumors may be small and nonpalpable yet may
secrete sufficient amounts of hCG or estrogen to cause
gynecomastia or impotence. Testicular ultrasound may help reveal
small tumors.
After unilateral orchiectomy for testicular cancer, an elevated
FSH level prior to further treatment indicates a patient at higher risk
for cancer in the remaining testis.
CRYPTORCHISM
One or both testes may be absent from the scrotum at birth in about
20% of premature or low-birth-weight male infants and in 3–6% of
full term infants. Cryptorchism is found in 1–2% of males after 1
year of age but must be distinguished from retractile testes, which
require no treatment. Cryptorchism should be corrected before age
12–24 months in an attempt to reduce the risk of infertility, which
occurs in up to 75% of men with bilateral cryptorchism and in 50%
of men with unilateral cryptorchism. It is not clear, however,
whether such early orchiopexy improves ultimate fertility. Some
patients have underlying hypogonadism.
The ultimate incidence of significant testicular neoplasia is about
0.002% in normal males, 0.06% in cryptorchid males, and up to
5% in patients with intra-abdominal testes.
If the testes are not palpable, ultrasound or MRI can be used to
locate them. Alternatively, hCG, 1500 units intramuscularly daily for
3 days, causes a significant rise in testosterone if the testes are
present. Therapy with hCG results in a testicular descent rate of
about 25%.
Orchiopexy decreases the risk of neoplasia when performed
before 10 years of age. Orchiectomy after puberty is an option for
intra-abdominal testes.
Husmann DA. Testicular descent: a hypothesis and review of
current controversies. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2009 Jun;6(4):
491–5. [PMID: 19550384]
 
Travis LB et al. Testicular cancer survivorship: research strategies
and recommendations. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):
1114–30. [PMID: 20585105]
 
Wood HM et al. Cryptorchidism and testicular cancer: separating
fact from fiction. J Urol. 2009 Feb;181(2):452–61. [PMID:
19084853]
 
GYNECOMASTIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Enlargement of the male breast, often asymmetric or unilateral.
 Glandular gynecomastia characterized by tenderness.
 Fatty gynecomastia typically nontender.
 Must be distinguished from tumors or mastitis.
 
 General Considerations
Gynecomastia refers to a female-appearing male breast. Pubertal
gynecomastia is common and the swelling usually subsides
spontaneously within a year. Gynecomastia is particularly common
in teenagers who are very tall or overweight. Gynecomastia
develops in about 50% of athletes who abuse androgens and
anabolic steroids. It is seen in Klinefelter syndrome, which affects
1:500 men. (See section on Klinefelter syndrome.) Gynecomastia
can develop in HIV-infected patients treated with highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART), especially in men receiving
efavirenz or didanosine; breast enlargement resolves spontaneously
in 73% of patients within 9 months. Gynecomastia is common
among elderly men, particularly when there is associated weight
gain. However, it can be the first sign of a serious disorder.
The causes of gynecomastia are multiple and diverse (Table 26–
15).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Gynecomastia is graded according to severity: I, mild; II, moderate;
III, severe. Fatty gynecomastia is usually diffuse and nontender.
Glandular enlargement beneath the areola may be tender. Pubertal
gynecomastia is characterized by tender discoid enlargement of
breast tissue 2–3 cm in diameter beneath the areola.
B. Laboratory Findings
Obtain plasma levels of PRL (see Hyperprolactinemia) and the β-
subunit of hCG (β-hCG). Detectable levels of β-hCG implicate a
testicular tumor (germ cell or Sertoli cell) or other malignancy
(usually lung or liver). Detectable low levels of serum β-hCG (< 5
mU/mL) may be reported in men with primary hypogonadism and
high serum LH levels if the assay for β-hCG cross-reacts with LH.
Measurements of plasma testosterone and LH are valuable in the
diagnosis of primary or secondary hypogonadism. A low
testosterone and high LH are seen in primary hypogonadism. High
testosterone levels plus high LH levels characterize partial androgen
resistance. Serum estradiol is determined but is usually normal;
increased levels may result from testicular tumors, increased β-
hCG, liver disease, obesity, adrenal tumors (rare), true
hermaphroditism (rare), or gain of function mutations affecting the
aromatase gene (rare). Many estrogens and substances with
estrogenic activity are not detected by estradiol assays. Serum TSH
(sensitive) and FT4 levels are also determined. A karyotype (for
Klinefelter syndrome) is obtained in men with persistent
gynecomastia without obvious cause.
Investigation of unclear cases should include a chest radiograph
to search for metastatic or bronchogenic carcinoma. Needle biopsy
with cytologic examination may be performed on suspicious areas
of male breast enlargement (especially when unilateral or
asymmetric) to distinguish gynecomastia from tumor or mastitis.
 Treatment
Pubertal gynecomastia often resolves spontaneously within 1–2
years. Drug-induced gynecomastia resolves after the offending drug
is removed. Spironolactone can be stopped, with substitution of a
selective aldosterone antagonist such as eplerenone. Patients with
painful or persistent gynecomastia may be treated with medical
therapy, which is usually continued for 9-12 months.
Selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) therapy is
much more effective for glandular (“lumpy”) gynecomastia than for
diffuse fatty gynecomastia. Examples of SERMs include raloxifene
and tamoxifen. There is some evidence that raloxifene, taken orally
in a dose of 60 mg daily, may be the more effective drug.
Aromatase inhibitor (AI) therapy, such as anastrozole and
letrozole, is reasonably effective for gynecomastia. Anastrozole, 1
mg orally daily, reduces breast volume significantly in adolescent
boys over a 6-month course of therapy. Serum levels of estrogen
fall slightly while testosterone levels rise significantly. Concerns
about long-term AI therapy in adolescents include the possibility of
inducing osteoporosis and delaying epiphyseal fusion, which could
cause an increase in adult height.
Surgical correction is reserved for patients with persistent or
severe gynecomastia, since results are often disappointing.
Endoscopically assisted transaxillary liposuction and subcutaneous
mastectomy may produce acceptable results. Generally, it is
prudent to treat patients for gynecomastia only when it becomes a
troubling and continuing problem for them.
Braunstein GD. Clinical practice. Gynecomastia. N Engl J Med.
2007 Sep 20;357(12):1229–37. [PMID: 17881754]
 
Devalia HL et al. Current concepts in gynaecomastia. Surgeon.
2009 Apr;7(2):114–9. [PMID: 19408804]
 
Eckman A et al. Drug-induced gynecomastia. Expert Opin Drug
Saf. 2008 Nov;7(6):691–702. [PMID: 18983216]
 
Johnson RE et al. Gynecomastia: pathophysiology, evaluation, and
management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Nov;84(11):1010–5.
[PMID: 19880691]
 
Mauras N et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
anastrozole in pubertal boys with recent-onset gynecomastia. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Aug;94(8):2975–8. [PMID:
19470631]
 
AMENORRHEA & MENOPAUSE
(SEE ALSO CHAPTER 18)
 
PRIMARY AMENORRHEA
Menarche ordinarily occurs between ages 11 and 15 years
(average in the United States: 12.7 years). The failure of any
menses to appear is termed “primary amenorrhea,” and evaluation
is commenced (1) at age 14 years if neither menarche nor any
breast development has occurred or if height is in the lowest 3%, or
(2) at age 16 years if menarche has not occurred.
 Etiology of Primary Amenorrhea
The causes of primary amenorrhea include hypothalamic-pituitary
causes, 
hyperandrogenism, 
ovarian 
causes,
pseudohermaphroditism, uterine causes, and pregnancy.
A. Hypothalamic-Pituitary Causes (with Low or Normal FSH)
A genetic deficiency of GnRH and gonadotropins may be isolated
or associated with other pituitary deficiencies or diminished olfaction
(Kallmann 
syndrome). 
Hypothalamic 
lesions, 
particularly
craniopharyngioma, may be present. Pituitary tumors may be
nonsecreting or may secrete PRL or GH. Cushing syndrome may
be caused by corticosteroid treatment, a cortisol-secreting adrenal
tumor, or an ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor. Hypothyroidism can
delay adolescence. Head trauma or encephalitis can cause
gonadotropin deficiency. Primary amenorrhea may also be caused
by constitutional delay of adolescence, organic illness, vigorous
exercise (eg, ballet dancing, running), stressful life events, dieting, or
anorexia nervosa; however, these conditions should not be assumed
to account for amenorrhea without a full physical and
endocrinologic evaluation. (See section on Hypopituitarism.)
B. Hyperandrogenism (with Low or Normal FSH)
Excess testosterone may be secreted by adrenal tumors or by
adrenal hyperplasia caused by steroidogenic enzyme defects such
as P450c21 deficiency (salt-wasting) or P450c11 deficiency
(hypertension). Ovarian tumors or polycystic ovaries may also
secrete excess testosterone. Androgenic steroids may also cause
this syndrome.
C. Ovarian Causes (with High FSH)
Gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome and variants; see below) is a
frequent cause of primary amenorrhea. Ovarian failure due to
autoimmunity is a common cause. Rare deficiencies in certain
ovarian steroidogenic enzymes are causes of primary hypogonadism
without virilization: 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency
(adrenal insufficiency with low serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone) and
P450c17 deficiency (hypertension and hypokalemia with high serum
17-hydroxyprogesterone). A whole-body deficiency in P450
aromatose (P450arom) activity produces female hypogonadism
associated with polycystic ovaries, tall stature, osteoporosis, and
virilization.
D. Pseudohermaphroditism (with High LH)
An enzymatic defect in testosterone synthesis may present as a
sexually immature phenotypic girl with primary amenorrhea.
Complete androgen resistance (testicular feminization) presents as a
phenotypic young woman without sexual hair but with normal breast
development and primary amenorrhea. In both cases, the uterus is
absent and testes are intra-abdominal or cryptorchid. Intra-
abdominal testes are surgically resected. Such patients are treated
as normal but infertile, hypogonadal women.
E. Uterine Causes (with Normal FSH)
Congenital absence or malformation of the uterus may be
responsible for primary amenorrhea, as may an unresponsive or
atrophic endometrium. An imperforate hymen is occasionally the
reason for the absence of visible menses.
F. Pregnancy (with High hCG)
Pregnancy may be the cause of primary amenorrhea even when the
patient denies ever having had sexual intercourse.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with primary amenorrhea require a thorough history and
physical examination to look for signs of the conditions noted
above. Headaches or visual field abnormalities implicate a
hypothalamic or pituitary tumor. Signs of pregnancy may be
present. Blood pressure abnormalities, acne, and hirsutism should
be noted. Short stature may be seen with an associated GH or
thyroid hormone deficiency. Short stature with manifestations of
gonadal dysgenesis indicates Turner syndrome (see below).
Olfaction testing screens for Kallmann syndrome. Obesity and short
stature may be signs of Cushing syndrome. Tall stature may be due
to eunuchoidism or gigantism. Hirsutism or virilization suggests
excessive testosterone.
An external pelvic examination plus a rectal examination should
be performed to assess hymen patency and the presence of a
uterus.
B. Laboratory Findings
The initial endocrine evaluation should include serum determinations
of FSH, LH, PRL, testosterone, TSH, FT4, and hCG (pregnancy
test). Patients who are virilized or hypertensive require serum
electrolyte determinations and further hormonal evaluation. MRI of
the hypothalamus and pituitary is used to evaluate teens with
primary amenorrhea and low or normal FSH and LH—especially
those with high PRL levels. Girls who have a normal uterus and high
FSH without the classic features of Turner syndrome may require a
karyotype to diagnose X chromosome mosaicism.
 Treatment
Treatment of primary amenorrhea is directed at the underlying
cause. Girls with permanent hypogonadism are treated with ERT
(see below).
Deligeoroglou E et al. Evaluation and management of adolescent
amenorrhea. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Sep;1205:23–32. [PMID:
20840249]
 
Gamboa S et al. Clinical inquiries. What's the best way to manage
athletes with amenorrhea? J Fam Pract. 2008 Nov;57(11): 749–
50. [PMID: 19006626]
 
SECONDARY AMENORRHEA & MENOPAUSE
Secondary amenorrhea is defined as the absence of menses for 3
consecutive months in women who have passed menarche.
Menopause is defined as the terminal episode of naturally occurring
menses; it is a retrospective diagnosis, usually made after 6 months
of amenorrhea.
 Etiology
The causes of secondary amenorrhea include pregnancy,
hypothalamic-pituitary causes, hyperandrogenism, uterine causes,
premature ovarian failure, and menopause.
A. Pregnancy (High hCG)
Pregnancy is the most common cause for secondary amenorrhea in
women of childbearing age. The differential diagnosis includes rare
ectopic secretion of hCG by a choriocarcinoma or bronchogenic
carcinoma.
B. Hypothalamic-Pituitary Causes (with Low or Normal FSH)
The hypothalamus must release GnRH in a pulsatile manner for the
pituitary to secrete gonadotropins. GnRH pulses occurring more
than once per hour favor LH secretion, while less frequent pulses
favor FSH secretion. In normal ovulatory cycles, GnRH pulses in
the follicular phase are rapid and favor LH synthesis and ovulation;
ovarian luteal progesterone is then secreted that slows GnRH
pulses, causing FSH secretion during the luteal phase. Most women
with hypothalamic amenorrhea have a persistently low frequency of
GnRH pulses.
Secondary “hypothalamic” amenorrhea may be caused by
stressful life events such as school examinations or leaving home.
Such women usually have a history of normal sexual development
and irregular menses since menarche. Amenorrhea may also be the
result of strict dieting, vigorous exercise, organic illness, or anorexia
nervosa. Intrathecal infusion of opioids causes amenorrhea in most
women. These conditions should not be assumed to account for
amenorrhea without a full physical and endocrinologic evaluation.
Young women in whom the results of evaluation and progestin
withdrawal test are normal have noncyclic secretion of
gonadotropins resulting in anovulation. Such women typically
recover spontaneously but should have regular evaluations and a
progestin withdrawal test about every 3 months to detect loss of
estrogen effect.
PRL elevation due to any cause (see section on hyper-
prolactinemia) may cause amenorrhea. Pituitary tumors or other
lesions may cause hypopituitarism. Corticosteroid excess of any
cause suppresses gonadotropins.
C. Hyperandrogenism (with Low-Normal FSH)
Elevated serum levels of testosterone can cause hirsutism,
virilization, and amenorrhea. In PCOS, GnRH pulses are
persistently rapid, favoring LH synthesis with excessive androgen
secretion; reduced FSH secretion impairs follicular maturation.
Progesterone administration can slow the GnRH pulses, thus
favoring FSH secretion that induces follicular maturation. Rare
causes include adrenal P450c21 deficiency, ovarian or adrenal
malignancies, ectopic ACTH secretion by a malignancy, and
Cushing disease. Anabolic steroids also cause amenorrhea.
D. Uterine Causes (with Normal FSH)
Infection of the uterus commonly occurs following delivery or D&C
but may occur spontaneously. Endometritis due to tuberculosis or
schistosomiasis should be suspected in endemic areas. Endometrial
scarring may result, causing amenorrhea (Asherman syndrome).
Such women typically continue to have monthly premenstrual
symptoms. The vaginal estrogen effect is normal.
E. Premature Ovarian Failure (with High FSH)
This refers to primary hypogonadism that occurs before age 40
years. It affects about 1% of women. About 30% of such cases are
due to autoimmunity against the ovary. About 8% of cases are due
to X chromosome mosaicism. Other causes include surgical bilateral
oophorectomy, radiation therapy for pelvic malignancy, and
chemotherapy. Women who have undergone hysterectomy are
prone to premature ovarian failure even though the ovaries were left
intact. Myotonic dystrophy, galactosemia, and mumps oophoritis
are additional causes. Other cases may be familial or idiopathic.
Ovarian failure is usually irreversible.
F. Menopause (with High FSH)
“Climacteric” is defined as the period of natural physiologic decline
in ovarian function, generally occurring over about 10 years. By
about age 40 years, the remaining ovarian follicles are those that are
the least sensitive to gonadotropins. Increasing titers of FSH are
required to stimulate estradiol secretion. Estradiol levels may
actually rise during early climacteric.
The normal age for menopause in the United States ranges
between 48 and 55 years, with an average of about 51.5 years.
Serum estradiol levels fall and the remaining estrogen after
menopause is estrone, derived mainly from peripheral aromatization
of adrenal androstenedione. Such peripheral production of estrone
is enhanced by obesity and liver disease. Individual differences in
y
y
estrone levels partly explain why the symptoms noted above may be
minimal in some women but severe in others.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Psychological symptoms of “climacteric” may include depression
and irritability. Women may experience fatigue, insomnia, headache,
diminished libido, or rheumatologic symptoms. Vasomotor
instability (hot flushes) is experienced by 80% of women, lasting
seconds to many minutes. Hot flushes with drenching sweats may
be most severe at night or may be triggered by emotional stress.
Some women continue to menstruate for many months despite
symptoms of estrogen deficiency. The acute symptoms of estrogen
deficiency noted above tend to decline in severity within several
years after menopause. However, about 35% of women have
symptoms for more than 5 years. The late manifestations of
estrogen deficiency include urogenital atrophy with vaginal dryness
and dyspareunia; dysuria, frequency, and incontinence may occur.
Increased bone osteoclastic activity increases the risk for
osteoporosis and fractures. The skin becomes more wrinkled.
Increases in the LDL:HDL cholesterol ratio cause an increased risk
for arteriosclerosis.
A careful pelvic examination is always required to check for
uterine or adnexal enlargement and to obtain a Papanicolaou smear
and a vaginal smear for assessment of estrogen effect. Various life
stresses, vigorous exercise, and “crash” dieting all predispose to
amenorrhea; however, such factors should not be assumed to
account for amenorrhea without a complete workup to screen for
other causes.
B. Laboratory Findings
Since pregnancy is the most common cause of amenorrhea, women
of childbearing age are immediately screened with a serum or urine
hCG (pregnancy test). An elevated hCG overwhelmingly indicates
pregnancy; false-positive testing may occur very rarely with ectopic
hCG secretion (eg, choriocarcinoma or bronchogenic carcinoma).
Women without an elevated hCG receive further laboratory
evaluation including serum PRL, FSH, LH, TSH, and plasma
potassium. Hyperprolactinemia or hypopituitarism (without obvious
cause; see section on Hypopituitarism) should prompt an MRI
study of the pituitary region. Routine testing for kidney and liver
function (eg, BUN, serum creatinine, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase,
and alanine aminotransferase) is also performed. A serum
testosterone level is obtained in hirsute or virilized women. Patients
with manifestations of hypercortisolism receive a 1-mg overnight
dexamethasone suppression test for initial screening (see section on
Cushing syndrome). Nonpregnant women without any laboratory
abnormality may receive a 10-day course of a progestin (eg,
medroxyprogesterone acetate, 10 mg/d); absence of withdrawal
menses typically indicates a lack of estrogen or a uterine
abnormality.
 Treatment
Therapy of symptomatic hypogonadism generally consists of
estrogen replacement therapy (see below). Slow, deep breathing
can ameliorate hot flushes. For women with severe hot flushes who
cannot take estrogen, gabapentin is quite effective in oral doses
titrated up to 800 mg every 8 hours; gabapentin is frequently
associated with side effects such as fatigue, headache, dizziness,
and cognitive impairment. Tamoxifen and raloxifene offer bone
protection but aggravate hot flushes. Treatment or prevention of
postmenopausal osteoporosis with bisphosphonates such as
alendronate, risedronate, or intravenous zoledronic acid (see section
on Osteoporosis) is another therapeutic option. Women with low
serum testosterone levels may experience hypoactive sexual desire
disorder (HSDD) that may respond to low-dose testosterone
replacement.
 Hormone Replacement Therapy
Two large, prospective studies have evaluated the effect of HRT on
postmenopausal women. The Women's Health Initiative (WHI)
monitored 16,606 mostly-older post-menopausal women in the
United States in a prospective, double-blinded, placebo-controlled
study of postmenopausal HRT. A control group of women taking a
daily placebo was compared with (1) women receiving daily
conventional-dose oral combined HRT (conjugated equine
estrogens [CEE] 0.625 mg/d with medroxyprogesterone acetate
2.5 mg/d) and (2) women, having had a hysterectomy, receiving
only CEE 0.625 mg/d. The California Teachers Study prospectively
followed up 71,237 postmenopausal women of all ages (mean age
63 years, range 36–94 years) for mortality, breast cancer, and
other outcomes.
The WHI and California Teachers Study risk–benefit findings
(described below) have dramatically changed postmenopausal
HRT. The overall use of HRT has declined. When HRT is
prescribed, lower-dose estrogen regimens are preferred over
conventional-dose therapy. Estrogen preparations other than CEE
have become increasingly favored. Transdermal and vaginal
estrogen preparations are widely preferred over oral estrogen
replacement. Also, the potential adverse effects of progestins are
now recognized, such that women taking very low-dose estrogen
replacement may not require progestins or may receive progestin
therapy only periodically, if at all. For moderate- to high-dose
estrogen therapy, progestins are being used in lower doses. Also,
clinicians are now tending to prescribe progesteroneeluting
intrauterine 
devices 
and 
oral 
progestins 
other 
than
medroxyprogesterone acetate.
A. Benefits of Estrogen Replacement Therapy
In the California Teachers Study, HRT in women under age 60 was
associated with a dramatic 46% reduction in all-cause mortality,
particularly cardiovascular disease. This association of HRT and
lower mortality may suffer from self-selection bias. Nevertheless,
there appears to be a survival advantage of HRT in women under
age 60 that diminishes with age; no reduction in mortality was noted
in group of women aged 85–94 years. The reduction in
cardiovascular disease among younger postmenopausal women
taking HRT may be explained by the reduction in serum levels of
atherogenic lipoprotein (a) with HRT, with or without a progestin.
Improvement in serum HDL cholesterol is greatest with unopposed
estrogen but is also seen with the addition of a progestin.
Estrogen replacement improves or eliminates post-menopausal
hot flushes and diaphoretic episodes. Vaginal moisture is improved
and libido is enhanced in some women. Sleep disturbances are
common in menopause and can be reversed with estrogen
replacement. Some women notice a mild impairment in memory and
cognitive function at menopause that can improve with HRT. Sex
hormone replacement may also improve the body pain and reduced
physical function experienced by some women at the time of
menopause. Many women taking HRT experience a significantly
improved quality of life. Estrogen replacement does not prevent
facial skin wrinkling; however, it may improve facial skin moisture
and thickness, reducing seborrhea and atrophy. Estrogen therapy
does not appear to reduce the risk of Alzheimer dementia.
1. Estrogen replacement without progestin (unopposed HRT)
—The WHI study found that women who received estrogen
therapy experienced a reduced number of hip fractures (six fewer
fractures/year per 10,000 women) compared with placebo. Even
“microdose” transdermal estradiol (0.014 mg/d) improves bone
density. Unopposed oral conjugated estrogens have no discernible
effect upon cognitive function, overall mortality, or the risk for heart
attacks, or colorectal cancer. Unopposed estrogen replacement
improves glycemic control in women with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Perimenopause-related depression is improved by unopposed
estrogen replacement; the addition of a progestin may negate this
effect. A 20-year study of 8801 women living in a retirement
community found that estrogen use was associated with improved
survival. Age-adjusted mortality rates were 56.4 (per 1000 person-
years) among nonusers and 50.4 among women who had used
estrogen for 15 years or longer.
2. Estrogen replacement therapy with progestins (combined
HRT)—Women receiving conventional-dose daily conjugated
estrogen and medroxyprogesterone acetate (0.625 mg and 2.5 mg,
respectively) for an average of 5.6 years, experienced a lower risk
of developing diabetes Mellitus (3.5%) versus those taking a
placebo (4.2%).
B. Risks of Estrogen Replacement Therapy
The risks of estrogen replacement depend on the dose.
Conventional doses (eg, oral conjugated estrogens ≥ 0.625 mg/d or
transdermal estradiol ≥ 0.05 mg/d) carry higher risks than lower
doses (eg, oral conjugated estrogens, ≤ 0.3 mg/d or transdermal
estradiol ≤ 0.025 mg/d). Route of administration also affects risks,
since oral estrogens pass through the liver and increase hepatic
production of clotting factors (thereby increasing the risks of
thrombotic stroke), whereas transdermal or vaginal administration
of estrogen does not significantly increase clotting proclivity. The
risks for HRT also depend on whether estrogen is administered
alone (unopposed HRT) or with a progestin (combined HRT).
1. Estrogen replacement without progestin (unopposed HRT)
—Surprisingly, the WHI study found that postmenopausal women
who received conventional-dose estrogen-only therapy had a
reduced risk of breast cancer (seven fewer cases/year per 10,000
women) compared with a placebo group. However, the California
Teachers Study monitored women for a longer period; a group of
37,000 women who had been taking conventional-dose estrogen-
only therapy for ≥ 20 years did have an increased risk of breast
cancer. Women taking lower-dose unopposed estrogen therapy
would be expected to have less long-term risk of breast cancer.
Conventional-dose unopposed estrogen replacement (0.625–
1.25 mg daily) increases the risk of endometrial hyperplasia and
dysfunctional uterine bleeding, which often prompts patients to stop
the estrogen. However, lower-dose unopposed estrogen confers a
much lower risk of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Recurrent
dysfunctional bleeding necessitates a pelvic examination and
possibly an endometrial biopsy. There has been considerable
concern that unopposed estrogen replacement might increase the
risk for endometrial carcinoma. However, a Cochrane Database
Review found no increased risk of endometrial carcinoma in a
review of 30 randomized controlled trials. Therefore, lower-dose
unopposed estrogen replacement does not appear to confer any
increased risk for endome-trial cancer.
Long-term conventional-dose unopposed estrogen increases the
mortality risk from ovarian cancer, although the absolute risk is
small. The annual age-adjusted ovarian cancer death rates for
women taking estrogen replacement for ≥ 10 years are 64:100,000
for current users, 38:100,000 for former users, and 26:100,000 for
women who had never taken estrogen. Lower-dose estrogen
replacement is believed to confer a negligible increased risk for
ovarian cancer.
The WHI trial was stopped in 2002 because of an increased risk
of stroke among women taking conjugated oral estrogens in doses
of 0.625 mg daily; the risk was about 44 strokes per 10,000
person-years versus about 32 per 10,000 person-years in women
taking placebo. Transdermal or transvaginal estrogen is not
expected to increase the risk of stroke.
Conventional-dose oral estrogen replacement increases the risk
of deep venous thrombosis. It can cause hypertriglyceridemia,
particularly in women with preexistent hyper-lipidemia, rarely
resulting in pancreatitis. Postmenopausal estrogen therapy also
slightly increases the risk of gallstones and cholecystitis. Oral
estrogens reduce the effectiveness of GH replacement. These side
effects can be reduced or avoided by using non-oral estrogen
replacement.
Elderly women, receiving long-term conventional-dose estrogen
replacement, experience an increased risk of urinary incontinence.
Some women complain of estrogen-induced edema or mastalgia.
Estrogen replacement has been reported to lower the seizure
threshold in some women with epilepsy. Untreated large pituitary
prolactinomas may enlarge if exposed to estrogen.
2. Estrogen replacement with a progestin (combined HRT)
—The WHI study found that women who received long-term
conventional oral doses of combined HRT (conjugated estrogens
0.625 mg/d plus medroxyprogesterone acetate 2.5 mg/d) had an
increased risk of deep venous thrombosis (3.5 per 1000 person-
years) compared with women receiving placebo (1.7 per 1000
person-years).
Conventional-dose oral combined HRT results in an increased
risk of myocardial infarction (24% or six additional heart attacks
per 10,000 women), mostly in older women with high-risk LDL
levels or preexistent coronary disease. Most of the risk for
myocardial infarction occurs in the first year of therapy. This
increased risk is attributable to the progestin component, since the
estrogen-only arm of the WHI study found no increased risk of
myocardial infarction.
Long-term conventional-dose oral combined HRT increases
breast density and the risk for abnormal mammograms (9.4%
versus 5.4% for placebo). There is also a higher risk of breast
cancer (8 cases per 10,000 women/year versus 6.5 cases per
10,000 women/year for placebo); no increased risk of breast
cancer has been found with estrogen-only HRT. This increased risk
for breast cancer appears to mostly affect relatively thin women
with a BMI < 24.4. The Iowa Women's Health Study reported an
increase in breast cancer with HRT only in women consuming more
than 1 oz of alcohol weekly. No accelerated risk of breast cancer
has been seen in users of HRT who have benign breast disease or a
family history of breast cancer. Women in whom new-onset breast
tenderness develops with combined HRT have an increased risk of
breast cancer, compared with women without breast tenderness.
The Women's Health Initiative Mental Study (WHIMS) followed
the effect of combined conventional-dose oral HRT on cognitive
function in women 65–79 years old. HRT did not protect these
older women from cognitive decline. In fact, they experienced an
increased risk for severe dementia at a rate of 23 more cases/year
for every 10,000 women over age 65 years.
In the WHI study, women receiving conventional-dose combined
oral HRT experienced an increased risk of stroke (31 strokes per
10,000 women/year versus 26 strokes per 10,000 women/year for
placebo). Stroke risk was also increased by hypertension, diabetes,
and smoking.
Women taking combined estrogen–progestin replacement do not
experience an increased risk of ovarian cancer. They do experience
an increased risk of developing asthma.
Progestins may cause moodiness, particularly in women with a
history of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Cycled progestins may
trigger migraines in certain women. Many other adverse reactions
have been reported, including breast tenderness, alopecia, and fluid
retention. Contraindications to the use of progestins include
thromboembolic disorders, liver disease, breast cancer, and
pregnancy.
C. Hormone Replacement Therapy Agents
1. Transdermal estradiol—Estradiol can be delivered
systemically with different transdermal systems. Because
transdermal absorption of estradiol is somewhat variable, this
delivery method will not work for all women.
A. TRANSDERMAL SYSTEMS WITH ESTRADIOL MIXED WITH
ADHESIVE—These systems tend to cause minimal skin irritation. Of
the following preparations, the Vivelle-Dot patches are the smallest
and least obtrusive. Available preparations include Esclim, Vivelle,
and Vivelle-Dot (0.025, 0.0375, 0.05, 0.075, or 0.1 mg/d),
replaced twice weekly; Alora (0.025, 0.05, 0.075, or 0.1 mg/d),
replaced twice weekly; Climara (0.025, 0.0375, 0.05, 0.06, 0.075,
or 0.1 mg/d), replaced weekly; FemPatch (0.025 mg/d), replaced
weekly; and Menostar (0.014 mg/d), replaced weekly. This type of
estradiol skin patch can be cut in half and applied to the skin
without proportionately greater loss of potency.
B. TRANSDERMAL SYSTEMS WITH ESTRADIOL IN A DRUG
RESERVOIR—These systems cause significant skin irritation in some
women. Available preparations include Estraderm (0.05 or 0.1
mg/d), replaced twice weekly.
C. TRANSDERMAL 
SYSTEMS 
WITH 
ESTRADIOL 
(E) 
AND
NORETHINDRONE 
ACETATE 
(NA) MIXED 
WITH
ADHESIVE—Available preparations include Combipatch (0.05 mg/d
E and 0.14 mg/d NA or 0.05 mg/d E and 0.25 mg/d NA), replaced
twice weekly. The addition of a progestin increases the likelihood of
side effects compared with therapy with estrogen alone.
D. TRANSDERMAL ESTRADIOL GEL (ESTROGEL, 0.6%)—This
preparation is available in a metered-dose dispenser that delivers
1.25 g estradiol per actuation. The gel is applied to one arm from
the wrist to the shoulder daily after bathing. To avoid spreading the
estradiol to others, the hands should be washed and precautions
taken to avoid prolonged skin contact with children. Application of
sun-screen prior to estradiol gel has been reported to increase the
transdermal absorption of estradiol.
2. Oral estrogen—Oral estrogen-only preparations include
CEEs (0.3, 0.45, 0.625, 0.9, and 1.25 mg), ethinyl estradiol (20
and 50 mcg), estradiol (0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 mg), estropipate (0.75,
1.5, 3, and 6 mg), plant-derived esterified estrogens (eg, Menest,
Estratab, 0.3, 0.625, and 2.5 mg), and synthetic estrogens (eg,
Cenestin, 0.3, 0.625, 0.9, and 1.25 mg).
Oral estrogen plus progestin preparations include CEE with
medroxyprogesterone acetate (Prempro 0.3/1.5, 0.45/1.5,
0.625/2.5, and 0.625/5), CEE for 14 days cycled with CEE plus
medroxyprogesterone acetate for 14 days (Premphase 0.625,
0.625/5), estradiol with norethin-drone acetate (Activella 1/0.5),
ethinyl estradiol with norethindrone acetate (Femhrt 1/5, 5 mcg/1
mg/tablet), and estradiol with norgestimate (Ortho-Prefest,
sequences of estradiol 1 mg/d for 3 days, alternating with a
combination of 1 mg estradiol/0.09 mg norgestimate daily for 3
days). Oral contraceptives can also be used for combined HRT.
3. Vaginal estrogen—Urogenital atrophy commonly develops in
postmenopausal women and can cause dryness of the vagina,
genital itching, burning, dyspareunia, and recurrent urinary tract
infections. Urinary symptoms can include urgency and dysuria.
Vaginal estrogen is intended to deliver estrogen directly to local
tissues and is moderately effective in reducing these symptoms,
while minimizing systemic estrogen exposure. Some estrogen is
absorbed systemically and can relieve menopausal symptoms.
Systemically absorbed estrogen avoids first-pass liver metabolism,
causing less hypertriglyceridemia and prothrombotic effects than
oral estrogen. Manufacturers recommend that these preparations be
used for only 3–6 months in women with an intact uterus, since
vaginal estrogen can cause endometrial proliferation. However,
most clinicians use them for longer periods. Vaginal estrogen can be
administered in three different ways: creams, tablets, and rings.
A. ESTROGEN VAGINAL CREAMS —These creams are administered
intravaginally with a measured-dose applicator daily for 2 weeks for
atrophic vaginitis, then administered one to three times weekly.
Available preparations include CEEs (Premarin, 0.626 mg/g
cream), 0.25–0.5 g cream vaginally; dienestrol (Ortho Dienestrol,
10 mg/g cream), 0.25–0.5 g cream vaginally; estradiol (Estrace, 0.1
mg/g cream), 1 g cream vaginally; and estropipate (Ogen, 1.5 mg/g
cream), 0.25–0.5 g vaginally.
B. ESTRADIOL VAGINAL TABLETS —These tablets are sold
prepackaged in a disposable applicator and can be administered
deep intravaginally daily for 2 weeks for atrophic vaginitis, then
twice weekly. The tablets dissolve into a gel that gradually releases
estradiol. Available preparations include vaginal estradiol tablets
(Vagifem, 25 mcg/tablet).
C. ESTRADIOL VAGINAL RINGS —These rings are inserted manually
into the upper third of the vagina, worn continuously, and replaced
every 90 days. Only a small amount of the released estradiol enters
the systemic circulation. Vaginal rings do not usually interfere with
sexual intercourse. If a ring is removed or descends into the
introitus, it may be washed in warm water and reinserted. Available
preparations include Estring (2 mg estradiol/ring, releasing 0.0075
mg/d) and Femring (12.4 mg estradiol/ring, releasing 0.05 mg/d, or
24.8 mg estradiol/ring, releasing 0.10 mg/d).
4. Oral progestins—For a woman with an intact uterus, long-term
conventional-dose unopposed systemic estrogen therapy can cause
endometrial hyperplasia, which typically results in dysfunctional
uterine bleeding and might rarely lead to endometrial cancer.
Progestin therapy transforms proliferative into secretory
endometrium, causing a menses when given intermittently or no
bleeding when given continuously.
The type of progestin preparation, its dosage, and the timing of
administration may be tailored to the given situation. Progestins may
be given daily, monthly, or at longer intervals. When given
episodically, progestins are usually administered for 7–14 day
periods. Progestins are available in different formulations:
Micronized 
progesterone 
(Prometrium, 
100 
mg/capsule),
medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera, Amen, Cycrin; 2.5, 5.0,
and 10 mg/scored tablet), norethindrone acetate (Aygestin, 5
mg/tablet), and norethindrone (Micronor, Nor-QD; 0.35
mg/tablet).
Topical progesterone (20–50 mg/d) may reduce hot flushes in
women who are intolerant to oral HRT. It may be applied to the
upper arms, thighs, or inner wrists daily. It may be compounded as
micronized progesterone 250 mg/mL in a transdermal gel. Its effects
upon the breast and endometrium are unknown.
5. Progestin-releasing intrauterine devices—Intrauterine
devices (IUDs) that release progestins can be useful for women
receiving ERT, since they can reduce the incidence of dysfunctional
uterine bleeding and endometrial carcinoma without exposing
women to the significant risks of systemic progestins. The Mirena
IUD releases levonorgestrel and is inserted into the uterus by a
clinician within 7 days of the onset of menses. It remains effective
for up to 5 years. Parous women are generally better able to
tolerate the Mirena IUD than nulliparous women.
6. Selective estrogen receptor modulators—SERMs (eg,
raloxifene, tamoxifen) are an alternative to estrogen replacement for
hypogonadal women at risk for osteoporosis who prefer not to take
estrogens because of their contraindications (eg, breast or uterine
cancer) or side effects. Raloxifene does not reduce hot flushes,
vaginal dryness, skin wrinkling, or breast atrophy; it does not
improve cognition. However, in doses of 60 mg/d orally, it inhibits
bone loss without stimulating effects upon the breasts or
endometrium. Because raloxifene may slightly increase the risk of
venous thromboembolism, it should not be used by women at
prolonged bed rest or by those prone to thrombosis. In contrast
with the use of ERT, concomitant progesterone therapy is not
needed, and raloxifene does not increase the risk of development of
breast cancer.
Tibolone (Livial) is an SERM whose metabolites have mixed
estrogenic, progestogenic, and weak androgenic activity. It is
comparable to HRT for the treatment of climacteric-related
complaints. It does not appear to significantly stimulate proliferation
of breast or endometrial tissue. It depresses both serum
triglycerides and HDL cholesterol. Long-term studies are lacking. It
is not available in the United States.
7. Phytoestrogens—These substances are found in plants that
bind to estrogen receptors. Phytoestrogens, found in soy and red
clover extracts, do not appear to significantly improve menopausal
hot flushes, cognitive function, bone density, or plasma lipids.
8. Testosterone replacement therapy in women—In
premenopausal women, serum testosterone levels decline with age.
Between 25 and 45 years of age, women's testosterone levels fall
50%. After natural menopause, the ovaries remain a significant
source for testosterone. In fact, following natural menopause, serum
testosterone levels do not fall abruptly and serum free testosterone
levels may actually rise. In contrast, very low serum testosterone
levels are found in women after bilateral oophorectomy,
autoimmune ovarian failure, adrenalectomy, and in hypopituitarism.
Testosterone deficiency contributes to hot flushes, loss of sexual
hair, muscle atrophy, osteoporosis, and diminished libido, also
known as hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).
In women, diminished libido is common and multifactorial.
Although low serum testosterone levels may contribute to HSDD,
hysterectomy and sexual isolation are major causes. Low serum
testosterone levels may also cause fatigue, a diminished sense of
well-being, and a dulled enthusiasm for life. Androgen replacement
may improve these problems.
Testosterone therapy is often effective, while DHEA therapy is
not. Selected women may be treated with low-dose testosterone.
Methyltestosterone can be taken orally in doses of 1.25–2.5 mg
daily. Testosterone can also be compounded as a cream containing
1 mg/mL, with 1 mL applied to the low abdomen daily.
Methyltestosterone is also available in combination with conjugated
estrogens (eg, Estratest). This formulation is convenient but carries
the same disadvantage as oral estrogen—increased risk of
thromboembolism. Tablets contain either 1.25 mg conjugated
estrogens with 2.5 mg methyltestosterone or 0.625 mg conjugated
estrogens with 1.25 mg methyltestosterone. Estratest is usually
started at the lowest strength. It should be given cyclically at the
lowest dose that controls symptoms.
Women receiving testosterone therapy must be monitored for the
appearance of any acne or hirsutism, and serum testosterone levels
are determined periodically if women feel that they are benefitting
and long-term testosterone therapy is instituted. Side effects of low-
dose testosterone therapy are usually minimal but may include
polycythemia, emotional changes, hirsutism, acne, an adverse effect
on lipids, and potentiation of warfarin anticoagulation therapy.
Testosterone replacement tends to reduce both triglyceride and
HDL cholesterol levels. Hepatocellular neoplasms and peliosis
hepatis, rare complications of oral androgens at higher doses, have
not been reported with methyltestosterone at lower doses of 2.5 mg
orally daily. Androgens should not be given to women with liver
disease or during pregnancy or breast-feeding. Testosterone
replacement therapy for women should be used judiciously, since
long-term prospective clinical trials are lacking. An analysis of the
Nurses’ Health Study found that women who had been taking
CEEs plus methyltestosterone experienced an increased risk of
breast cancer. Yearly mammography is recommended for all
women over 40 years of age.
Gordon CM. Clinical practice. Functional hypothalamic
amenorrhea. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 22;363(4):365–71. [PMID:
20660404]
 
Pinkerton JV et al. Advances in the treatment of menopausal
symptoms. Womens Health (Lond Engl). 2009 Jul;5(4):361–84.
[PMID: 19586429]
 
Rebar RW. Premature ovarian failure. Obstet Gynecol. 2009
Jun;113(6):1355–63. [PMID: 19461434]
 
Santen RJ et al. Postmenopausal hormone therapy: an Endocrine
Society scientific statement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010
Jul;95(7 Suppl 1):s1–s66. [PMID: 20566620]
 
Saxena T et al. Menopausal hormone therapy and subsequent risk
of specific invasive breast cancer subtypes in the California
Teacher's Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010
Sep;19(9):2366–78. [PMID: 20699377]
 
Smith AL et al. Estrogen replacement therapy for the treatment of
postmenopausal genitourinary tract dysfunction. Discov Med.
2010 Dec;10(55):500–10. [PMID: 21189221]
 
Stram DO et al. Age-specific effects of hormone therapy use on
overall mortality and ischemic heart disease mortality among
women in the California Teachers Study. Menopause. 2011
Mar;18: (3):253–61. [PMID: 20881652]
 
TURNER SYNDROME (Gonadal Dysgenesis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Short stature with normal GH levels.
 Primary amenorrhea or early ovarian failure.
 Epicanthal folds, webbed neck, short fourth metacarpals.
 Renal and cardiovascular anomalies.
 
Turner syndrome comprises a group of X chromosome disorders
that are associated with spontaneous abortion, primary
hypogonadism, short stature, and other phenotypic anomalies. It
affects 1–2% of fetuses, of which about 97% abort, accounting for
about 10% of all spontaneous abortions. Nevertheless, it affects
about 1 in every 2500 live female births. Patients with the classic
syndrome (about 50% of cases) lack one of the two chromosomes
(45,XO karyotype). Other patients with Turner syndrome have X
chromosome abnormalities, such as ring X or Xq (X/abnormal X)
or X chromosome deletions affecting all or some somatic cells
(mosaicism, XX/XO). Turner syndrome may be diagnosed in infant
girls at birth, since they tend to be small and may exhibit severe
lymphedema. Evaluation for childhood short stature often leads to
the diagnosis. Girls and women with Turner syndrome have an
increased risk of aortic coarctation (11%) and bicuspid aortic
valves (16%); these cardiac abnormalities are more common in
patients with webbed necks.
1. Classic Turner Syndrome (45,XO Gonadal Dysgenesis)
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Features of Turner syndrome are variable and may be subtle in girls
with mosaicism. Typical manifestations in adulthood include short
stature, hypogonadism, webbed neck, high-arched palate, wide-
spaced nipples, hypertension, and renal abnormalities (Table 26–
16). Emotional disorders are common.
 
Table 26–16. Manifestations of turner syndrome.
 
Short stature
Distinctive facial features
Ptosis
     Micrognathia
     Low-set ears
     Epicanthal folds
Sexual infantilism due to gonadal dysgenesis with primary
amenorrhea (80%)
Early ovarian failure with secondary amenorrhea (20%)
Webbed neck (40%)
Low hairline
High-arched palate
Cubitus valgus
Short fourth metacarpals (50%)
Lymphedema of hands and feet (30%)
Hypoplastic widely spaced nipples
Hyperconvex nails
Pigmented nevi
Keloid formation (eg, surgical scars or after ear piercing)
Recurrent otitis media
Renal abnormalities (60%)
     Horseshoe kidney
     Hydronephrosis
Hypertension (idiopathic or due to coarctation or kidney
disease)
Gastrointestinal disorders
     Telangiectasis with bleeding
     Celiac disease
     Inflammatory bowel disease
     Colon carcinoma
     Liver disease
Impaired space-form recognition, direction sense, and
mathematical reasoning
Cardiovascular anomalies
     Coarctation of the aorta (10–20%)
     Partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection
     Bicuspid aortic valve (with aortic stenosis or
insufficiency)
     Aortic dissection due to coarctation and cystic medial
necrosis of the aorta
Associated conditions
     Obesity
     Diabetes mellitus (types 1 and 2)
     Dyslipidemia
     Hyperuricemia
     Hashimoto thyroiditis
     Achlorhydria
     Cataracts, corneal opacities
     Neuroblastoma (1%)
     Rheumatoid arthritis
     Inflammatory bowel disease
Hypogonadism presents as “delayed adolescence” (primary
amenorrhea, 80%) or early ovarian failure (20%); girls with 45,XO
Turner (blood karyotyping) who enter puberty are typically found to
have mosaicism if other tissues are karyotyped.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hypogonadism is confirmed in girls who have high serum levels of
FSH and LH. A blood karyotype showing 45,XO (or X
chromosome abnormalities or mosaicism) establishes the diagnosis.
GH and IGF-1 levels are normal.
C. Imaging
An ultrasound and MRI scan of the chest and abdomen should be
done in all patients with Turner syndrome to determine whether
cardiac, aortic, and renal abnormalities are present.
 Treatment
Treatment of short stature with daily injections of GH (0.1 unit/kg/d)
plus an androgen (eg, oxandrolone) for at least 4 years before
epiphysial fusion increases final height by a mean of about 10.3 cm
over the mean predicted height of 144.2 cm. Such GH treatment
rarely causes pseudotumor cerebri. After age 12 years, estrogen
therapy is begun with low doses of conjugated estrogens (0.3 mg)
or ethinyl estradiol (5 mcg) given on days 1–21 per month. When
growth stops, HRT is begun with estrogen and progestin;
transdermal estrogen may be used to initiate pubertal development.
 Complications & Surveillance
Bicuspid aortic valves are associated with an increased risk of
infective endocarditis, aortic valvular stenosis or insufficiency, and
ascending aortic aneurysm and dissection. Partial anomalous
pulmonary vein connections occur in 13% and can lead to left-to-
right shunting of blood. Adults with Turner syndrome have a high
incidence of ECG abnormalities.
Women with Turner syndrome have a reduced life expectancy
due in part to their increased risk of diabetes mellitus (types 1 and
2), hypertension, dyslipidemia, and osteoporosis.
Diagnostic vigilance and aggressive treatment of these conditions
reduce the risk of aortic aneurysm dissection, ischemic heart
disease, stroke, and fracture. Patients are prone to keloid formation
after surgery or ear piercing. Yearly ocular examinations and
periodic thyroid evaluations are recommended.
Repeat cardiovascular evaluations should be done every 3–4
years. Patients with the classic 45,XO karyotype have a high risk of
renal structural abnormalities, whereas those with 46 X/abnormal X
are more prone to malformations of the urinary collecting system.
The risk of aortic dissection is increased more than 100-fold in
women with Turner syndrome, particularly those with pronounced
neck webbing and shield chest. Patients with aortic root
enlargement are usually treated with β-blockade and serial imaging.
Women with Turner syndrome who are able to become pregnant
are strongly advised to deliver via cesarean section due to the risk
of aortic aneurysm rupture during vaginal delivery.
2. Turner Syndrome Variants
A. 46,X (Abnormal X) Karyotype
Patients with small distal short arm deletions of the X chromosome
(Xp-) that include the SHOX gene often have short stature and
skeletal abnormalities but have a low risk of ovarian failure.
Transmission of Turner syndrome from mother to daughter can
occur. There may be an increased risk of trisomy 21 in the
conceptuses of women with Turner syndrome. Patients with
deletions of the long arm of the X chromosome (distal to Xq24)
often have amenorrhea without short stature or other features of
Turner syndrome. Abnormalities or deletions of other genes located
on both the long and short arms of the X chromosome can produce
gonadal dysgenesis with few other somatic features.
B. 45,XO/46,XX Mosaicism
This karyotype results in a modified form of Turner syndrome. Such
girls tend to be taller and may have more gonadal function and
fewer other manifestations of Turner syndrome.
C. Other Variants
45,XO/46,XY mosaicism can produce some manifestations of
Turner syndrome. Patients may have ambiguous genitalia or male
infertility with an otherwise normal phenotype. Germ cell tumors,
such as gonadoblastomas and seminomas, develop in about 10% of
patients with 45,XO/46,XY mosaicism; most such tumors are
benign.
Bondy CA. Aortic dissection in Turner syndrome. Curr Opin
Cardiol. 2008 Nov;23(6):519–26. [PMID: 18839441]
 
Bondy CA. Turner syndrome 2008. Horm Res. 2009 Jan;71
(Suppl 1):52–6. [PMID: 19153507]
 
Mazzanti L et al. Developmental syndromes: growth hormone
deficiency and treatment. Endocr Dev. 2009;14:114–34. [PMID:
19293579]
 
Thomas J et al. Management of cardiovascular disease in Turner
syndrome. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2009 Dec;7(12): 1631–
41. [PMID: 19954324]
 
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE
NEOPLASIA
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 MEN 1: tumors of the parathyroid glands, endocrine pancreas
and duodenum, pituitary, adrenal, thyroid; lipomas and facial
angiofibromas.
 MEN 2A: medullary thyroid cancers, pheochromocytomas,
Hirschsprung disease.
 MEN 2B: medullary thyroid cancers, pheochromocytomas,
Marfan-like habitus, mucosal neuromas, intestinal
ganglioneuroma, delayed puberty.
 
Syndromes of MEN are inherited as autosomal dominant traits
and cause a predisposition to the development of tumors in different
tissues, particularly involving endocrine glands (Table 26–17).
1. MEN 1 (Wermer Syndrome)
MEN 1 is a familial multiglandular endocrine tumor syndrome, with
a prevalence of 2–10 per 100,000 people. The presentation of
MEN 1 is quite variable, even in the same kindred. Parathyroid,
enteropancreatic, and pituitary tumors can be present in one
individual, though not necessarily at the same time. Nonendocrine
tumors also occur, such as subcutaneous lipomas, facial
angiofibromas, and collagenomas. In some affected individuals,
tumors may start developing in childhood, whereas in others, tumors
develop late in adult life.
About 90% of patients with MEN 1 have germline mutations that
are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Patients with MEN 1
usually have detectable mutations in the menin gene, located on the
long arm of chromosome 11 (11q13). MEN 1 gene testing is
available at a few centers and is able to detect the specific mutation
in 60–95% of cases. If no mutation is detected, genetic linkage
analysis can be done if there are several affected members in the
kindred. Gene testing permits the rest of the kindred to be tested for
the specific gene defect and allows informed genetic counseling.
 
Table 26–17. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes:
incidence of tumor types.
 
 
With close endocrine surveillance of affected individuals, the
initial biochemical manifestations (usually hyper-calcemia) can often
be detected as early as age 14–18 years in patients with a MEN 1
gene mutation, although clinical manifestations do not usually present
until the third or fourth decade.
Hyperparathyroidism is the first clinical manifestation of MEN
1 in two-thirds of affected patients, but it may present at any time of
life. Patients with the MEN 1 mutation have a > 90% lifetime risk of
developing hyperparathyroidism. The hyperparathyroidism of MEN
1 is notoriously difficult to treat surgically, due to multiple gland
involvement and the frequency of supernumerary glands and ectopic
parathyroid tissue. Typically, three and one-half glands are
resected, leaving one-half of the most normal-appearing gland
intact. Also, during neck surgery, a thymectomy is performed to
resect any intrathymic parathyroid glands or occult thymic carcinoid
tumors. Nevertheless, the surgical failure rate is about 38%, and
there is a recurrence rate of about 16%, with hypercalcemia often
recurring many years after neck surgery. Aggressive parathyroid
resection can cause permanent hypoparathyroidism. Patients with
persistent or recurrent hyperparathyroidism should avoid oral
calcium supplements and thiazide diuretics; oral therapy with
calcimimetic drug, such as cinacalcet, is effective but expensive. The
diagnosis and treatment of hyperparathyroidism is described earlier
in this chapter.
Enteropancreatic tumors occur in about 75% of patients with
MEN 1. Nonsecretory neuroendocrine tumors occur and do
not secrete hormones; they tend to be large and very aggressive.
Gastrinomas occur in about 35% of patients with MEN 1; they
secrete gastrin, thereby causing severe gastric hyperacidity
(Zollinger–Ellison syndrome) with peptic ulcer disease or diarrhea.
Concurrent hypercalcemia, due to hyperparathyroidism (see
above), stimulates gastrin and gastric acid secretion; control of the
hypercalcemia often reduces gastric acid secretion and serum
gastrin levels. These gastrinomas tend to be small, multiple, and
ectopic; they are frequently found outside the pancreas, usually in
the duodenum. Gastrinomas of MEN 1 can metastasize to the liver;
but in patients with MEN 1, depending upon the kindred, hepatic
metastases tend to be less aggressive than those from sporadic
gastrinomas. Treatment of patients with gastrinomas in MEN 1 is
usually conservative, utilizing long-term high-dose proton pump
inhibitor therapy and control of hypercalcemia; surgery is palliative
and usually reserved for aggressive gastrinomas and those tumors
arising in the duodenum. Zollinger–Ellison syndrome is also
discussed in Chapter 15.
Insulinomas cause hyperinsulinism and fasting hypoglycemia.
They occur in about 15% of patients with MEN 1. Surgery is
usually attempted, but the tumors can be small, multiple, and difficult
to detect. The diagnosis and treatment of insulinomas are described
in Chapter 27. Glucagonomas (1.6%) secrete glucagon and cause
diabetes and migratory necrolytic erythema. VIPomas (1%) secrete
VIP and cause profuse watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and
achlorhydria 
(WDHA, 
Verner–Morrison 
syndrome).
Somatostatinomas (0.7%) can cause diabetes mellitus, steatorrhea,
and cholelithiasis.
Pituitary adenomas occur in about 42% of patients with MEN
1. They are more common in women (50%) than men (31%) and
are the presenting tumor in 17% of patients with MEN 1. These
tumors tend to be more aggressive macroadenomas (> 1 cm
diameter, 85%) compared to sporadic pituitary tumors (42%). Of
MEN 1–associated pituitary tumors, about 62% secrete PRL, 8%
secrete GH, 13% secrete both PRL and GH, and 13% are
nonsecretory; only 4% secrete ACTH and cause Cushing disease.
The diagnosis and treatment of pituitary tumors and Cushing disease
were described earlier in this chapter. These pituitary tumors can
produce local pressure effects and hypopituitarism.
Adrenal adenomas or hyperplasia occurs in about 37% of
patients with MEN 1 and 50% are bilateral. They are generally
benign and nonfunctional. In one series, one out of 12 of these
patients developed a feminizing adrenal carcinoma. These adrenal
lesions are pituitary independent.
Nonendocrine tumors occur commonly in MEN 1. Small facial
angiofibromas 
and 
subcutaneous 
lipomas 
are 
common.
Collagenomas can present as firm dermal nodules. Malignant
melanomas have been reported.
The differential diagnosis of MEN 1 includes sporadic or familial
tumors of the pituitary, parathyroids, or pancreatic islets.
Hypercalcemia (from any cause) may cause gastrointestinal
symptoms and increased gastrin levels, simulating a gastrinoma.
Routine suppression of gastric acid secretion with H2-blockers or
proton pump inhibitors causes a physiologic increase in serum
gastrin that can be mistaken for a gastrinoma. H2-blockers and
metoclopr-amide cause hyperprolactinemia, simulating a pituitary
prolactinoma.
Variants of MEN 1 also occur. Kindreds with MEN 1 Burin
variant have a high prevalence of prolactinomas, late-onset
hyperparathyroidism, 
and 
carcinoid 
tumors, 
but 
rarely
enteropancreatic tumors.
2. MEN 2A (Sipple Syndrome)
MEN 2A is a rare familial multiglandular syndrome that is inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait. Patients with MEN 2A should have
genetic testing for a ret protoonco-gene (RET) mutation. Their first-
degree relatives may then be tested for the specific RET mutation.
Patients with MEN 2A may have medullary thyroid carcinoma
(> 90%); hyperparathyroidism (20–50%), due to hyperplasia or
multiple adenomas in over 70% of cases; pheochromocytomas
(20–35%), which are often bilateral; or Hirschsprung disease.
The medullary thyroid carcinoma is of mild to moderate
aggressiveness. Children harboring an MEN 2A RET gene mutation
are advised to have a prophylactic total thyroidectomy by age 6
years.
Siblings or children of patients with MEN 2A should have genetic
testing to determine if they have a mutation of the ret
protooncogene (RET) on chromosome 10cen-10q11.2; this
identifies about 95% of affected individuals. Each kindred has a
certain ret codon mutation that correlates with the particular
variation in the MEN 2 syndrome, such as the age of onset and
aggressiveness of medullary thyroid cancer. The specific mutation as
well as case histories of family members should guide the timing for
prophylactic thyroidectomy. Before any surgical procedure, MEN 2
carriers should be screened for pheochromocytoma. There is
incomplete penetrance, and about 30% of those with such
mutations never manifest endocrine tumors.
Patients may be screened for medullary thyroid carcinoma with a
serum calcitonin drawn after 3 days of omeprazole, 20 mg orally
twice daily; calcitonin levels rise in the presence of medullary thyroid
carcinoma to above 80 pg/mL in women or above 190 pg/mL in
men.
3. MEN 2B
MEN 2B is a familial, autosomal dominant multiglandular syndrome
that is caused by a mutation of the ret protooncogene (RET) on
chromosome 10. MEN 2B is characterized by mucosal neuromas
(> 90%) with bumpy and enlarged lips and tongue, Marfan-like
habitus (75%), adrenal pheochromocytomas (60%) that are rarely
malignant and often bilateral, and medullary thyroid carcinoma
(80%). Patients also have intestinal abnormalities (75%) such as
intestinal ganglioneuromas, skeletal abnormalities (87%), and
delayed puberty (43%). Medullary thyroid carcinoma is aggressive
and presents early in life. Therefore, infants having a parent with
MEN 2B receive genetic screening; those carrying the RET
mutation undergo a prophylactic total thyroidectomy by age 6
months.
OTHER SYNDROMES OF MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE
NEOPLASIA
Patients with Carney complex develop tumors in the adrenal
cortex, pituitary, thyroid, and gonads as well as cardiac myxomas
and hyperpigmentation. Patients with Cowden disease develop
thyroid abnormalities (66%) such as benign adenomas and follicular
adenocarcinomas, along with breast cancer (20–36% in women),
and multiple hamartomas that affect the skin and multiple other
organs. Patients with McCune-Albright syndrome may develop
precocious puberty (particularly girls) due to gonadal
hypersecretion, Cushing syndrome caused by multiple adrenal
nodules, hyperthyroidism from hypersecretory thyroid nodules, and
acromegaly caused by GH-secreting pituitary tumors. Patients have
fibrous dysplasia of bones and hypophosphatemia, with bone
fractures being common. Sudden death has been reported. It is
caused by a postzygotic somatic mutation in the gene encoding the
stimulatory Gs protein, resulting in constitutive activation of affected
cells.
Daly AF et al. Update on familial pituitary tumors: from multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 to familial isolated pituitary adenoma.
Horm Res. 2009 Jan;71(Suppl 1):105–11. [PMID: 19153518]
 
Romei C et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes
(MEN 2): results from the ItaMEN network analysis on the
prevalence of different genotypes and phenotypes. Eur J
Endocrinol. 2010 Aug;163(2):301–8. [PMID: 20516206]
 
Thakker RV. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). Best
Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;24(3):355–70.
[PMID: 20833329]
 
Wohllk N et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. Best Pract
Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;24(3):371–87. [PMID:
20833330]
 
CLINICAL USE OF
CORTICOSTEROIDS
 
 Mechanisms of Action
Cortisol is a steroid hormone that is normally secreted by the
adrenal cortex in response to ACTH. It exerts its action by binding
to nuclear receptors, which then act upon chromatin to regulate
gene expression, producing effects throughout the body.
 Relative Potencies (Table 26–18)
Hydrocortisone and cortisone acetate, like cortisol, have
mineralocorticoid effects that become excessive at higher doses.
Other synthetic corticosteroids such as prednisone, dexamethasone,
and deflazacort (an oxazoline derivative of prednisolone) have
minimal mineralocorticoid activity. Anticonvulsant drugs (eg,
phenytoin, 
carbamazepine, 
phenobarbital) 
accelerate 
the
metabolism of corticosteroids other than hydrocortisone, making
them significantly less potent. Megestrol, a synthetic progestin, has
slight corticosteroid activity that becomes significant when
administered in high doses for appetite stimulation.
 
Table 26–18. systemic versus topical activity of corticosteroids.1
 
1 Hydrocortisone = 1 in potency.
 
Table 26–19. Management of patients receiving systemic
corticosteroids.
 
Recommendations for prescribing
       • Do not administer corticosteroids unless absolutely
indicated or more conservative measures have failed.
       • Keep dosage and duration of administration to the
minimum required for adequate treatment.
Monitoring recommendations
       • Screen for tuberculosis with a purified protein
derivative (PPD) test or chest radiograph before
commencing long-term corticosteroid therapy.
       • Screen for diabetes mellitus before treatment and at
each clinician visit.
           –Have patient test urine weekly for glucose.
           –Teach patient about the symptoms of
hyperglycemia.
       • Screen for hypertension before treatment and at
each clinician visit.
       • Screen for glaucoma and cataracts before treatment,
3 months after treatment inception, and then at least
yearly.
       • Monitor plasma potassium for hypokalemia and treat
as indicated.
       • Obtain bone densitometry before treatment and then
periodically. Treat osteoporosis.
       • Weigh daily. Use dietary measures to avoid obesity
and optimize nutrition.
       • Measure height frequently to document the degree of
axial spine demineralization and compression.
       • Watch for fungal or yeast infections of skin, nails,
mouth, vagina, and rectum, and treat appropriately.
       • With dosage reduction, watch for signs of adrenal
insufficiency or corticosteroid withdrawal syndrome.
Patient information
       • Prepare the patient and family for possible adverse
effects on mood, memory, and cognitive function.
       • Inform the patient about other possible side effects,
particularly weight gain, osteoporosis, and aseptic
necrosis of bone.
       • Counsel to avoid smoking and excessive ethanol
consumption.
Prophylactic measures
       • Institute a vigorous physical exercise and isometric
regimen tailored to each patient's disabilities.
       • Administer calcium (1 g elemental calcium) and
vitamin D3, 400–800 international units orally daily.
           –Check spot morning urines for calcium, and alter
dosage to keep urine calcium concentration below 30
mg/dL.
           –If the patient is receiving thiazide diuretics, check
for hypercalcemia, and administer only 500 mg elemental
calcium daily.
           –Consider a bisphosphonate such as alendronate
(70 mg orally weekly) or periodic intravenous infusions of
pamidronate or zoledronic acid.
       • Avoid prolonged bed rest that will accelerate muscle
weakness and bone mineral loss. Ambulate early after
fractures.
       • Avoid elective surgery, if possible. Vitamin A in a
daily dose of 20,000 units orally for 1 week may improve
wound healing, but it is not prescribed in pregnancy.
       • Avoid activities that could cause falls or other
trauma.
       • For ulcer prophylaxis, if administering corticosteroids
with nonsteroidals, prescribe a proton pump inhibitor (not
required for corticosteroids alone). Avoid large doses of
antacids containing aluminum hydroxide (many popular
brands) because aluminum hydroxide binds phosphate
and may cause a hypophosphatemic osteomalacia that
can compound corticosteroid osteoporosis.
       • Treat hypogonadism.
       • Treat infections aggressively. Consider unusual
pathogens.
       • Treat edema as indicated.
 Adverse Effects
Prolonged treatment with systemic high-dose corticosteroids causes
a variety of adverse effects that can be life-threatening. Patients
should be thoroughly informed of the major possible side effects of
treatment such as insomnia, personality change, weight gain, muscle
weakness, polyuria, kidney stones, diabetes mellitus, sex hormone
suppression, occasional amenorrhea in women, candidiasis and
opportunistic infections, osteoporosis with fractures, or aseptic
necrosis of bones (particularly of the hips), which may become
manifest many months after even brief treatment (see section on
Cushing syndrome). High-dose corticosteroids have adverse
cardiovascular effects, increasing the risk of hypertension,
dyslipidemia, myocardial infarction, stroke, atrial fibrillation or
flutter, and heart failure. Patients who receive intermittent high-dose
corticosteroids (eg, prednisone ≥ 15 mg daily and cumulative dose
> 1 g) are at increased risk for osteoporotic fractures. Avascular
necrosis of bone develops in about 15% of patients who receive
corticosteroids at high doses (eg, prednisone ≥ 15 mg daily) for
more than 1 month with cumulative prednisone doses of ≥ 10 g.
Bisphosphonates (eg, alendronate, 70 mg orally weekly) prevent
the development of osteoporosis among patients receiving
prolonged courses of corticosteroids. For patients who are unable
to tolerate oral bisphosphonates (due to esophagitis, hiatal hernia,
or gastritis), periodic intravenous infusions of pamidronate, 60–90
mg, or zoledronic acid, 2–4 mg, should also be effective.
Teriparatide, 20 mcg subcutaneously daily for up to 2 years, is also
effective against corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis. (See further
discussion in Osteoporosis section.) It is wise to follow an
organized treatment plan such as the one outlined in Table 26–19.
Christiansen CF et al. Glucocorticoid use and risk of atrial
fibrillation or flutter: a population-based, case-control study. Arch
Intern Med. 2009 Oct 12;169(18):1677–83. [PMID: 19822824]
 
Compston J. Management of glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis.
Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Feb;6(2):82–8. [PMID: 20125175]
 
Weldon D. The effects of corticosteroids on bone growth and
bone density. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009 Jul;103(1):3–
11. [PMID: 19663120]
 
 
 
Diabetes Mellitus &
Hypoglycemia
Umesh Masharani, MB, Bs, MRCP (UK)
DIABETES MELLITUS
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Type 1 diabetes:
 
 Polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss associated with random
plasma glucose ≥ 200 mg/dL.
 Plasma glucose of ≥ 126 mgdL after an overnight fast,
documented on more than one occasion.
 Ketonemia, ketonuria, or both.
 Islet autoantibodies are frequently present.
Type 2 diabetes:
 
 Most patients are over 40 years of age and obese.
 Polyuria and polydipsia. Ketonuria and weight loss generally are
uncommon at time of diagnosis. Candidal vaginitis in women may
be an initial manifestation. Many patients have few or no
symptoms.
 Plasma glucose of ≥ 126 mgdL after an overnight fast on more
than one occasion. After 75 g oral glucose, diagnostic values are
≥ 200 mg/dL 2 hours after the oral glucose.
 Hypertension, dyslipidemia, and atherosclerosis are often
associated.
 
 Epidemiologic Considerations
In 2007, an estimated 23.6 million people in the United States had
diabetes mellitus, of which approximately 1 million have type 1
diabetes and most of the rest have type 2 diabetes. A third group
that was designated as “other specific types” by the American
Diabetes Association (ADA) (Table 27–1) number only in the
thousands. Among these are the rare monogenic defects of either B
cell function or of insulin action, primary diseases of the exocrine
pancreas, endocrinopathies, and medication-induced diabetes.
Updated information about the prevalence of diabetes in the United
States is available from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/estimates.htm#prev).
 Classification & Pathogenesis
Diabetes mellitus is a syndrome with disordered metabolism and
inappropriate hyperglycemia due to either a deficiency of insulin
secretion or to a combination of insulin resistance and inadequate
insulin secretion to compensate. Type 1 diabetes is due to
pancreatic islet B cell destruction predominantly by an autoimmune
process, and these patients are prone to ketoacidosis. Type 2
diabetes is the more prevalent form and results from insulin
resistance with a defect in compensatory insulin secretion (Table
27–2).
A. Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
This form of diabetes is immune-mediated in over 95% of cases
(type 1a) and idiopathic in < 5% (type 1b). The rate of pancreatic
B cell destruction is quite variable, being rapid in some individuals
and slow in others. Type 1 diabetes is usually associated with
ketosis in its untreated state. It occurs at any age but most
commonly arises in children and young adults with a peak incidence
before school age and again at around puberty. It is a catabolic
disorder in which circulating insulin is virtually absent, plasma
glucagon is elevated, and the pancreatic B cells fail to respond to all
insulinogenic stimuli. Exogenous insulin is therefore required to
reverse the catabolic state, prevent ketosis, reduce the
hyperglucagonemia, and reduce blood glucose.
1. Immune-mediated type 1 diabetes mellitus (type 1A)—The
highest incidence of immune-mediated type 1 diabetes mellitus is in
Scandinavia and northern Europe, where the annual incidence is as
high as 40 per 100,000 children aged 14 years or younger in
Finland, 31 per 100,000 in Sweden, 22 per 100,000 in Norway,
and 20 per 100,000 in England. The annual incidence of type 1
diabetes decreases across the rest of Europe to 11 per 100,000 in
Greece and 9 per 100,000 in France. Surprisingly, the island of
Sardinia has as high an annual incidence as Finland (40 per
100,000) even though in the rest of Italy, including the island of
Sicily, it is only 11 per 100,000 per year. In the United States, the
annual incidence of type 1 diabetes averages 16 per 100,000, with
higher rates in states more densely populated with persons of
Scandinavian descent such as Minnesota. Worldwide, the lowest
incidence of type 1 diabetes (< 1 case per 100,000 per year) is in
China and parts of South America. The global incidence of type 1
diabetes is increasing (approximately 3% each year). In Europe, the
highest annual incidence increase was seen in low prevalence
countries in Eastern Europe, especially Romania and Poland.
Changes in environmental factors most likely explain this increased
incidence.
 
Table 27–1. other specific types of diabetes mellitus.
 
Genetic defects of pancreatic B cell function
     MODY 1 (HNF-4α); rare
     MODY 2 (glucokinase); less rare
     MODY 3 (HNF-1α); accounts for two-thirds of all MODY
     MODY 4 (IPF-1); very rare
     MODY 5 (HNF-1β); very rare
     MODY 6 (neuroD1); very rare
     Mitochondrial DNA
Genetic defects in insulin action
     Type A insulin resistance
     Leprechaunism
     Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome
     Lipoatrophic diabetes
Diseases of the exocrine pancreas
Endocrinopathies
Drug- or chemical-induced diabetes
Other genetic syndromes (Down, Klinefelter, Turner,
others) sometimes associated with diabetes
MODY, maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
Approximately one-third of the disease susceptibility is due to
genes and two-thirds to environmental factors. Genes that are
related to the HLA locus contribute about 40% of the genetic risk.
About 95% of patients with type 1 diabetes possess either HLA-
DR3 or HLA-DR4, compared with 45–50% of white controls.
HLA-DQ genes are even more specific markers of type 1
susceptibility, since a particular variety (HLA-DQB1*0302) is found
in the DR4 patients with type 1, while a “protective” gene (HLA-
DQB1*0602) is often present in the DR4 controls. The other
important gene that contributes to about 10% of the genetic risk is
found at the 5′ polymorphic region of the insulin gene. This
polymorphic region affects the expression of the insulin gene in the
thymus and results in depletion of insulin-specific T lymphocytes. In
linkage studies, 16 other genetic regions of the human genome have
been identified as being important to pathogenesis. Many of the
genes linked to these additional loci play important roles in the
function and regulation of the immune response.
 
Table 27–2. Clinical classification of common diabetes mellitus
syndromes.
 
 
Table 27–3. Diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of autoimmune
markers in patients with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus.
 
 
Most patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus have circulating
antibodies to islet cells (ICA), insulin (IAA), glutamic acid
decarboxylase 65 (GAD65), tyrosine phosphatase IA2 (ICA-512),
and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) at the time the diagnosis is made
(Table 27-3). These antibodies facilitate screening for an
autoimmune cause of diabetes, particularly screening siblings of
affected children, as well as adults with atypical features of type 2
diabetes. Screening with GAD65, ICA-512, IAA, and ZnT8
autoantibodies may identify about 98% of people who have an
autoimmune basis for their beta cell loss. Antibody levels decline
with increasing duration of disease. Also, low levels of anti-insulin
antibodies develop in almost all patients once they are treated with
insulin.
Family members of diabetic probands are at increased lifetime
risk for developing type 1 diabetes. A child whose mother has type
1 diabetes has a 3% risk of developing the disease and a 6% risk if
the child's father has it. The risk in siblings is related to the number
of HLA haplotypes that the sibling shares with the diabetic proband.
If one haplo-type is shared, the risk is 6% and if two haplotypes are
shared, the risk increases to 12–25%. The highest risk is for
identical twins, where the concordance rate is 25–50%.
Some patients with a milder expression of type 1 diabetes
mellitus initially retain enough B cell function to avoid ketosis, but as
their B cell mass diminishes later in life, dependence on insulin
therapy develops. Islet cell antibody surveys among northern
Europeans indicate that up to 15% of “type 2” diabetic patients may
actually have this mild form of type 1 diabetes (latent autoimmune
diabetes of adulthood; LADA). Evidence for environmental factors
playing a role in the development of type 1 diabetes include the
observation that the disease is more common in Scandinavian
countries and becomes progressively less frequent in countries
nearer and nearer to the equator. Also, the risk for type 1 diabetes
increases when individuals who normally have a low risk emigrate to
the Northern Hemisphere. For example, it was recently shown that
Pakistani children born and raised in Bradford, England have a
higher risk for developing type 1 diabetes compared with children
who lived in Pakistan all their lives.
Which environmental factor is responsible for the increased risk
is not known. There have been a number of different hypotheses
including infections with certain viruses (rubella, Coxsackie B4) and
consumption of cow's milk. Also, in developed countries, childhood
infections have become less frequent and so perhaps the immune
system becomes dysregulated with development of autoimmunity
and conditions such as asthma and diabetes. This theory is referred
to as the hygiene hypothesis. None of these factors has so far been
confirmed as the culprit. Part of the difficulty is that autoimmune
injury undoubtedly starts many years before clinical diabetes mellitus
develops.
2. Idiopathic type 1 diabetes mellitus (type 1B)
—Approximately 5% of subjects have no evidence of pancreatic B
cell autoimmunity to explain their insulinopenia and ketoacidosis.
This subgroup has been classified as “idiopathic type 1 diabetes”
and designated as “type 1B.” Although only a minority of patients
with type 1 diabetes fall into this group, most of these are of Asian
or African origin. It was recently reported that about 4% of the
West Africans with ketosis-prone diabetes are homozygous for a
mutation in PAX-4 (Arg133Trp)—a transcription factor that is
essential for the development of pancreatic islets.
B. Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
This represents a heterogeneous group of conditions that used to
occur predominantly in adults, but it is now more frequently
encountered in children and adolescents. More than 90% of all
diabetic persons in the United States are included under this
classification. Circulating endogenous insulin is sufficient to prevent
ketoacidosis but is inadequate to prevent hyperglycemia in the face
of increased needs owing to tissue insensitivity (insulin resistance).
Genetic and environmental factors combine to cause both the
insulin resistance and the beta cell loss. Most epidemiologic data
indicate strong genetic influences, since in monozygotic twins over
40 years of age, concordance develops in over 70% of cases within
a year whenever type 2 diabetes develops in one twin. Genome-
wide association studies have made considerable progress in
identifying the at-risk genes. So far, 19 different genetic loci have
been associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. A
significant number of the identified loci appear to code for proteins
that have a role in beta cell function or development. One of the
genetic loci with the largest risk effect is TCF7L2. This gene codes
for a transcription factor involved in the WNT signaling pathway
that is required for normal pancreatic development. Alleles at other
genetic loci (CDKAL1, SLC30A8, HHEX-IDE, CDKN2A/B,
KCNJ11, and IGF2BP2) are thought to affect insulin secretion.
Two loci (FTO and MC4R) affect fat mass and obesity risk. The
PPARG locus has been implicated in insulin resistance. The loci
identified to date still explain only some of the heritable risk for
diabetes; clearly, other loci remain to be discovered.
Early in the disease process, hyperplasia of pancreatic B cells
occurs and probably accounts for the fasting hyper-insulinism and
exaggerated insulin and proinsulin responses to glucose and other
stimuli. With time, chronic deposition of amyloid in the islets may
combine with inherited genetic defects progressively to impair B cell
function.
Obesity is the most important environmental factor causing insulin
resistance. The degree and prevalence of obesity varies among
different racial groups with type 2 diabetes. While obesity is
apparent in no more than 30% of Chinese and Japanese patients
with type 2, it is found in 60–70% of North Americans, Europeans,
or Africans with type 2 and approaches 100% of patients with type
2 among Pima Indians or Pacific Islanders from Nauru or Samoa.
Visceral obesity, due to accumulation of fat in the omental and
mesenteric regions, correlates with insulin resistance; subcutaneous
abdominal fat seems to have less of an association with insulin
insensitivity. There are many patients with type 2 diabetes who,
while not overtly obese, have increased visceral fat; they are termed
the “metabolically obese.” Exercise may affect the deposition of
visceral fat as suggested by CT scans of Japanese wrestlers, whose
extreme obesity is predominantly subcutaneous. Their daily vigorous
exercise program prevents accumulation of visceral fat, and they
have normal serum lipids and euglycemia despite daily intakes of
5000–7000 kcal and development of massive subcutaneous
obesity. Several adipokines, secreted by fat cells, can affect insulin
action in obesity. Two of these, leptin and adiponectin, seem to
increase sensitivity to insulin, presumably by increasing hepatic
responsiveness. Two others—tumor necrosis factor, which
inactivates insulin receptors, and resistin, which interferes with
insulin action on glucose metabolism—have been reported to be
elevated in obese animal models. Abnormal levels of these
adipokines may contribute to the development of insulin resistance
in human obesity.
Hyperglycemia per se can impair insulin action by causing
accumulation of hexosamines in muscle and fat tissue and by
inhibiting glucose transport (acquired glucose toxicity). Correction
of hyperglycemia reverses this acquired insulin resistance.
C. Other Specific Types of Diabetes Mellitus
1. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)—This
subgroup is a relatively rare monogenic disorder characterized by
non–insulin-dependent 
diabetes 
with 
autosomal 
dominant
inheritance and an age at onset of 25 years or younger. Patients are
nonobese, and their hyperglycemia is due to impaired glucose-
induced secretion of insulin. Six types of MODY have been
described. Except for MODY 2, in which a glucokinase gene is
defective, all other types involve mutations of a nuclear transcription
factor that regulates islet gene expression.
MODY 2 is quite mild, associated with only slight fasting
hyperglycemia and few if any microvascular diabetic complications.
It generally responds well to hygienic measures or low doses of oral
hypoglycemic agents. MODY 3—the most common form—
accounts for two-thirds of all MODY cases. The clinical course is
similar to that of idiopathic type 2 diabetes in terms of
microangiopathy and failure to respond to oral agents with time.
2. Diabetes due to mutant insulins—This is a very rare subtype
of nonobese type 2 diabetes, with no more than ten families having
been described. Since affected individuals were heterozygous and
possessed one normal insulin gene, diabetes was mild, did not
appear until middle age, and showed autosomal dominant genetic
transmission. There is generally no evidence of clinical insulin
resistance, and these patients respond well to standard therapy.
3. Diabetes due to mutant insulin receptors—Defects in one of
their insulin receptor genes have been found in more than 40 people
with diabetes, and most have extreme insulin resistance associated
with acanthosis nigricans (Figures 27–1 and 27–2). In very rare
instances when both insulin receptor genes are abnormal, newborns
present with a leprechaun-like phenotype and seldom live through
infancy.
4. Diabetes mellitus associated with a mutation of
mitochondrial DNA—Since sperm do not contain mitochondria,
only the mother transmits mitochondrial genes to her offspring.
Diabetes due to mutations of mitochondrial DNA occurs in < 2% of
patients with diabetes. The most common cause is the A3243G
mutation in the gene coding for the tRNA (Leu,UUR). Diabetes
occurs even when a small percentage of the mitochondria in the cell
carry the mutation; the heteroplasmy levels in the leukocytes range
from 1% to 40%. Diabetes usually develops in these patients in their
late 30s, and characteristically, they also have hearing loss
(maternally inherited diabetes and deafness [MIDD]). In some
patients, the beta cell failure can be rapidly progressive and patients
require insulin soon after diagnosis. Other patients can be managed
by diet or oral agents for a while but most eventually require insulin.
MIDD patients are not usually overweight; they resemble patients
with type 1 diabetes mellitus but without evidence for autoimmunity.
Figure 27–1. Acanthosis nigricans of the axilla, with typical dark
coloration and velvety appearance and texture. (Used with
permission from Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK).)
 
Figure 27–2. Acanthosis nigricans of the nape of the neck, with
typical dark and velvety appearance. (Used with permission from
Umesh Masharani, MB, BS, MRCP (UK).)
 
5. Wolfram syndrome—Wolfram syndrome is an autosomal
recessive neurodegenerative disorder first evident in childhood. It
consists of diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and
deafness, hence the acronym DIDMOAD. It is due to mutations in
a gene named WFS1, which encodes a 100.3 KDa transmembrane
protein localized in the endoplasmic reticulum. The WFS1 protein
forms part of the unfolding protein response and helps protect the
beta cells from endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis
especially during periods of high insulin demand. Diabetes develops
in mice with mutated form of this protein; and isolated islets from
these mice show impairment in insulin secretion to glucose stimulus
and increased apoptosis. The diabetes mellitus usually presents in
the first decade together with the optic atrophy. Cranial diabetes
insipidus and sensorineural deafness develop during the second
decade in 60–75% of patients. Ureterohydronephrosis, neurogenic
bladder, cerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, and psychiatric
illness develop later in many patients.
6. Diabetes mellitus secondary to other causes—Endocrine
tumors secreting growth hormone, glucocorticoids, catecholamines,
glucagon, or somatostatin can cause glucose intolerance (Table 27–
4). In the first four of these situations, peripheral responsiveness to
insulin is impaired. With excess of glucocorticoids, catecholamines,
or glucagon, increased hepatic output of glucose is a contributory
factor; in the case of catecholamines, decreased insulin release is an
additional factor in producing carbohydrate intolerance, and with
somatostatin, inhibition of insulin secretion is the major factor.
 
Table 27–4. Secondary causes of hyperglycemia.
 
Hyperglycemia due to tissue insensitivity to insulin
Hormonal tumors (acromegaly, Cushing syndrome,
glucagonoma, pheochromocytoma)
Pharmacologic agents (corticosteroids, sympathomimetic
drugs, niacin)
Liver disease (cirrhosis, hemochromatosis)
Muscle disorders (myotonic dystrophy)
Adipose tissue disorders (lipodystrophy, truncal obesity)
Insulin receptor disorders (acanthosis nigricans
syndromes, leprechaunism)
Hyperglycemia due to reduced insulin secretion
Hormonal tumors (somatostatinoma, pheochromocytoma)
Pancreatic disorders (pancreatitis, hemosiderosis,
hemochromatosis)
Pharmacologic agents (thiazide diuretics, phenytoin,
pentamidine)
A rare syndrome of extreme insulin resistance associated with
acanthosis nigricans (Figures 27–1 and 27–2) afflicts either young
women with androgenic features as well as insulin receptor
mutations or older individuals, mostly women, in whom a circulating
immunoglobulin binds to insulin receptors and reduces their affinity
to insulin.
Medications such as diuretics, phenytoin, niacin, and high-dose
corticosteroids (even when administered intraarticularly) can
produce hyperglycemia that is reversible once the medications are
discontinued or when diuretic-induced hypokalemia is corrected.
Chronic pancreatitis or subtotal pancreatectomy reduces the
number of functioning B cells and can result in a metabolic
derangement very similar to that of genetic type 1 diabetes except
that a concomitant reduction in pancreatic A cells may reduce
glucagon secretion so that relatively lower doses of insulin
replacement are needed.
 
Insulin 
Resistance 
Syndrome
(Syndrome X; Metabolic Syndrome)
Twenty-five percent of the general nonobese, nondiabetic
population has insulin resistance of a magnitude similar to that seen
in type 2 diabetes. These insulin-resistant non-diabetic individuals
are at much higher risk for developing type 2 diabetes than insulin-
sensitive persons. In addition to diabetes, these individuals have
increased risk for elevated plasma triglycerides, lower high-density
lipoproteins (HDLs), and higher blood pressure—a cluster of
abnormalities termed syndrome X or metabolic syndrome. These
associations have now been expanded to include small, dense, low-
density lipoprotein (LDL), hyperuricemia, abdominal obesity,
prothrombotic state with increased levels of plasminogen activator
inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), and proinflammatory state. These clusters
of abnormalities significantly increase the risk of atherosclerotic
disease.
It has been postulated that hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance
play a direct role in these metabolic abnormalities, but supportive
evidence is inconclusive. Although hyperinsulinism and hypertension
often coexist in whites, that is not the case in blacks or Pima
Indians. Moreover, patients with hyperinsulinism due to insulinoma
are not hypertensive, and there is no fall in blood pressure after
surgical removal of the insulinoma restores normal insulin levels. The
main value of grouping these disorders as a syndrome, however, is
to remind clinicians that the therapeutic goals are not only to correct
hyperglycemia but also to manage the elevated blood pressure and
dyslipidemia that result in increased cerebrovascular and cardiac
morbidity and mortality in these patients.
American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and classification of
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2011 Jan;34(Suppl 1):S62–9.
[PMID: 21193628]
 
Kahn SE et al. Mechanisms linking obesity to insulin resistance and
type 2 diabetes. Nature. 2006 Dec 14;444(7121):840–6. [PMID:
17167471]
 
Simmons RK et al. The metabolic syndrome: useful concept or
clinical tool? Report of a WHO Expert Consultation. Diabetologia.
2010 Apr;53(4):600–5. [PMID: 20012011]
 
 Clinical Findings
The principal clinical features of the two major types of diabetes
mellitus are listed for comparison in Table 27–5.
Patients with type 1 diabetes have a characteristic symptom
complex.
An absolute deficiency of insulin results in accumulation of
circulating glucose and fatty acids, with consequent hyperosmolality
and hyperketonemia.
Patients with type 2 diabetes may or may not have characteristic
features. The presence of obesity or a strongly positive family
history for mild diabetes suggests a high risk for the development of
type 2 diabetes.
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Type 1 diabetes—Increased urination is a consequence of
osmotic diuresis secondary to sustained hyperglycemia. This results
in a loss of glucose as well as free water and electrolytes in the
urine. Thirst is a consequence of the hyperosmolar state, as is
blurred vision, which often develops as the lenses are exposed to
hyperosmolar fluids.
 
Table 27–5. Clinical features of diabetes at diagnosis.
 
 
Weight loss despite normal or increased appetite is a common
feature of type 1 when it develops subacutely. The weight loss is
initially due to depletion of water, glycogen, and triglycerides;
thereafter, reduced muscle mass occurs as amino acids are diverted
to form glucose and ketone bodies.
Lowered plasma volume produces symptoms of postural
hypotension. Total body potassium loss and the general catabolism
of muscle protein contribute to the weakness.
Paresthesias may be present at the time of diagnosis, particularly
when the onset is subacute. They reflect a temporary dysfunction of
peripheral sensory nerves, which clears as insulin replacement
restores glycemic levels closer to normal, suggesting neurotoxicity
from sustained hyperglycemia.
When absolute insulin deficiency is of acute onset, the above
symptoms develop abruptly. Ketoacidosis exacerbates the
dehydration and hyperosmolality by producing anorexia and nausea
and vomiting, interfering with oral fluid replacement.
The patient's level of consciousness can vary depending on the
degree of hyperosmolality. When insulin deficiency develops
relatively slowly and sufficient water intake is maintained, patients
remain relatively alert and physical findings may be minimal. When
vomiting occurs in response to worsening ketoacidosis, dehydration
progresses and compensatory mechanisms become inadequate to
keep serum osmolality below 320–330 mosm/L. Under these
circumstances, stupor or even coma may occur. The fruity breath
odor of acetone further suggests the diagnosis of diabetic
ketoacidosis.
Hypotension in the recumbent position is a serious prognostic
sign. Loss of subcutaneous fat and muscle wasting are features of
more slowly developing insulin deficiency. In occasional patients
with slow, insidious onset of insulin deficiency, subcutaneous fat
may be considerably depleted.
2. Type 2 diabetes—While increased urination and thirst may be
presenting symptoms in some patients with type 2 diabetes, many
other patients have an insidious onset of hyperglycemia and are
asymptomatic initially. This is particularly true in obese patients,
whose diabetes may be detected only after glycosuria or
hyperglycemia is noted during routine laboratory studies.
Occasionally, when the disease has been occult for some time,
patients with type 2 diabetes may have evidence of neuropathic or
cardiovascular complications at the time of presentation. Chronic
skin infections are common. Generalized pruritus and symptoms of
vaginitis are frequently the initial complaints of women. Diabetes
should be suspected in women with chronic candidal vulvovaginitis
as well as in those who have delivered large babies (> 9 lb, or 4.1
kg) or have had polyhydramnios, preeclampsia, or unexplained fetal
losses. Balanoposthitis (inflammation of the foreskin and glans in
uncircumcised males) may occur.
Many patients with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese.
Even those who are not significantly obese often have characteristic
localization of fat deposits on the upper segment of the body
(particularly the abdomen, chest, neck, and face) and relatively less
fat on the appendages, which may be quite muscular. This
centripetal fat distribution is characterized by a high waist
circumference; a waist circumference > 40 inches (102 cm) in men
and 35 inches (88 cm) in women is associated with an increased
risk of diabetes. Some patients may have acanthosis nigricans,
which is associated with significant insulin resistance; the skin in the
axilla, groin, and back of neck is hyperpigmented and
hyperkeratotic (Figures 27-1 and 27–2). Mild hypertension is often
present in obese diabetics. Eruptive xanthomas on the flexor surface
of the limbs and on the buttocks and lipemia retinalis due to
hyperchylomicronemia can occur in patients with uncontrolled type
2 diabetes who also have a familial form of hypertriglyceridemia.
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma can also be present; in these
cases, patients are profoundly dehydrated, hypotensive, lethargic or
comatose but without Kussmaul respirations.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Urinalysis
A. GLUCOSURIA—A specific and convenient method to detect
glucosuria is the paper strip impregnated with glucose oxidase and a
chromogen system (Clinistix, Diastix), which is sensitive to as little
as 0.1% glucose in urine. Diastix can be directly applied to the
urinary stream, and differing color responses of the indicator strip
reflect glucose concentration.
A normal renal threshold for glucose as well as reliable bladder
emptying is essential for interpretation.
Nondiabetic glycosuria (renal glycosuria) is a benign
asymptomatic condition wherein glucose appears in the urine
despite a normal amount of glucose in the blood, either basally or
during a glucose tolerance test. Its cause may vary from an
autosomally transmitted genetic disorder to one associated with
dysfunction of the proximal renal tubule (Fanconi syndrome, chronic
kidney disease), or it may merely be a consequence of the
increased load of glucose presented to the tubules by the elevated
glomerular filtration rate during pregnancy. As many as 50% of
pregnant women normally have demonstrable sugar in the urine,
especially during the third and fourth months. This sugar is
practically always glucose except during the late weeks of
pregnancy, when lactose may be present.
B. KETONURIA—Qualitative detection of ketone bodies can be
accomplished by nitroprusside tests (Acetest or Ketostix). Although
these tests do not detect β-hydroxybutyric acid, which lacks a
ketone group, the semiquantitative estimation of ketonuria thus
obtained is nonetheless usually adequate for clinical purposes. Many
laboratories now measure β-hydroxybutyric acid, and there is now
a meter available (Precision Xtra, Abbott Diabetes Care) for patient
use that measures β-hydroxybutyric acid levels in capillary glucose
samples.
2. Blood testing procedures
A. PLASMA OR SERUM GLUCOSE—Plasma or serum from venous
blood samples has the advantage over whole blood of providing
values for glucose that are independent of hematocrit and that
reflect the glucose concentration to which body tissues are exposed.
Venous samples should be collected in tubes containing sodium
fluoride to prevent glycolysis, placed on ice and the plasma
separated from cells within 60 minutes. In the absence of fluoride,
the rate of disappearance of glucose in presence of blood cells has
been reported to be approximately 10 mg/dL/h. The glucose
concentration is 10–15% higher in plasma or serum than in whole
blood because structural components of blood cells are absent. A
plasma glucose level of 126 mg/dL or higher on more than one
occasion after at least 8 hours of fasting is diagnostic of diabetes
mellitus (Table 27–6). Fasting plasma glucose levels of 100–125
mg/dL are associated with increased risk of diabetes (impaired
fasting glucose tolerance).
 
Table 27–6. Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes.
 
1Give 75 g of glucose dissolved in 300 mL of water after an overnight fast
in persons who have been receiving at least 150–200 g of carbohydrate
daily for 3 days before the test.
2A fasting plasma glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL or HbA1c of ≥ 6.5% is diagnostic
of diabetes if confirmed by repeat testing.
B. ORAL GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST—If the fasting plasma
glucose level is < 126 mg/dL in suspected cases, then a
standardized oral glucose tolerance test may be done (Table 27–6).
In order to optimize insulin secretion and effectiveness, especially
when patients have been on a low-carbohydrate diet, a minimum of
150–200 g of carbohydrate per day should be included in the diet
g
y
p
y
for 3 days preceding the test. The patient should eat nothing after
midnight prior to the test day. On the morning of the test, adults are
then given 75 g of glucose in 300 mL of water; children are given
1.75 g of glucose per kilogram of ideal body weight. The glucose
load is consumed within 5 minutes. The test should be performed in
the morning because there is some diurnal variation in oral glucose
tolerance, and patients should not smoke or be active during the
test.
Blood samples for plasma glucose are obtained at 0 and 120
minutes after ingestion of glucose. An oral glucose tolerance test is
normal if the fasting venous plasma glucose value is < 100 mg/dL
(5.6 mmol/L) and the 2-hour value falls below 140 mg/dL (7.8
mmol/L). A fasting value of 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L) or higher or a
2-hour value of > 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) is diagnostic of
diabetes mellitus. Patients with 2-hour value of 140–199 mg/dL
have impaired glucose tolerance. False-positive results may occur in
patients who are malnourished, bedridden, or afflicted with an
infection or severe emotional stress. Diuretics, oral contraceptives,
corticosteroids, excess thyroxine, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, and
some psychotropic medications may also cause false-positive
results.
C. 
GLYCATED 
HEMOGLOBIN 
(HEMOGLOBIN 
A1)
MEASUREMENTS— Hemoglobin becomes glycated by ketoamine
reactions between glucose and other sugars and the free amino
groups on the α and β chains. Only glycation of the N-terminal
valine of the beta chain imparts sufficient negative charge to the
hemoglobin molecule to allow separation by charge dependent
techniques. These charge separated hemoglobins are collectively
referred to as hemoglobin A1 (HbA1). The major form of HbA1 is
hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) where glucose is the carbohydrate. HbA1c
comprises 4–6% of total hemoglobin A1. The remaining HbA1
species contain fructose-1,6 diphosphate (HbA1a1); glucose-6-
phosphate (HbA1a2); and unknown carbohydrate moiety (HbA1b).
The hemoglobin A1c fraction is abnormally elevated in diabetic
persons with chronic hyperglycemia. Methods for measuring HbA1c
include electrophoresis, cation-exchange chromatography, boronate
affinity chromatography, and immunoassays. Office-based
immunoassays using capillary blood give a result in about 9 minutes
and this allows for immediate feedback to the patients regarding
their glycemic control.
Since glycohemoglobins circulate within red blood cells whose
life span lasts up to 120 days, they generally reflect the state of
glycemia over the preceding 8–12 weeks, thereby providing an
improved method of assessing diabetic control. The HbA1c value,
however, is weighted to more recent glucose levels (previous
month) and this explains why significant changes in HbA1c are
observed with short-term (1 month) changes in mean plasma
glucose levels. Measurements should be made in patients with either
type of diabetes mellitus at 3- to 4-month intervals so that
adjustments in therapy can be made if HbA1c is either subnormal or
if it is more than 2% above the upper limits of normal for a
particular laboratory. In patients monitoring their own blood glucose
levels, HbA1c values provide a valuable check on the accuracy of
monitoring. In patients who do not monitor their own blood glucose
levels, HbA1c values are essential for adjusting therapy. There is a
linear relationship between the HbA1c and the average glucose
levels in the previous 3 months as determined from continuous
glucose monitoring data and from seven-point capillary blood
glucose profiles (preprandial, postprandial, and bedtime). Table
27–7 gives the mean capillary glucose values for HbA1c values
ranging from 5% to 12%.
The accuracy of HbA1c values can be affected by hemoglobin
variants or traits; the effect depends on the specific hemoglobin
variant or derivative and the specific assay used. Immunoassays that
use an antibody to the glycated amino terminus of β globin do not
recognize the terminus of the γ globin of hemoglobin F. Thus, in
patients with high levels of hemoglobin F, immunoassays give falsely
low values of HbA1c. Cation-exchange chromatography separates
hemoglobin species by charge differences. Hemoglobin variants that
co-elute with HbA1c can lead to an overestimation of the HbA1c
value. Chemically modified derivatives of hemoglobin such as
carbamoylation (in end-stage chronic kidney disease) or acetylation
(high-dose aspirin therapy) can similarly co-elute with HbA1c by
some 
assay 
methods. 
The 
National 
Glycohemoglobin
Standardization Program website (www.ngsp.org) has information
on the impact of frequently encountered hemoglobin variants and
traits on the results obtained with the commonly used HbA1c
assays.
 
Table 27–7. Correlations of HbA1c levels with average of capillary
glucose measurements (preprandial, postprandial and bedtime) in
the previous 3 months.
 
HbA1c Value (%) Determined
Using DCCT Aligned Assays
Mean Capillary Blood
Glucose Levels (mg/dL)
5
97
6
126
7
154
8
183
9
212
10
240
11
269
12
298
DCCT, Diabetes Complications and Control Trial Adapted, with
permission, from Nathan DM et al. Translating the A1c assay into
estimated average glucose values. Diabetes Care 2008 Aug; 31(8):1473–
8. © 2008 American Diabetes Association.
Any condition that shortens erythrocyte survival or decreases
mean erythrocyte age (eg, recovery from acute blood loss,
hemolytic anemia) will falsely lower HbA1c irrespective of the assay
method used. Alternative methods such as fructosamine (see below)
should be considered for these patients. Vitamins C and E are
reported to falsely lower test results possibly by inhibiting glycation
of hemoglobin.
The ADA has endorsed using the HbA1c as a diagnostic test for
diabetes (Table 27–6). A cutoff value of 6.5% was chosen because
the risk for retinopathy increases substantially above this value. The
advantages of using the HbA1c to diagnose diabetes is that there is
no need to fast; it has lower intraindividual variability than the fasting
glucose test and the oral glucose tolerance test; and it provides an
estimate of glucose control for the preceding 2–3 months. People
with HbA1c levels of 5.7–6.4% should be considered at high risk
for developing diabetes (prediabetes). The diagnosis should be
confirmed with a repeat HbA1c test, unless the patient is
symptomatic with plasma glucose levels > 200 mg/dL. This test is
not appropriate to use in populations with high prevalence of
hemoglobinopathies or in conditions with increased red cell
turnover. Also, the testing should be performed using a National
Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program certified method and
standardized to the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
assay.
D. SERUM FRUCTOSAMINE—Serum fructosamine is formed by
nonenzymatic glycosylation of serum proteins (pre-dominantly
albumin). Since serum albumin has a much shorter half-life than
hemoglobin, serum fructosamine generally reflects the state of
glycemic control for only the preceding 1–2 weeks. Reductions in
serum albumin (eg, nephrotic state or hepatic disease) will lower the
serum fructosamine value. When abnormal hemoglobins or
hemolytic states affect the interpretation of glycohemoglobin or
when a narrower time frame is required, such as for ascertaining
glycemic control at the time of conception in a diabetic woman who
has recently become pregnant, serum fructosamine assays offer
some advantage. Normal values vary in relation to the serum
albumin concentration and are 200–285 mcmol/L when the serum
albumin level is 5 g/dL. HbA1c values and serum fructosamine are
highly correlated. The following relationship between serum
fructosamine levels and HbA1c has been reported based on linear
regression analysis:
HbA1c = 0.017 × serum fructosamine level (mcmol/L) + 1.61
Thus, serum fructosamine levels of 317, 375, and 435 mcmol/L
are equivalent to HbA1c values of 7%, 8%, and 9%.
E. SELF-MONITORING OF BLOOD GLUCOSE—Capillary blood
glucose measurements performed by patients themselves, as
outpatients, are extremely useful. In type 1 patients in whom “tight”
metabolic control is attempted, they are indispensable. There are
several paper strip (glucose oxidase, glucose dehydrogenase, or
hexokinase) methods for measuring glucose on capillary blood
samples. A reflectance photometer or an amperometric system is
then used to measure the reaction that takes place on the reagent
strip. A large number of blood glucose meters are now available.
All are accurate, but they vary with regard to speed, convenience,
size of blood samples required, and cost. Popular models include
those manufactured by LifeScan (One Touch), Bayer Corporation
(Breeze, Contour), Roche Diagnostics (Accu-Chek), and Abbott
Laboratories (Precision, FreeStyle). These blood glucose meters
are relatively inexpensive, ranging from $50 to $100 each. Test
strips remain a major expense, costing $.50 to $.75 apiece. Each
glucose meter also comes with a lancet device and disposable 26-
to 33-gauge lancets. The accuracy of data obtained by home
glucose monitoring does require education of the patient in sampling
and measuring procedures as well as in properly calibrating the
instruments.
The clinician should be aware of the limitations of the self-
monitoring glucose systems. First, some older meters require input
of a code for each batch of strips; failure to enter the code can
result in misleading results. Many of the newer meters no longer
require this step. Second, increases or decreases in hematocrit can
decrease or increase the measured glucose values. The mechanism
underlying this effect is not known but presumably it is due to the
impact of red cells on the diffusion of plasma into the reagent layer.
Third, the meters and the test strips are calibrated over the glucose
concentrations ranging from 60 mg/dL to 160 mg/dL, and the
accuracy is not as good for higher and lower glucose levels. When
the glucose is < 60 mg/dL, the difference between the meter and the
laboratory value may be as much as 20%. Fourth, glucose oxidase–
based amperometric systems underestimate glucose levels in the
presence of high oxygen tension. This may be important in the
critically ill who are receiving supplemental oxygen; under these
circumstances, a glucose dehydrogenase–based system may be
preferable. Fifth, glucose-dehydrogenase pyrroloquinoline quinone
(GDH-PQQ) systems may report falsely high glucose levels in
patients who are receiving parenteral products containing
nonglucose sugars such as maltose, galactose, or xylose or their
metabolites. Patients have been given falsely high glucose values
resulting in life-threatening hypoglycemia. Sixth, some meters have
been approved for measuring glucose in blood samples obtained at
alternative sites such as the forearm and thigh. There is, however, a
5- to 20-minute lag in the glucose response on the arm with respect
to the glucose response on the finger. Forearm blood glucose
measurements could therefore result in a delay in detection of
rapidly developing hypoglycemia.
F. CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING SYSTEMS—Three
continuous glucose monitoring systems are currently available for
clinical use. The MiniMed Medtronic, Navigator, and DexCom
systems involve inserting a subcutaneous sensor (rather like an
insulin pump cannula) that measures glucose concentrations in the
interstitial fluid for 3, 5, or 7 days, respectively. The data are
transmitted to a separate pager-like device with a screen. The
MiniMed system also has the option to wirelessly transmit the data
to the screen of their insulin pump. The systems allow the patient to
set “alerts” for low and high glucose values and rate of change of
glucose levels. Patients still have to calibrate the devices with
periodic fingerstick glucose levels, and since there are concerns
regarding reliability, it is still necessary to confirm the displayed
glucose level with a fingerstick glucose before making interventions
such as injecting extra insulin or eating extra carbohydrates. A 6-
month randomized controlled study of type 1 patients showed that
adults (25 years and older) using these systems had improved
glycemic control without an increase in the incidence of
hypoglycemia. A randomized controlled study of continuous glucose
monitoring during pregnancy showed improved glycemic control in
the third trimester, lower birth weight, and reduced risk of
macrosomia. The individual glucose values are not that critical—
what matters is the direction and the rate at which the glucose is
changing, allowing the user to take corrective action. The wearer
also gains insight into the way particular foods and activities affect
their glucose levels. The other main benefit is the low glucose alert
warning. The MiniMed insulin pump marketed in Europe can be
programmed to automatically suspend insulin delivery for 2 hours
when the glucose levels on the continuous glucose monitoring device
falls to a preset level. Increasingly, these systems are being covered
by insurance. The initial cost is about $800 to $1000, and the
sensor, which has to be changed every 3 to 7 days, costs $35 to
$60. This adds up to an out-of-pocket expense of about $4000
annually.
There is great interest in using the data obtained from these
continuous glucose monitoring systems to automatically deliver
insulin by continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion pump. Algorithms
have been devised to link continuous glucose monitoring to insulin
delivery and preliminary clinical studies appear promising.
3. 
Lipoprotein 
abnormalities 
in 
diabetes—Circulating
lipoproteins are just as dependent on insulin as is the plasma
glucose. In type 1 diabetes, moderately deficient control of
hyperglycemia is associated with only a slight elevation of LDL
cholesterol and serum triglycerides and little if any change in HDL
cholesterol. Once the hyperglycemia is corrected, lipoprotein levels
are generally normal. However, in patients with type 2 diabetes, a
distinct “diabetic dyslipidemia” is characteristic of the insulin
resistance syndrome. Its features are a high serum triglyceride level
(300–400 mg/dL), a low HDL cholesterol (< 30 mg/dL), and a
qualitative change in LDL particles, producing a smaller dense
particle whose membrane carries supranormal amounts of free
cholesterol. These smaller dense LDL particles are more
susceptible to oxidation, which renders them more atherogenic.
Since a low HDL cholesterol is a major feature predisposing to
macrovascular disease, the term “dyslipidemia” has preempted the
term “hyperlipidemia,” which mainly denoted the elevated
triglycerides. Measures designed to correct the obesity and
hyperglycemia, such as exercise, diet, and hypoglycemic therapy,
are the treatment of choice for diabetic dyslipidemia, and in
occasional patients in whom normal weight was achieved, all
features of the lipoprotein abnormalities cleared. Since primary
disorders of lipid metabolism may coexist with diabetes, persistence
of lipid abnormalities after restoration of normal weight and blood
glucose should prompt a diagnostic workup and possible
pharmacotherapy of the lipid disorder. Chapter 28 discusses these
matters in detail.
Gilliam LK et al. Practical aspects of real-time continuous glucose
monitoring. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2009 Jun;11(Suppl 1): S75–
82. [PMID: 19469681]
 
Murphy HR et al. Effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring in
pregnant women with diabetes: randomised clinical trial. BMJ.
2008 Sep 25;337:a1680. [PMID: 18818254]
 
Nathan DM et al; A1c-Derived Average Glucose Study Group.
Translating the A1c assay into estimated average glucose values.
Diabetes Care. 2008 Aug;31(8):1473–8. [PMID: 18540046]
 
Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2008 Jun 3;148(11):846–54. [PMID: 18519930]
 
Tamborlane WV et al; Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation
Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group. Continuous glucose
monitoring and intensive treatment of type 1 diabetes. N Engl J
Med. 2008 Oct 2;359(14):1464–76. [PMID: 18779236]
;
(
)
[
]
 
 Clinical Trials in Diabetes
Findings of the Diabetes Complications and Control Trial (DCCT)
and of the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS),
have confirmed the beneficial effects of improved glycemic control
in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, respectively (see below). In
addition, with increased understanding of the pathophysiology of
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, large prospective studies—
Diabetes Prevention Trial 1 (DPT-1) and the Diabetes Prevention
Program (DPP)—have been performed in attempts to prevent
onset of these disorders (see below).
A. Clinical Trials in Type 1 Diabetes
1. Diabetes Prevention Trial-1—This multicenter study
sponsored by the National Institutes of Health was designed to
determine whether the development of type 1 diabetes mellitus
could be prevented or delayed by immune intervention therapy.
Daily low-dose insulin injections were administered for up to 8
years in first-degree relatives of type 1 diabetic patients who were
selected as being at high risk for development of type 1 diabetes
because of detectable islet cell antibodies and reduced early-insulin
release. Unfortunately, this immune intervention failed to affect the
onset of type 1 diabetes compared with a randomized untreated
group. A related study using oral insulin in lower risk first-degree
relatives who have islet cell antibodies but whose early insulin
release remains intact also failed to show an effect on the onset of
type 1 diabetes. After an average of 4.3 years of observation, type
1 diabetes developed in about 35% of persons in both the oral
insulin and the placebo groups.
2. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial—A long-
term therapeutic study involving 1441 patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus reported that “near” normalization of blood glucose resulted
in a delay in the onset and a major slowing of the progression of
established microvascular and neuropathic complications of
diabetes during a follow-up period of up to 10 years. Multiple
insulin injections (66%) or insulin pumps (34%) were used in the
intensively treated group, who were trained to modify their therapy
in response to frequent glucose monitoring. The conventionally
treated groups used no more than two insulin injections, and clinical
well-being was the goal with no attempt to modify management
based on HbA1c determinations or the glucose results.
In half of the patients, a mean hemoglobin A1c of 7.2% (normal:
< 6%) and a mean blood glucose of 155 mg/dL were achieved
using intensive therapy, while in the conventionally treated group
HbA1c averaged 8.9% with an average blood glucose of 225
mg/dL. Over the study period, which averaged 7 years, there was
an approximately 60% reduction in risk between the two groups in
regard to diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. The
intensively treated group also had a nonsignificant reduction in the
risk of macrovascular disease of 41% (95% CI, –10 to 68).
Intensively treated patients had a threefold greater risk of serious
hypoglycemia as well as a greater tendency toward weight gain.
However, there were no deaths definitely attributable to
hypoglycemia in any persons in the DCCT study, and no evidence
of posthypoglycemic cognitive damage was detected.
Subjects participating in the DCCT study were subsequently
enrolled in a follow-up observational study, the Epidemiology of
Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) study. Even
though the between-group differences in mean HbA1c narrowed
over 4 years, the group assigned to intensive therapy had a lower
risk of retinopathy at 4 years and microalbuminuria at 7 to 8 years
of continued study follow-up. Moreover, by the end of the 11-year
follow-up period, the intensive therapy group had significantly
reduced their risk of any cardiovascular disease events by 42%
(95% CI, 9% to 23%; P = 0.02). Thus, it seems that the benefits of
good glucose control persist even if control deteriorates at a later
date.
The general consensus of the ADA is that intensive insulin
therapy associated with comprehensive self-management training
should become standard therapy in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus after the age of puberty. Exceptions include those with
advanced chronic kidney disease and the elderly, since in these
groups the detrimental risks of hypoglycemia outweigh the benefits
of tight glycemic control.
3. Immune intervention trials in new-onset type 1 diabetes
—At the time of diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, patients still have
significant B cell function. This explains why soon after diagnosis
patients go into a partial clinical remission (“honeymoon”) requiring
little or no insulin. This clinical remission is short-lived, however, and
eventually patients lose all B cell function and have more labile
glucose control. Attempts have been made to prolong this partial
clinical remission using medications such as cyclosporine,
azathioprine, prednisone, and antithymocyte globulin. These
medications have had limited efficacy, and there are concerns about
toxicity and the need for continuous treatment.
Newer agents that may induce immune tolerance and appear to
have few side effects have been used in new-onset type 1 patients.
Phase I/II clinical trials using the humanized monoclonal antibodies
against CD3, hOKT3 γ (AlaAla) (teplizumab) and ChAglyCD3
(otelixizumab), showed efficacy in reducing the decline in insulin
production in patients with newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes.
The CD3 complex is the major signal transducing element of the T
cell receptor and the anti-CD3 antibodies are believed to modulate
the autoimmune response by selectively inhibiting the pathogenic T
cells or by inducing regulatory T cells. Patients were treated for 14
days with one of these antibodies within 6 weeks after the new
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes. One year later, most patients in the
treated group had maintained or increased insulin production and
improved glycemic control relative to the control group. Larger
phase II/III clinical trials are currently in progress. These and other
approaches that selectively modulate the autoimmune T cell
response hold promise that type 1 diabetes may eventually be
preventable without prolonged immunosuppression.
Bluestone JA et al. Genetics, pathogenesis and clinical
interventions in type 1 diabetes. Nature. 2010 Apr
29;464(7293):1293–300. [PMID: 20432533]
 
Diabetes Prevention Trial—Type 1 Diabetes Study Group. Effects
of insulin in relatives of patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. N
Engl J Med. 2002 May 30;346(22):1685–91. [PMID: 12037147]
 
Nathan DM et al; Diabetes Control and Complications
Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications
(DCCT/EDIC) Study Research Group. Intensive diabetes
treatment and cardiovascular disease in patients with type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2005 Dec 22;353(25):2643–53. [PMID:
16371630]
 
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group.
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development
and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 1993 Sep 30;329(14):977–86.
[PMID: 8366922]
 
B. Clinical Trials in Type 2 Diabetes
1. The Diabetes Prevention Program—This study was aimed at
discovering whether treatment with either diet and exercise or
metformin could prevent the onset of type 2 diabetes in people with
impaired glucose tolerance; 3234 overweight men and women aged
25–85 years with impaired glucose tolerance participated in the
study. Intervention with a low-fat diet and 150 minutes of moderate
exercise (equivalent to a brisk walk) per week reduced the risk of
progression to type 2 diabetes by 71% compared with a matched
control group. Participants taking 80 mg of metformin twice a day
reduced their risk of developing type 2 diabetes by 31%, but this
intervention was relatively ineffective in those who were either less
obese or in the older age group.
With the demonstration that intervention can be successful in
preventing progression to diabetes in these subjects, a
recommendation has been made to change the terminology from the
less comprehensible “impaired glucose tolerance” to “prediabetes.”
The latter is a term that the public can better understand and thus
respond to by implementing healthier diet and exercise habits.
2. Kumamoto study—The Kumamoto study involved a relatively
small number of patients with type 2 diabetes (n = 110) who were
nonobese and only slightly insulin-resistant, requiring < 30 units of
insulin per day for intensive therapy. Over a 6-year period, it was
shown that intensive insulin therapy, achieving a mean HbA1c of
7.1%, significantly reduced microvascular end points compared
with conventional insulin therapy achieving a mean HbA1c of 9.4%.
Cardiovascular events were neither worsened nor improved by
intensive therapy, and weight changes were likewise not influenced
by either form of treatment.
3. The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study—This
multicenter study was designed to establish, in type 2 diabetic
patients, whether the risk of macrovascular or microvascular
complications could be reduced by intensive blood glucose control
with oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin and whether any particular
therapy was of advantage. A total of 3867 patients aged 25–65
years with newly diagnosed diabetes were recruited between 1977
and 1991, and studied over 10 years. The median age at baseline
was 54 years; 44% were overweight (> 120% over ideal weight);
and baseline HbA1c was 9.1%. Therapies were randomized to
include a control group on diet alone and separate groups
intensively 
treated 
with 
either 
insulin 
or 
sulfonylurea
(chlorpropamide, glyburide, or glipizide). Metformin was included
as a randomization option in a subgroup of 342 overweight or
obese patients, and much later in the study an additional subgroup
of both normal-weight and overweight patients who were
responding unsatisfactorily to sulfonylurea therapy were randomized
to either continue on their sulfonylurea therapy alone or to have
metformin combined with it.
A. HYPERTENSION CONTROL SUBSTUDY—In 1987, an additional
modification was made to evaluate whether tight control of blood
pressure with stepwise antihypertensive therapy would prevent
macrovascular and microvascular complications in 758 hypertensive
patients among this UKPDS population compared with 390 of them
whose blood pressure was treated less intensively. The tight control
group was randomly assigned to treatment with either an
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (captopril) or a β-
blocker (atenolol). Both medications were stepped up to maximum
dosages of 100 mg/d and then, if blood pressure remained higher
than the target level of < 150/85 mm Hg, more medications were
added in the following stepwise sequence: a diuretic, slow-release
nifedipine, methyldopa, and prazosin—until the target level of tight
control was achieved. In the control group, hypertension was
conventionally treated to achieve target levels < 180/105 mm Hg,
but these patients were not prescribed either ACE inhibitors or β-
blockers.
B. RESULTS OF THE UKPDS—Intensive treatment with either
sulfonylureas, metformin, combinations of those two, or insulin
achieved mean HbA1c levels of 7%. This level of glycemic control
decreases the risk of microvascular complications (retinopathy and
nephropathy) in comparison with conventional therapy (mostly diet
alone), which achieved mean levels of HbA1c of 7.9%. Weight gain
occurred in intensively treated patients except when metformin was
used as monotherapy. No cardiovascular benefit and no adverse
cardiovascular outcomes were noted regardless of the therapeutic
agent. Hypoglycemic reactions occurred in the intensive treatment
groups, but only one death from hypoglycemia was documented
during 27,000 patient-years of intensive therapy.
When therapeutic subgroups were analyzed, some unexpected
and paradoxical results were noted. Among the obese patients,
intensive treatment with insulin or sulfonylureas did not reduce
microvascular complications compared with diet therapy alone. This
was in contrast to the significant benefit of intensive therapy with
these medications in the total group. Furthermore, intensive therapy
with metformin was more beneficial in the overweight or obese
persons than diet alone with regard to fewer myocardial infarctions,
strokes, and diabetes-related deaths, but there was no significant
reduction by metformin of diabetic microvascular complications as
compared with the diet group. Moreover, in the subgroup of obese
and non-obese patients in whom metformin was added to
sulfonylurea failures, rather than showing a benefit, there was a 96%
increase in diabetes-related deaths compared with the matched
cohort of patients with unsatisfactory glycemic control on
sulfonylureas who remained on their sulfonylurea therapy.
Chlorpropamide also came out poorly on subgroup analysis in that
those receiving it as intensive therapy did less well regarding
progression to retinopathy than those conventionally treated with
diet.
Tight control of blood pressure (median value 144/82 mm Hg vs
154/87 mm Hg) substantially reduced the risk of microvascular
disease and stroke but not myocardial infarction. In fact, reducing
blood pressure by this amount had substantially greater impact on
microvascular outcomes than that achieved by lowering HbA1c from
7.9% to 7%. An epidemiologic analysis of the UKPDS data did
show that every 10 mm Hg decrease in updated mean systolic
blood pressure was associated with 11% reduction in risk for
myocardial infarction. More than half of the patients needed two or
more medications for adequate therapy of their hypertension, and
there was no demonstrable advantage of ACE inhibitor therapy
over therapy with β-blockers with regard to diabetes end points.
Use of a calcium channel blocker added to both treatment groups
appeared to be safe over the long term in this diabetic population
despite some controversy in the recent literature about its safety in
diabetics.
Like the DCCT trialists, the UKPDS researchers performed
post-trial monitoring to determine whether there were long-term
benefits of having been in the intensively treated glucose and blood
pressure arms of the study. The between-group differences in
HbA1c were lost within the first year of follow-up, but the reduced
risk (24%, P = 0.001) of development or progression of
microvascular complications in the intensively treated group
persisted for 10 years. The intensively treated group also had
significantly reduced risk of myocardial infarction (15%, P = 0.01)
and death from any cause (13%, P = 0.007) during the follow-up
period. The subgroup of overweight or obese subjects who were
initially randomized to metformin therapy showed sustained
reduction in risk of myocardial infarction and death from any cause
in the follow-up period. The between-group blood pressure
differences disappeared within 2 years of the end of the trial. Unlike
the sustained benefits seen with glucose control, there were no
sustained benefits from having been in the more tightly controlled
blood pressure group. Both blood pressure groups were at similar
risk for microvascular events and diabetes-related end points during
the follow-up period.
Thus, the follow-up of the UKPDS type 2 diabetes cohort
showed that, as in type 1 diabetes, the benefits of good glucose
control persist even if control deteriorates at a later date. Blood
pressure benefits, however, last only as long as the blood pressure
is well controlled.
4. The Steno-2 study—The Steno-2 study was designed in 1990
to validate the efficacy of targeting multiple concomitant risk factors
for both microvascular and macrovascular disorders in type 2
diabetes. A prospective, randomized, open, blinded end point
design was used where 160 patients with type 2 diabetes and
microalbuminuria were assigned to conventional therapy with their
general practitioner or to intensive care at the Steno Diabetes
Center. The intensively treated group had step-wise introduction of
lifestyle and pharmacologic interventions aimed at keeping glycated
hemoglobin < 6.5%, blood pressure < 130/80 mm Hg; total
cholesterol < 175 mg/dL, and triglycerides < 150 mg/dL. All the
intensively treated group received ACE inhibitors and if intolerant,
an angiotensin II-receptor blocker. The lifestyle component of
intensive intervention included reduction in dietary fat intake to <
30% of total calories; smoking cessation program; light to moderate
exercise; daily vitamin-mineral supplement of vitamin C, E, and
chromium picolinate. Initially, aspirin was only given as secondary
prevention to patients with a history of ischemic cardiovascular
disease; later, all patients received aspirin. After a mean follow-up
of 7.8 years, cardiovascular events (eg, myocardial infarction,
angioplasties, coronary bypass grafts, strokes, amputations,
vascular surgical interventions) developed in 44% of patients in the
conventional arm and only in 24% in the intensive multifactorial arm
—about a 50% reduction. Rates of nephropathy, retinopathy, and
autonomic neuropathy were also lower in the multifactorial
intervention arm by 62% and 63%, respectively.
The persons who participated in this trial were subsequently
enrolled in an observational follow-up study for an average of 5.5
years. Even though the significant differences in glycemic control
and levels of risk factors of cardiovascular disease between the
groups had disappeared by the end of the follow-up period, the
interventional group continued to have a lower risk of retinal
photocoagulation, renal failure, cardiovascular end points, and
cardiovascular mortality.
The data from the UKPDS and this study provide support for
guidelines recommending vigorous treatment of concomitant
microvascular and cardiovascular risk factors in patients with type 2
diabetes.
5. ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT studies— The
ACCORD study was a randomized controlled study designed to
determine whether normal HbA1c levels would reduce the risk of
cardiovascular events in middle-aged or older individuals with type
2 diabetes. About 35% of the 10,251 recruited subjects had
established cardiovascular disease at study entry. The intensive arm
of the study was discontinued after 3.5 years of follow-up because
of more unexplained deaths in the intensive arm when compared
with the control arm (22%, P = 0.020). Analysis of the data at time
of discontinuation showed that the intensively treated group (mean
HbA1c 6.4%) had a 10% reduction in cardiovascular event rate
compared with the standard treated group (mean HbA1c 7.5%), but
this difference was not statistically significant.
The ADVANCE trial randomly assigned 11,140 patients with
type 2 diabetes to standard or intensive glucose control. The
primary outcomes were major macrovascular cardiovascular events
(nonfatal myocardial infarction or stroke or death from
cardiovascular causes) or microvascular events. Overall, one-third
(32%) of the subjects had established cardiovascular disease at
study entry. After a median follow-up of 5 years, there was a
nonsignificant reduction (6%) in major macrovascular event rate in
the intensively treated group (mean HbA1c 6.5%) compared with
the standard therapy group (HbA1c 7.3%).
The Veteran Administration Diabetes Trial (VADT) randomly
assigned 1791 patients from age 50 to 69 years with type 2
diabetes to standard or intensive glucose control. Overall, 97% of
the subjects were men. The primary outcome was a composite of
myocardial infarction, death from cardiovascular causes, congestive
heart failure, vascular surgery, inoperable coronary artery disease,
and amputation for gangrene. All the patients had optimized blood
pressure and lipid levels. After a median follow-up of 5.6 years,
there was no significant difference in the primary outcome in the
intensively treated group (HbA1c 6.9%) compared with the
standard therapy (HbA1c 8.4%). Within this larger study, there was
an embedded study evaluating the impact of the intensive therapy on
patients who were subcategorized as having low, moderate, and
high coronary calcium scores on CT scans. Patients with low
coronary calcium score showed a reduced number of
cardiovascular events with intensive therapy.
Thus, the ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT results do not
provide support for the hypothesis that near-normal glucose control
in patients with type 2 diabetes will reduce cardiovascular events. It
is, however, important not to over-interpret the results of these
three studies. The results do not exclude the possibility that
cardiovascular benefits might accrue with longer duration of near-
normal glucose control. In the UKPDS, risk reductions for
myocardial infarction and death from any cause were only observed
during 10 years of post-trial follow-up. Specific subgroups of type
2 diabetic patients may also have different outcomes. The
ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT studies recruited patients who
had diabetes for 8–10 years and one-third of them already had
established cardiovascular disease. Patients in the UKPDS, in
contrast, had newly diagnosed diabetes and only 7.5% had a
history of macro-vascular disease. It is possible that the benefits of
tight glycemic control on macrovascular events are attenuated in
patients with longer duration of diabetes or with established vascular
disease. Specific therapies used to lower glucose may also affect
cardiovascular event rate or mortality. Severe hypoglycemia
occurred more frequently in the intensively treated groups of the
ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT studies; the ACCORD
investigators were not able to exclude undiagnosed hypoglycemia as
a potential cause for the increased death rate in the intensive
treatment group.
A formal meta-analysis performed of the raw trial data from the
ACCORD, ADVANCE, VADT, and UKPDS studies found that
allocation to more intensive glucose control reduced the risk of
myocardial infarction by 15% (hazard ratio 0.85, 95% CI 0.76–
0.94). This benefit occurred in patients who did not have preexisting
macro-vascular disease.
ACCORD Study Group; Gerstein HC et al. Effects of intensive
glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jun
12;358(24):2545–59. [PMID: 18539917]
 
ADVANCE Collaborative Group; Patel A et al. Intensive blood
glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jun 12;358(24):2560–72. [PMID:
18539916]
 
Duckworth W et al; VADT Investigators. Glucose control and
vascular complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Jan 8;360(2):129–39. [PMID: 19092145]
 
Holman RR et al. 10-year follow-up of intensive glucose control in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct 9;359(15):1577–89.
[PMID: 18784090]
 
Gaede P et al. Multifactorial intervention and cardiovascular
disease in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jan
30;348(5):383–93. [PMID: 12556541]
 
Knowler WC et al; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle
intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002 Feb
7;346(6):393–403. [PMID: 11832527]
 
Ohkubo Y et al. Intensive insulin therapy prevents the progression
of diabetic microvascular complications in Japanese patients with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: a randomized prospective
6-year study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1995 May;28(2):103–17.
[PMID: 7587918]
 
Turnbull FM et al. Intensive glucose control and macrovascular
outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia. 2009 Nov;52(11):
2288–98. [PMID: 19655124]
 
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive
blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared
with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients
with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet. 1998 Sep
12;352(9131):837–53. [PMID: 9742976]
 
UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight blood pressure
control and risk of macrovascular and microvascular complications
in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ. 1998 Sep 12;
317(7160):703–13. [PMID: 9732337]
 
 Treatment Regimens
A. Diet
A well-balanced, nutritious diet remains a fundamental element of
therapy. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends
about 45–65% of total daily calories in the form of carbohydrates;
25–35% in the form of fat (of which < 7% are from saturated fat),
and 10–35% in the form of protein. In patients with type 2 diabetes,
limiting the carbohydrate intake and substituting some of the calories
with monounsaturated fats, such as olive oil, rapeseed (canola) oil,
or the oils in nuts and avocados, can lower triglycerides and
increase HDL cholesterol. Patients with type 1 diabetes or type 2
diabetes who take insulin should be taught “carbohydrate counting,”
so they can administer their insulin bolus for each meal based on its
carbohydrate content. In obese individuals with diabetes, an
additional goal is weight reduction by caloric restriction (see
Chapter 29).
The current recommendations for both types of diabetes continue
to limit cholesterol to 300 mg daily, and individuals with LDL
cholesterol more than 100 mg/dL should limit dietary cholesterol to
200 mg daily. High protein intake may cause progression of kidney
disease in patients with diabetic nephropathy; for these individuals, a
reduction in protein intake to 0.8 kg/day (or about 10% of total
calories daily) is recommended.
Exchange lists for meal planning can be obtained from the
American Diabetes Association and its affiliate associations or from
the American Dietetic Association, 216 W. Jackson Blvd.,
Chicago, IL 60606 (312-899-0040). Their Internet address is
http://www.eatright.org.
1. Dietary fiber—Plant components such as cellulose, gum, and
pectin are indigestible by humans and are termed dietary “fiber.”
Insoluble fibers such as cellulose or hemicellulose, as found in bran,
tend to increase intestinal transit and may have beneficial effects on
colonic function. In contrast, soluble fibers such as gums and
pectins, as found in beans, oatmeal, or apple skin, tend to retard
nutrient absorption rates so that glucose absorption is slower and
hyperglycemia may be slightly diminished. Although its
recommendations do not include insoluble fiber supplements such as
added bran, the ADA recommends food such as oatmeal, cereals,
and beans with relatively high soluble fiber content as staple
components of the diet in diabetics. High soluble fiber content in the
diet may also have a favorable effect on blood cholesterol levels.
2. Artificial and other sweeteners—Aspartame (Nutra Sweet)
consists of two major amino acids, aspartic acid and phenylalanine,
which combine to produce a sweetener 180 times as sweet as
sucrose. A major limitation is that it is not heat stable, so it cannot
be used in cooking. Saccharin (Sweet ’N Low), Sucralose
(Splenda), Acesulfame potassium (Sweet One), and rebiana
(Truvia) are other “artificial” sweeteners that can be used in cooking
and baking.
Fructose represents a “natural” sugar substance that is a highly
effective sweetener, induces only slight increases in plasma glucose
levels, and does not require insulin for its metabolism. However,
because of potential adverse effects of large amounts of fructose on
raising serum cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL cholesterol, it does
not have any advantage as a sweetening agent in the diabetic diet.
This does not preclude, however, ingestion of fructose-containing
fruits and vegetables or fructose-sweetened foods in moderation.
Sugar alcohols, also known as polyols or polyalcohol, are
commonly used as sweeteners and bulking agents. They occur
naturally in a variety of fruits and vegetables but are also
commercially made from sucrose, glucose, and starch. Examples
are sorbitol, xylitol, mannitol, lactitol, isomalt, maltitol, and
hydrogenated starch hydrolysates (HSH). They are not as easily
absorbed as sugar, so they do not raise blood glucose levels as
much. Therefore, sugar alcohols are often used in food products
that are labeled as “sugar free,” such as chewing gum, lozenges,
hard candy, and sugar-free ice cream. However, if consumed in
large quantities, they will raise blood glucose and can cause bloating
and diarrhea.
B. Medications for Treating Hyperglycemia
(Table 27–8.) The medications for treating type 2 diabetes fall into
several categories: (1) Medications that primarily stimulate insulin
secretion by binding to the sulfonylurea receptor: Sulfonylureas
remain the most widely prescribed medications for treating
hyperglycemia. The meglitinide analog repaglinide and the d-
phenylalanine derivative nateglinide also bind the sulfonylurea
receptor and stimulate insulin secretion. (2) Medications that
primarily lower glucose levels by their actions on the liver, muscle,
and adipose tissue: Metformin works in the liver. The
thiazolidinediones appear to have their main effect on skeletal
muscle and adipose tissue. (3) Medications that principally affect
absorption of glucose: The α-glucosidase inhibitors acarbose and
miglitol are such currently available therapies. (4) Medications that
mimic incretin effect or prolong incretin action: Glucagon-like
peptide 1 (GLP1) receptor agonists and DPP 1V inhibitors fall into
this category. (5) Other: Pramlintide lowers glucose by suppressing
glucagon and slowing gastric emptying.
1. Medications that primarily stimulate insulin secretion by
binding to the sulfonylurea receptor on the beta cell—
A. SULFONYLUREAS—The primary mechanism of action of the
sulfonylureas is to stimulate insulin release from pancreatic B cells.
Specific receptors on the surface of pancreatic B cells bind
sulfonylureas in the rank order of their insulinotropic potency
(glyburide with the greatest affinity and tolbutamide with the least
affinity). It has been shown that activation of these receptors closes
potassium channels, resulting in depolarization of the B cell. This
depolarized state permits calcium to enter the cell and actively
promote insulin release.
Sulfonylureas are not indicated for use in type 1 diabetes patients
since these medications require functioning pancreatic B cells to
produce their effect on blood glucose. These medications are used
in patients with type 2 diabetes, in whom acute administration
improves the early phase of insulin release that is refractory to acute
glucose stimulation. Sulfonylureas are metabolized by the liver and
apart from acetohexamide, whose metabolite is more active than the
parent compound, the metabolites of all the other sulfonylureas are
weakly active or inactive. The metabolites are excreted by the
kidney and, in the case of the second-generation sulfonylureas,
partly excreted in the bile. Sulfonylureas are generally
contraindicated in patients with severe liver or kidney impairment.
Idiosyncratic reactions are rare, with skin rashes or hematologic
toxicity (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia) occurring in < 0.1% of
users.
(1) First-generation sulfonylureas (tolbutamide, tolaz-
amide, acetohexamide, chlorpropamide)— Tolbutamide is
supplied as 500-mg tablets. It is rapidly oxidized in the liver to
inactive metabolites, and its approximate duration of effect is
relatively short (6–10 hours). Tolbutamide is probably best
administered in divided doses (eg, 500 mg before each meal and at
bedtime); however, some patients require only one or two tablets
daily with a maximum dose of 3000 mg/d. Because of its short
duration of action, which is independent of kidney function,
tolbutamide is probably the safest sulfonylurea to use if liver function
is normal. Prolonged hypoglycemia has been reported rarely with
tolbutamide, mostly in patients receiving certain antibacterial
sulfonamides (sulfisoxazole), phenylbutazone for arthralgias, or the
oral azole antifungal medications to treat candidiasis. These
medications apparently compete with tolbutamide for oxidative
enzyme systems in the liver, resulting in maintenance of high levels of
unmetabolized, active sulfonylurea in the circulation.
Tolazamide, acetohexamide, and chlorpropamide are rarely
used. Chlorpropamide has a prolonged biologic effect, and severe
hypoglycemia can occur especially in the elderly as their renal
clearance declines with aging. Its other side effects include alcohol-
induced flushing and hyponatremia due to its effect on vasopressin
secretion and action.
(2) 
Second-generation 
sulfonylureas 
(glyburide,
glipizide, gliclazide, glimepiride)— Glyburide, glipizide,
gliclazide, and glimepiride are 100–200 times more potent than
tolbut-amide. These medications should be used with caution in
patients with cardiovascular disease or in elderly patients, in whom
prolonged hypoglycemia would be especially dangerous.
Glyburide is available in 1.25-mg, 2.5-mg, and 5-mg tablets.
The usual starting dose is 2.5 mg/d, and the average maintenance
dose is 5–10 mg/d given as a single morning dose; maintenance
doses higher than 20 mg/d are not recommended. Some reports
suggest that 10 mg is a maximum daily therapeutic dose, with 15–
20 mg having no additional benefit in poor responders and doses
over 20 mg actually worsening hyperglycemia. Glyburide is
metabolized in the liver into products with hypoglycemic activity,
which probably explains why assays specific for the unmetabolized
compound suggest a plasma half-life of only 1–2 hours, yet the
biologic effects of glyburide are clearly persistent 24 hours after a
single morning dose in diabetic patients. Glyburide is unique among
sulfonylureas in that it not only binds to the pancreatic B cell
membrane sulfonylurea receptor but also becomes sequestered
within the B cell. This may also contribute to its prolonged biologic
effect despite its relatively short circulating half-life. A “Press Tab”
formulation of “micronized” glyburide—easy to divide in half with
slight pressure if necessary—is available in tablet sizes of 1.5 mg, 3
mg, and 6 mg.
 
Table 27–8. Drugs for treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
 
Glyburide has few adverse effects other than its potential for
causing hypoglycemia, which at times can be prolonged. Flushing
has rarely been reported after ethanol ingestion. It does not cause
water retention, as chlorpropamide does, but rather slightly
enhances free water clearance. Glyburide should not be used in
patients with liver failure and renal failure because of the risk of
hypoglycemia. Elderly patients are at particular risk for
hypoglycemia even with relatively small daily doses.
Glipizide is available in 5- and 10-mg tablets. For maximum
effect in reducing postprandial hyperglycemia, this agent should be
ingested 30 minutes before meals, since rapid absorption is delayed
when the medication is taken with food. The recommended starting
dose is 5 mg/d, with up to 15 mg/d given as a single daily dose
before breakfast. When higher daily doses are required, they should
be divided and given before meals. The maximum dose
recommended by the manufacturer is 40 mg/d, although doses
above 10–15 mg probably provide little additional benefit in poor
responders and may even be less effective than smaller doses.
At least 90% of glipizide is metabolized in the liver to inactive
products, and 10% is excreted unchanged in the urine. Glipizide
therapy should therefore not be used in patients with liver failure.
Because of its lower potency and shorter duration of action, it is
preferable to glyburide in elderly patients. Glipizide has also been
marketed as Glucotrol-XL in 2.5-, 5-, and 10-mg tablets. It
provides extended release during transit through the gastrointestinal
tract with greater effectiveness in lowering prebreakfast
hyperglycemia than the shorter-duration immediate-release standard
glipizide tablets. However, this formulation appears to have
sacrificed its lower propensity for severe hypoglycemia compared
with longer-acting glyburide without showing any demonstrable
therapeutic advantages over glyburide.
Gliclazide (not available in the United States) is another
intermediate duration sulfonylurea with a duration of action of about
12 hours. It is available as 80 mg tablets. The recommended
starting dose is 40–80 mg/d with a maximum dose of 320 mg.
Doses of 160 mg and above are given as divided doses before
breakfast and dinner. The medication is metabolized by the liver; the
metabolites and conjugates have no hypoglycemic effect. An
extended release preparation is available.
Glimepiride is available as 1-, 2- and 4-mg tablets. It has a long
duration of effect with a half-life of 5 hours allowing once or twice
daily dosing. Glimepiride achieves blood glucose lowering with the
lowest dose of any sulfonylurea compound. A single daily dose of 1
mg/d has been shown to be effective, and the maximal
recommended dose is 8 mg. It is completely metabolized by the
liver to relatively inactive metabolic products.
B. MEGLITINIDE ANALOGS—Repaglinide is structurally similar to
glyburide but lacks the sulfonic acid-urea moiety. It acts by binding
to the sulfonylurea receptor and closing the ATP-sensitive
potassium channel. It is rapidly absorbed from the intestine and then
undergoes complete metabolism in the liver to inactive biliary
products, giving it a plasma half-life of < 1 hour. The medication
therefore causes a brief but rapid pulse of insulin. The starting dose
is 0.5 mg three times a day 15 minutes before each meal. The dose
can be titrated to a maximal daily dose of 16 mg. Like the
sulfonylureas, repaglinide can be used in combination with
metformin. Hypoglycemia is the main side effect. In clinical trials,
when the medication was compared with a long-duration
sulfonylurea (glyburide), there was a trend toward less
hypoglycemia. Like the sulfonylureas also, repaglinide causes weight
gain. Metabolism is by cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme, and
other medications that induce or inhibit this isoenzyme may increase
or inhibit (respectively) the metabolism of repaglinide. The
medication may be useful in patients with kidney impairment or in
the elderly.
Mitiglinide is a benzylsuccinic acid derivative that binds to the
sulfonylurea receptor and is similar to repaglinide in its clinical
effects. It has been approved for use in Japan.
C. D-PHENYLALANINE DERIVATIVE—Nateglinide stimulates insulin
secretion by binding to the sulfonylurea receptor and closing the
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. This compound is rapidly
absorbed from the intestine, reaching peak plasma levels within 1
hour. It is metabolized in the liver and has a plasma half-life of about
1.5 hours. Like repaglinide, it causes a brief rapid pulse of insulin,
and when given before a meal it reduces the postprandial rise in
blood glucose. The medication is available as 60- and 120-mg
tablets. The 60-mg dose is used in patients who have mild
elevations in HbA1c. For most patients, the recommended starting
and maintenance dose is 120 mg three times a day before meals.
Like the other insulin secretagogues, its main side effects are
hypoglycemia and weight gain.
2. Medications that primarily lower glucose levels by their
actions on the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue—
A. 
METFORMIN—Metformin 
(1,1-dimethylbiguanide
hydrochloride) is used, either alone or in conjunction with other oral
agents or insulin, in the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes.
Metformin activates adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase 
(AMPK) 
by 
uncoupling 
mitochondrial 
oxidative
phosphorylation and increasing cellular AMP levels. Metformin's
therapeutic effects primarily derive from the increasing hepatic
AMPK activity, which reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis and
lipogenesis. Metformin is a substrate for organic cation transporter
1, which is abundantly expressed in hepatocytes and in the gut.
Metformin has a half-life of 1.5–3 hours, is not bound to plasma
proteins, and is not metabolized in humans, being excreted
unchanged by the kidneys.
Metformin is the first-line therapy for patients with type 2
diabetes. The current recommendation is to start this medication at
diagnosis. A side benefit of metformin therapy is its tendency to
improve both fasting and post-prandial hyperglycemia and
hypertriglyceridemia in obese diabetics without the weight gain
associated with insulin or sulfonylurea therapy. Metformin is
ineffective in patients with type 1 diabetes. Patients with chronic
kidney disease (calculated glomerular filtration rate < 50 mL/min)
should not be given this medication because failure to excrete it
would produce high blood and tissue levels of metformin that could
stimulate lactic acid overproduction. Likewise, patients with liver
failure or persons who abuse alcohol should not receive this
medication; lactic acid production from the gut and other tissues,
which rises during metformin therapy, could result in lactic acidosis
when defective hepatocytes cannot remove the lactate or when
alcohol-induced reduction of nucleotides interferes with lactate
clearance.
Metformin is dispensed as 500 mg, 850 mg, and 1000 mg
tablets. A 500 mg and 750 mg extended-release preparation is also
available. Although the maximal dosage is 2.55 g, little benefit is
seen above a total dose of 2000 mg. It is important to begin with a
low dose and increase the dosage very gradually in divided doses—
taken with meals—to reduce minor gastrointestinal upsets. A
common schedule would be one 500 mg tablet three times a day
with meals or one 850 mg or 1000 mg tablet twice daily at
breakfast and dinner. Up to 2000 mg of the extended-release
preparation can be given once a day.
The most frequent side effects of metformin are gastrointestinal
symptoms (anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort,
diarrhea), which occur in up to 20% of patients. These effects are
dose-related, tend to occur at onset of therapy, and often are
transient. However, in 3–5% of patients, therapy may have to be
discontinued because of persistent diarrheal discomfort. In a
retrospective analysis, it has been reported that patients switched
from immediate-release metformin to comparable dose of
extended-release metformin experienced fewer gastrointestinal side
effects.
Hypoglycemia does not occur with therapeutic doses of
metformin, which permits its description as a “euglycemic” or
“antihyperglycemic” medication rather than an oral hypoglycemic
agent. Dermatologic or hematologic toxicity is rare. Absorption of
vitamin B12 appears to be reduced during long-term metformin
therapy, but the serum vitamin B12 levels usually remain in the
normal range. However, periodic screening with serum vitamin B12
levels should be considered, especially in patients with symptoms of
peripheral neuropathy or if a macrocytic anemia develops.
p p
p
y
y
p
Lactic acidosis has been reported as a side effect but is
uncommon with metformin in contrast to phenformin. While
therapeutic doses of metformin reduce lactate uptake by the liver,
serum lactate levels rise only minimally if at all, since other organs
such as the kidney can remove the slight excess. However, if tissue
hypoxia occurs, the metformin-treated patient is at higher risk for
lactic acidosis due to compromised lactate removal. Similarly, when
kidney function deteriorates, affecting not only lactate removal by
the kidney but also metformin excretion, plasma levels of metformin
rise far above the therapeutic range and block hepatic uptake
enough to provoke lactic acidosis without associated increases in
lactic acid production. Almost all reported cases have involved
subjects with associated risk factors that should have
contraindicated its use (kidney, liver, or cardiorespiratory
insufficiency, alcoholism, advanced age). Acute kidney failure can
occur rarely in certain patients receiving radiocontrast agents.
Metformin therapy should therefore be temporarily halted on the
day of radiocontrast administration and restarted a day or two later
after confirmation that renal function has not deteriorated.
B. THIAZOLIDINEDIONES—Medications of this class of
antihyperglycemic agents sensitize peripheral tissues to insulin. They
bind a nuclear receptor called peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) and affect the expression of a number
of genes. Observed effects of thiazolidinediones include increased
glucose transporter expression (GLUT 1 and GLUT 4), decreased
free fatty acid levels, decreased hepatic glucose output, increased
adiponectin and decreased release of resistin from adipocytes, and
increased differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes. They
have also been demonstrated to decrease levels of plasminogen
activator inhibitor type 1, matrix metal-loproteinase 9, C-reactive
protein, and interleukin 6. Like the biguanides, this class of
medications does not cause hypoglycemia.
Two medications of this class, rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, are
available for clinical use. Both are effective as monotherapy and in
combination with sulfonylureas or metformin or insulin. When used
as monotherapy, these medications lower HbA1c by about 1 or 2
percentage points. When used in combination with insulin, they can
result in a 30–50% reduction in insulin dosage, and some patients
can come off insulin completely. The dosage of rosiglita-zone is 4–8
mg daily and of pioglitazone, 15–45 mg daily, and the medications
do not have to be taken with food. Rosiglitazone is primarily
metabolized by the CYP 2C8 isoenzyme and pioglitazone is
metabolized by CYP 2C8 and CYP 3A4.
The combination of a thiazolidinedione and metformin has the
advantage of not causing hypoglycemia. Patients inadequately
managed on sulfonylureas can do well on a combination of
sulfonylurea and rosiglitazone or pioglita-zone. About 25% of
patients in clinical trials fail to respond to these medications,
presumably because they are significantly insulinopenic.
These medications have some additional effects apart from
glucose lowering. Rosiglitazone therapy is associated with increases
in total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol (15%), and HDL-cholesterol
(10%). There is a reduction in free fatty acids of about 8–15%. The
changes in triglycerides were generally not different from placebo.
Pioglitazone in clinical trials lowered triglycerides (9%) and
increased HDL-cholesterol (15%), but did not cause a consistent
change in total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol levels. A
prospective randomized comparison of the metabolic effects of
pioglitazone and rosiglitazone on patients who had previously taken
troglitazone (now withdrawn from the US market) showed similar
effects on HbA1c and weight gain. Pioglitazone-treated persons,
however, had lower total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, and
triglycerides when compared with rosiglitazone-treated persons.
Small prospective studies have demonstrated that treatment with
these medications leads to improvements in the biochemical and
histologic features of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The
thiazolidinediones also may limit vascular smooth muscle
proliferation after injury, and there are reports that pioglitazone and
troglitazone (subsequently withdrawn from the US market) reduced
neointimal proliferation after coronary stent placement. Finally, in
one double-blind, placebo-controlled study, rosiglitazone was
shown to be associated with a decrease in the ratio of urinary
albumin to creatinine excretion.
Safety concerns and some troublesome side effects have
emerged about this class of medications that potentially limit their
use.
A meta-analysis of 42 randomized clinical trials with rosiglitazone
suggested that this medication increases the risk of angina pectoris
or myocardial infarction. A meta-analysis of clinical trials with
pioglitazone did not show similar findings. Although conclusive data
are lacking, the European Medicines Agency has suspended the use
of rosiglitazone in Europe. In the United States, the FDA has
mandated that it be prescribed to new patients only if they are
unable to achieve glucose control on other medications or are
unable to take pioglitazone. Patients currently taking rosiglitazone
can continue the medication, but they will be required to review
statements regarding the cardiovascular safety of rosiglitazone and
acknowledge that they understand the risks.
Edema occurs in about 3–4% of patients receiving monotherapy
with rosiglitazone or pioglitazone. The edema occurs more
frequently (10–15%) in patients receiving concomitant insulin
therapy and may result in congestive heart failure. The medications
are contraindicated in diabetic individuals with New York Heart
Association class III and IV cardiac status. Thiazolidinediones have
also been reported as being associated with new onset or
worsening macular edema. Apparently, this is a rare side effect, and
most of these patients also had peripheral edema. The macular
edema resolved or improved once the medication was discontinued.
In experimental animals, rosiglitazone stimulates bone marrow
adipogenesis at the expense of osteoblastogenesis resulting in a
decrease in bone density. An increase in fracture risk in women (but
not men) has been reported with both rosiglitazone and
pioglitazone. The fracture risk is in the range of 1.9 per 100 patient-
years with the thiazolidinedione compared to 1.1 per 100 patient
years on comparison treatment. In at least one study of
rosiglitazone, the fracture risk was increased in premenopausal as
well as post-menopausal women.
Other side effects include anemia, which occurs in 4% of patients
treated with these medications; it may be due to a dilutional effect of
increased plasma volume rather than a reduction in red cell mass.
Weight gain occurs, especially when the medication is combined
with a sulfonylurea or insulin. Some of the weight gain is fluid
retention, but there is also an increase in total fat mass. In preclinical
studies with pioglitazone, bladder tumors were observed in male
rats receiving clinically relevant doses of the medication. In a
planned 5-year interim analysis of data from a long-term
observational cohort study of patients taking pioglitazone, there was
no overall increased risk of bladder cancer with pioglitazone.
However, increased bladder cancer risk was observed with
increasing dose and duration of pioglitazone use, reaching statistical
significance after 24 months of exposure.
Troglitazone, the first medication in this class to go into
widespread clinical use, was withdrawn from clinical use because of
medication-associated fatal liver failure. The two currently available
agents, rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, have thus far not caused
hepatotoxicity. The FDA has, however, recommended that patients
should not initiate medication therapy if there is clinical evidence of
active liver disease or pre-treatment elevation of the alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) level that is 2.5 times greater than the
upper limit of normal. Obviously, caution should be used in initiation
of therapy in patients with even mild ALT elevations. Liver
biochemical tests should be performed prior to initiation of
treatment and periodically thereafter.
3. Medications that affect absorption of glucose—α-
Glucosidase inhibitors competitively inhibit the α-glucosidase
enzymes in the gut that digest dietary starch and sucrose. Two of
these medications—acarbose and miglitol—are available for clinical
use in the United States. Voglibose, another α-glucosidase inhibitor
is available in Japan, Korea, and India. Acarbose and miglitol are
potent inhibitors of glucoamylase, α-amylase, and sucrase but have
less effect on isomaltase and hardly any on trehalase and lactase.
Acarbose binds 1000 times more avidly to the intestinal
disaccharidases than do products of carbohydrate digestion or
sucrose. A fundamental difference between acarbose and miglitol is
in their absorption. Acarbose has the molecular mass and structural
features of a tetrasaccha-ride, and very little (about 2%) crosses the
microvillar membrane. Miglitol, however, has a structural similarity
with glucose and is absorbable. Both medications delay the
absorption of carbohydrate and lower postprandial glycemic
excursion.
A. ACARBOSE—Acarbose is available as 50-mg and 100-mg
tablets. The recommended starting dose of acarbose is 50 mg twice
daily, gradually increasing to 100 mg three times daily. For maximal
benefit on postprandial hyperglycemia, acarbose should be given
with the first mouthful of food ingested. In diabetic patients, it
reduces postprandial hyperglycemia by 30–50%, and its overall
effect is to lower the HbA1c by 0.5–1%.
The principal adverse effect, seen in 20–30% of patients, is
flatulence. This is caused by undigested carbohydrate reaching the
lower bowel, where gases are produced by bacterial flora. In 3% of
cases, troublesome diarrhea occurs. This gastrointestinal discomfort
tends to discourage excessive carbohydrate consumption and
promotes improved compliance of type 2 patients with their diet
prescriptions. When acarbose is given alone, there is no risk of
hypoglycemia. However, if combined with insulin or sulfonylureas, it
might increase the risk of hypoglycemia from these agents. A slight
rise in hepatic aminotransferases has been noted in clinical trials with
acarbose (5% versus 2% in placebo controls, and particularly with
doses > 300 mg/d). The levels generally return to normal on
stopping the medication.
In the UKPDS, approximately 2000 patients on diet,
sulfonylurea, metformin, or insulin therapy were randomized to
acarbose or placebo therapy. By 3 years, 60% of the patients had
discontinued the medication, mostly because of gastrointestinal
symptoms. If one looked only at the 40% who remained on the
medication, they had an 0.5% lower HbA1c compared with
placebo.
B. MIGLITOL—Miglitol is similar to acarbose in terms of its clinical
effects. It is indicated for use in diet- or sulfonylurea-treated patients
with type 2 diabetes. Therapy is initiated at the lowest effective
dosage of 25 mg three times a day. The usual maintenance dose is
50 mg three times a day, although some patients may benefit from
increasing the dose to 100 mg three times a day. Gastrointestinal
side effects occur as with acarbose. The medication is not
metabolized and is excreted unchanged by the kidney.
Theoretically, absorbable α-glucosidase inhibitors could induce a
deficiency of one or more of the α-glucosidases involved in cellular
glycogen metabolism and biosynthesis of glycoproteins. This does
not occur in practice because, unlike the intestinal mucosa, which
sees a high concentration of the medication, the blood level is 200-
fold to 1000-fold lower than the concentration needed to inhibit
intracellular α-glucosidases. Miglitol should not be used in end-stage
chronic kidney disease, when its clearance would be impaired.
4. Incretins—Oral glucose provokes a threefold to fourfold higher
insulin response than an equivalent dose of glucose given
intravenously. This is because the oral glucose causes a release of
gut hormones, principally glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP1), that amplify
the glucose-induced insulin release. This “incretin effect” is reduced
in patients with type 2 diabetes. GLP-1 secretion (but not GIP1
secretion) is impaired in patients with type 2 diabetes and when
GLP-1 is infused in patients with type 2 diabetes, it stimulates insulin
secretion and lowers glucose levels. GLP-1, unlike the
sulfonylureas, has only a modest insulin stimulatory effect at
normoglycemic concentrations. This means that GLP-1 has a lower
risk for hypoglycemia than the sulfonylureas.
In addition to its insulin stimulatory effect, GLP-1 also has a
number of other pancreatic and extrapancreatic effects. It
suppresses glucagon secretion and so may ameliorate the
hyperglucagonemia that is present in people with diabetes and
improve postprandial hyperglycemia. GLP-1 preserves islet integrity
and reduces apoptotic cell death of human islet cells in culture. In
mice, streptozotocin-induced apoptosis is significantly reduced by
coadministration of exendin-4 or exenatide, a GLP-1 receptor
agonist. GLP-1 acts on the stomach delaying gastric emptying; the
importance of this effect on glucose lowering is illustrated by the
observation that antagonizing the deceleration of gastric emptying
markedly reduces the glucose lowering effect of GLP-1. GLP-1
receptors are present in the central nervous system, and
intracerebroventricular administration of GLP-1 in wild type mice,
but not in GLP-1 receptor knockout mice, inhibits feeding. Type 2
diabetic patients undergoing GLP-1 infusion are less hungry; it is
unclear whether this is mainly due to a deceleration of gastric
emptying or whether there is a central nervous system effect as well.
A. GLP-1 RECEPTOR AGONISTS—GLP-1 is rapidly proteolyzed by
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) and by other enzymes, such as
endopeptidase 24.11, and is also cleared rapidly by the kidney. As
a result, GLP-1’s half-life is only 1–2 minutes. The native peptide,
therefore, cannot be used therapeutically and the approach taken
has been to develop metabolically stable analogs or derivatives of
GLP-1 that are not subject to the same enzymatic degradation or
renal clearance. Two GLP-1 receptor agonists, exenatide and
liraglutide, are currently available for clinical use.
Exenatide (Exendin 4) is a GLP-1 receptor agonist isolated
from the saliva of the Gila Monster (a venomous lizard) that is more
resistant to DPP-4 action and cleared by the kidney. Its half-life is
2.4 hours, and its glucose lowering effect is about 6 hours. When
this medication is given to patients with type 2 diabetes by
subcutaneous injection twice daily, it lowers blood glucose and
HbA1c levels. Exenatide appears to have the same effects as GLP-
1 on glucagon suppression and gastric emptying. In clinical trials,
adding exenatide therapy to patients with type 2 diabetes already
taking metformin or a sulfonylurea, or both, further lowered the
HbA1c value by 0.4% to 0.6% over a 30-week period. These
patients also experienced a weight loss of 3–6 pounds. In an open
label extension study up to 80 weeks, the HbA1c reduction was
sustained, and there was further weight loss (to a total loss of about
10 pounds). The main side effect was nausea, affecting over 40% of
the patients. The nausea was dose-dependent and declined with
time. The risk of hypoglycemia was higher in persons taking
sulfonylureas. The FDA has received 30 post-marketing reports of
acute pancreatitis in patients taking exenatide. The pancreatitis was
severe (hemorrhagic or necrotizing) in 6 instances, and two of these
patients died. Many of these patients had other risk factors for
pancreatitis, but the possibility remains that the medication was
causally responsible for some cases. Patients taking exenatide
should be advised to seek immediate medical care if they
experience unexplained persistent severe abdominal pain. The FDA
also reported 16 cases of renal impairment and 62 cases of acute
renal failure in patients taking exenatide. Some of these patients had
preexisting kidney disease, and others had one or more risk factors
for kidney disease. A number of patients reported nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea; it is possible that these side effects cause volume
depletion and contributed to the development of the renal failure.
The delay in gastric emptying may affect the absorption of some
other medications; therefore, antibiotics and oral contraceptives
should be taken 1 hour before exenatide doses. Low-titer
antibodies against exenatide develop in over one-third (38%) of
patients, but the clinical effects are not attenuated. High-titer
antibodies develop in a subset of patients (~6%), and in about half
of these cases, an attenuation of glycemic response has been seen.
Exenatide is dispensed as two fixed-dose pens (5 mcg and 10
mcg). It is injected 60 minutes before breakfast and before dinner.
Patients should be prescribed the 5 mcg pen for the first month and,
if tolerated, the dose can then be increased to 10 mcg twice a day.
The medication is not recommended in patients with glomerular
filtration rate < 30 mL/min.
Liraglutide is a soluble fatty acid acylated GLP-1 analog (with
replacement of lysine with arginine at position 34 and the attachment
of a C16 acyl chain to a lysine at position 26). The fatty-acyl GLP-
1 retains affinity for GLP-1 receptors but the addition of the C 16
acyl chain allows for noncovalent binding to albumin, both hindering
DPP-4 access to the molecule and contributing to a prolonged half-
life and duration of action. The half-life is approximately 12 hours,
allowing the medication to be injected once a day.
In clinical trials lasting 26 and 52 weeks, adding liraglutide to the
therapeutic regimen (metformin, sulfonylurea, thiazolidinedione) of
patients with type 2 diabetes further lowered the HbA1c value.
Depending on the dose and design of the study, the HbA1c decline
was in the range of 0.6% to 1.5%. The patients had sustained
weight loss of 1–6 pounds.
Like exenatide, the most frequent side effects were nausea
(28%) and vomiting (10%). There was also an increased incidence
of diarrhea. About 2–5% of participants withdrew from the studies
because of the gastrointestinal symptoms. In clinical trials, there
were seven cases of pancreatitis in the liraglutide treated group with
one case in the comparison group (2.2 vs. 0.6 cases per 1000
patient-years). Liraglutide stimulates C-cell neoplasia and causes
medullary thyroid carcinoma in rats. Human C-cells express very
few GLP1-receptors, and the relevance to human therapy is
unclear; however, because of the animal data, the medication should
not be used in patients with personal or family history of medullary
thyroid carcinoma or multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
syndrome type 2.
The dosing is initiated at 0.6 mg daily, increased after 1 week to
1.2 mg daily. If needed, an additional increase in dose to 1.8 mg is
recommended for optimal glycemic control. Titration is also based
on tolerability. There is limited experience using the medication in
renal failure but no dose adjustment is recommended.
B. DPP-4 INHIBITORS—An alternate approach to the use of GLP-
1 receptor agonists is to inhibit the enzyme DPP-4 and prolong the
action of endogenously released GLP-1 and GIP. Two oral DPP-4
inhibitors, sitagliptin and saxagliptin are available for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes in the United States. An additional DPP4 inhibitor
vildagliptin is available in Europe.
Sitagliptin in clinical trials was shown to be effective in lowering
glucose when used alone and in combination with metformin and
pioglitazone. In various clinical trials, improvements in HbA1c
ranged from 0.5% to 1.4%. The usual dose of sitagliptin is 100 mg
once daily, but the dose is reduced to 50 mg daily if the calculated
creatinine clearance is 30–50 mL/min and to 25 mg for clearances
< 30 mL/min. Unlike exenatide, sitagliptin does not cause nausea or
vomiting. It also does not result in weight loss. The main adverse
effect appears to be a predisposition to nasopharyngitis or upper
respiratory tract infection. A small increase in neutrophil count of
~200 cells/mcL has also occurred. Since its FDA approval and
clinical use, there have been reports of serious allergic reactions to
sitagliptin, including anaphylaxis, angioedema, and exfoliative skin
conditions including Stevens-Johnson syndrome. There have also
been reports of pancreatitis (88 cases including 2 cases of
hemorrhagic or necrotizing pancreatitis). The frequency of these
events is unclear. A number of neuropeptides, growth factors,
cytokines, and chemokines are potential DPP-4 substrates; DPP-4
inhibitors prolong the actions of neuro-peptide Y and substance P.
It is unknown whether the effects of DPP-4 inhibitors on the actions
of neuropeptide Y and substance P over a long-term period will
have negative consequences.
Saxagliptin, when added to the therapeutic regimen (metformin,
sulfonylurea, thiazolidinedione) of patients with type 2 diabetes,
further lowered the HbA1c value by about 0.7–0.9%. The dose is
2.5 mg or 5 mg once a day. The 2.5-mg dose should be used in
patients with calculated creatinine clearance < 50 mL/min. It lowers
HbA1c by about 0.6% when added to metformin or glyburide or
thiazolidine in various 24-week clinical trials. The medication does
not cause weight gain or loss. The main adverse reactions were
upper respiratory tract infection, nasopharyngitis, headache, and
urinary tract infection. There is also small reversible dose-dependent
reduction in absolute lymphocyte count, which remains within
normal limits. Hypersensitivity reactions, such as urticaria and facial
edema, occurred in 1.5% of patients taking the medication
compared with 0.4% receiving placebo. The metabolism of
saxagliptin is by CYP3A4/5; thus, strong inhibitors or inducers of
CYP3A4/5 will affect the pharmacokinetics of saxagliptin and its
active metabolite.
Vildagliptin, like the other DPP-4 competitive inhibitors, lowers
HbA1c by about 0.5–1% when added to the therapeutic regimen of
patients with type 2 diabetes. The dose in 50 mg once or twice
daily. Adverse reactions include upper respiratory tract infections,
nasopharyngitis, dizziness, and headache. Rare cases of hepatic
dysfunction, including hepatitis, have been reported. Liver function
testing is recommended quarterly during the first year of use and
periodically thereafter.
p
y
5. Others—Pramlintide is a synthetic analog of islet amyloid
polypeptide (IAPP or amylin). When given subcutaneously, it
delays gastric emptying, suppresses glucagon secretion, and
decreases appetite. It is approved for use both in type 1 diabetes
and in insulin-treated type 2 diabetes. In 6-month clinical studies
with type 1 and insulin-treated type 2 patients, those taking the
medication had an approximately 0.4% reduction in HbA1c and
about 1.7 kg weight loss compared with placebo. The HbA1c
reduction was sustained for 2 years but some of the weight was
regained. The medication is given by injection immediately before
the meal. Hypoglycemia can occur, and it is recommended that the
short-acting or premixed insulin doses be reduced by 50% when
the medication is started. Since the medication slows gastric
emptying, recovery from hypoglycemia can be a problem because
of delay in absorption of fast-acting carbohydrates. Nausea was the
other main side effect, affecting 30–50% of persons but tended to
improve with time. In patients with type 1 diabetes, the initial dose
of pramlintide is 15 mcg before each meal and titrated up by 15
mcg increments to a maintenance dose of 30 mcg or 60 mcg before
each meal. In patients with type 2 diabetes, the starting dose is 60
mcg premeals increased to 120 mcg in 3 to 7 days if no significant
nausea occurs.
6. Medication combinations—Several medication combinations
are available in different dose sizes, including glyburide and
metformin (Glucovance); glipizide and metformin (Metaglip);
repaglinide-metformin (Prandi-Met); rosiglitazone and metformin
(Avandamet); pioglitazone and metformin (ACTOplus Met);
rosiglitazone and glimepiride (Avandaryl); pioglitazone and
glimepiride (Duetact); sitagliptin and metformin (Janumet); and
saxagliptin and metformin XR (Kombiglyze XR). These medication
combinations, however, limit the clinician's ability to optimally adjust
dosage of the individual medications and for that reason are not
recommended.
C. Insulin
Insulin is indicated for type 1 diabetes as well as for type 2 diabetic
patients with insulinopenia whose hyperglycemia does not respond
to diet therapy either alone or combined with other hypoglycemic
medications.
With the development of highly purified human insulin
preparations, immunogenicity has been markedly reduced, thereby
decreasing the incidence of therapeutic complications such as insulin
allergy, immune insulin resistance, and localized lipoatrophy at the
injection site. However, the problem of achieving optimal insulin
delivery remains unsolved with the present state of technology. It
has not been possible to reproduce the physiologic patterns of
intraportal insulin secretion with subcutaneous injections of short-
acting or longer-acting insulin preparations. Even so, with the help
of appropriate modifications of diet and exercise and careful
monitoring of capillary blood glucose levels at home, it has often
been possible to achieve acceptable control of blood glucose by
using various mixtures of short- and longer-acting insulins injected at
least twice daily or portable insulin infusion pumps.
1. Characteristics of available insulin preparations
—Commercial insulin preparations differ with respect to the time of
onset and duration of their biologic action (Table 27–9).
A. SPECIES OF INSULIN—Human insulin is produced by
recombinant DNA techniques (biosynthetic human insulin) as
Humulin (Eli Lilly) and as Novolin (Novo Nordisk). It is dispensed
as either regular (R) or NPH (N) formulations. Five analogs of
human insulin—three rapidly acting (insulin lispro, insulin aspart,
insulin glulisine) and two long-acting (insulin glargine and insulin
detemir)—have been approved by the FDA for clinical use (Table
27–10). Animal insulins are no longer available in the United States.
 
Table 27–9. Summary of bioavailability characteristics of the
insulins.
 
 
B. PURITY OF INSULIN—“Purified” insulin is defined by FDA
regulations as the degree of purity wherein proinsulin contamination
is < 10 ppm. All insulins presently available contain < 10 ppm of
proinsulin and are labeled as “purified.” These purified insulins seem
to preserve their potency quite well, so that refrigeration is
recommended but not crucial. During travel, reserve supplies of
insulin can thus be readily transported for weeks without losing
potency if protected from extremes of heat or cold.
C. CONCENTRATION OF INSULIN—At present, insulins in the
United States are available in a concentration of 100 units/mL
(U100), and all are dispensed in 10-mL vials. With the popularity of
“low-dose” (0.5- or 0.3-mL) disposable insulin syringes, U100 can
be measured with acceptable accuracy in doses as low as 1–2
units. For use in rare cases of severe insulin resistance in which large
quantities of insulin are required, U500 regular human insulin
(Humulin R) is available from Eli Lilly.
 
Table 27–10. Insulin preparations available in the United states.1
 
Rapidly acting human insulin analogs
     Insulin lispro (Humalog, Lilly)
     Insulin aspart (Novolog, Novo Nordisk)
     Insulin glulisine (Apidra, Sanofi Aventis)
Short-acting regular insulin
     Regular insulin (Lilly, Novo Nordisk)
Intermediate-acting insulins
     NPH insulin (Lilly, Novo Nordisk)
(
y,
)
Premixed insulins
     70% NPH/30% regular (70/30 insulin—Lilly, Novo
Nordisk)
     70% NPL/25% insulin lispro (Humalog Mix 75/25—Lilly)
     50% NPL/50% insulin lispro (Humalog Mix 50/50—Lilly)
     70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insulin aspart
(Novolog Mix 70/30—Novo Nordisk)
Long-acting human insulin analogs
     Insulin glargine (Lantus, Sanofi Aventis)
     Insulin detemir (Levemir, Novo Nordisk)
1All insulins available in the United States are recombinant human or
human insulin analog origin. All the insulins are dispensed at U100
concentration. There is an additional U500 preparation of regular insulin.
NPH, neutral protamine Hagedorn.
2. Insulin preparations—Insulins are classified into short-acting
and long-acting insulin preparations. The short-acting preparations
are regular insulin and the rapidly acting insulin analogs (Figure 27–
3). They are dispensed as clear solutions at neutral pH and contain
small amounts of zinc to improve their stability and shelf life. The
long-acting preparations are NPH insulin and the long-acting insulin
analogs. NPH insulin is dispensed as a turbid suspension at neutral
pH with protamine in phosphate buffer. The long-acting insulin
analogs are also dispensed as clear solutions; insulin glargine is at
acidic pH and insulin detemir is at neutral pH. The rapidly acting
insulin analogs and the long-acting insulins are designed for
subcutaneous administration, while regular insulin can also be given
intravenously. While insulin aspart has been approved for
intravenous use (eg, in hyperglycemic emergencies), there is no
advantage in using insulin aspart over regular insulin by this route.
A. SHORT-ACTING INSULIN PREPARATIONS—
(1) Regular insulin— Regular insulin is a short-acting soluble
crystalline zinc insulin whose effect appears within 30 minutes after
subcutaneous injection and lasts 5–7 hours when usual quantities
are administered. Intravenous infusions of regular insulin are
particularly useful in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis and
during the perioperative management of insulin-requiring diabetics.
Regular insulin is indicated when the subcutaneous insulin
requirement is changing rapidly, such as after surgery or during
acute infections—although the rapidly acting insulin analogs may be
preferable in these situations.
For markedly insulin-resistant persons who would otherwise
require large volumes of insulin solution, a U500 preparation of
human regular insulin is available. Since a U500 syringe is not
available, a U100 insulin syringe or tuberculin syringe is used to
measure doses. The physician should carefully note dosages in both
units and volume to avoid overdosage.
(2) Rapidly acting insulin analogs— Insulin lispro (Humalog)
is an insulin analog produced by recombinant technology, wherein
two amino acids near the carboxyl terminal of the B chain have
been reversed in position: Proline at position B28 has been moved
to B29 and lysine has been moved from B29 to B28. Insulin aspart
(Novolog) is a single substitution of proline by aspartic acid at
position B28. Insulin glulisine (Apidra) differs from human insulin in
that the amino acid asparagine at position B3 is replaced by lysine
and the lysine in position B29 by glutamic acid. These changes
result in these three analogs having less tendency to form hexamers,
in contrast to human insulin. When injected subcutaneously, the
analogs quickly dissociate into monomers and are absorbed very
rapidly, reaching peak serum values in as soon as 1 hour—in
contrast to regular human insulin, whose hexamers require
considerably more time to dissociate and become absorbed. The
amino acid changes in these analogs do not interfere with their
binding to the insulin receptor, with the circulating half-life, or with
their immunogenicity, which are all identical with those of human
regular insulin.
Figure 27–3. Extent and duration of action of various types of
insulin–euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamps in normal volunteers. A.
Intermediate neutral protamine Hagedorn (nPH) insulin and long-
acting insulin analogs. B. Regular insulin and rapidly acting insulin
analogs.
 
Clinical trials have demonstrated that the optimal times of
preprandial subcutaneous injection of comparable doses of the
rapidly acting insulin analogs and of regular human insulin are 20
minutes and 60 minutes, respectively, before the meal. While this
more rapid onset of action has been welcomed as a great
convenience by diabetic patients who object to waiting as long as
60 minutes after injecting regular human insulin before they can
begin their meal, patients must be taught to ingest adequate
absorbable carbohydrate early in the meal to avoid hypoglycemia
during the meal. Another desirable feature of rapidly acting insulin
analogs is that their duration of action remains at about 4 hours
irrespective of dosage. This contrasts with regular insulin, whose
duration of action is prolonged when larger doses are used.
The rapidly acting analogs are also commonly used in pumps. In
a double-blind crossover study comparing insulin lispro with regular
insulin in insulin pumps, persons using insulin lispro had lower
HbA1c values and improved postprandial glucose control with the
same frequency of hypoglycemia. The concern remains that in the
event of pump failure, users of the rapidly acting insulin analogs will
have more rapid onset of hyperglycemia and ketosis.
B. LONG-ACTING INSULIN PREPARATIONS—
(1) NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn or isophane)
insulin— NPH is an intermediate-acting insulin whose onset of
action is delayed by combining 2 parts soluble crystalline zinc insulin
with 1 part protamine zinc insulin. This produces equivalent amounts
of insulin and protamine, so that neither is present in an
uncomplexed form (“isophane”).
Its onset of action is delayed to 2–4 hours, and its peak response
is generally reached in about 8–10 hours. Because its duration of
action is often < 24 hours (with a range of 10–20 hours), most
patients require at least two injections daily to maintain a sustained
insulin effect. Occasional vials of NPH insulin have tended to show
unusual clumping of their contents or “frosting” of the container, with
considerable loss of bioactivity. This instability is rare and occurs
less frequently if NPH human insulin is refrigerated when not in use
and if bottles are discarded after 1 month of use.
(2) Insulin glargine— Insulin glargine is an insulin analog in
which the asparagine at position 21 of the A chain of the human
insulin molecule is replaced by glycine and two arginines are added
to the carboxyl terminal of the B chain. The arginines raise the
isoelectric point of the molecule closer to neutral, making it more
soluble in an acidic environment. In contrast, human insulin has an
isoelectric point of pH 5.4. Insulin glargine is a clear insulin which,
when injected into the neutral pH environment of the subcutaneous
tissue, forms microprecipitates that slowly release the insulin into the
circulation. It lasts for about 24 hours without any pronounced
peaks and is given once a day to provide basal coverage. This
insulin cannot be mixed with the other human insulins because of its
acidic pH. When this insulin was given as a single injection at
bedtime to type 1 patients, fasting hyperglycemia was better
controlled when compared with bedtime NPH insulin. The clinical
trials also suggest that there may be less nocturnal hypoglycemia
with this insulin when compared with NPH insulin.
In one clinical trial involving type 2 patients, insulin glargine was
associated with a slightly higher progression of retinopathy when
compared with NPH insulin. The frequency was 7.5% with the
analog and 2.7% with the NPH. However, this observation was not
confirmed in a 5-year open-label prospective study of 1024
persons randomized to NPH or insulin glargine. Insulin glargine
does have a sixfold greater affinity for IGF-1 receptor compared
with the human insulin. There has also been a report that insulin
glargine had increased mitogenicity compared with human insulin in
a human osteosarcoma cell line. The significance of these
observations is not yet clear. An observational study from Germany
of 127,031 patients who had exposure to regular insulin, short-
acting insulin analogs, and insulin glargine reported a strong
correlation between increased insulin dose and cancer risk.
Moreover, insulin glargine, dose for dose, appeared to carry a
higher risk of cancer than regular insulin. Additional studies are
needed to confirm or refute this observation. Because of lack of
safety data, use of insulin glargine during pregnancy is not
recommended.
(3) Insulin detemir— Insulin detemir is an insulin analog in
which the tyrosine at position 30 of the β chain has been removed
and a 14-C fatty acid chain (tetradecanoic acid) is attached to the
lysine at position 29 by acylation. The fatty acid chain makes the
molecule more lipophilic than native insulin and the addition of zinc
stabilizes the molecule and leads to formation of hexamers. After
injection, self-association at the injection site and albumin binding in
the circulation via the fatty acid side chain, leads to slower
distribution to peripheral target tissues and prolonged duration of
action. The affinity of insulin detemir is fourfold to fivefold lower
than that of human soluble insulin and therefore the U100
formulation of insulin detemir has an insulin concentration of 2400
nmol/mL compared with 600 nmol/mL for NPH. The duration of
action for insulin detemir is about 17 hours at therapeutically
relevant doses. It is recommended that the insulin be injected once
or twice a day to achieve a stable basal coverage. This insulin has
been reported to have lower within-subject pharmacodynamic
variability compared with NPH insulin and insulin glargine. In vitro
studies do not suggest any clinically relevant albumin binding
interactions between insulin detemir and fatty acids or protein-
bound medications. Since there is a vast excess (~400,000) of
albumin binding sites available in plasma per insulin detemir
molecule, it is unlikely that hypoalbuminemic disease states will
affect the ratio of bound to free insulin detemir.
C. MIXED INSULIN PREPARATIONS—Since intermediate insulins
require several hours to reach adequate therapeutic levels, their use
in patients with type 1 diabetes requires supplements of regular or
rapidly acting insulin analogs preprandially. For convenience, regular
or rapidly acting insulin analogs and NPH insulin may be mixed
together in the same syringe and injected subcutaneously in split
dosage before breakfast and supper. It is recommended that the
regular insulin or rapidly acting insulin analog be withdrawn first,
then the NPH insulin and that the injection be given immediately
after loading the syringe. Stable pre-mixed insulins (70% NPH and
30% regular) are available as a convenience to patients who have
difficulty mixing insulin because of visual problems or impairment of
manual dexterity. Premixed preparations of insulin lispro and NPH
insulins are unstable because of exchange of insulin lispro with the
human insulin in the protamine complex. Consequently, the soluble
component becomes over time a mixture of regular and insulin lispro
at varying ratios. In an attempt to remedy this, an intermediate
insulin composed of isophane complexes of protamine with insulin
lispro was developed called NPL (neutral protamine lispro). This
insulin has the same duration of action as NPH insulin. Premixed
combinations of NPL and insulin lispro—(75% NPL/25% insulin
lispro mixture [Humalog Mix 75/25] and 50% NPL/50% insulin
lispro mixture [Humalog Mix 50/50]) are available for clinical use.
Similarly, a 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insulin aspart
(NovoLog Mix 70/30) is available. The main advantages of these
mixtures are that they can be given within 15 minutes of starting a
meal and they are superior in controlling the postprandial glucose
rise after a carbohydrate rich meal. These benefits have not
translated into improvements in HbA1c levels when compared with
the usual 70% NPH/30% regular mixture.
The longer-acting insulin analogs cannot be mixed with either
regular insulin or the rapidly acting insulin analogs.
3. Methods of insulin administration
A. INSULIN SYRINGES AND NEEDLES—Plastic disposable syringes
are available in 1-mL, 0.5-mL, and 0.3-mL sizes. The “low-dose”
0.3-mL syringes have become increasingly popular, because many
diabetics do not take more than 30 units of insulin in a single
injection except in rare instances of extreme insulin resistance. Two
lengths of needles are available: short (8 mm) and long (12.7 mm).
Long needles are preferable in obese patients to reduce variability
of insulin absorption. Ultrafine needles as small as 31 gauge reduce
the pain of injections. “Disposable” syringes may be reused until
blunting of the needle occurs (usually after three to five injections).
Sterility adequate to avoid infection with reuse appears to be
maintained by recapping syringes between uses. Cleansing the
needle with alcohol may not be desirable since it can dissolve the
silicone coating and can increase the pain of skin puncturing.
Any part of the body covered by loose skin can be used, such as
the abdomen, thighs, upper arms, flanks, and upper buttocks.
Preparation with alcohol is no longer required prior to injection as
long as the skin is clean. Rotation of sites continues to be
recommended to avoid delayed absorption when fibrosis or
lipohypertrophy occurs from repeated use of a single site. However,
considerable variability of absorption rates from different sites,
particularly with exercise, may contribute to the instability of
glycemic control in certain type 1 patients if injection sites are
rotated too frequently in different areas of the body. Consequently,
it is best to limit injection sites to a single region of the body and
rotate sites within that region. The abdomen is recommended for
sub-cutaneous injections, since regular insulin has been shown to
absorb more rapidly from there than from other subcutaneous sites.
The effect of anatomic regions appears to be much less pronounced
with the analog insulins.
B. INSULIN PEN INJECTOR DEVICES—Insulin pens eliminate the
need for carrying insulin vials and syringes. Cartridges of insulin
lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glargine are available for reusable
pens (Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk, Owen Mumford, and Sanofi Aventis
pens). Disposable prefilled pens are also available for insulin lispro,
insulin aspart, insulin glulisine, insulin detemir, insulin glargine, NPH,
70% NPH/30% regular, 75% NPL/25% insulin lispro, 50%
NPL/50% insulin lispro, and 70% insulin aspart protamine/30%
insulin aspart. Thirty-one gauge needles (5, 6, and 8 mm long) for
these pens make injections almost painless.
C. INSULIN PUMPS—In the United States, Medtronic MiniMed,
Animas, Insulet, and Roche make insulin infusion pumps for
subcutaneous delivery of insulin. These pumps are small (about the
size of a pager) and very easy to program. They offer many
features, including the ability to set a number of different basal rates
throughout the 24 hours and to adjust the time over which bolus
doses are given. They also are able to detect pressure build-up if
the catheter is kinked. Improvements have also been made in the
infusion sets. The catheter connecting the insulin reservoir to the
subcutaneous cannula can be disconnected, allowing the patient to
remove the pump temporarily (eg, for bathing). Ominpod (Insulet
Corporation) is an insulin infusion system in which the insulin
reservoir and infusion set are integrated into one unit (pod), so there
is no catheter. The pod, placed on the skin, delivers subcutaneous
basal and bolus insulin based on wirelessly transmitted instructions
from a personal digital assistant. The great advantage of continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) is that it allows for
establishment of a basal profile tailored to the patient. The patient
therefore is able to eat with less regard to timing because the basal
insulin infusion should maintain constant blood glucose between
meals. Also the ability to adjust the basal insulin infusion makes it
easier for the patient to manage glycemic excursions that occur with
exercise. The pumps also have software that can assist the patient
to calculate boluses based on glucose reading and carbohydrates to
be consumed. They keep track of the time elapsed since last insulin
bolus and the patient is reminded of this when he or she attempts to
give additional correction bolus before the effect of the previous
bolus has worn off (“insulin on board” feature). This feature reduces
the risk of overcorrecting and subsequent hypoglycemia.
CSII therapy is appropriate for patients with type 1 diabetes who
are motivated, mechanically inclined, educated about diabetes (diet,
insulin action, treatment of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia), and
willing to monitor their blood glucose four to six times a day.
Known complications of CSII include ketoacidosis, which can
occur when insulin delivery is interrupted, and skin infections.
Another disadvantage is its cost and the time demanded of
physicians and staff in initiating therapy.
D. INHALED INSULIN—Exubera, the first inhaled insulin preparation
approved by the FDA is no longer available; the manufacturer
stopped marketing it because of lack of demand. In clinical trials,
Exubera was as effective as subcutaneous regular insulin in
controlling postprandial glucose excursions. Physicians, however,
were reluctant to prescribe Exubera for a number of reasons,
including a lack of long-term safety data on pulmonary function,
awkward dosing schedule, availability of other insulin delivery
systems, and cost and lack of insurance coverage. The
manufacturer also subsequently reported that there were six cases
of lung cancer in patients who used inhaled insulin and one case in
the comparison treatment patients. All the patients in whom lung
cancer developed had a history of cigarette smoking. There is
currently only one pharmaceutical company conducting clinical trials
with inhaled insulin (Technosphere insulin, MannKind Corporation).
D. Transplantation
Pancreas transplantation at the time of kidney transplantation is
becoming more widely accepted. Patients undergoing simultaneous
pancreas and kidney transplantation have an 85% chance of
pancreatic graft survival and a 92% chance of kidney graft survival
after 1 year. Solitary pancreatic transplantation in the absence of a
need for kidney transplantation should be considered only in those
rare patients who fail all other insulin therapeutic approaches and
who have frequent severe hypoglycemia or who have life-
threatening complications related to their lack of metabolic control.
Islet cell transplantation is a minimally invasive procedure, and
investigators in Edmonton, Canada, have reported initial insulin
independence in a small number of patients with type 1 diabetes
who underwent this procedure. Using islets from multiple donors
and 
corticosteroid-free 
immunosuppression, 
percutaneous
transhepatic portal vein transplantation of islets was achieved in
over 20 subjects. Although all of the initial cohort was able to
achieve insulin independence posttransplantation (some for more
than 2 years of follow-up), a decline in insulin secretion has
occurred over time and the subjects have again required
supplemental insulin. All patients had complete correction of severe
hypoglycemic reactions, leading to a marked improvement in overall
quality of life. Islet cell transplant trials with different kinds and
combinations of immunosuppressive agents are currently underway.
Even if long-term insulin independence is demonstrated, wide
application of this procedure for the treatment of type 1 diabetes is
limited by the dependence on multiple donors and the requirement
for potent long-term immunotherapy.
Drucker DJ et al. Incretin-based therapies for the treatment of type
2 diabetes: evaluation of the risks and benefits. Diabetes Care.
2010 Feb;33(2):428–33. [PMID: 20103558]
 
Jeitler K et al. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus
multiple daily insulin injections in patients with diabetes mellitus:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2008
Jun;51(6):941–51. [PMID: 18351320]
 
Robertson RP et al; American Diabetes Association. Pancreas and
islet transplantation in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006
Apr;29(4):935. [PMID: 16567844]
 
Tahrani AA et al. Glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes: targets and
new therapies. Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Feb;125(2):328–61.
[PMID: 19931305]
 
Waugh N et al. Newer agents for blood glucose control in type 2
diabetes: systematic review and economic evaluation. Health
Technol Assess. 2010 Jul;14(36):1–248. [PMID: 20646668]
 
White SA et al. Pancreas transplantation. Lancet. 2009 May
23;373(9677):1808–17. [PMID: 19465236]
 
 Steps in the Management of the
Diabetic Patient
A. Diagnostic Examination
Any features of the clinical picture that suggest end-organ
insensitivity to insulin, such as visceral obesity, must be identified.
The family history should document not only the incidence of
diabetes in other members of the family but also the age at onset,
whether it was associated with obesity, and whether insulin was
required. An attempt should be made to characterize the diabetes
as type 1 or type 2, based on the clinical features present and on
whether or not ketonuria accompanies the glycosuria. For the
occasional patient, measurement of ICA, GAD65, IAA, and ICA
512 antibodies can help distinguish between type 1 and type 2
diabetes. Many patients with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes still
have significant endogenous insulin production, and C peptide levels
do not reliably distinguish between type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Other factors that increase cardiac risk, such as smoking history,
presence of hypertension or hyperlipidemia, or oral contraceptive
pill use, should be recorded.
Laboratory diagnosis should document fasting plasma glucose
levels above 126 mg/dL or postprandial values consistently above
200 mg/dL and whether ketonuria accompanies the glycosuria. A
glycohemoglobin measurement is useful for assessing the
effectiveness of future therapy. Some flexibility of clinical judgment
is appropriate when diagnosing diabetes mellitus in the elderly
patient with borderline hyperglycemia.
Baseline values include fasting plasma triglycerides, total
cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol, electrocardiography, kidney
function studies, peripheral pulses, and neurologic, podiatric, and
ophthalmologic examinations to help guide future assessments.
B. Patient Education (Self-Management Training)
Since diabetes is a lifelong disorder, education of the patient and the
family is probably the most important obligation of the clinician who
provides initial care. The best persons to manage a disease that is
affected so markedly by daily fluctuations in environmental stress,
exercise, diet, and infections are the patients themselves and their
families. The “teaching curriculum” should include explanations by
the physician or nurse of the nature of diabetes and its potential
acute and chronic hazards and how they can be recognized early
and prevented or treated. Self-monitoring of blood glucose should
be emphasized, especially in insulin-requiring diabetic patients, and
instructions must be given on proper testing and recording of data.
Patients taking insulin should be taught how to adjust the insulin
dose for the carbohydrate content of a meal. Strenuous exercise
can precipitate hypoglycemia, and patients must therefore be taught
to reduce their insulin dosage in anticipation of strenuous activity or
to take supplemental carbohydrate. Injection of insulin into a site
farthest away from the muscles most involved in the exercise may
help ameliorate exercise-induced hypoglycemia, since insulin
injected in the proximity of exercising muscle may be more rapidly
mobilized. Exercise training also increases the effectiveness of insulin
and insulin doses should be adjusted accordingly.
The targets for blood glucose control should be elevated
appropriately in elderly patients since they have the greatest risk if
subjected to hypoglycemia and the least long-term benefit from
more rigid glycemic control. Advice on personal hygiene, including
detailed instructions on foot and dental care, should be provided.
All infections (especially pyogenic ones) provoke the release of high
levels of insulin antagonists, such as catecholamines or glucagon,
and thus bring about a marked increase in insulin requirements.
Patients who are taking oral agents may decompensate and
temporarily require insulin. Patients should be told about community
agencies, such as Diabetes Association chapters, that can serve as a
continuing source of instruction.
Finally, vigorous efforts should be made to persuade new
diabetics who smoke to give up the habit, since large vessel
peripheral vascular disease and debilitating retinopathy are less
common in nonsmoking diabetic patients.
C. Therapy
Treatment must be individualized on the basis of the type of
diabetes and specific needs of each patient. However, certain
general principles of management can be outlined for hyperglycemic
states of different types.
1. Type 1 diabetes—Traditional once- or twice-daily insulin
regimens are usually ineffective in type 1 patients without residual
endogenous insulin. In these patients, information and counseling
based on the findings of the DCCT (see above) should be provided
about the advantages of taking multiple injections of insulin in
conjunction with self-blood glucose monitoring. If near-
normalization of blood glucose is attempted, at least four
measurements of capillary blood glucose and three or four insulin
injections are necessary.
A combination of rapidly acting insulin analogs and long-acting
insulin analogs allows for more physiologic insulin replacement. The
rapidly acting insulin analogs have been advocated as a safer and
much more convenient alternative to regular human insulin for
preprandial use. In a study comparing regular insulin with insulin
lispro, daily insulin doses and HbA1c levels were similar, but insulin
lispro improved postprandial control, reduced hypoglycemic
episodes, and improved patient convenience compared with regular
insulin. However, because of their relatively short duration (no more
than 3–4 hours), the rapidly acting insulin analogs need to be
combined with longer-acting insulins to provide basal coverage and
avoid hyperglycemia prior to the next meal. In addition to
carbohydrate content of the meal, the effect of simultaneous fat
ingestion must also be considered a factor in determining the rapidly
acting insulin analog dosage required to control the glycemic
increment during and just after the meal. With low-carbohydrate
content and high-fat intake, there is an increased risk of
hypoglycemia from insulin lispro within 2 hours after the meal. Table
27–11 illustrates a regimen with a rapidly acting insulin analog and
insulin detemir or insulin glargine that might be appropriate for a 70-
kg person with type 1 diabetes eating meals providing standard
carbohydrate intake and moderate to low fat content.
Insulin glargine is usually given once in the evening to provide 24-
hour coverage. This insulin cannot be mixed with any of the other
insulins and must be given as a separate injection. There are
occasional patients in whom insulin glargine does not seem to last
for 24 hours, and in such cases it needs to be given twice a day. As
shown, insulin detemir may also need to be given twice a day to get
adequate 24-hour basal coverage. Alternatively, small doses of
NPH (~ 3 to 4 units) can be given with each meal to provide
daytime basal coverage with a larger dose at night. Unlike the long-
acting insulin analogs, NPH can be mixed in the same syringe as the
insulin lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glulisine.
 
Table 27–11. Examples of intensive insulin regimens using rapidly
acting insulin analogs (insulin lispro, aspart, or glulisine) and insulin
detemir, or insulin glargine in a 70-kg man with type 1 diabetes.1–3
 
1Assumes that patient is consuming approximately 75 g carbohydrate at
breakfast, 60 g at lunch, and 90 g at dinner.
2The dose of rapidly acting insulin can be raised by 1 or 2 units if extra
carbohydrate (15–30 g) is ingested or if premeal blood glucose is > 170
mg/dL.
3Insulin glargine or insulin detemir must be given as a separate injection.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) by portable
battery-operated “open loop” devices currently provides the most
flexible approach, allowing the setting of different basal rates
throughout the 24 hours and permitting patients to delay or skip
meals and vary meal size and composition. The dosage is usually
based on providing 50% of the estimated insulin dose as basal and
the remainder as intermittent boluses prior to meals. For example, a
70-kg man requiring 35 units of insulin per day may require a basal
rate of 0.7 units per hour throughout the 24 hours with the
exception of 3 AM to 8 AM, when 0.8 units per hour might be
appropriate (given the “dawn phenomenon”—reduced tissue
sensitivity to insulin between 5 AM and 8 AM). The meal bolus
would depend on the carbohydrate content of the meal and the
premeal blood glucose value. One unit per 15 g of carbohydrate
plus 1 unit for 50 mg/dL of blood glucose above a target value (eg,
120 mg/dL) is a common starting point. Further adjustments to
basal and bolus dosages would depend on the results of blood
glucose monitoring. The majority of patients use the rapidly acting
insulin analogs in the pumps. One of the more difficult therapeutic
problems in managing patients with type 1 diabetes is determining
the proper adjustment of insulin dose when the prebreakfast blood
glucose level is high. Occasionally, the prebreakfast hyperglycemia
is due to the Somogyi effect, in which nocturnal hypoglycemia leads
to a surge of counterregulatory hormones to produce high blood
glucose levels by 7 AM. However, a more common cause for
prebreakfast hyperglycemia is the waning of circulating insulin levels
by the morning. Also, the dawn phenomenon is present in as many
as 75% of type 1 patients and can aggravate the hyperglycemia.
Table 27–12 shows that diagnosis of the cause of pre-breakfast
hyperglycemia can be facilitated by self-monitoring of blood glucose
at 3 AM in addition to the usual bedtime and 7 AM measurements.
This is required for only a few nights, and when a particular pattern
emerges from monitoring blood glucose levels overnight,
appropriate therapeutic measures can be taken. The Somogyi effect
can be treated by eliminating the dose of intermediate insulin at
dinnertime and giving it at a lower dosage at bedtime or by
supplying more food at bedtime. When a waning insulin level is the
cause, then either increasing the evening dose or shifting it from
dinnertime to bedtime (or both) can be effective. A bedtime dose
either of insulin glargine or insulin detemir provides more sustained
overnight insulin levels than human NPH and may be effective in
managing refractory prebreakfast hyperglycemia. If this fails, insulin
pump therapy may be required. When the dawn phenomenon alone
is present, the dosage of intermediate insulin can be divided
between dinnertime and bedtime; when insulin pumps are used, the
basal infusion rate can be increased (eg, from 0.8 unit/h to 0.9 unit/h
from 6 am until breakfast).
 
Table 27–12. Prebreakfast hyperglycemia: Classification by blood
glucose and insulin levels.
 
 
2. Type 2 diabetes—Therapeutic recommendations are based on
the relative contributions of beta cell insufficiency and insulin
insensitivity in individual patients. The possibility that the individual
patient has a specific etiologic cause for their diabetes should
always be considered, especially when the patient does not have a
family history of type 2 diabetes or does not have any evidence of
central obesity or insulin resistance. Such patients should be
evaluated for other types of diabetes such as LADA or MODY.
Patients with LADA should be prescribed insulin when the disease
is diagnosed and treated like patients with type 1 diabetes. It is also
important to note that many patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
have a progressive loss of beta cell function and will require
additional therapeutic interventions with time.
A. WEIGHT REDUCTION—For obese type 2 diabetes patients,
treatment is directed toward achieving weight reduction, and
prescribing a diet is only one means to this end. Behavior
modification to achieve adherence to the diet—as well as increased
physical activity to expend energy—is also required. Cure can be
achieved by reducing adipose stores, with consequent restoration of
tissue sensitivity to insulin, but weight reduction is hard to achieve
and even more difficult to maintain with current therapies. The
presence of diabetes with its added risk factors may motivate the
obese diabetic patient to greater efforts to lose weight.
For selected patients, medical or surgical options for weight loss
should be considered (see Chapter 29). Sibutramine, a combined
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, was moderately
effective in promoting weight loss, but it has been withdrawn from
the US market because of its association with increased
cardiovascular risk. Orlistat is a reversible inhibitor of gastric and
pancreatic lipases and prevents the hydrolysis and absorption of
dietary triglycerides. It is available over-the-counter and in
prescription strength. In 1-year studies in obese patients with type 2
diabetes, those taking orlistat had lost more weight, had lower
HbA1c values, and had improved lipid profiles. The main adverse
reactions were gastrointestinal, with oily spotting, oily stool, flatus,
and fecal urgency and frequency. Malabsorption of fat-soluble
vitamins also occurs, and patients should take a multivitamin tablet
containing fat-soluble vitamins at least 2 hours before or 2 hours
after the administration of orlistat. Cases of severe liver injury have
been reported with this medication, although a cause and effect
relationship has not been established.
Bariatric surgery (Roux-en-Y, gastric banding, gastric sleeve,
biliopancreatic diversion/duodenal switch) typically results in
substantial weight loss and improvement in glucose levels. A meta-
analysis examining the impact of bariatric surgery on patients with
diabetes and BMI of 40 kg/m2 or greater noted that 82% of
patients had resolution of clinical and laboratory manifestations of
diabetes in the first 2 years after surgery and 62% remained free of
diabetes more than 2 years after surgery. The improvement was
most marked in the procedure that caused the greatest weight loss
(biliopancreatic diversion/duodenal switch). There was, however, a
high attrition of patients available for follow-up, and there was little
information about different ethnic types. Weight regain does occur
after bariatric surgery, and it can be expected that 20–25% of the
lost weight will be regained over 10 years. The impact of this weight
gain on diabetes recurrence depends principally on the degree of
beta cell dysfunction. Also anatomic changes imposed by
malabsorptive surgery can result in protein malnutrition, vitamin and
mineral deficiencies. Clinically significant deficiencies in calcium;
folic acid; iron; and vitamins D, B12, A, and K are common. Thus,
patients undergoing malabsorptive procedures require lifelong
supplementation and monitoring by a team familiar with possible
deficiencies. Both early and late dumping symptoms can also occur.
Nonobese patients with type 2 diabetes frequently have
increased visceral adiposity—the so-called metabolically obese
normal weight patient. There is less emphasis on weight loss, but
exercise remains an important aspect of treatment.
B. GLUCOSE LOWERING AGENTS—The current recommendation is
to start metformin therapy at diagnosis and not wait to see whether
the patient can achieve target glycemic control with weight
management and exercise. Metformin is advantageous because,
apart from lowering glucose without the risk of hypoglycemia, it also
lowers serum triglycerides and promotes some modest weight loss.
In the UKPDS study, metformin use in the obese participants was
associated with reduction in risk of cardiovascular events. The
medication, however, cannot be used in patients with end-stage
renal disease, and sometimes gastrointestinal side effects develop at
even the lowest doses. Under these circumstances the choice of the
initial agent depends on a number of factors, including comorbid
conditions, adverse reactions to the medications, ability of the
patient to monitor for hypoglycemia, medication cost, and patient
and clinician preferences. Sulfonylureas have been available for
many years and their use in combination with metformin is well
established. They do, however, have the propensity of causing
hypoglycemia and weight gain. Pioglitazone improves peripheral
insulin resistance and lowers glucose without causing hypoglycemia.
Troublesome adverse reactions include weight gain, fluid retention
and heart failure, increased fracture risk in women, and possible
increased risk of bladder cancer. Pioglitazone is contraindicated in
patients with active liver disease and in patients with liver enzymes ≥
2.5 times the upper limit of normal. The α-glucosidase inhibitors
have modest glucose lowering effects and have gastrointestinal side
effects. 
The GLP-1 receptor agonists (exenatide and
liraglutide) have a lower risk of hypoglycemia than the
sulfonylureas and they promote weight loss. However, they need to
be given by injection, cause nausea, may cause pancreatitis, and are
contraindicated in patients with gastroparesis. The DPP-4
inhibitors (sitagliptin and saxagliptin) also have a low risk of
hypoglycemia, and they do not cause nausea or vomiting. They can
also be used in patients with kidney impairment. There are,
however, reports of serious allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis,
angioedema, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. There is also concern
that sitagliptin, like the GLP-1 receptor agonists, may cause
pancreatitis.
When diabetes is not well controlled with initial therapy (usually
metformin), then a second agent should be added. In patients who
experience hyperglycemia after a carbohydrate-rich meal (such as
dinner), a short-acting secretagogue before meals may suffice to get
the glucose levels into the target range. Patients with severe insulin
resistance may be candidates for pioglitazone. Patients who are
very concerned about weight gain may benefit from a trial of GLP-1
receptor agonist or DPP-4 inhibitor. If two agents are inadequate,
then a third agent is added, although data regarding efficacy of such
combined therapy are limited.
When the combination of oral agents (and injectable GLP-1
receptor agonists) fail to achieve euglycemia in patients with type 2
diabetes, then insulin treatment should be instituted. Various insulin
regimens may be effective. One proposed regimen is to continue the
oral combination therapy and then simply add a bedtime dose of
NPH or long-acting insulin analog (insulin glargine or insulin detemir)
to reduce excessive nocturnal hepatic glucose output and improve
fasting glucose levels. If the patient does not achieve target glucose
levels during the day, then daytime insulin treatment can be initiated.
A convenient insulin regimen under these circumstances is a split
dose of 70/30 NPH/regular mixture (or Humalog Mix 75/25 or
NovoLogMix 70/30) before breakfast and before dinner. If this
regimen fails to achieve satisfactory glycemic goals or is associated
with unacceptable frequency of hypoglycemic episodes, then a
more intensive regimen of multiple insulin injections can be instituted
as in patients with type 1 diabetes. Metformin principally reduces
hepatic glucose output, and it is reasonable to continue with this
medication when insulin therapy is instituted. Pioglitazone, which
improves peripheral insulin sensitivity, can be used together with
insulin but this combination is associated with more weight gain and
peripheral edema. The sulfonylureas also continue to be of benefit.
There is limited information on the benefits of continuing the GLP1-
receptor agonists or the DPP-4 inhibitors once insulin therapy is
initiated. Weight-reducing interventions should continue even after
initiation of insulin therapy and may allow for simplification of the
therapeutic regimen in the future.
D. Acceptable Levels of Glycemic Control
A reasonable aim of therapy is to approach normal glycemic
excursions without provoking severe or frequent hypoglycemia.
What has been considered “acceptable” control includes blood
glucose levels of 90–130 mg/dL before meals and after an overnight
fast, and levels no higher than 180 mg/dL 1 hour after meals and
150 mg/dL 2 hours after meals. HbA1c levels < 7% are a
reasonable goal for nonpregnant adults. Less stringent HbA1c goals
may be appropriate in children, those with a history of severe
hypoglycemia, limited life expectancy, and advanced microvascular
and macrovascular disease. In the elderly frail patient, an HbA1c
target of approximately 8% may be reasonable although formal
evidence is lacking. It should be emphasized that the value of blood
pressure control was as great as or greater than glycemic control in
type 2 patients as regards microvascular as well as macrovascular
complications.
Buchwald H et al. Weight and type 2 diabetes after bariatric
surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2009
Mar;122(3):248–256.e5. [PMID: 19272486]
 
Heber D et al. Endocrine and nutritional management of the post-
bariatric surgery patient: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice
Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;95(11): 4823–43.
[PMID: 21051578]
 
Karra E et al. Mechanisms facilitating weight loss and resolution of
type 2 diabetes following bariatric surgery. Trends Endocrinol
Metab. 2010 Jun;21(6):337–44. [PMID: 20133150]
 
Mooradian AD et al. Narrative review: a rational approach to
starting insulin therapy. Ann Intern Med. 2006 Jul 18;145(2): 125–
34. [PMID: 16847295]
 
Nathan DM et al. Medical management of hyperglycemia in type 2
diabetes: a consensus algorithm for the initiation and adjustment of
therapy: a consensus statement of the American Diabetes
Association and the European Association for the Study of
Diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009 Jan;32(1):193–203. [PMID:
18945920]
 
Zinman B et al; American Diabetes Association. Physical
activity/exercise and diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2004 Jan;27(Suppl
1): S58–62. [PMID: 14693927]
 
E. Complications of Insulin Therapy
1. Hypoglycemia—Hypoglycemic reactions are the most common
complications that occur in patients with diabetes who are treated
with insulin. Hypoglycemia may result from delay in taking a meal or
from unusual physical exertion without supplemental calories or
decrease in insulin dose. In addition, hypoglycemia can occur in
patient taking sulfonylureas, repaglinide, and nateglinide, particularly
if the patient is elderly, has kidney or liver disease, or is taking
certain other medications that alter metabolism of the sulfonylureas
(eg, phenylbutazone, sulfonamides, or warfarin). It occurs more
frequently with the use of long-acting sulfonylureas than when
shorter-acting agents are used.
The signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be divided into
those resulting from stimulation of the autonomic nervous system
and those from neuroglycopenia (insufficient glucose for normal
central nervous system function). When the blood glucose falls to
around 54 mg/dL, the patient starts to experience both sympathetic
(tachycardia, 
palpitations, 
sweating, 
tremulousness) 
and
parasympathetic (nausea, hunger) nervous system symptoms. If
these autonomic symptoms are ignored and the glucose levels fall
further (to around 50 mg/dL), then neuroglycopenic symptoms
appear, including irritability, confusion, blurred vision, tiredness,
headache, and difficulty speaking. A further decline in glucose can
then lead to loss of consciousness or even a seizure. With repeated
episodes of hypoglycemia, there is adaptation, and autonomic
symptoms do not occur until the blood glucose levels are much
lower and so the first symptoms are often due to neuroglycopenia.
This condition is referred to as “hypoglycemic unawareness.” It has
been shown that hypoglycemic unawareness can be reversed by
keeping glucose levels high for a period of several weeks. Except
for sweating, most of the sympathetic symptoms of hypoglycemia
are blunted in patients receiving β-blocking agents for angina
pectoris or hypertension. Though not absolutely contraindicated,
these medications must be used with caution in insulin-requiring
diabetics, and β1-selective blocking agents are preferred.
Hypoglycemia in insulin-treated patients with diabetes occurs as
a consequence of three factors: behavioral issues, impaired
counterregulatory systems, and complications of diabetes.
Behavioral issues include injecting too much insulin for the
amount of carbohydrates ingested. Drinking alcohol in excess,
especially on an empty stomach, can also cause hypoglycemia. In
patients with type 1 diabetes, hypoglycemia can occur during or
even several hours after exercise, and so glucose levels need to be
monitored and food and insulin adjusted. Some patients do not like
their glucose levels to be high, and they treat every high glucose
level aggressively. These individuals who “stack” their insulin—that
is, give another dose of insulin before the first injection has had its
full action—can develop hypoglycemia.
Counterregulatory issues resulting in hypoglycemia include
impaired glucagon response, sympatho-adrenal responses, and
cortisol deficiency. Patients with diabetes of > 5 years duration lose
their glucagon response to hypoglycemia. As a result, they are at a
significant disadvantage in protecting themselves against falling
glucose levels. Once the glucagon response is lost, their sympatho-
adrenal responses take on added importance. Unfortunately, aging,
autonomic neuropathy, or hypoglycemic unawareness due to
repeated low glucose levels further blunts the sympatho-adrenal
responses. Occasionally, Addison disease develops in persons with
type 1 diabetes mellitus; when this happens, insulin requirements fall
significantly, and unless insulin dose is reduced, recurrent
hypoglycemia will develop.
Complications of diabetes that increase the risk for
hypoglycemia include autonomic neuropathy, gastroparesis, and
end-stage chronic kidney disease. The sympathetic nervous system
is an important system alerting the individual that the glucose level is
falling by causing symptoms of tachycardia, palpitations, sweating,
and tremulousness. Failure of the sympatho-adrenal responses
increases the risk of hypoglycemia. In addition, in patients with
gastroparesis, if insulin is given before a meal, the peak of insulin
action may occur before the food is absorbed causing the glucose
levels to fall. Finally, in end-stage chronic kidney disease,
hypoglycemia can occur presumably because of decreased insulin
clearance as well as loss of renal contribution to gluconeogenesis in
the postabsorptive state.
To prevent and treat insulin-induced hypoglycemia, the
diabetic patient should carry glucose tablets or juice at all times. For
most episodes, ingestion of 15 grams of carbohydrate is sufficient to
reverse the hypoglycemia. The patient should be instructed to check
the blood glucose in 15 minutes and treat again if the glucose level is
still low. A parenteral glucagon emergency kit (1 mg) should be
provided to every patient with diabetes who is receiving insulin
therapy. Family or friends should be instructed how to inject it
subcutaneously or intramuscularly into the buttock, arm, or thigh in
the event that the patient is unconscious or refuses food. The
medication can occasionally cause vomiting, and the unconscious
patient should be turned on his or her side to protect the airway.
The glucagon mobilizes glycogen from the liver, raising the blood
glucose by about 36 mg/dL in about 15 minutes. After the patient
recovers consciousness, additional oral carbohydrate should be
given. People with diabetes receiving hypoglycemic medication
therapy should also wear an identification MedicAlert bracelet or
necklace or carry a card in his or her wallet. The telephone number
for the MedicAlert Foundation International in Turlock, California,
is 
1-800-ID-ALERT 
and 
the 
Internet 
address 
is
www.medicalert.org.
Medical personnel treating severe hypoglycemia can give 50 mL
of 50% glucose solution by rapid intravenous infusion. If intravenous
access is not available, 1 mg of glucagon can be injected
intramuscularly.
2. Immunopathology of insulin therapy—At least five molecular
classes of insulin antibodies are produced during the course of
insulin therapy in diabetes, including IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM.
With the increased therapeutic use of purified pork and especially
human insulin, the various immunopathologic syndromes such as
insulin allergy, immune insulin resistance, and lipoatrophy have
become quite rare since the titers and avidity of these induced
antibodies are generally quite low.
A. INSULIN ALLERGY—Insulin allergy, or immediate-type
hypersensitivity, is a rare condition in which local or systemic
urticaria is due to histamine release from tissue mast cells sensitized
by adherence of anti-insulin IgE antibodies. In severe cases,
anaphylaxis results. When only human insulin has been used from
the onset of insulin therapy, insulin allergy is exceedingly rare.
Antihistamines, corticosteroids, and even desensitization may be
required, especially for systemic hypersensitivity. There have been
case reports of successful use of insulin lispro in those rare patients
who have a generalized allergy to human insulin or insulin resistance
due to a high titer of insulin antibodies.
B. IMMUNE INSULIN RESISTANCE—A low titer of circulating IgG
anti-insulin antibodies that neutralize the action of insulin to a small
extent develops in most insulin-treated patients. With the old animal
insulins, a high titer of circulating antibodies sometimes developed,
resulting in extremely high insulin requirements—often more than
200 units daily. This is now rarely seen with the switch to highly
purified pork or human insulins and has not been reported with the
analogs.
3. Lipodystrophy at injection sites—Atrophy of subcutaneous
fatty tissue leading to disfiguring excavations and depressed areas
may rarely occur at the site of injection. This complication results
from an immune reaction, and it has become rarer with the
development of pure and human insulin preparations.
Lipohypertrophy, on the other hand, is a consequence of the
pharmacologic effects of insulin being deposited in the same location
repeatedly. It can occur with purified insulins as well. Rotation of
injection sites will prevent lipohypertrophy. There is a case report of
a patient who had intractable lipohypertrophy with human insulin but
no longer had the problem when he switched to insulin lispro.
Cryer PE et al. Hypoglycemia in diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2003
Jun;26(6):1902–12. [PMID: 12766131]
 
 Chronic Complications of Diabetes
Late clinical manifestations of diabetes mellitus include a number of
pathologic changes that involve small and large blood vessels,
cranial and peripheral nerves, the skin, and the lens of the eye.
These lesions lead to hypertension, end-stage chronic kidney
disease, blindness, autonomic and peripheral neuropathy,
amputations of the lower extremities, myocardial infarction, and
cerebrovascular accidents. These late manifestations correlate with
the duration of the diabetic state subsequent to the onset of puberty.
In type 1 diabetes, end-stage chronic kidney disease develops in up
to 40% of patients, compared with < 20% of patients with type 2
diabetes. As regards proliferative retinopathy, it ultimately develops
in both types of diabetes but has a slightly higher prevalence in type
1 patients (25% after 15 years’ duration). In patients with type 1
diabetes, complications from end-stage chronic kidney disease are
a major cause of death, whereas patients with type 2 diabetes are
more likely to have macrovascular diseases leading to myocardial
infarction and stroke as the main causes of death. Cigarette use
adds significantly to the risk of both microvascular and
macrovascular complications in diabetic patients.
A. Ocular Complications
1. Diabetic cataracts—Premature cataracts occur in diabetic
patients and seem to correlate with both the duration of diabetes
and the severity of chronic hyperglycemia. Nonenzymatic
glycosylation of lens protein is twice as high in diabetic patients as in
age-matched nondiabetic persons and may contribute to the
premature occurrence of cataracts.
2. Diabetic retinopathy—After 10 to 15 years, 25–50% of
patients with type 1 diabetes show some signs of retinopathy. After
15 years, prevalence increases to 75–95%, and after 30 years, the
prevalence approaches 100%. In patients with type 2 diabetes, the
prevalence of nonproliferative retinopathy is 60% after 16 years.
There are two main categories of diabetic retinopathy:
nonproliferative and proliferative. Diabetic macular edema can
occur 
at 
any 
stage. Nonproliferative (“background”)
retinopathy represents the earliest stage of retinal involvement by
diabetes and is characterized by such changes as microaneurysms,
dot hemorrhages, exudates, and retinal edema. During this stage,
the retinal capillaries leak proteins, lipids, or red cells into the retina.
When this process occurs in the macula (clinically significant
macular edema), the area of greatest concentration of visual cells,
there is interference with visual acuity; this is the most common
cause of visual impairment in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Proliferative retinopathy involves the growth of new capillaries
and fibrous tissue within the retina and into the vitreous chamber. It
is a consequence of small vessel occlusion, which causes retinal
hypoxia; this in turn stimulates new vessel growth. New vessel
formation may occur at the optic disc or elsewhere on the retina.
Proliferative retinopathy can occur in both types of diabetes but is
more common in type 1, developing about 7–10 years after onset
of symptoms, with a prevalence of 25% after 15 years’ duration.
Prior to proliferation of new capillaries, a preproliferative phase
often occurs in which arteriolar ischemia is manifested as cotton-
wool spots (small infarcted areas of retina). Vision is usually normal
until vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment occurs.
Proliferative retinopathy is a leading cause of blindness in the
United States, particularly since it increases the risk of retinal
detachment. Vision-threatening retinopathy virtually never appears
in type 1 patients in the first 3–5 years of diabetes or before
puberty. Up to 20% of patients with type 2 diabetes have
retinopathy at the time of diagnosis. Annual consultation with an
ophthalmologist should be arranged for patients who have had type
1 diabetes for more than 3–5 years and for all patients with type 2
diabetes, because many were probably diabetic for an extensive
period of time before diagnosis. Patients with any macular edema,
severe nonproliferative retinopathy, or any proliferative retinopathy
require the care of an ophthalmologist. Extensive “scatter” xenon or
argon photocoagulation and focal treatment of new vessels reduce
severe visual loss in those cases in which proliferative retinopathy is
associated with recent vitreous hemorrhages or in which extensive
new vessels are located on or near the optic disk. Macular edema,
which is more common than proliferative retinopathy in patients with
type 2 diabetes (up to 20% prevalence), has a guarded prognosis,
but it has also responded to scatter therapy with improvement in
visual acuity if detected early. Injection of bevacizumab (Avastin),
an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF), into the eye
has been shown to stop the growth of the new blood vessels in
diabetic eye disease. Avoiding tobacco use and correction of
associated hypertension are important therapeutic measures in the
management of diabetic retinopathy. There is no contraindication to
using aspirin in patients with proliferative retinopathy.
3. Glaucoma—Glaucoma occurs in approximately 6% of persons
with diabetes. It is responsive to the usual therapy for open-angle
disease. Neovascularization of the iris in diabetics can predispose to
closed-angle glaucoma, but this is relatively uncommon except after
cataract extraction, when growth of new vessels has been known to
progress rapidly, involving the angle of the iris and obstructing
outflow.
B. Diabetic Nephropathy
As many as 4000 cases of end-stage chronic kidney disease occur
each year among diabetic people in the United States. This is about
one-third of all patients being treated for end-stage chronic kidney
disease and represents a considerable national health expense.
The cumulative incidence of nephropathy differs between the two
major types of diabetes. Patients with type 1 diabetes have a 30–
40% chance of having nephropathy after 20 years—in contrast to
the much lower frequency in type 2 diabetes patients, in whom only
about 15–20% develop clinical kidney disease. However, since
there are many more individuals affected with type 2 diabetes, end-
stage chronic kidney disease is much more prevalent in type 2 than
in type 1 diabetes in the United States and especially throughout the
rest of the world. Improved glycemic control and more effective
therapeutic measures to correct hypertension—and with the
beneficial effects of ACE inhibitors—can reduce the development
of end-stage chronic kidney disease among diabetics.
Diabetic nephropathy is initially manifested by proteinuria;
subsequently, as kidney function declines, urea and creatinine
accumulate in the blood.
1. Microalbuminuria—Sensitive radioimmunoassay methods of
detecting small amounts of urinary albumin have permitted detection
of microgram concentrations—in contrast to the less sensitive
dipstick strips, whose minimal detection limit is 0.3–0.5%.
Conventional 24-hour urine collections, in addition to being
inconvenient for patients, also show wide variability of albumin
excretion, since several factors such as sustained erect posture,
dietary protein, and exercise tend to increase albumin excretion
rates. For these reasons, an albumin-creatinine ratio in an early
morning spot urine collected upon awakening is preferable. In the
early morning spot urine, a ratio of albumin (mcg/L) to creatinine
(mg/L) of < 30 mcg/mg creatinine is normal, and a ratio of 30–300
mcg/mg creatinine suggests abnormal microalbuminuria. At least
two early morning spot urine collections over a 3- to 6-month
period should be abnormal before a diagnosis of microalbuminuria
is justified. Short-term hyperglycemia, exercise, urinary tract
infections, heart failure, and acute febrile illness can cause transient
albuminuria and so testing for microalbuminuria should be
postponed until resolution of these problems.
Subsequent end-stage chronic kidney disease can be predicted
by persistent urinary albumin excretion rates exceeding 30 mcg/min.
Glycemic control as well as a low-protein diet (0.8 g/kg/d) may
reduce both the hyperfiltration and the elevated microalbuminuria in
patients in the early stages of diabetes and those with incipient
diabetic nephropathy. Antihypertensive therapy also decreases
microalbuminuria. Evidence from some studies—but not the
UKPDS—supports a specific role for ACE inhibitors in reducing
intraglomerular pressure in addition to their lowering of systemic
hypertension. An ACE inhibitor (captopril, 50 mg twice daily) in
normotensive diabetics impedes progression to proteinuria and
prevents the increase in albumin excretion rate. Since
microalbuminuria has been shown to correlate with elevated
nocturnal systolic blood pressure, it is possible that “normotensive”
diabetic patients with microalbuminuria have slightly elevated
systolic blood pressure during sleep, which is lowered during
antihypertensive therapy. This action may contribute to the reported
efficacy of ACE inhibitors in reducing microalbuminuria in
“normotensive” patients.
2. Progressive diabetic nephropathy—Progressive diabetic
nephropathy consists of proteinuria of varying severity occasionally
leading to nephrotic syndrome with hypoalbuminemia, edema, and
an increase in circulating LDL cholesterol as well as progressive
azotemia. In contrast to all other kidney disorders, the proteinuria
associated with diabetic nephropathy does not diminish with
progressive end-stage chronic kidney disease (patients continue to
excrete 10–11 g daily as creatinine clearance diminishes). As end-
stage chronic kidney disease progresses, there is an elevation in the
renal threshold at which glycosuria appears.
Hypertension develops with progressive kidney involvement, and
coronary and cerebral atherosclerosis seems to be accelerated.
Once diabetic nephropathy has progressed to the stage of
hypertension, proteinuria, or early chronic kidney disease, glycemic
control may not be beneficial in influencing its course. In this
circumstance, antihypertensive medications, including ACE
inhibitors, and restriction of dietary protein to 0.8 g/kg body weight
per day are recommended. ACE inhibitors have been shown to
protect against deterioration in kidney function in type 1 diabetic
patients with clinical nephropathy. This beneficial effect appears to
be due to improved glomerular hemodynamics that cannot be
explained only by the antihypertensive action of these medications.
Captopril (25 mg three times daily) has shown a 50% reduction in
the risk of the combined end points of death, dialysis, and
transplantation in type 1 subjects with diabetic nephropathy and
clinical proteinuria. During initiation of ACE inhibitor therapy, an
increment in serum creatinine > 2 mg/dL due to a rapid fall in
intraglomerular pressure—or the occurrence of persistent
hyperkalemia (above 6 mEq/L) due to hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronism—is an indication to stop this medication.
There has been gradual improvement in quality of life of diabetic
patients receiving dialysis. The cumulative survival for diabetic
patients is about 22% compared with about 37% for dialysis
patients without diabetes. Diabetic nephropathy accounts for about
20% of kidney transplantations performed annually in the United
States. Survival rates have also improved for diabetic patients after
kidney transplantation.
C. Diabetic Neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathies are the most common complications of
diabetes affecting up to 50% of older patients with type 2 diabetes.
1. Peripheral neuropathy—
A. DISTAL SYMMETRIC POLYNEUROPATHY —This is the most
common form of diabetic peripheral neuropathy where loss of
function appears in a stocking-glove pattern and is due to an axonal
neuropathic process. Longer nerves are especially vulnerable, hence
the impact on the foot. Both motor and sensory nerve conduction is
delayed in the peripheral nerves, and ankle jerks may be absent.
Sensory involvement usually occurs first and is generally bilateral,
symmetric, and associated with dulled perception of vibration, pain,
and temperature. The pain can range from mild discomfort to severe
incapacitating symptoms (see below). The sensory deficit may
eventually be of sufficient degree to prevent patients from feeling
pain. Patients who have a sensory neuropathy should therefore be
examined with a 5.07 Semmes Weinstein filament and those who
cannot feel the filament must be considered at risk for unperceived
neuropathic injury.
The denervation of the small muscles of the foot result in clawing
of the toes and displacement of the submetatarsal fat pads
anteriorly. These changes, together with the joint and connective
tissue changes, alter the biomechanics of the foot and increase
plantar pressures. This combination of decreased pain threshold,
abnormally high foot pressures, and repetitive stress (such as from
walking) can lead to calluses and ulcerations in the high-pressure
areas such as over the metatarsal heads (Figure 27–4). Peripheral
neuropathy, autonomic neuropathy, and trauma also pre-disposes
to the development of Charcot arthropathy. An acute case of
Charcot foot arthropathy presents with pain and swelling, and if left
untreated, leads to a “rocker bottom” deformity and ulceration. The
early radiologic changes show joint subluxation and periarticular
fractures. As the process progresses, there is frank osteoclastic
destruction leading to deranged and unstable joints particularly in
the midfoot. Not surprisingly, the key issue for the healing of
neuropathic ulcers in a foot with good vascular supply is mechanical
unloading. In addition, any infection should be treated with
debridement and appropriate antibiotics; healing duration of 8–10
weeks is typical. Occasionally, when healing appears refractory,
platelet-derived growth factor (becaplermin [Regranex]) should
be considered for local application. A post-marketing epidemiologic
study showed increased cancer deaths in patients who had used
three or more tubes of becaplermin on their leg or feet ulcers, and
there is now a “black box” warning on the medication label. Once
ulcers are healed, therapeutic footwear is key to preventing
recurrences. Custom molded shoes are reserved for patients with
significant foot deformities. Other patients with neuropathy may
require accommodative insoles that distribute the load over as wide
an area as possible. Patients with foot deformities and loss of their
protective threshold should get regular care from a podiatrist.
Patients should be educated on appropriate footwear and those
with loss of their protective threshold should be instructed to inspect
their feet daily for reddened areas, blisters, abrasions, or
lacerations.
Figure 27–4. neuropathic ulcer under the head of the third
metatarsal on the foot of a diabetic patient. (Courtesy of Javier La
Fontaine, DPM; used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith
MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of
Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
B. ISOLATED PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY—Involvement of the
distribution of only one nerve (“mononeuropathy”) or of several
nerves (“mononeuropathy multiplex”) is characterized by sudden
onset with subsequent recovery of all or most of the function. This
neuropathology has been attributed to vascular ischemia or
traumatic damage. Cranial and femoral nerves are commonly
involved, and motor abnormalities predominate. The patient with
cranial nerve involvement usually has diplopia and single third,
fourth, or sixth nerve weakness on examination but the pupil is
spared. A full recovery of function occurs in 6–12 weeks. Diabetic
amyotrophy presents with onset of severe pain in the front of the
thigh. Within a few days or weeks of the onset of pain, weakness
and wasting of the quadriceps develops. As the weakness appears,
the pain tends to improve. Management includes analgesia and
improved diabetes control. The symptoms improve over 6–18
months.
C. PAINFUL DIABETIC NEUROPATHY—Hypersensitivity to light touch
and occasionally severe “burning” pain, particularly at night, can
become physically and emotionally disabling. Amitriptyline, 25–75
mg at bedtime, has been recommended for pain associated with
diabetic neuropathy. Dramatic relief has often resulted within 48–72
hours. This rapid response is in contrast to the 2 or 3 weeks
required for an antidepressive effect. Patients often attribute the
benefit to having a full night's sleep. Mild to moderate morning
drowsiness is a side effect that generally improves with time or can
be lessened by giving the medication several hours before bedtime.
This medication should not be continued if improvement has not
occurred after 5 days of therapy. If amitriptyline's anticholinergic
effects are too troublesome, then nortriptyline can be used.
Desipramine in doses of 25–150 mg/d seems to have the same
efficacy as amitriptyline. Tricyclic antidepressants, in combination
with the phenothiazine, fluphenazine, have been shown in two
studies to be efficacious in painful neuropathy, with benefits
unrelated to relief of depression. Gabapentin (900–1800 mg/d in
three divided doses) has also been shown to be effective in the
treatment of painful neuropathy and should be tried if the tricyclic
medications prove ineffective. Pregabalin, a congener of gabapentin,
has been shown in an 8-week study to be more effective than
placebo in treating painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy. However,
this medication was not compared with an active control. Also,
because of its abuse potential, it has been categorized as a schedule
V controlled substance. Duloxetine, a serotonin and norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor, has been approved for the treatment of painful
diabetic neuropathy. In clinical trials, this medication reduced the
pain sensitivity score by 40–50%. Capsaicin, a topical irritant, has
been found to be effective in reducing local nerve pain; it is
dispensed as a cream (Zostrix 0.025%, Zostrix-HP 0.075%) to be
rubbed into the skin over the painful region two to four times daily.
Gloves should be used for application since hand contamination
could result in discomfort if the cream comes in contact with eyes or
sensitive areas such as the genitalia. Application of a 5% lidocaine
patch over an area of maximal pain has been reported to be of
benefit, and this therapy is currently in clinical trials.
Diabetic neuropathic cachexia is a syndrome characterized by a
symmetric peripheral neuropathy associated with profound weight
loss (up to 60% of total body weight) and painful dysesthesias
affecting the proximal lower limbs, the hands, or the lower trunk.
Treatment is usually with insulin and analgesics. The prognosis is
generally good, and patients typically recover their baseline weight
with resolution of the painful sensory symptoms within 1 year.
2. Autonomic neuropathy—With autonomic neuropathy, there is
evidence of postural hypotension, decreased cardiovascular
response to the Valsalva maneuver, gastroparesis, alternating bouts
of diarrhea (particularly nocturnal) and constipation, inability to
empty the bladder, and erectile dysfunction. Gastroparesis should
be considered in type 1 diabetic patients in whom unexpected
fluctuations and variability in their blood glucose levels develops
after meals. Erectile dysfunction due to neuropathy differs from
psychogenic erectile dysfunction in that the latter may be intermittent
(erections occur under special circumstances), whereas diabetic
erectile dysfunction is usually persistent; aortoiliac occlusive disease
may contribute to this problem.
A. MANAGEMENT OF AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY—There is no
consistently effective treatment for diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
Metoclopramide has been of some help in treating diabetic
gastroparesis. It is a dopamine antagonist that has central antiemetic
effects as well as a cholinergic action to facilitate gastric emptying. It
is given in a dose of 10 mg orally three or four times a day, 30
minutes before meals and at bedtime. Drowsiness, restlessness,
fatigue, and lassitude are common adverse effects. Tardive
dyskinesia and extrapyramidal effects can occur especially when
used for longer than 3 months and the FDA has cautioned against
the long-term use of metoclopramide. Erythromycin appears to bind
to motilin receptors in the stomach and has been found to improve
gastric emptying over the short term in doses of 250 mg three times
daily, but its effectiveness seems to diminish over time. Tegaserod
(Zelnorm), the partial 5-HT4 agonist, has been withdrawn from the
US market by the FDA, so it is no longer used for this indication. In
selected patients, injections of botulinum toxin into the pylorus can
reduce pylorus sphincter resistance and enhance gastric emptying.
Gastric electrical stimulation has been reported to improve
symptoms and quality of life indices in patients with gastroparesis
refractory to pharmacologic therapy. Diarrhea associated with
autonomic neuropathy has occasionally responded to broad-
spectrum antibiotic therapy, although it often undergoes
spontaneous remission. Refractory diabetic diarrhea is often
associated with impaired sphincter control and fecal incontinence.
Therapy with loperamide, 4–8 mg daily, or diphenoxylate with
atropine, two tablets up to four times a day, may provide relief. In
more severe cases, tincture of paregoric or codeine (60-mg tablets)
may be required to reduce the frequency of diarrhea and improve
the consistency of the stools. Clonidine has been reported to lessen
diabetic diarrhea; however, its usefulness is limited by its tendency
to lower blood pressure in these patients who already have
autonomic neuropathy, resulting in orthostatic hypotension.
Constipation usually responds to stimulant laxatives such as senna.
Bethanechol in doses of 10–50 mg three times a day has
occasionally improved emptying of the atonic urinary bladder.
Catheter decompression of the distended bladder has been
reported to improve its function, and considerable benefit has been
reported after surgical severing of the internal vesicle sphincter.
Mineralocorticoid therapy with fludrocortisone, 0.2–0.3 mg/d, and
elastic stockings or pressure suits have reportedly been of some
help in patients with orthostatic hypotension occurring as a result of
loss of postural reflexes. Fludrocortisone therapy, however, can
result in supine hypertension and hypokalemia. Midodrine (10 mg
three times a day), an α-agonist, can also be used.
B. MANAGEMENT OF ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION—There are
medical, mechanical, and surgical treatments available for treatment
of erectile dysfunction. Penile erection depends on relaxation of the
smooth muscle in the arteries of the corpus cavernosum, and this is
mediated 
by 
nitric 
oxide-induced 
cyclic 
3′,5′-guanosine
monophosphate 
(cGMP) 
formation. 
cGMP-specific
phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors impair the breakdown
of cGMP and improve the ability to attain and maintain an erection.
Sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis) have
been shown in placebo-controlled clinical trials to improve erections
in response to sexual stimulation. The recommended dose of
sildenafil for most patients is one 50-mg tablet taken approximately
1 hour before sexual activity. The peak effect is at 1.5–2 hours,
with some effect persisting for 4 hours. Patients with diabetes
mellitus using sildenafil reported 50–60% improvement in erectile
function. The maximum recommended dose is 100 mg. The
recommended dose of both vardenafil and tadalafil is 10 mg. The
doses may be increased to 20 mg or decreased to 5 mg based on
efficacy and side effects. Tadalafil has been shown to improve
erectile function for up to 36 hours after dosing. Low doses are
now available for daily use. In clinical trials, only a few adverse
effects have been reported—transient mild headache, flushing,
dyspepsia, and some altered color vision. Priapism can occur with
these medications, and patients should be advised to seek
immediate medical attention if an erection persists for longer than 4
hours. The PDE5 inhibitors potentiate the hypotensive effects of
nitrates and their use is contraindicated in patients who are
concurrently using organic nitrates in any form. Caution is advised
for men who have suffered a heart attack, stroke, or life-threatening
arrhythmia within the previous 6 months; men who have resting
hypotension or hypertension; and men who have a history of
cardiac failure or have unstable angina. Rarely, a decrease in vision
or permanent visual loss has been reported after PDE5 inhibitor
use.
Intracorporeal injection of vasoactive medications causes penile
engorgement and erection. Medications most commonly used
include papaverine alone, papaverine with phentolamine, and
alprostadil (prostaglandin E1). Alprostadil injections are relatively
painless, but careful instruction is essential to prevent local trauma,
priapism, and fibrosis. Intraurethral pellets of alprostadil avoid the
problem of injection of the medication.
External vacuum therapy (Erec-Aid System) is a nonsurgical
treatment consisting of a suction chamber operated by a hand pump
that creates a vacuum around the penis. This draws blood into the
penis to produce an erection that is maintained by a specially
designed tension ring inserted around the base of the penis and
which can be kept in place for up to 20–30 minutes. While this
method is generally effective, its cumbersome nature limits its
appeal.
In view of the recent development of nonsurgical approaches to
therapy of erectile dysfunction, resort to surgical implants of penile
prostheses is becoming less common.
D. Cardiovascular Complications
1. Heart disease—Microangiopathy occurs in the heart and may
explain the etiology of congestive cardiomyopathies in diabetic
patients who do not have demonstrable coronary artery disease.
More commonly, however, heart disease in patients with diabetes is
due to coronary atherosclerosis. Myocardial infarction is three to
five times more common in diabetic patients and is the leading cause
of death in patients with type 2 diabetes. Cardiovascular disease
risk is increased in patients with type 1 diabetes as well, although
the absolute risk is lower than in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Premenopausal women who normally have lower rates of coronary
artery disease lose this protection once diabetes develops. The
increased risk in patients with type 2 diabetes reflects the
combination of hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, abnormalities of
platelet adhesiveness, coagulation factors, hypertension, oxidative
stress, and inflammation. Large intervention studies of risk factor
reduction in diabetes are lacking, but it is reasonable to assume that
reducing these risk factors would have a beneficial effect. Lowering
LDL cholesterol reduces first events in patients without known
coronary disease and secondary events in patients with known
coronary disease. These intervention studies included some patients
with diabetes, and the benefits of LDL cholesterol lowering was
apparent in this group. The National Cholesterol Education
Program clinical practice guidelines have designated diabetes as a
coronary risk equivalent and have recommended that patients with
diabetes should have an LDL cholesterol goal of < 100 mg/dL.
Lowering LDL cholesterol to 70 mg/dL may have additional benefit
and is a reasonable target for most patients with type 2 diabetes
who have multiple risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
The ADA also recommends lowering blood pressure to 130/80
mm Hg or less. The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation
(HOPE) study randomized 9297 high-risk patients who had
evidence of vascular disease or diabetes plus one other
cardiovascular risk factor to receive ramipril or placebo for a mean
of 5 years. Treatment with ramipril resulted in a 25% reduction of
the risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, or death from
cardiovascular disease. The mean difference between the placebo
and ramipril group was 2.2 mm Hg systolic and 1.4 mm Hg
diastolic blood pressure. The reduction in cardiovascular event rate
remained significant after adjustment for this small difference in
blood pressure. The mechanism underlying this protective effect of
ramipril is unknown. Patients with type 2 diabetes who already have
cardiovascular disease or microalbuminuria should therefore be
considered for treatment with an ACE inhibitor. More clinical
studies are needed to address the question of whether patients with
type 2 diabetes who do not have cardiovascular disease or
microalbuminuria would specifically benefit from ACE inhibitor
treatment.
Aspirin at a dose of 81–325 mg daily has been shown to
effectively inhibit thromboxane synthesis by platelets and reduce the
risk of diabetic atherothrombosis with only a minor increased risk of
gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Use of low-dose enteric-coated aspirin
is recommended in diabetic adults with evident macrovascular
disease or in those with increased cardiovascular risk factors or
those older than 30 years. Contraindications for aspirin therapy are
patients with aspirin allergy, bleeding tendency, recent
gastrointestinal bleeding, or active hepatic disease. The Early
Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) showed that
aspirin does not influence the course of proliferative retinopathy.
There was no statistically significant difference in the severity of
vitreous/preretinal hemorrhages or their rate of resolution between
the aspirin and placebo groups. Thus, it appears that there is no
contraindication to aspirin use to achieve cardiovascular benefit in
diabetic patients who have proliferative retinopathy.
2. Peripheral vascular disease—Atherosclerosis is markedly
accelerated in the larger arteries. It is often diffuse, with localized
enhancement in certain areas of turbulent blood flow, such as at the
bifurcation of the aorta or other large vessels. Clinical manifestations
of peripheral vascular disease include ischemia of the lower
extremities, erectile dysfunction, and intestinal angina.
The incidence of gangrene of the feet in diabetics is 30 times
that in age-matched controls. The factors responsible for its
development, in addition to peripheral vascular disease, are small
vessel disease, peripheral neuropathy with loss of both pain
sensation and neurogenic inflammatory responses, and secondary
infection. In two-thirds of patients with ischemic gangrene, pedal
pulses are not palpable. In the remaining one-third who have
palpable pulses, reduced blood flow through these vessels can be
demonstrated by plethysmographic or Doppler ultrasound
examination. Prevention of foot injury is imperative. Agents that
reduce peripheral blood flow such as tobacco and propranolol
should be avoided. Control of other risk factors such as
hypertension is essential. Cholesterol-lowering agents are useful as
adjunctive therapy when early ischemic signs are detected and when
dyslipidemia is present. Patients should be advised to seek
immediate medical care if a diabetic foot ulcer develops.
Improvement in peripheral blood flow with endarterectomy and
bypass operations is possible in certain patients.
E. Skin and Mucous Membrane Complications
Chronic pyogenic infections of the skin may occur, especially in
poorly controlled diabetic patients. Eruptive xanthomas can result
from hypertriglyceridemia, associated with poor glycemic control.
An unusual lesion termed necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum is
usually located over the anterior surfaces of the legs or the dorsal
surfaces of the ankles. They are oval or irregularly shaped plaques
with demarcated borders and a glistening yellow surface and occur
in women two to four times more frequently than in men.
“Shin spots” are not uncommon in adult diabetics. They are
brownish, rounded, painless atrophic lesions of the skin in the
pretibial area. Candidal infection can produce erythema and edema
of intertriginous areas below the breasts, in the axillas, and between
the fingers. It causes vulvovaginitis in most chronically uncontrolled
diabetic women with persistent glucosuria and is a frequent cause of
pruritus.
While antifungal creams containing miconazole or clotrimazole
offer immediate relief of vulvovaginitis, recurrence is frequent unless
glucosuria is reduced.
F. Bone and Joint Complications
Long-standing diabetes can cause progressive stiffness of the hand
secondary to contracture and tightening of skin over the joints
(diabetic cheiroarthropathy), frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis),
carpal tunnel syndrome, and Dupuytren contractures. These
complications are believed to be due to glycosylation of collagen
and perhaps other proteins in connective tissue. There may also be
an inflammatory component.
Data on bone mineral density and fracture risk in people with
diabetes are contradictory. Patients with type 2 diabetes do appear
to be at increased risk for nonvertebral fractures. Women with type
1 diabetes have an increased risk of fracture when compared with
women without diabetes. Other factors, such as duration of
diabetes, and diabetes complications, such as neuropathy and renal
disease, likely affect both the bone mineral density and fracture risk.
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) is characterized
by ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligaments of the spine and
various extraspinal ligaments. It causes stiffness and decreased
range of spinal motion. The peripheral joints most commonly
affected are the metacarpophalangeal joints, elbows, and shoulders.
Diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia are risk factors
for this condition.
Hyperuricemia is more common in type 2 diabetes, so it is not
surprising that these patients are at increased risk for acute and
tophaceous gout.
Bursitis, particularly of the shoulders and hips occurs more
frequently than expected in patients with diabetes.
Albersen M et al. Evaluation and treatment of erectile dysfunction.
Med Clin North Am. 2011 Jan;95(1):201–12. [PMID:
21095423]
 
Boscia F. Current approaches to the management of diabetic
retinopathy and diabetic macular oedema. Drugs. 2010 Nov
12;70(16):2171–200. [PMID: 20964459]
 
Howard IM. The prevention of foot ulceration in diabetic patients.
Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2009 Nov;20(4):595–609.
[PMID: 19781501]
 
Marso SP et al. Peripheral arterial disease in patients with
diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Mar 7;47(5):921–9. [PMID:
16516072]
 
McGill JB. Improving microvascular outcomes in patients with
diabetes through management of hypertension. Postgrad Med.
2009 Mar;121(2):89–101. [PMID: 19332966]
 
Mohamed Q et al. Management of diabetic retinopathy: a
systematic review. JAMA. 2007 Aug 22;298(8):902–16. [PMID:
17712074]
 
Schwartz SG et al. Pharmacotherapy for diabetic retinopathy.
Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009 May;10(7):1123–31. [PMID:
19405788]
 
Shields J et al. Managing diabetic nephropathy. Clin Med. 2010
Oct;10(5):500–4. [PMID: 21117388]
 
Tesfaye S et al; Toronto Diabetic Neuropathy Expert Group.
Diabetic neuropathies: update on definitions, diagnostic criteria,
estimation of severity, and treatments. Diabetes Care. 2010
Oct;33(10):2285–93. [PMID: 20876709]
 
Van Buren PN et al. Hypertension in diabetic nephropathy:
epidemiology, mechanisms, and management. Adv Chronic
Kidney Dis. 2011 Jan;18(1):28–41. [PMID: 21224028]
 
Yusuf S et al. Effects of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme
inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients.
The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. N
Engl J Med. 2000 Jan 20;342(3):145–53. [PMID: 10639539]
 
 Special Situations
A. Diabetes Management in the Hospital
Most patients with diabetes are hospitalized for reasons other than
their diabetes. Indeed, up to 10–15% of all hospitalized patients
have diabetes. Audits suggest that as many as a 30% of these
hospitalized patients have inappropriate management of their
diabetes, with such errors as being given metformin where
contraindicated, failure to act on high blood glucose levels, omission
of diabetes medication, no record of diabetes complications, and
inappropriate insulin management or blood glucose monitoring. It is
challenging using outpatient oral therapies or insulin regimens in the
hospital because patients are not eating as usual; they are often
fasting for procedures; clinical events increase adverse reactions
associated with diabetes medicines, eg, thiazolidinediones can cause
fluid retention and worsen heart failure; metformin should not be
used in patients with significant chronic kidney or liver disease.
Subcutaneous or intravenous insulin therapy is frequently substituted
for other diabetes medicines because the insulin dose can be
adjusted to match changing inpatient needs and it is safe to use
insulin in patients with heart, kidney, and liver disease.
Surgery represents a stress situation during which most of the
insulin antagonists (eg, catecholamines, growth hormone, and
corticosteroids) are mobilized. In the diabetic patient, this can lead
to a worsening of hyperglycemia and perhaps even ketoacidosis.
The aim of medical management of people with diabetes during the
perioperative period is to minimize these stress-induced changes.
Recommendations for management depend both on the patient's
usual diabetic regimen and on the type of surgery (major or minor)
to be done (see also Chapter 3).
For people with diabetes controlled with diet alone, no special
precautions must be taken unless diabetic control is markedly
disturbed by the procedure. If this occurs, small doses of short-
acting insulin as needed will correct the hyperglycemia.
Patients taking oral agents should not take them on the day of
surgery. If there is significant hyperglycemia, small doses of short-
acting insulin are given as needed. If this approach does not provide
adequate control, an insulin infusion should be started in the manner
indicated below. The oral agents can be restarted once the patient is
eating normally after the operation. It is important to order a
postoperative serum creatinine level to ensure adequate kidney
function prior to restarting metformin therapy.
Patients taking insulin represent the only serious challenge to
management of diabetes when surgery is necessary. However, with
careful attention to changes in the clinical or laboratory picture,
glucose control can be managed successfully. The protocol used to
control the glucose depends on the kind of diabetes (type 1 or type
2); whether it is minor surgery (lasting < 2 hours and patient eating
afterwards) or major surgery (lasting > 2 hours, with invasion of a
body cavity, and patient not eating afterwards); and the
preoperative insulin regimen (basal bolus or premixed insulin twice a
day or premeal bolus only or regular insulin before meals and NPH
at bedtime). Patients with type 1 diabetes must be receiving some
insulin to prevent the development of diabetic ketoacidosis. Many
patients with type 2 diabetes who are taking insulin do well
perioperatively without insulin for a few hours. Ideally, patients with
diabetes should undergo surgery early in the morning. Table 27–13
summarizes the approach for these patients.
One insulin infusion method adds 10 units of regular insulin to 1 L
of 5% dextrose in 0.45% saline, and this is infused intravenously at
a rate of 100–180 mL/h. This gives the patient 1–1.8 units of insulin
per hour which, except in the most severe cases, generally keeps
the blood glucose within the range of 100–250 mg/dL (5.5–13.9
mmol/L). The infusion may be continued for several days, if
necessary. Perioperatively, plasma glucose or blood glucose should
be determined every 2–4 hours to be sure metabolic control is
adequate. If it is not, adjustments in the ratio of insulin to dextrose in
the intravenous solution can be made.
An alternative method, which is gaining increasing popularity,
consists of separate infusions of insulin and glucose delivered by
pumps to permit independent adjustments of each infusion rate,
depending on hourly variation of blood glucose values. There are a
number of different algorithms available for insulin infusions.
After surgery, when the patient has resumed an adequate oral
intake, subcutaneous administration of insulin can be resumed and
intravenous administration of insulin and dextrose can be stopped
30 minutes after the first subcutaneous dose. Insulin needs may vary
in the first several days after surgery because of continuing
postoperative stresses and because of variable caloric intake. In this
situation, multiple doses of short-acting insulin plus some long-acting
basal insulin, guided by blood glucose determinations, can keep the
patient in acceptable metabolic control.
 
Table 27–13. Recommendations for management of insulin-treated
diabetes during surgery.
 
 
In the intensive care units (ICUs), glucose levels are
controlled most frequently using insulin infusions. Patients receiving
total parenteral nutrition can have insulin added to the bag. Standard
total parenteral nutrition contains 25% dextrose so an infusion rate
of 50 mLs/h delivers 12.5 g of dextrose per hour.
On the general surgical and medical wards, most patients are
treated with subcutaneous insulin regimens. Limited cross-sectional
and prospective studies suggest that the best glucose control is
achieved on a combination of basal and bolus regimen with 50% of
daily insulin needs provided by intermediate- or long-acting insulins.
Standardized order sets prompt medical personnel to write more
physiologic insulin orders; they can reduce errors; and they often
include algorithms for recognition and treatment of hypoglycemia.
The morbidity and mortality in diabetic patients is twice that of
nondiabetic patients. Those with new-onset hyperglycemia (ie,
those without a preadmission diagnosis of diabetes) have even
higher mortality—almost eightfold that of nondiabetic patients in one
study. These observations have led to the question of whether tight
glycemic control in the hospital improves outcomes.
A prospective trial in surgical ICU patients (Leuven 1 study)
reported that aggressive treatment of hyperglycemia (blood glucose
> 110 mg/dL) reduced mortality and morbidity. Only a small
number of persons in this study (204 of 1548) had a diagnosis of
diabetes preoperatively, and so this study suggests that controlling
hyperglycemia per se (independent of a diagnosis of diabetes) was
beneficial. The benefits, however, were principally seen in patients
who were in the ICU for longer than 5 days, and it is unclear
whether the benefits also apply to most surgical patients who stay in
the ICU for only 1 to 2 days.
The same investigators performed a similar prospective trial
among 1200 medical ICU patients (Leuven 2 study) and reported
that aggressive treatment of hyperglycemia reduced morbidity
(decreased acquired kidney injury and increased early weaning
from mechanical ventilation) but not mortality. Again, as in the
surgical ICU study, only a small number of persons (16.9%) had a
diagnosis of diabetes at admission.
The findings of the Leuven studies, however, have not been
confirmed by other prospective studies. Two other ICU-based
studies (Glucontrol and VISEP) that attempted to confirm the
findings were unable to do so. Both studies were stopped
prematurely, however. The Glucontrol study was stopped because
an interim analysis (falsely) suggested increased mortality in the test
group; and the VISEP study was stopped because of seven-fold
increase in hypoglycemic events in the intensively treated group. A
large multi-center, multinational study (NICE-SUGAR) recruited
6104 surgical and medical ICU patients with hyperglycemia (20%
had diabetes) and randomized them to tight control (blood glucose
levels of 81–108 mg/dL) or less tight control (glucose levels < 180
mg/dL). The tight group achieved blood glucose levels of 115 ± 18
mg/dL and the conventional group, 144 ± 23 mg/dL. There were
more deaths (829 versus 751 deaths) in the tight glucose control
group compared with the less tight glucose control group (P =
0.02). The excess deaths in the intensive group were due to
cardiovascular events. The intensively treated group also had more
cases of severe hypoglycemia (206 versus 15 cases).
A study on tight intraoperative glycemic control during cardiac
surgery also failed to show any benefit; if anything, the intensively
treated group had more events. The United Kingdom Glucose
Insulin in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK) failed to show beneficial effect of
tight glycemic control in stroke patients; however, the investigators
acknowledged that, because of slow recruitment, the study was
underpowered.
Thus, based on the evidence available so far, ICU patients with
blood glucose levels above 180 mg/dL (diabetes and new-onset
hyperglycemia) should be treated with insulin, aiming for target
glucose levels between 140 mg/dL and 180 mg/dL. In the ICU
setting, aiming for blood glucose levels close to 100 mg/dL is not
beneficial and may even be harmful. When patients leave the ICU,
target glucose values between 100 mg/dL and 180 mg/dL may be
appropriate, although this view is based on clinical observations
rather than conclusive evidence.
B. Pregnancy and the Diabetic Patient
Tight glycemic control with normal HbA1c levels is very important
during pregnancy. Early in pregnancy, poor control increases the
risk of spontaneous abortion and congenital malformations. Late in
pregnancy, poor control can result in polyhydramnios, preterm
labor, stillbirth, and fetal macrosomia with its associated problems.
Diabetes complications can impact both maternal and fetal health.
Diabetic retinopathy can first develop during pregnancy or
retinopathy that is already present can worsen. Diabetic women
with microalbuminuria can have worsening albuminuria during
pregnancy and are at higher risk for preeclampsia. Patients who
have preexisting kidney failure (prepregnancy creatinine clearance <
80 mL/min) are at high risk for further decline in kidney function
during the pregnancy, and this may not reverse after delivery.
Diabetic gastroparesis can severely exacerbate the nausea and
vomiting of pregnancy and some patients may require fluid and
nutritional support.
Although there is evidence that glyburide is safe during
pregnancy, the current practice is to control diabetes with insulin
therapy. Every effort should be made, utilizing multiple injections of
insulin or a continuous infusion of insulin by pump, to maintain near-
normalization of fasting and preprandial blood glucose values while
avoiding hypoglycemia. The fast-acting insulin analogs insulin aspart
and insulin lispro can be used, but data on using the long-acting
insulin analogs are limited. A small study using insulin glargine in 32
pregnancies did not reveal any problems. There are no data on
insulin detemir use in pregnancy. NPH is currently the preferred
intermediate insulin for basal coverage during pregnancy.
Unless there are fetal or maternal complications, diabetic women
should be able to carry the pregnancy to full-term, delivering at 38
to 41 weeks. Induction of labor before 39 weeks may be
considered if there is concern about increasing fetal weight. See
Chapter 19 for further details.
Boinpally T et al. Management of type 2 diabetes and gestational
diabetes in pregnancy. Mt Sinai J Med. 2009 Jun;76(3):269–80.
[PMID: 19421970]
 
Griesdale DE et al. Intensive insulin therapy and mortality among
critically ill patients: a meta-analysis including NICE-SUGAR study
data. CMAJ. 2009 Apr 14;180(8):821–7. [PMID: 19318387]
 
Kitzmiller JL et al. Managing preexisting diabetes for pregnancy:
summary of evidence and consensus recommendations for care.
Diabetes Care. 2008 May;31(5):1060–79. [PMID: 18445730]
 
Scurlock C et al. Critique of normoglycemia in intensive care
evaluation: survival using glucose algorithm regulation (NICE-
SUGAR)—a review of recent literature. Curr Opin Clin Nutr
Metab Care. 2010 Mar;13(2):211–4. [PMID: 20010098]
 
 Prognosis
The DCCT showed that the previously poor prognosis for as many
as 40% of patients with type 1 diabetes is markedly improved by
optimal care. DCCT participants were generally young and highly
motivated and were cared for in academic centers by skilled
diabetes educators and endocrinologists who were able to provide
more attention and services than are usually available. Improved
training of primary care providers may be beneficial.
For type 2 diabetes, the UKPDS documented a reduction in
microvascular disease with glycemic control, although this was not
apparent in the obese subgroup. Cardiovascular outcomes were not
improved by glycemic control, although antihypertensive therapy
showed benefit in reducing the number of adverse cardiovascular
complications as well as in reducing the occurrence of
microvascular disease among hypertensive patients. In patients with
visceral obesity, successful management of type 2 diabetes remains
a major challenge in the attempt to achieve appropriate control of
hyperglycemia, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Once safe and
effective methods are devised to prevent or manage obesity, the
prognosis of type 2 diabetes with its high cardiovascular risks
should improve considerably.
In addition to poorly understood genetic factors relating to
differences in individual susceptibility to development of long-term
complications of hyperglycemia, it is clear that in both types of
diabetes, the diabetic patient's intelligence, motivation, and
awareness of the potential complications of the disease contribute
significantly to the ultimate outcome.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients should receive self-management education
when diabetes is diagnosed and at intervals thereafter. The
instructional team must include a registered dietitian and
registered nurse; they must be Certified Diabetes
Educators (CDEs).
•    Patients with type 1 diabetes should be referred to an
endocrinologist for comanagement with a primary care
provider.
•    Patients with type 2 diabetes should be referred to an
endocrinologist if treatment goals are not met or if the
patient requires an increasingly complex regimen to
maintain glycemic control.
•    Patients with type 2 diabetes should be referred to an
ophthalmologist or optometrist for a dilated eye
examination when the diabetes is diagnosed, and patients
with type 1 diabetes should be referred 5 years after the
diagnosis is made.
•    Patients with peripheral neuropathy or structural foot
problems should be referred to a podiatrist.
•    Referrals to other specialists may be required for
management of chronic complications of diabetes.
American Association of Diabetes Educators
http://www.aadenet.org/
 
American Diabetes Association http://www.diabetes.org/home
 
American Diabetes Association. Standards of Medical Care in
Diabetes—2010. Diabetes Care. 2010 Jan;33(Suppl 1):S11–61.
[PMID: 20042772]
 
American Dietetic Association http://www.eatright.org
 
Juvenile Diabetes Foundation http://www.jdf.org/index.html
 
DIABETIC COMA
 
Coma may be due to a variety of causes not directly related to
diabetes. Certain causes directly related to diabetes require
differentiation: (1) Hypoglycemic coma resulting from excessive
doses of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents. (2) Hyperglycemic
coma associated with either severe insulin deficiency (diabetic
ketoacidosis) or mild to moderate insulin deficiency (hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar state). (3) Lactic acidosis associated with diabetes,
particularly in diabetics stricken with severe infections or with
cardiovascular collapse.
DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hyperglycemia > 250 mg/dL.
 Acidosis with blood pH < 7.3.
 Serum bicarbonate < 15 mEq/L.
 Serum positive for ketones.
 
 General Considerations
Diabetic ketoacidosis may be the initial manifestation of type 1
diabetes or may result from increased insulin requirements in type 1
diabetes patients during the course of infection, trauma, myocardial
infarction, or surgery. It is a life-threatening medical emergency with
a mortality rate just under 5% in individuals under 40 years of age,
but with a more serious prognosis in the elderly, who have mortality
rates over 20%. The National Data Group reports an annual
incidence of five to eight episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis per 1000
diabetic persons. Ketoacidosis may develop in patients with type 2
diabetes when severe stress such as sepsis or trauma is present.
Diabetic ketoacidosis has been found to be one of the more
common serious complications of insulin pump therapy, occurring in
approximately 1 per 80 patient-months of treatment. Many patients
who monitor capillary blood glucose regularly ignore urine ketone
measurements, which would signal the possibility of insulin leakage
or pump failure before serious illness develops. Poor compliance,
either for psychological reasons or because of inadequate
education, is one of the most common causes of diabetic
ketoacidosis, particularly when episodes are recurrent.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The appearance of diabetic ketoacidosis is usually preceded by a
day or more of polyuria and polydipsia associated with marked
fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. If untreated, mental stupor ensues that
can progress to coma. Drowsiness is fairly common but frank coma
only occurs in about 10% of patients. On physical examination,
evidence of dehydration in a stuporous patient with rapid deep
breathing and a “fruity” breath odor of acetone would strongly
suggest the diagnosis. Hypotension with tachycardia indicates
profound fluid and electrolyte depletion, and mild hypothermia is
usually present. Abdominal pain and even tenderness may be
present in the absence of abdominal disease. Conversely,
cholecystitis or pancreatitis may occur with minimal symptoms and
signs.
B. Laboratory Findings
(Table 27–14.) Typically, the patient with moderately severe
diabetic ketoacidosis has a plasma glucose of 350–900 mg/dL
(19.4–50 mmol/L), serum ketones at a dilution of 1:8 or greater,
hyperkalemia (serum potassium level of 5–8 mEq/L), slight
hyponatremia (serum sodium of approximately 130 mEq/L),
hyperphosphatemia (serum phosphate level of 6–7 mg/dL), and
elevated blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels. Acidosis
may be severe (pH ranging from 6.9 to 7.2, and serum bicarbonate
ranging from 5 mEq/L to 15 mEq/L); Pco2 is low (15–20 mm Hg)
related to hyperventilation. Fluid depletion is marked, typically
about 100 mL/kg.
The hyperkalemia occurs despite total body potassium depletion
because of the shift of potassium from the intracellular to
extracellular spaces that occurs in systemic acidosis. The average
total body potassium deficit resulting from osmotic diuresis,
acidosis, and gastrointestinal losses is about 3–5 mEq/kg body
weight. Similarly, despite the elevated serum phosphate, total body
phosphate is generally depleted. Serum sodium is generally reduced
due to loss of sodium ions (7–10 mEq/kg) by polyuria and vomiting
and because severe hyperglycemia shifts intracellular water into the
interstitial compartment. There is some controversy about the
correction factor for the serum sodium in the presence of
hyperglycemia. Many guidelines recommend a correction factor,
whereby the serum sodium concentration decreases by 1.6 mEq/L
for every 100 mg/dL (5.56 mmol/L) rise in plasma glucose above
normal, but there is evidence that the decrease may be greater when
patients have more severe hyperglycemia (greater than 400 mg/dL
or 22.2 mmol/L) and/or volume depletion. One group has
suggested (based on short-term exposure of normal volunteers to
markedly elevated glucose levels) that, when the serum glucose is
greater than 200 mg/dL, the serum sodium concentration decreases
by at least 2.4 mEq/L. Serum osmolality can be directly measured
by standard tests of freezing point depression or can be estimated
by calculating the molarity of sodium, chloride, and glucose in the
serum. A convenient method of estimating effective serum
osmolality is as follows (normal values in humans are 280–300
mosm/kg):
These calculated estimates are usually 10–20 mosm/kg lower
than values measured by standard cryoscopic techniques. Central
nervous system depression or coma occurs when the effective
serum osmolality exceeds 320–330 mosm/L. Coma in a diabetic
patient with a lower osmolality should prompt a search for cause of
coma other than hyperosmolality (see Chapter 21).
Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine are invariably elevated
because of dehydration. In some automated creatinine assays,
serum creatinine can be falsely elevated by nonspecific
chromogenicity of keto acids and glucose. Most laboratories,
however, now routinely eliminate this interference.
 
Table 27–14. Laboratory diagnosis of coma in diabetic patients.
 
1Leftover urine in bladder might still contain glucose from earlier
hyperglycemia.
2Alcohol can elevate plasma lactate as well as keto acids to reduce pH.
 
Ketoacidemia represents the effect of insulin lack at multiple
enzyme loci. Insulin lack associated with elevated levels of growth
hormone, catecholamines, and glucagon contributes to increases in
lipolysis from adipose tissue and in hepatic ketogenesis. In addition,
reduced ketolysis by insulin-deficient peripheral tissues contributes
to the ketoacidemia. The only true “keto” acid present is
acetoacetic acid which, along with its by-product acetone, is
measured by nitroprusside reagents (Acetest and Ketostix). The
sensitivity for acetone, however, is poor, requiring over 10 mmol/L,
which is seldom reached in the plasma of ketoacidotic patients—
although this detectable concentration is readily achieved in urine.
Thus, in the plasma of ketotic patients, only acetoacetate is
measured by these reagents. The more prevalent β-hydroxybutyric
acid has no ketone group and is therefore not detected by
conventional nitroprusside tests. This takes on special importance in
the presence of circulatory collapse during diabetic ketoacidosis,
wherein an increase in lactic acid can shift the redox state to
increase β-hydroxybutyric acid at the expense of the readily
detectable acetoacetic acid. Bedside diagnostic reagents are then
unreliable, suggesting no ketonemia in cases where β-
hydroxybutyric acid is a major factor in producing the acidosis. A
combined glucose and ketone meter (Precision Xtra, Abbott
Diabetes Care) that is able to measure blood β-hydroxybutyrate
concentration on capillary blood is now available. Many clinical
laboratories 
also 
offer 
direct 
blood 
β-hydroxybutyrate
measurement.
Elevation of serum amylase is common but often represents
salivary as well as pancreatic amylase. Thus, in this setting, an
elevated serum amylase is not specific for acute pancreatitis. Serum
lipase may be useful if the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is being
seriously considered. Leukocytosis as high as 25,000/mcL with a
left shift may occur with or without associated infection. The
presence of an elevated or even a normal temperature would
suggest the presence of an infection, since patients with diabetic
ketoacidosis are generally hypothermic if uninfected.
 Treatment
Patients with mild diabetic ketoacidosis are alert and have pH levels
between 7.25 and 7.30; those with moderate ketoacidosis have pH
levels between 7.0 and 7.24 and are either alert or little drowsy;
and those with severe ketoacidosis are stuporose and have a pH <
7.0. Those with mild ketoacidosis can be treated in the emergency
department, but those with moderate or severe ketoacidosis require
admission to the ICU or step-down unit. Therapeutic goals are to
restore plasma volume and tissue perfusion, reduce blood glucose
and osmolality toward normal, correct acidosis, replenish electrolyte
losses, and identify and treat precipitating factors. Gastric intubation
is recommended in the comatose patient to prevent vomiting and
aspiration that may occur as a result of gastric atony, a common
complication of diabetic ketoacidosis. An indwelling catheter may
also be necessary. In patients with preexisting cardiac or renal
failure or those in severe cardiovascular collapse, a central venous
pressure catheter or a Swan-Ganz catheter should be inserted to
evaluate the degree of hypovolemia and to monitor subsequent fluid
administration.
A comprehensive flow sheet that includes vital signs, serial
laboratory data, and therapeutic interventions (eg, fluids, insulin)
should be meticulously maintained by the clinician responsible for
the patient's care. Plasma glucose should be recorded hourly and
electrolytes and pH at least every 2–3 hours during the initial
treatment period. Bedside glucose meters should be used to titrate
the insulin therapy. The patient should not receive sedatives or
opioids.
A. Fluid Replacement
In most patients, the fluid deficit is 4–5 L. Initially, 0.9% saline
solution is the solution of choice to help reexpand the contracted
vascular volume and should be started in the emergency department
as soon as the diagnosis is established. The saline should be infused
rapidly to provide 1 L/h over the first 1–2 hours. After the first 2 L
of fluid have been given, the intravenous infusion should be at the
rate of 300–400 mL/h. Use 0.9% (“normal”) saline unless the
serum sodium is > 150 mEq/L, when 0.45% (“half normal”) saline
solution should be used. The volume status should be very carefully
monitored. Failure to give enough volume replacement (at least 3–4
L in 8 hours) to restore normal perfusion is one of the most serious
therapeutic shortcomings adversely influencing satisfactory
recovery. Excessive fluid replacement (more than 5 L in 8 hours)
may contribute to acute respiratory distress syndrome or cerebral
edema. When blood glucose falls to approximately 250 mg/dL, the
fluids should be changed to a 5% glucose-containing solution to
maintain serum glucose in the range of 250–300 mg/dL. This will
prevent the development of hypoglycemia and will also reduce the
likelihood of cerebral edema, which could result from too rapid
decline of blood glucose.
B. Insulin Replacement
Immediately after initiation of fluid replacement, regular insulin
should be given intravenously in a loading dose of 0.15 unit/kg as an
intravenous bolus to prime the tissue insulin receptors. Following the
initial bolus, intravenous doses of insulin as low as 0.1 unit/kg/h are
continuously infused or given hourly as an intramuscular injection;
this is sufficient to replace the insulin deficit in most patients.
Replacement of insulin deficiency helps correct the acidosis by
reducing the flux of fatty acids to the liver, reducing ketone
production by the liver, and also improving removal of ketones from
the blood. Insulin treatment reduces the hyperosmolality by reducing
the hyperglycemia. It accomplishes this by increasing removal of
glucose through peripheral utilization as well as by decreasing
production of glucose by the liver. This latter effect is accomplished
by direct inhibition of gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis as well as
by lowered amino acid flux from muscle to liver and reduced
hyperglucagonemia.
The insulin dose should be “piggy-backed” into the fluid line so
the rate of fluid replacement can be changed without altering the
insulin delivery rate. If the plasma glucose level fails to fall at least
10% in the first hour, a repeat loading dose is recommended. The
availability of bedside glucometers and of laboratory instruments for
rapid and accurate glucose analysis (Beckman or Yellow Springs
glucose analyzer) has contributed much to achieving optimal insulin
replacement. Rarely, a patient with immune insulin resistance is
encountered, and this requires doubling the insulin dose every 2–4
hours if hyperglycemia does not improve after the first two doses of
insulin.
C. Potassium
Total body potassium loss from polyuria and vomiting may be as
high as 200 mEq. However, because of shifts of potassium from
cells into the extracellular space as a consequence of acidosis,
serum potassium is usually normal to slightly elevated prior to
institution of treatment. As the acidosis is corrected, potassium
flows back into the cells, and hypokalemia can develop if potassium
replacement is not instituted. If the patient is not uremic and has an
adequate urinary output, potassium chloride in doses of 10–30
mEq/h should be infused during the second and third hours after
beginning therapy as soon as the acidosis starts to resolve.
Replacement should be started sooner if the initial serum potassium
is inappropriately normal or low and should be delayed if serum
potassium fails to respond to initial therapy and remains above 5
mEq/L, as in cases of chronic kidney disease. An ECG can be of
help in monitoring the patient's potassium status: High peaked T
waves are a sign of hyperkalemia, and flattened T waves with U
waves are a sign of hypokalemia. Foods high in potassium content
should be prescribed when the patient has recovered sufficiently to
take food orally. Tomato juice has 14 mEq of potassium per 240
mL, and a medium-sized banana provides about 10 mEq.
D. Sodium Bicarbonate
The use of sodium bicarbonate in management of diabetic
ketoacidosis has been questioned since clinical benefit was not
demonstrated in one prospective randomized trial and because of
the following potentially harmful consequences: (1) development of
hypokalemia from rapid shift of potassium into cells if the acidosis is
overcorrected; (2) tissue anoxia from reduced dissociation of
oxygen from hemoglobin when acidosis is rapidly reversed (leftward
shift of the oxygen dissociation curve); and (3) cerebral acidosis
resulting from lowering of cerebrospinal fluid pH. It must be
emphasized, however, that these considerations are less important
when very severe acidosis exists. Therefore, it is recommended that
bicarbonate be administered to diabetic patients in ketoacidosis if
the arterial blood pH is 7.0 or less, with careful monitoring to
prevent overcorrection. One or two ampules of sodium bicarbonate
(one ampule contains 44 mEq/50 mL) should be added to 1 L of
0.45% saline. (Note: Addition of sodium bicarbonate to 0.9%
saline would produce a markedly hypertonic solution that could
aggravate the hyperosmolar state already present.) This should be
administered rapidly (over the first hour). It can be repeated until
the arterial pH reaches 7.1, but it should not be given if the pH is
7.1 or greater since additional bicarbonate would increase the risk
of rebound metabolic alkalosis as ketones are metabolized.
Alkalosis shifts potassium from serum into cells, which could
precipitate a fatal cardiac arrhythmia.
E. Phosphate
Phosphate replacement is seldom required in treating diabetic
ketoacidosis. However, if severe hypophosphatemia of < 1 mg/dL
(< 0.32 mmol/L) develops during insulin therapy, a small amount of
phosphate can be replaced per hour as the potassium salt.
Correction of hypophosphatemia helps restore the buffering
capacity of the plasma, thereby facilitating renal excretion of
hydrogen. It also corrects the impaired oxygen dissociation from
hemoglobin by regenerating 2,3-diphosphoglycerate. However,
three randomized studies in which phosphate was replaced in only
half of a group of patients with diabetic ketoacidosis did not show
any apparent clinical benefit from phosphate administration.
Moreover, attempts to use potassium phosphate as the sole means
of replacing potassium have led to a number of reported cases of
severe hypocalcemia with tetany. To minimize the risk of inducing
tetany from too-rapid replacement of phosphate, the average deficit
of 40–50 mmol of phosphate should be replaced intravenously at a
rate no> 3–4 mmol/h in a 60–70-kg person. A stock solution
(Abbott) provides a mixture of 1.12 g KH2PO4 and 1.18 g
K2HPO4 in a 5-mL single-dose vial (this equals 22 mmol of
potassium and 15 mmol of phosphate). One-half of this vial (2.5
mL) should be added to 1 L of either 0.45% saline or 5% dextrose
in water. Two liters of this solution, infused at a rate of 400 mL/h,
will correct the phosphate deficit at the optimal rate of 3 mmol/h
while providing 4.4 mEq of potassium per hour. (Additional
potassium should be administered as potassium chloride to provide
a total of 10–30 mEq of potassium per hour, as noted above.) If the
serum phosphate remains below 2.5 mg/dL after this infusion, a
repeat 5-hour infusion can be given.
F. Hyperchloremic Acidosis During Therapy
Because of the considerable loss of keto acids in the urine during
the initial phase of therapy, substrate for subsequent regeneration of
bicarbonate is lost and correction of the total bicarbonate deficit is
hampered. A portion of the bicarbonate deficit is replaced with
chloride ions infused in large amounts as saline to correct the
dehydration. In most patients, as the ketoacidosis clears during
insulin replacement, a hyperchloremic, low-bicarbonate pattern
emerges with a normal anion gap. This is a relatively benign
condition that reverses itself over the subsequent 12–24 hours once
intravenous saline is no longer being administered.
G. Treatment of Associated Infection
Antibiotics are prescribed as indicated. Cholecystitis and
pyelonephritis may be particularly severe in these patients.
H. Transition to Subcutaneous Insulin Regimen
Once the diabetic ketoacidosis is controlled and the patient is
awake and able to eat, subcutaneous insulin therapy can be
initiated. The patient with type 1 diabetes may have persistent
significant tissue insulin resistance and may require a total daily
insulin dose of approximately 0.6 units/kg. The amount of insulin
required in the previous 8 hours can also be helpful in estimating the
initial insulin doses. Half the total daily dose can be given as a long-
acting basal insulin and the other half as short-acting insulin
premeals. The patient should receive subcutaneous basal insulin and
rapid-acting insulin analog with the first meal and the insulin infusion
discontinued an hour later. The overlap of the subcutaneous insulin
action and insulin infusion is necessary to prevent relapse of the
diabetic ketoacidosis. The increased insulin resistance is only
present for a few days, and it is important to reduce both the basal
and bolus insulins to avoid hypoglycemia. A patient with new-onset
type 1 diabetes usually still has significant beta cell function and may
not need any basal insulin and only very low doses of rapid-acting
insulin before meals after recovery from the ketoacidosis. Patients
with type 2 diabetes and diabetes ketoacidosis due to severe illness
may initially require insulin therapy but can often transition back to
oral agents during outpatient follow-up.
 Prognosis
Low-dose insulin infusion and fluid and electrolyte replacement
combined with careful monitoring of patients’ clinical and laboratory
responses to therapy have dramatically reduced the mortality rates
of diabetic ketoacidosis to < 5%. However, this complication
remains a significant risk in the aged who have mortality rates >
20% and in patients in profound coma in whom treatment has been
delayed. Acute myocardial infarction and infarction of the bowel
following prolonged hypotension worsen the outlook. A serious
prognostic sign is end-stage chronic kidney disease, and prior
kidney dysfunction worsens the prognosis considerably because the
kidney plays a key role in compensating for massive pH and
electrolyte abnormalities. Symptomatic cerebral edema occurs
primarily in the pediatric population. Risk factors for its
development include severe baseline acidosis, rapid correction of
hyperglycemia, and excess volume administration in the first 4
hours. Onset of headache or deterioration in mental status during
treatment should lead to consideration of this complication.
Intravenous mannitol at a dosage of 1–2 g/kg given over 15 minutes
is the mainstay of treatment. Excess crystalloid infusion can
precipitate pulmonary edema. Acute respiratory distress syndrome
is a rare complication of treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis.
After recovery and stabilization, patients should be instructed on
how to recognize the early symptoms and signs of ketoacidosis.
Urine ketones or capillary blood β-hydroxybutyrate should be
measured in patients with signs of infection or in insulin pump-
treated patients when capillary blood glucose remains unexpectedly
and persistently high. When heavy ketonuria and glycosuria persist
on several successive examinations, supplemental regular insulin
should be administered and liquid foods such as lightly salted
tomato juice and broth should be ingested to replenish fluids and
electrolytes. The patient should be instructed to contact the clinician
if ketonuria persists, and especially if there is vomiting and inability
to keep down fluids. Recurrent episodes of severe ketoacidosis
often indicate poor compliance with the insulin regimen, and these
patients will require intensive counseling.
Kitabchi AE et al. Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009 Jul;32(7):1335–43. [PMID:
19564476]
 
Savage MW et al. Joint British Diabetes Societies guideline for the
management of diabetic ketoacidosis. Diabet Med. 2011 Jan 22.
[Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21255074].
http://www.diabetologists-
abcd.org.uk/JBDS_DKA_Management.pdf
 
Weber C et al. Prevention of diabetic ketoacidosis and self-
monitoring of ketone bodies: an overview. Curr Med Res Opin.
2009 May;25(5):1197–207. [PMID: 19327102]
 
HYPERGLYCEMIC HYPEROSMOLAR STATE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hyperglycemia > 600 mg/dL.
 Serum osmolality > 310 mosm/kg.
 No acidosis; blood pH above 7.3.
 Serum bicarbonate > 15 mEq/L.
 Normal anion gap (< 14 mEq/L).
 
 General Considerations
This second most common form of hyperglycemic coma is
characterized by severe hyperglycemia in the absence of significant
ketosis, with hyperosmolality and dehydration. It occurs in patients
with mild or occult diabetes, and most patients are typically middle-
aged to elderly. Accurate figures are not available as to its true
incidence, but from data on hospital discharges it is rarer than
diabetic ketoacidosis even in older age groups. Lethargy and
confusion develop as serum osmolality exceeds 310 mosm/kg, and
coma can occur if osmolality exceeds 320–330 mosm/kg.
Underlying chronic kidney disease or congestive heart failure is
common, and the presence of either worsens the prognosis. A
precipitating event such as infection, myocardial infarction, stroke,
or recent operation is often present. Certain medications such as
phenytoin, diazoxide, corticosteroids, and diuretics have been
implicated in its pathogenesis, as have procedures associated with
glucose loading such as peritoneal dialysis.
 Pathogenesis
A partial or relative insulin deficiency may initiate the syndrome by
reducing glucose utilization of muscle, fat, and liver while inducing
hyperglucagonemia and increasing hepatic glucose output. With
massive glycosuria, obligatory water loss ensues. If a patient is
unable to maintain adequate fluid intake because of an associated
acute or chronic illness or has suffered excessive fluid loss, marked
dehydration results. As plasma volume contracts, chronic kidney
disease develops, and the resultant limitation of renal glucose loss
leads to increasingly higher blood glucose concentrations. Severe
hyperosmolality develops that causes mental confusion and finally
coma. It is not clear why ketosis is virtually absent under these
conditions of insulin insufficiency, although reduced levels of growth
hormone may be a factor, along with portal vein insulin
concentrations sufficient to restrain ketogenesis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Onset may be insidious over a period of days or weeks, with
weakness, polyuria, and polydipsia. The lack of features of
ketoacidosis may retard recognition of the syndrome and delay
therapy until dehydration becomes more profound than in
ketoacidosis. Reduced intake of fluid is not an uncommon historical
feature, due to either inappropriate lack of thirst, nausea, or
inaccessibility of fluids to elderly, bedridden patients. Lethargy and
confusion develop, progressing to convulsions and deep coma.
Physical examination confirms the presence of profound
dehydration in a lethargic or comatose patient without Kussmaul
respirations.
B. Laboratory Findings
(Table 27–14.) Severe hyperglycemia is present, with blood
glucose values ranging from 600 mg/dL to 2400 mg/dL. In mild
cases, where dehydration is less severe, dilutional hyponatremia as
well as urinary sodium losses may reduce serum sodium to 120–
125 mEq/L, which protects to some extent against extreme
hyperosmolality. However, as dehydration progresses, serum
sodium can exceed 140 mEq/L, producing serum osmolality
readings of 330–440 mosm/kg. Ketosis and acidosis are usually
absent or mild. Prerenal azotemia is the rule, with serum urea
nitrogen elevations over 100 mg/dL being typical.
 Treatment
A. Fluid Replacement
Fluid replacement is of paramount importance in treating nonketotic
hyperglycemic coma. The onset of hyperosmolarity is more
insidious in elderly people without ketosis than in younger
individuals with high serum ketone levels, which provide earlier
indicators of severe illness (vomiting, rapid deep breathing, acetone
odor, etc). Consequently, diagnosis and treatment are often delayed
until fluid deficit has reached levels of 6–10 L.
If hypovolemia is present as evidenced by hypotension and
oliguria, fluid therapy should be initiated with 0.9% saline. In all
other cases, 0.45% saline appears to be preferable as the initial
replacement solution because the body fluids of these patients are
markedly hyperosmolar. As much as 4–6 L of fluid may be required
in the first 8–10 hours. Careful monitoring of the patient is required
for proper sodium and water replacement. Once blood glucose
reaches 250 mg/dL, fluid replacement should include 5% dextrose
in either water, 0.45% saline solution, or 0.9% saline solution. The
rate of dextrose infusion should be adjusted to maintain glycemic
levels of 250–300 mg/dL in order to reduce the risk of cerebral
edema. An important end point of fluid therapy is to restore urinary
output to 50 mL/h or more.
B. Insulin
Less insulin may be required to reduce the hyperglycemia in
nonketotic patients as compared to those with diabetic ketoacidotic
coma. In fact, fluid replacement alone can reduce hyperglycemia
considerably by correcting the hypovolemia, which then increases
both glomerular filtration and renal excretion of glucose. An initial
dose of 0.15 unit/kg is followed by an insulin infusion of 0.1
units/kg/h, which is titrated to lower blood glucose levels by 50–70
mg/dL per hour.
C. Potassium
With the absence of acidosis, there may be no initial hyper-kalemia
unless associated end-stage chronic kidney disease is present. This
results in less severe total potassium depletion than in diabetic
ketoacidosis, and less potassium replacement is therefore needed.
However, because initial serum potassium is usually not elevated
and because it declines rapidly as a result of insulin's effect on
driving potassium intracellularly, it has been recommended that
potassium replacement be initiated earlier than in ketotic patients,
assuming that no chronic kidney disease or oliguria is present.
Potassium chloride (10 mEq/L) can be added to the initial bottle of
fluids administered if the patient's serum potassium is not elevated.
D. Phosphate
If severe hypophosphatemia (serum phosphate < 1 mg/dL [< 0.32
mmol/L]) develops during insulin therapy, phosphate replacement
can be given as described for ketoacidotic patients (at 3 mmol/h).
 Prognosis
The overall mortality rate of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
coma is more than ten times that of diabetic ketoacidosis, chiefly
because of its higher incidence in older patients, who may have
compromised cardiovascular systems or associated major illnesses
and whose dehydration is often excessive because of delays in
recognition and treatment. (When patients are matched for age, the
prognoses of these two hyperglycemic emergencies are reasonably
comparable.) When prompt therapy is instituted, the mortality rate
can be reduced from nearly 50% to that related to the severity of
coexistent disorders.
After the patient is stabilized, the appropriate form of long-term
management of the diabetes must be determined. Insulin treatment
should be continued for a few weeks but patients usually recover
sufficient endogenous insulin secretion to make a trial of diet or diet
plus oral agents worthwhile. When the episode occurs in a patient
who has known diabetes, then education of the patient and
caregivers should be instituted. They should be taught how to
recognize situations (nausea and vomiting, infection) that predispose
to recurrence of the hyperglycemic, hyper-osmolar state, as well as
detailed information on how to prevent the escalating dehydration
that culminates in hyper-osmolar coma (small sips of sugar-free
liquids, increase in usual hypoglycemic therapy, or early contact
with the clinician).
American Diabetes Association. Hyperglycemic crises in patients
with diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2001 Jan;24(1):154–61.
[PMID: 11221603]
 
Kearney T et al. Diabetic and endocrine emergencies. Postgrad
Med J. 2007 Feb;83(976):79–86. [PMID: 17308209]
 
LACTIC ACIDOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe acidosis with hyperventilation.
 Blood pH below 7.30.
 Serum bicarbonate < 15 mEq/L.
 Anion gap > 15 mEq/L.
 Absent serum ketones.
 Serum lactate > 5 mmol/L.
 
 General Considerations
Lactic acidosis is characterized by accumulation of excess lactic
acid in the blood. Normally, the principal sources of this acid are
the erythrocytes (which lack enzymes for aerobic oxidation),
skeletal muscle, skin, and brain. Conversion of lactic acid to glucose
and its oxidation principally by the liver but also by the kidneys
represent the chief pathways for its removal. Overproduction of
lactic acid (tissue hypoxia), deficient removal (hepatic failure), or
both (circulatory collapse) can cause accumulation. Lactic acidosis
is not uncommon in any severely ill patient suffering from cardiac
decompensation, respiratory or hepatic failure, septicemia, or
infarction of bowel or extremities. With the discontinuance of
phenformin therapy in the United States, lactic acidosis in patients
with diabetes mellitus has become uncommon but occasionally
occurs in metformin-treated patients (see above) and it still must be
considered in the acidotic diabetic, especially if the patient is
seriously ill. Most cases of metformin-associated lactic acidosis
occur in patients in whom there were contraindications to the use of
metformin, in particular renal failure.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The main clinical feature of lactic acidosis is marked
hyperventilation. When lactic acidosis is secondary to tissue hypoxia
or vascular collapse, the clinical presentation is variable, being that
of the prevailing catastrophic illness. However, in the idiopathic, or
spontaneous, variety, the onset is rapid (usually over a few hours),
blood pressure is normal, peripheral circulation is good, and there is
no cyanosis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Plasma bicarbonate and blood pH are quite low, indicating the
presence of severe metabolic acidosis. Ketones are usually absent
from plasma and urine or at least not prominent. The first clue may
be a high anion gap (serum sodium minus the sum of chloride and
bicarbonate anions [in mEq/L] should be no > 15). A higher value
indicates the existence of an abnormal compartment of anions. If
this cannot be clinically explained by an excess of keto acids
(diabetes), inorganic acids (uremia), or anions from medication
overdosage (salicylates, methyl alcohol, ethylene glycol), then lactic
acidosis is probably the correct diagnosis. (See also Chapter 21.)
In the absence of azotemia, hyperphosphatemia may be a clue to
the presence of lactic acidosis for reasons that are not clear. The
diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating, in a sample of blood that is
promptly chilled and separated, a plasma lactic acid concentration
of 5 mmol/L or higher (values as high as 30 mmol/L have been
reported). Normal plasma values average 1 mmol/L, with a normal
lactate/pyruvate ratio of 10:1. This ratio is greatly exceeded in lactic
acidosis.1
 Treatment
Aggressive treatment of the precipitating cause of lactic acidosis is
the main component of therapy, such as ensuring adequate
oxygenation and vascular perfusion of tissues. Empiric antibiotic
coverage for sepsis should be given after culture samples are
obtained in any patient in whom the cause of the lactic acidosis is
not apparent.
Alkalinization with intravenous sodium bicarbonate to keep the
pH above 7.2 has been recommended by some in the emergency
treatment of lactic acidosis; as much as 2000 mEq in 24 hours has
been used. However, there is no evidence that the mortality rate is
favorably affected by administering bicarbonate, and its use remains
controversial. Hemodialysis may be useful in cases where large
sodium loads are poorly tolerated and in cases associated with
metformin toxicity.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate of spontaneous lactic acidosis is high. The
prognosis in most cases is that of the primary disorder that
produced the lactic acidosis.
Fitzgerald E et al. Metformin associated lactic acidosis. BMJ.
2009 Sep 16;339:b3660. [PMID: 19759079]
 
Forsythe SM et al. Sodium bicarbonate for the treatment of lactic
acidosis. Chest. 2000 Jan;117(1):260–7. [PMID: 10631227]
 
Goergen SK et al. Systematic review of current guidelines, and
their evidence base, on risk of lactic acidosis after administration of
contrast medium for patients receiving metformin. Radiology. 2010
Jan;254(1):261–9. [PMID: 20032157]
 
Jansen TC et al. Blood lactate monitoring in critically ill patients: a
systematic health technology assessment. Crit Care Med. 2009
Oct;37(10):2827–39. [PMID: 19707124]
 
Salpeter SR et al. Risk of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis with
metformin use in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2010 Jan 20; (1):CD002967. [PMID: 20091535]
 
____________
1In collecting samples, it is essential to rapidly chill and separate the
blood in order to remove red cells, whose continued glycolysis at
room temperature is a common source of error in reports of high
plasma lactate. Frozen plasma remains stable for subsequent assay.
 
THE HYPOGLYCEMIC STATES
 
Spontaneous hypoglycemia in adults is of two principal types:
fasting and postprandial. Symptoms begin at plasma glucose levels
in the range of 60 mg/dL and impairment of brain function at
approximately 50 mg/dL. Fasting hypoglycemia is often subacute or
chronic and usually presents with neuroglycopenia as its principal
manifestation; post-prandial hypoglycemia is relatively acute and is
often heralded by symptoms of neurogenic autonomic discharge
(sweating, palpitations, anxiety, tremulousness).
 Differential Diagnosis (Table 27–15)
Fasting hypoglycemia may occur in certain endocrine disorders,
such as hypopituitarism, Addison disease, or myxedema; in
disorders related to liver malfunction, such as acute alcoholism or
liver failure; and in instances of end-stage chronic kidney disease,
particularly in patients requiring dialysis. These conditions are
usually obvious, with hypoglycemia being only a secondary feature.
When fasting hypoglycemia is a primary manifestation developing in
adults without apparent endocrine disorders or inborn metabolic
diseases from childhood, the principal diagnostic possibilities
include: (1) hyperinsulinism, due to either pancreatic B cell tumors,
iatrogenic or surreptitious administration of insulin or sulfonylurea
and (2) hypoglycemia due to extra-pancreatic tumors.
 
Table 27–15. Common causes of hypoglycemia in adults.1
 
Fasting hypoglycemia
     Pancreatic B cell tumor
     Surreptitious administration of insulin or sulfonylureas
     Extrapancreatic tumors
Postprandial hypoglycemia
     Alimentary
     Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia
syndrome
     Functional
     Occult diabetes mellitus
Alcohol-related hypoglycemia Immunopathologic
hypoglycemia
     Idiopathic anti-insulin antibodies (which release their
bound insulin)
     Antibodies to insulin receptors (which act as agonists)
Drug-induced hypoglycemia
1In the absence of clinically obvious endocrine, renal, or hepatic disorders
and exclusive of diabetes mellitus treated with hypoglycemic agents.
Postprandial (reactive) hypoglycemia may be seen after
gastrointestinal surgery and is particularly associated with the
dumping syndrome after gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass surgery. Occult diabetes very occasionally present with
postprandial hypoglycemia. Rarely, it occurs with islet cell
hyperplasia—the 
so-called 
noninsulinoma 
pancreatogenous
hypoglycemia syndrome.
Alcohol-related hypoglycemia is due to hepatic glycogen
depletion 
combined 
with 
alcohol-mediated 
inhibition 
of
gluconeogenesis. It is most common in malnourished alcohol
abusers but can occur in anyone who is unable to ingest food after
an acute alcoholic episode followed by gastritis and vomiting.
Immunopathologic hypoglycemia is an extremely rare
condition in which anti-insulin antibodies or antibodies to insulin
receptors develop spontaneously. In the former case, the
mechanism appears to relate to increasing dissociation of insulin
from circulating pools of bound insulin. When antibodies to insulin
receptors are found, most patients do not have hypoglycemia but
rather severe insulin-resistant diabetes and acanthosis nigricans.
However, during the course of the disease in these patients, certain
anti-insulin receptor antibodies with agonist activity mimicking insulin
action may develop, producing severe hypoglycemia.
HYPOGLYCEMIA DUE TO PANCREATIC B CELL
TUMORS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hypoglycemic symptoms—frequently neuroglycopenic
(confusion, blurred vision, diplopia, anxiety, convulsions).
 Immediate recovery upon administration of glucose.
 Blood glucose < 40 mg/dL with a serum insulin level of 6
microunit/mL or more.
 
 General Considerations
Fasting hypoglycemia in an otherwise healthy, well-nourished adult
is rare and is most commonly due to an adenoma of the islets of
Langerhans. Ninety percent of such tumors are single and benign,
but multiple adenomas can occur as well as malignant tumors with
functional metastases. Adenomas may be familial, and multiple
adenomas have been found in conjunction with tumors of the
parathyroids and pituitary (MEN type 1 [MEN 1]).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The most important prerequisite to diagnosing an insulinoma is
simply to consider it, particularly in relatively healthy-appearing
persons who have fasting hypoglycemia associated with some
degree of central nervous system dysfunction such as confusion or
abnormal behavior. A delay in diagnosis can result in unnecessary
treatment for psychomotor epilepsy or psychiatric disorders and
may cause irreversible brain damage. In longstanding cases, obesity
can result as a consequence of overeating to relieve symptoms.
The so-called Whipple triad is characteristic of hypoglycemia
regardless of the cause. It consists of: (1) a history of hypoglycemic
symptoms; (2) an associated fasting blood glucose of 45 mg/dL or
less; and (3) immediate recovery upon administration of glucose.
The hypoglycemic symptoms in insulinoma often develop in the
early morning or after missing a meal. Occasionally, they occur after
exercise. They typically begin with evidence of central nervous
system glucose lack and can include blurred vision or diplopia,
headache, feelings of detachment, slurred speech, and weakness.
Personality and mental changes vary from anxiety to psychotic
behavior, and neurologic deterioration can result in convulsions or
coma. Sweating and palpitations may not occur.
Hypoglycemic unawareness is very common in patients with
insulinoma. They adapt to chronic hypoglycemia by increasing their
efficiency in transporting glucose across the blood-brain barrier,
which masks awareness that their blood glucose is approaching
critically low levels. Counterregulatory hormonal responses as well
as neurogenic symptoms such as tremor, sweating, and palpitations
are therefore blunted during hypoglycemia. If lack of these warning
symptoms prevents recognition of the need to eat to correct the
problem, patients can lapse into severe hypoglycemic coma.
However, symptoms and normal hormone responses during
experimental insulin-induced hypoglycemia have been shown to be
restored after successful surgical removal of the insulinoma.
Presumably with return of euglycemia, adaptive effects on glucose
transport into the brain are corrected, and thresholds of
counterregulatory responses and neurogenic autonomic symptoms
are therefore restored to normal.
B. Laboratory Findings
B cell adenomas do not reduce secretion in the presence of
hypoglycemia, and the critical diagnostic test is to demonstrate
inappropriately elevated serum insulin levels at a time when
hypoglycemia is present. A reliable serum insulin level
(radioimmunoassay) of 6 microunit/mL or more in the presence of
blood glucose values below 40 mg/dL is diagnostic of inappropriate
hyperinsulinism. Immunochemiluminometric assays (ICMA) have
sensitivities of < 1 microunit/mL, and with these assays, the cutoffs
for insulinomas is insulin level of 3 microunit/mL or higher. Other
causes of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia must be considered,
including factitious administration of insulin or sulfonylureas.
Factitious use of insulin will result in suppression of endogenous
insulin secretion and a low C-peptide levels. An elevated circulating
proinsulin level in the presence of fasting hypoglycemia is
characteristic of most B cell adenomas and does not occur in
factitious hyperinsulinism. Thus, C-peptide and proinsulin levels (by
ICMA) of > 200 pmol/L and > 5 pmol/L, respectively, are
characteristic of insulinomas.
In patients with epigastric distress, a history of renal calculi, or
menstrual or erectile dysfunction, a serum calcium, gastrin, or
prolactin level may be useful in screening for MEN 1 associated
with insulinoma.
C. Diagnostic Tests
If the history is consistent with episodic spontaneous hypoglycemia,
patients should be given a home blood glucose monitor and advised
to monitor blood glucose levels at the time of symptoms and before
consumption of carbohydrates, if this can be done safely. Patients
with insulinomas frequently report fingerstick blood glucose levels
between 40 mg/dL and 50 mg/dL at the time of symptoms. The
diagnosis, however, cannot be made based on a finger-stick blood
glucose. It is necessary to have a low laboratory glucose
concomitantly with elevated plasma insulin, proinsulin, and C-
peptide levels and a negative sulfonylurea screen. When patients
give a history of symptoms after only a short period of food
withdrawal or with exercise, then an outpatient assessment can be
attempted. The patient should be brought by a family member to the
office after an overnight fast and observed in the office. Activity
such as walking should be encouraged and fingerstick blood
glucose measured repeatedly during observation. If symptoms
occur or fingerstick blood glucose is below 50 mg/dL then samples
for plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin, sulfonylurea
screen, serum ketones, and antibodies to insulin should be sent. If
outpatient observation does not result in symptoms or hypoglycemia
and if the clinical suspicion remains high, then the patient should
undergo an inpatient supervised 72-hour fast. A suggested protocol
for the supervised fast is shown in Table 27–16.
 
Table 27–16. suggested hospital protocol for supervised fast in
diagnosis of insulinoma.
 
(1) Obtain baseline serum glucose, insulin, proinsulin, and
C-peptide measurements at onset of fast and place
intravenous cannula.
 
(2) Permit only calorie-free and caffeine-free fluids and
encourage supervised activity (such as walking).
 
(3) Measure urine for ketones at the beginning and every
12 hours and at end of fast.
 
(4) Obtain capillary glucose measurements with a
reflectance meter every 4 hours until values < 60 mg/dL
are obtained. Then increase the frequency of fingersticks
to each hour, and when capillary glucose value is < 49
mg/dL send a venous blood sample to the laboratory for
serum glucose, insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide
measurements. Check frequently for manifestations of
neuroglycopenia.
 
(5) If symptoms of hypoglycemia occur or if a laboratory
value of serum glucose is < 45 mg/dL, or if 72 hours have
elapsed then conclude the fast with a final blood sample
for serum glucose, insulin, proinsulin, C-peptide, β-
hydroxybutyrate or acetone and sulfonylurea
measurements. Then give oral fast-acting carbohydrate
followed by a meal. If the patient is confused or unable to
take oral agents, then administer 50 mL of 50% dextrose
intravenously over 3 to 5 minutes. Do not conclude a fast
based simply on a capillary blood glucose measurement
—wait for the laboratory glucose value—unless the patient
is very symptomatic and it would be dangerous to wait.
 
In 30% of patients with insulinoma, the blood glucose levels often
drop below 40 mg/dL after an overnight fast, but some patients
require up to 72 hours to develop symptomatic hypoglycemia.
However, the term “72-hour fast” is actually a misnomer in most
cases since the fast should be immediately terminated as soon as
symptoms appear and laboratory confirmation of hypoglycemia is
available. In normal male subjects, the blood glucose does not fall
below 55–60 mg/dL during a 3-day fast. In contrast, in normal
premenopausal women who have fasted for only 24 hours, the
plasma glucose may fall normally to such an extent that it can reach
values as low as 35 mg/dL. In these cases, however, the women
are not symptomatic, presumably owing to the development of
sufficient ketonemia to supply energy needs to the brain. Insulinoma
patients, on the other hand, become symptomatic when plasma
glucose drops to sub-normal levels, since inappropriate insulin
secretion restricts ketone formation. Moreover, the demonstration
of a non-suppressed insulin level ≥ 6 microunit/mL using a RIA
assay (> 3 microunit/mL using an ICMA assay) in the presence of
hypoglycemia suggests the diagnosis of insulinoma. If hypoglycemia
does not develop in a male patient after fasting for up to 72 hours—
and particularly when this prolonged fast is terminated with a period
of moderate exercise—insulinoma must be considered an unlikely
diagnosis.
Stimulation with pancreatic B cell secretagogues such as
tolbutamide, glucagon, or leucine has been devised to demonstrate
exaggerated and prolonged insulin secretion in the presence of
insulinomas. However, because insulin-secreting tumors have a
wide range of granule content and degrees of differentiation, they
are variably responsive to these secretagogues; and a negative
response does not necessarily rule out an insulinoma. For these
reasons, stimulation tests are not recommended in the diagnostic
work-up of insulinoma.
D. Preoperative Localization of B Cell Tumors
After the diagnosis of insulinoma has been unequivocally made by
clinical and laboratory findings, studies to localize the tumor should
be initiated. The focus of attention should be directed to the
pancreas since that is where virtually all insulinomas originate.
Because of the small size of these tumors (averaging 1.5 cm in
diameter in one large series), imaging studies do not necessarily
identify all of them. A pancreatic dual phase helical CT scan with
thin section can identify 82–94% of the lesions. MRI scans with
gadolinium can be helpful in detecting a tumor in 85% of cases. One
case report suggests that diffusion-weighted MRI can be useful for
detecting and localizing small insulinomas, especially for those with
no hypervascular pattern. The imaging study used will depend on
local availability and local radiologic skill. If the imaging study is
normal, then an endoscopic ultrasound should be performed. In
experienced hands, about 80–90% of tumors can be detected with
this procedure. Fine-needle aspiration of the identified lesion can be
attempted to confirm the presence of a neuroendocrine tumor. If the
tumor is not identified or the imaging result is equivocal, then the
patient should undergo selective calcium-stimulated angiography,
which has been reported to localize the tumor to a particular region
of the pancreas approximately about 90% of the time. In this test,
angiography is combined with injections of calcium gluconate into
the gastroduodenal, splenic, and superior mesenteric arteries, and
insulin levels are measured in the hepatic vein effluent. The
procedure is performed after an overnight fast. Calcium gluconate
10% solution diluted to a volume of 5 mL with 0.95% saline is
bolused into the selected artery at a dose of 0.0125 mmol
calcium/kg (0.005 mmol calcium/kg for obese patients). Small
samples of blood (5 mL) are taken from the hepatic effluent just
before and at 20, 40, and 60 seconds after the calcium injection.
Fingerstick blood glucose levels are measured at intervals and a
dextrose infusion is maintained throughout the procedure to prevent
hypoglycemia. Calcium stimulates insulin release from insulinomas
but not normal islets, and so a step-up from baseline in insulin levels
at 20, 40, or 60 seconds (twofold or greater) regionalizes the
source of the hyperinsulinism to the head of the pancreas for the
gastroduodenal artery, the uncinate process for the superior
mesenteric artery, and the body and tail of the pancreas for the
splenic artery calcium infusions. In a single insulinoma, the response
is in one artery alone unless the tumor resides in an area fed by two
arteries or if there are multiple insulinomas (eg, in MEN 1). Patients
who 
have 
diffuse 
islet 
hyperplasia 
(the 
noninsulinoma
pancreatogenous hypoglycemia syndrome) will have positive
responses in multiple arteries. Because diazoxide may interfere with
this test, it should be discontinued for at least 48–72 hours before
sampling. Patients should be closely monitored during the procedure
to avoid hypoglycemia (as well as hyperglycemia, which could
affect insulin gradients). These studies combined with careful
intraoperative ultra-sonography and palpation by a surgeon
experienced in insulinoma surgery identifies up to 98% of tumors.
 Treatment
A. Surgical Measures
It is imperative that the surgeon be convinced that the diagnosis of
insulinoma has been unequivocally made by clinical and laboratory
findings. Only then should surgery be considered, as there is no
justification for exploratory operation—just as there is none for the
use of current localization techniques as a preoperative diagnostic
tool. Resection by a surgeon with previous experience in removing
pancreatic B cell tumors is the treatment of choice. In patients with
a single benign adenoma, 90–95% have a successful cure at the first
surgical attempt when intraoperative ultrasound is used by a skilled
surgeon. Blood glucose should be monitored throughout surgery,
and 10% dextrose in water should be infused at a rate of 100 mL/h
or faster. In cases where the diagnosis has been established but no
adenoma is located after careful palpation and use of intraoperative
ultrasound, it is no longer advisable to blindly resect the body and
tail of the pancreas, since a nonpalpable tumor missed by ultrasound
is most likely embedded within the fleshy head of the pancreas that
is left behind with subtotal resections. Most surgeons prefer to close
the incision and schedule a selective arterial calcium stimulation with
hepatic venous sampling to locate the tumor site prior to a repeat
operation. Laparoscopy using ultrasound and enucleation has been
successful with a single tumor of the body or tail of the pancreas,
but open surgery remains necessary for tumors in the head of the
pancreas.
B. Diet and Medical Therapy
In patients with inoperable functioning islet cell carcinoma and in
approximately 5–10% of MEN 1 cases when subtotal removal of
the pancreas has failed to produce cure, reliance on frequent
feedings is necessary. Since most tumors are not responsive to
glucose, carbohydrate feedings every 2–3 hours are usually
effective in preventing hypoglycemia, although obesity may become
a problem. Diazoxide, 300–600 mg (or 3 mg to 8 mg/kg; 50
mg/mL oral suspension) daily orally in two or three divided doses, is
the treatment of choice. Hydrochlorothiazide, 25–50 mg daily,
should also be prescribed to counteract the sodium retention and
edema secondary to diazoxide therapy as well as to potentiate its
hyperglycemic effect. If patients are unable to tolerate diazoxide
because of gastrointestinal upset, hirsutism, or edema, the calcium
channel blocker verapamil may be beneficial in view of its inhibitory
effect on insulin release from insulinoma cells. Octreotide, a potent
long-acting synthetic octapeptide analog of somatostatin, has been
used to inhibit release of hormones from a number of endocrine
tumors. A dose of 50 mcg of octreotide injected subcutaneously
twice daily has been tried in cases where surgery failed to remove
the source of hyperinsulinism. However, its effectiveness is limited
since its affinity for somatostatin receptors of the pancreatic B cell is
very much less than for those of the anterior pituitary somatotrophs
for which it was originally designed as treatment for acromegaly.
When hypoglycemia persists after attempted surgical removal of the
insulinoma and if diazoxide or verapamil is poorly tolerated or
ineffective, multiple small feedings may be the only recourse until
more selective somatostatin receptor agonists are available.
Streptozocin can decrease insulin secretion in islet cell carcinomas,
and effective doses have been delivered via selective arterial
catheter so that the undue renal toxicity that characterized early
experience is less of a problem.
 Prognosis
When insulinoma is diagnosed early and cured surgically, complete
recovery is likely, although brain damage following prolonged
severe hypoglycemia is not reversible. A significant increase in
survival rate has been shown in streptozocin-treated patients with
islet cell carcinoma, with reduction in tumor mass as well as
decreased hyperinsulinism.
Cryer PE et al. Evaluation and management of adult hypoglycemic
disorders: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Mar;94(3):709–28. [PMID: 19088155]
 
Kapoor RR et al. Advances in the diagnosis and management of
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab.
2009 Feb;5(2):101–12. [PMID: 19165222]
 
Mathur A et al. Insulinoma. Surg Clin North Am. 2009 Oct;
89(5):1105–21. [PMID: 19836487]
 
Tucker ON et al. The management of insulinoma. Br J Surg. 2006
Mar;93(3):264–75. [PMID: 16498592]
 
NONISLET CELL TUMOR HYPOGLYCEMIA
These rare causes of hypoglycemia include mesenchymal tumors
such as retroperitoneal sarcomas, hepatocellular carcinomas,
adrenocortical carcinomas, and miscellaneous epithelial-type
tumors. The tumors are frequently large and readily palpated or
visualized on CT scans or MRI.
In many cases the hypoglycemia is due to the expression and
release of an incompletely processed insulin-like growth factor 2
(IGF-2) by the tumor. This immature form of the IGF-II molecule
(pro-IGF-2 or “big IGF-2”) binds IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-
3) but not to the acid-labile subunit. As a consequence, this pro-
IGF-II remains active and binds to insulin receptors in muscle to
promote glucose transport and to insulin receptors in liver and
kidney to reduce glucose output. It also binds to receptors for IGF-
1 in the pancreatic B cell to inhibit insulin secretion and in the
pituitary to suppress growth hormone release. With the reduction of
growth hormone, there is a consequent lowering of IGF-1 levels as
well as IGFBP-3 and acid-labile subunit.
The diagnosis is supported by laboratory documentation of
serum insulin levels below 5 mcU/mL with plasma glucose levels of
45 mg/dL or lower. Values for growth hormone and IGF-1 are also
decreased. Levels of IGF-2 may be increased but often are
“normal” in quantity, despite the presence of the immature, higher-
molecular-weight form of IGF-2, which can only be detected by
special laboratory techniques.
The prognosis for these tumors is generally poor, and surgical
removal should be attempted when feasible. Dietary management of
the hypoglycemia is the mainstay of medical treatment, since
diazoxide is usually ineffective.
de Groot JW et al. Non-islet cell tumour-induced hypoglycaemia:
a review of the literature including two new cases. Endocr Relat
Cancer. 2007 Dec;14(4):979–93. [PMID: 18045950]
 
Escobar GA et al. Severe paraneoplastic hypoglycemia in a patient
with a gastrointestinal stromal tumor with an exon 9 mutation: a
case report. BMC Cancer. 2007 Jan 17;7:13. [PMID: 17229322]
 
POSTPRANDIAL HYPOGLYCEMIA
1. Hypoglycemia Following Gastric Surgery
Hypoglycemia sometimes develops in patients who have undergone
gastric surgery (eg, gastrectomy, vagotomy, Pyloroplasty,
gastrojejunostomy, Nissan fundoplication, Bilroth II procedure and
Roux-en-Y), especially when they consume foods containing high
levels of carbohydrates. This late dumping syndrome occurs about
1–3 hours after a meal and is a result of rapid delivery of high
concentration of carbohydrates in the proximal small bowel and
rapid absorption of glucose. The hyperinsulinemic response to the
high carbohydrate load causes hypoglycemia. The symptoms
include lightheadedness, sweating, confusion and even loss of
consciousness after eating a high carbohydrate meal. It is possible
that gastrointestinal hormones such as GLP-1 play a role in the
hyperinsulinemic response. The incidence of secondary dumping
syndrome declined with the advent of medical therapy for peptic
ulcer disease. There has been resurgence of cases, however, with
the popularity of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery for the
treatment of morbid obesity. There have been case reports that
some patients with Roux-en-Y–associated hypoglycemia have islet
hyperplasia; other studies report normal islet pathology. A careful
history may identify those patients who have a history of
hypoglycemia with exercise or when missing a meal, and these
individuals may require a formal 72-hour fast to rule out insulinoma.
Treatment for secondary dumping includes dietary modification, but
this may be difficult to sustain. Patients can try more frequent meals
with smaller portions of less rapidly digested carbohydrates. α-
Glucosidase therapy may be a useful adjunct to a low carbohydrate
diet. Octreotide 50 mcg administered subcutaneously two or three
times a day 30 minutes prior to each meal has been reported to
improve symptoms due to late dumping syndrome. Surgical
procedures to delay gastric emptying may also be considered.
2. Noninsulinoma Pancreatogenous Hypoglycemia Syndrome
(Islet Cell Hyperplasia)
In a very small number of patients with organic hyperinsulinism, islet
cell hyperplasia is present rather than an adenoma. This condition is
referred to as noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia
syndrome. 
These 
patients 
typically 
have 
documented
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after meals but not with fasting up to
72 hours. The patients have a positive response to calcium-
stimulated angiography. A gradient-guided partial pancreatectomy
leads to clinical remission, and the pathology of the pancreas shows
evidence of islet cell hyperplasia and nesidioblastosis. These
patients do not have mutations in the pancreatic islet beta-cell ATP-
sensitive potassium channel inward rectifier (Kir 6.2) and the
sulfonylurea receptor-1 (SUR1) genes, which have been reported in
children with familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.
3. Functional Alimentary Hypoglycemia
Patients have symptoms suggestive of increased sympathetic
activity, including anxiety, weakness, tremor, sweating or
palpitations after meals. Physical examination and laboratory tests
are normal. Previously, many of these patients underwent a 5-hour
oral glucose tolerance test and the detection of glucose levels in the
50–60 mg/dL range was thought to be responsible for the
symptoms; the recommended treatment was dietary modification. It
is now recognized that at least 10% of normal patients who do not
have any symptoms have nadir glucose levels < 50 mg/dL during a
4- to 6-hour oral glucose tolerance test. In a study comparing
responses to oral glucose tolerance test with a mixed meal test,
none of the patients who had plasma glucose levels < 50 mg/dL on
oral glucose had low glucose values with the mixed meal. Thus, it is
not recommended that these patients with symptoms suggestive of
increased sympathetic activity undergo either a prolonged oral
glucose tolerance test or a mixed meal test. Instead, the patients
should be given home blood glucose monitors (with memories) and
instructed to monitor fingerstick glucose levels at the time of
symptoms. Only patients who have symptoms when their fingerstick
blood glucose is low (< 50 mg/dL) and who have resolution of
symptoms when the glucose is raised by eating rapidly released
carbohydrate need additional evaluation. Patients who do not have
evidence for low glucose levels at time of symptoms are generally
reassured by their findings. Counseling and support should be the
mainstays in therapy, with dietary manipulation only an adjunct.
4. Occult Diabetes
This condition is characterized by a delay in early insulin release
from pancreatic B cells, resulting in initial exaggeration of
hyperglycemia during a glucose tolerance test. In response to this
hyperglycemia, an exaggerated insulin release produces a late
hypoglycemia 4–5 hours after ingestion of glucose. These patients
are often obese and frequently have a family history of diabetes
mellitus.
Patients with this type of postprandial hypoglycemia often
respond to reduced intake of refined sugars with multiple, spaced,
small feedings high in dietary fiber. In the obese, treatment is
directed at weight reduction to achieve ideal weight. These patients
should be considered to have prediabetes or early diabetes (type 1
or 2) and advised to have periodic medical evaluations.
5. Autoimmune Hypoglycemia
Patients with autoimmune hypoglycemia have early post-prandial
hyperglycemia followed by hypoglycemia 3–4 hours later. The
hypoglycemia is attributed to a dissociation of insulin-antibody
immune complexes, releasing free insulin.
The disorder is associated with methimazole treatment for Graves
disease, although it can also occur in patients treated with various
other sulfhydryl-containing medications (captopril, penicillamine) as
well as other drugs such as hydralazine, isoniazid, and
procainamide. In addition, it has been reported in patients with
autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and polymyositis as well as in multiple myeloma and
other plasma cell dyscrasias where paraproteins or antibodies
cross-react with insulin. There is also an association with the HLA
class II alleles (DRB1*0406, DQA1*0301, and DQB1*0302).
These alleles are 10 to 20 times more common in Japanese and
Korean populations, which explains why the disorder has been
reported mostly in Japanese patients.
High titers of insulin autoantibodies, usually IgG class, can be
detected. Insulin, proinsulin, and C-peptide levels may be elevated,
but the results may be erroneous because of the interference of the
insulin antibodies with the immunoassays for these peptides.
In most cases, the hypoglycemia is transient and usually resolves
spontaneously within 3–6 months of diagnosis, particularly when the
offending medications are stopped. The most consistent therapeutic
benefit in management of this syndrome has been achieved by
dietary treatment with small, frequent low-carbohydrate meals.
Prednisone (30–60 mg orally daily) has been used to lower the titer
of insulin antibodies.
ALCOHOL-RELATED HYPOGLYCEMIA
1. Fasting Hypoglycemia after Ethanol
During the postabsorptive state, normal plasma glucose is
maintained by hepatic glucose output derived from both
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. With prolonged starvation,
glycogen reserves become depleted within 18–24 hours and hepatic
glucose output becomes totally dependent on gluconeogenesis.
Under these circumstances, a blood concentration of ethanol as low
as 45 mg/dL can induce profound hypoglycemia by blocking
gluconeogenesis. Neuroglycopenia in a patient whose breath smells
of alcohol may be mistaken for alcoholic stupor. Prevention consists
of adequate food intake during ethanol ingestion. Therapy consists
of glucose administration to replenish glycogen stores until
gluconeogenesis resumes.
2. Postethanol Reactive Hypoglycemia
When sugar-containing soft drinks are used as mixers to dilute
alcohol in beverages (gin and tonic, rum and cola), there seems to
be a greater insulin release than when the soft drink alone is ingested
and a tendency for more of a late hypoglycemic overswing to occur
3–4 hours later. Prevention would consist of avoiding sugar mixers
while ingesting alcohol and ensuring supplementary food intake to
provide sustained absorption.
Kellogg TA et al. Postgastric bypass hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia syndrome: characterization and response to a
modified diet. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2008 Jul–Aug;4(4):492–9.
[PMID: 18656831]
 
Lupsa BC et al. Autoimmune forms of hypoglycemia. Medicine
(Baltimore). 2009 May;88(3):141–53. [PMID: 19440117]
 
Van de Wiel A. Diabetes mellitus and alcohol. Diabetes Metab
Res Rev. 2004 Jul–Aug;20(4):263–7. [PMID: 15250029]
 
FACTITIOUS HYPOGLYCEMIA
Factitious hypoglycemia may be difficult to document. A suspicion
of self-induced hypoglycemia is supported when the patient is
associated with the health professions or has access to insulin or
sulfonylurea medications taken by a diabetic member of the family.
The triad of hypoglycemia, high immunoreactive insulin, and
suppressed plasma C peptide immunoreactivity is pathognomonic of
exogenous insulin administration. Demonstration of circulating insulin
antibodies supports this diagnosis in suspected cases. When
sulfonylureas, repaglinide and nateglinide are suspected as a cause
of factitious hypoglycemia, a plasma level of these medications to
detect their presence may be required to distinguish laboratory
findings from those of insulinoma.
Charlton R et al. Munchausen's syndrome manifesting as factitious
hypoglycaemia. Diabetologia. 2001 Jun;44(6):784–5. [PMID:
11440375]
 
Hirshberg B et al. Repaglinide-induced factitious hypoglycemia. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Feb;86(2):475–7. [PMID:
11157993]
 
Trenque T et al. Prevalence of factitious hypoglycaemia associated
with sulphonylurea drugs in France in the year 2000. Br J Clin
Pharmacol. 2002 Nov;54(5):548. [PMID: 12445037]
 
HYPOGLYCEMIA DUE TO INSULIN RECEPTOR
ANTIBODIES
Hypoglycemia due to insulin receptor autoantibodies is also an
extremely rare syndrome; most cases have occurred in women
often with a history of autoimmune disease. Almost all of these
patients have also had episodes of insulin-resistant diabetes and
acanthosis nigri-cans. Their hypoglycemia may be either fasting or
postprandial and is often severe and is attributed to an agonistic
action of the antibody on the insulin receptor. Balance between the
antagonistic and agonistic effects of the antibodies determines
whether insulin-resistant diabetes or hypoglycemia occurs.
Hypoglycemia was found to respond to corticosteroid therapy but
not to plasmapheresis or immunosuppression.
Kim CH et al. Autoimmune hypoglycemia in a type 2 diabetic
patient with anti-insulin and insulin receptor antibodies. Diabetes
Care. 2004 Jan;27(1):288–9. [PMID: 14694017]
 
Yaturu S et al. Severe autoimmune hypoglycemia with insulin
antibodies necessitating plasmapheresis. Endocr Pract. 2004 Jan–
Feb;10(1):49–54. [PMID: 15251622]
 
MEDICATION-INDUCED HYPOGLYCEMIA
A number of medications apart from the sulfonylureas can
occasionally cause hypoglycemia. Common offenders include the
fluoroquinolones such as gatifloxacin and levofloxacin, pentamidine,
quinine, ACE inhibitors, salicylates and β-adrenergic blocking
agents. The fluoroquinolones, particularly gatifloxacin, has been
associated with both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. It is thought
that the drug acts on the ATP sensitive potassium channels in the
beta cell. Hypoglycemia is an early event, and hyperglycemia occurs
several days into therapy. Intravenous pentamidine is cytotoxic to
beta cells and causes acute hyperinsulinemia and hypoglycemia
followed by insulinopenia and hyperglycemia. Fasting patients taking
noncardioselective β-blockers can have an exaggerated
hypoglycemic response to starvation. The β-blockade inhibits fatty
acids and gluconeogenesis substrate release and reduces plasma
glucagon response. Therapy with ACE inhibitors increases the risk
of hypoglycemia in patients who are taking insulin or sulfonylureas
presumably because these drugs increase sensitivity to circulating
insulin by increasing blood flow to the muscle.
Marks V et al. Drug-induced hypoglycemia. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am. Sep;28(3):555–77. [PMID: 10500931]
 
Rave K et al. Enhancement of blood glucose lowering effect of a
sulfonylurea when coadministered with an ACE inhibitor: results of
a glucose-clamp study. Diab Metabol Res Rev. 2005 Sep–
Oct;21(5):459–64. [PMID: 15915547]
 
 
 
Lipid Disorders
Robert B. Baron, MD, MS
For patients with known cardiovascular disease (secondary
prevention), cholesterol lowering leads to a consistent reduction in
total mortality and recurrent cardiovascular events in men and
women and in middle-aged and older patients. Among patients
without cardiovascular disease (primary prevention), the data are
less conclusive, with rates of cardiovascular events, heart disease
mortality, and all-cause mortality differing among studies.
Nonetheless, treatment algorithms have been designed to assist
clinicians in selecting patients for cholesterol-lowering therapy based
on their lipid levels and their overall risk of developing
cardiovascular disease.
LIPOPROTEINS & ATHEROGENESIS
The plaques in the arterial walls of patients with atherosclerosis
contain large amounts of cholesterol. The higher the level of low-
density lipoproteins (LDL) cholesterol, the greater the risk of
atherosclerotic heart disease; conversely, the higher the high-density
lipoproteins (HDL) cholesterol, the lower the risk of coronary heart
disease (CHD). This is true in men and women, in different racial
and ethnic groups, and at all ages up to age 75 years. Because most
cholesterol in serum is LDL, high total cholesterol levels are also
associated with an increased risk of CHD. Middle-aged men whose
serum cholesterol levels are in the highest quintile for age (above
about 230 mg/dL or 6.9 mmol/L) have a risk of coronary death
before age 65 years of about 10%; men in the lowest quintile
(below about 170 mg/dL or 5.1 mmol/L) have a 3% risk. Death
from CHD before age 65 years is less common in women, with
equivalent risks one-third those of men. In men, each 10-mg/dL or
0.3-mmol/L increase in cholesterol (or LDL cholesterol) increases
the risk of CHD by about 10%; each 5-mg/dL or 0.13-mmol/L
increase in HDL reduces the risk by about 10%. The effect of HDL
cholesterol is greater in women, whereas the effects of total and
LDL cholesterol are smaller.
There are several genetic disorders that provide insight into the
pathogenesis 
of 
lipid-related 
diseases. Familial
hypercholesterolemia, rare in the homozygous state (about one
per million) is a condition in which the cell-surface receptors for the
LDL molecule are absent or defective, resulting in unregulated
synthesis of LDL. Patients with two abnormal genes (homozygotes)
have extremely high levels—up to eight times normal—and present
with atherosclerotic disease in childhood. Homozygotes may require
liver transplantation to correct their severe lipid abnormalities.
Those with one defective gene (heterozygotes) have LDL
concentrations twice normal; persons with this condition may
develop CHD in their 30s or 40s.
Another rare condition is caused by an abnormality of lipoprotein
lipase, the enzyme that enables peripheral tissues to take up
triglyceride from chylomicrons and very-low-density lipoproteins
(VLDL) particles. Patients with this condition, one cause of familial
hyperchylomicronemia, have marked hypertriglyceridemia with
recurrent pancreatitis and hepatosplenomegaly in childhood.
Numerous other genetic abnormalities of lipid metabolism are
named for the abnormality noted when serum is electrophoresed
(eg, dysbetalipoproteinemia) or from combinations of lipid
abnormalities in families (eg, familial combined hyperlipidemia).
Thus, family members of patients with severe lipid disorders are
appropriately studied. Other patients have abnormalities in the
production of apoproteins, such as increased apoprotein B and its
affiliated lipoproteins, LDL and VLDL; reduced apoprotein AII and
its affiliated particle; or excess lipoprotein (a). Other mutations
occur in lipoprotein lipase and in the gene encoding for cholesterol
efflux regulatory protein.
 When to Refer
 
•    Known genetic lipid disorders.
•    Striking family history of hyperlipidemia or premature
atherosclerosis.
•    Extremely high serum LDL cholesterol or triglyceride, or
extremely low serum HDL cholesterol.
Alwaili K et al. High-density lipoproteins and cardiovascular
disease: 2010 update. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2010
Mar;8(3):413–23. [PMID: 20222819]
 
Brener SJ et al. The relation between extent of coronary artery
disease measured by quantitative coronary angiography and
changes in lipid profile: insights from trials of atherosclerosis
regression. J Invasive Cardiol. 2008 Jun;20(6):261–5. [PMID:
18523316]
 
Kathiresan S et al. Polymorphisms associated with cholesterol and
risk of cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med. 2008 Mar
20;358(12):1240–9. [PMID: 18354102]
 
Pencina MJ et al. Predicting the 30-year risk of cardiovascular
disease: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2009 Jun
23;119(24):3078–84. [PMID: 19506114]
 
LIPID FRACTIONS & THE RISK OF CORONARY
HEART DISEASE
In fasting serum, cholesterol is carried primarily on three different
lipoproteins—the VLDL, LDL, and HDL molecules. Total
cholesterol equals the sum of these three components:
Total cholesterol = HDL cholesterol +
VLDL cholesterol + LDL cholesterol
Most clinical laboratories measure the total cholesterol, the total
triglycerides, and the amount of cholesterol found in the HDL
fraction, which is easily precipitated from serum. Most triglyceride is
found in VLDL particles, which contain five times as much
triglyceride by weight as cholesterol. The amount of cholesterol
found in the VLDL fraction can be estimated by dividing the
triglyceride by 5:
Because the triglyceride level is used as a proxy for the amount
of VLDL, this formula works only in fasting samples and when the
triglyceride level is < 400 mg/dL or < 4 mmol/L. At higher
triglyceride levels, LDL and VLDL cholesterol levels can be
determined after ultracentrifugation or by direct chemical
measurement.
The total cholesterol is reasonably stable over time; however,
measurements of HDL and especially triglycerides may vary
considerably because of analytic error in the laboratory and biologic
variation in a patient's lipid level. Thus, the LDL should always be
estimated as the mean of at least two determinations; if those two
estimates differ by more than 10%, a third lipid profile is obtained.
The LDL is estimated as follows:
When using SI units, the formula becomes
Understanding the relationships of the different lipid fractions
leads to a more accurate understanding of a patient's lipid-related
coronary risk than the total cholesterol. Two persons with the same
total cholesterol of 275 mg/dL (8.25 mmol/L) may have very
different lipid profiles. One may have an HDL cholesterol of 110
mg/dL (2.86 mmol/L) with a triglyceride of 150 mg/dL (1.5
mmol/L), giving an estimated LDL cholesterol of 135 mg/dL (3.51
mmol/L); the other may have an HDL cholesterol of 25 mg/dL
(0.65 mmol/L) with a triglyceride of 200 mg/dL (2.0 mmol/L) and
an LDL cholesterol of 210 mg/dL (5.46 mmol/L). The second
would have more than a tenfold higher CHD risk than the first,
assuming no differences in other factors. Because of high HDL
cholesterol levels in women, many with apparently high total
cholesterol levels have favorable lipid profiles. Thus, evaluation of
the lipid fractions is essential before therapy is initiated.
Some authorities use the ratio of the total to HDL cholesterol as
an indicator of lipid-related coronary risk: the lower this ratio is, the
better. Although ratios are useful predictors within populations of
patients, they may obscure important information in individual
patients. (A total cholesterol of 300 mg/dL [9.0 mmol/L] and an
HDL of 60 mg/dL [1.56 mmol/L] result in the same ratio as a total
cholesterol of 150 mg/dL [4.5 mmol/L] with an HDL of 30 mg/dL
[0.78 mmol/L].) Moreover, the total cholesterol-to-HDL
cholesterol ratio will magnify the importance of variations in HDL
measurement.
There is no true “normal” range for serum lipids. In Western
populations, cholesterol values are about 20% higher than in Asian
populations and exceed 300 mg/dL (9.0 mmol/L) in nearly 5% of
adults. About 10% of adults have LDL cholesterol levels above
200 mg/dL (5.2 mmol/L). Total and LDL cholesterol levels tend to
rise with age in persons who are otherwise in good health.
Declines are seen in acute illness, and lipid studies in such
patients are of little value with the exception of the serum
triglyceride level in a patient with pancreatitis. Cholesterol levels
(even when expressed as an age-matched percentile rank, such as
the highest 20%) do not remain constant over time, especially from
childhood through adolescence and young adulthood. Thus, children
and young adults with relatively high cholesterol may have lower
levels later in life, whereas those with low cholesterol may show
increases.
THERAPEUTIC EFFECTS OF LOWERING
CHOLESTEROL
Reducing cholesterol levels in healthy middle-aged men without
CHD (primary prevention) reduces their risk in proportion to the
reduction in LDL cholesterol and the increase in HDL cholesterol.
Treated patients have statistically significant and clinically important
reductions in the rates of myocardial infarctions, new cases of
angina, and need for coronary artery bypass procedures. The West
of Scotland Study showed a 31% decrease in myocardial
infarctions in middle-aged men treated with pravastatin compared
with placebo. The Air Force/Texas Coronary Atherosclerosis
Prevention Study (AFCAPS/TexCAPS) study showed similar
results with lovastatin. As with any primary prevention interventions,
large numbers of healthy patients need to be treated to prevent a
single event. The numbers of patients needed to treat (NNT) to
prevent a nonfatal myocardial infarction or a coronary artery
disease death in these two studies were 46 and 50, respectively.
The Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial (ASCOT) study
of atorvastatin in subjects with hypertension and other risk factors
but without CHD also demonstrated a convincing 36% reduction in
CHD events. The Justification for the Use of Statins in Prevention:
an Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JUPITER) showed a
44% reduction in a combined end point of myocardial infarction,
stroke, revascularization, hospitalization for unstable angina, or
death from cardiovascular causes. The NNT for 1 year to prevent
one event was 169.
Primary prevention studies have found a less consistent effect on
total mortality. The West of Scotland study found a 20% decrease
in total mortality, tending toward statistical significance. The
AFCAPS/TexCAPS study with lovastatin showed no difference in
total mortality. The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment
to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT-LLT) also showed no
reduction either in all-cause mortality or in CHD events when
pravastatin was compared with usual care. Subjects treated with
atorvastatin in the ASCOT study had a 13% reduction in mortality,
but the result was not statistically significant. This study, however,
was stopped early due to the marked reduction in CHD events. The
JUPITER trial demonstrated a statistically significant 20% reduction
in death from any cause. The NNT for 1 year was 400.
In patients with CHD, the benefits of cholesterol lowering are
clearer. Major studies with statins have shown significant reductions
in cardiovascular events, cardiovascular deaths, and all-cause
mortality in men and women with coronary artery disease. The
NNT to prevent a nonfatal myocardial infarction or a coronary
artery disease death in these three studies were between 12 and 34.
Aggressive cholesterol lowering with these agents causes regression
of atherosclerotic plaques in some patients, reduces the progression
of atherosclerosis in saphenous vein grafts, and can slow or reverse
carotid artery atherosclerosis. Meta-analysis suggests that this latter
effect results in a significant decrease in strokes. Results with other
classes of medications have been less consistent. For example,
gemfibrozil treatment subjects had fewer cardiovascular events, but
there was no benefit in all-cause mortality when compared with
placebo.
The disparities in results between primary and secondary
prevention studies highlight several important points. The benefits
and adverse effects of cholesterol lowering may be specific to each
type of drug; the clinician cannot assume that the effects will
generalize to other classes of medication. Second, the net benefits
from cholesterol lowering depend on the underlying risk of CHD
and of other disease. In patients with atherosclerosis, morbidity and
mortality rates associated with CHD are high, and measures that
reduce it are more likely to be beneficial even if they have no effect
—or even slightly harmful effects—on other diseases.
Bayturan O et al. The metabolic syndrome, its component risk
factors, and progression of coronary atherosclerosis. Arch Intern
Med. 2010 Mar 8;170(5):478–84. [PMID: 20212186]
 
Brugts JJ et al. The benefits of statins in people without established
cardiovascular disease but with cardiovascular risk factors: meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2009;338:b2376.
[PMID: 19567909]
 
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists (CTT) Collaborators; Kearney PM
et al. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in 18,686 people
with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-analysis.
Lancet. 2008 Jan 12;371(9607):117–25. [PMID: 18191683]
 
Cooney MT et al; SCORE investigators. HDL cholesterol protects
against cardiovascular disease in both genders, at all ages and at all
levels of risk. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Oct;206(2): 611–6. [PMID:
19375079]
 
Cui Y et al. Effects of increasing high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol and decreasing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol on
the incidence of first acute coronary events (from the Air
Force/Texas Coronary Atherosclerosis Prevention Study). Am J
Cardiol. 2009 Sep 15;104(6):829–34. [PMID: 19733719]
 
Pletcher MJ et al. Comparing impact and cost-effectiveness of
primary prevention strategies for lipid-lowering. Ann Intern Med.
2009 Feb 17;150(4):243–54. [PMID: 19221376]
 
Ridker PM et al; JUPITER Study Group. Rosuvastatin to prevent
vascular events in men and women with elevated C-reactive
protein. N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 20;359(21):2195–207. [PMID:
18997196]
 
Zhao XQ et al. Effects of combination lipid therapy on coronary
stenosis progression and clinical cardiovascular events in coronary
disease patients with metabolic syndrome: a combined analysis of
the Familial Atherosclerosis Treatment Study (FATS), the HDL-
Atherosclerosis Treatment Study (HATS), and the Armed Forces
Regression Study (AFREGS). Am J Cardiol. 2009 Dec
1;104(11):1457–64. [PMID: 19932775]
 
SECONDARY CONDITIONS THAT AFFECT LIPID
METABOLISM
Several factors, including drugs, can influence serum lipids (Table
28–1). These are important for two reasons: abnormal lipid levels
(or changes in lipid levels) may be the presenting sign of some of
these conditions, and correction of the underlying condition may
obviate the need to treat an apparent lipid disorder. Diabetes and
alcohol use, in particular, are commonly associated with high
triglyceride levels that decline with improvements in glycemic control
or reduction in alcohol use, respectively. Thus, secondary causes of
high blood lipids should be considered in each patient with a lipid
disorder before lipid-lowering therapy is started. In most instances,
special testing is not needed: a history and physical examination are
sufficient. However, screening for hypothyroidism in patients with
hyperlipidemia is cost effective.
CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS
Most patients with high cholesterol levels have no specific
symptoms or signs. The vast majority of patients with lipid
abnormalities are detected by the laboratory, either as part of the
workup of a patient with cardiovascular disease or as part of a
preventive screening strategy. Extremely high levels of chylomicrons
or VLDL particles (triglyceride level above 1000 mg/dL or 10
mmol/L) result in the formation of eruptive xanthomas (Figure
28–1) (red-yellow papules, especially on the buttocks). High LDL
concentrations result in tendinous xanthomas on certain tendons
(Achilles, patella, back of the hand). Such xanthomas usually
indicate one of the underlying genetic hyperlipidemias. Lipemia
retinalis (cream-colored blood vessels in the fundus) is seen with
extremely high triglyceride levels (above 2000 mg/dL or 20
mmol/L).
 
Table 28–1. Secondary causes of lipid abnormalities.
 
Cause
Associated Lipid
Abnormality
Obesity
Increased triglycerides,
decreased HDL cholesterol
Sedentary lifestyle
Decreased HDL cholesterol
Diabetes mellitus
Increased triglycerides,
increased total cholesterol
Alcohol use
Increased triglycerides,
increased HDL cholesterol
Hypothyroidism
Increased total cholesterol
Hyperthyroidism
Decreased total cholesterol
Nephrotic syndrome
Increased total cholesterol
Chronic kidney disease Increased total cholesterol,
increased triglycerides
Liver disease (cirrhosis) Decreased total cholesterol
Obstructive liver disease Increased total cholesterol
Malignancy
Decreased total cholesterol
Cushing disease (or
corticosteroid use)
Increased total cholesterol
Oral contraceptives
Increased triglycerides,
increased total cholesterol
Diuretics1
Increased total cholesterol,
increased triglycerides
β-Blockers1,2
Increased total cholesterol,
decreased HDL
1Short-term effects only.
2β-Blockers with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, such as pindolol and
acebutolol, do not affect lipid levels.
SCREENING FOR HIGH BLOOD CHOLESTEROL
All patients with CHD or CHD risk equivalents (other clinical forms
of atherosclerosis such as peripheral artery disease, abdominal
aortic aneurysm, and symptomatic carotid artery disease; patients
with diabetes mellitus; and patients with multiple risk factors that
confer a > 20% 10-year risk for developing CHD) should be
y
p g
)
screened for elevated lipids. The only exceptions are patients in
whom lipid lowering is not indicated or desirable for other reasons.
Patients who already have evidence of atherosclerosis are the group
at highest risk of suffering additional manifestations in the near term
and thus have the most to gain from reduction of blood lipids.
Additional risk reduction measures for atherosclerosis are discussed
in Chapter 10; lipid lowering should be just one aspect of a
program to reduce the progression and effects of the disease.
Figure 28–1. Eruptive xanthoma on the arm of a man with
untreated hyperlipidemia and diabetes mellitus. (Courtesy of
Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
In patients with cardiovascular disease, a complete lipid profile
(total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels) after an
overnight fast should be obtained as a screening test. Those whose
estimated LDL cholesterol level is high should have at least one
repeat measurement. Specific treatments for high LDL cholesterol
levels are discussed below. The goal of therapy should be to reduce
the LDL cholesterol to below 100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L) or optimally
to below 70 mg/dL (1.82 mmol/L). Evidence suggests that
treatment with a statin is effective even if the starting LDL
cholesterol is below 100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L). These data suggest
that most patients with CHD or CHD risk equivalents should be
treated with statin therapy.
The best screening and treatment strategy for adults who do not
have atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is less clear. Several
algorithms have been developed to guide the clinician in treatment
decisions, but management decisions are individualized based on the
patient's risk.
Although the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP)
recommends screening of all adults aged 20 years or older for high
blood cholesterol, the United States Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) suggests beginning at age 20 years only if there is
increased risk of CHD. For men without increased risk, screening is
recommended beginning at age 35 years. For women and for men
aged 20 to 35 without increased risk, the USPSTF makes no
recommendation for or against routine screening for lipid disorders.
Although there is no established interval for screening, screening can
be repeated every 5 years for those with average or low risk and
more often for those whose levels are close to therapeutic
thresholds. This strategy focuses cholesterol screening on those at
the greatest risk of coronary artery disease and increases the cost
effectiveness of cholesterol screening.
Individuals without cardiovascular disease can then be stratified
according to risk factors as defined by the NCEP. Those with two
or more risk factors are considered to be at intermediate risk of
coronary artery disease, and those with less than two are at low
risk. These risks include age and gender (men aged 45 years or
older, women aged 55 years or older), a family history of premature
CHD (myocardial infarction or sudden cardiac death before age 55
years in a first-degree male relative or before age 65 years in a first-
degree female relative), hypertension (whether treated or not),
current cigarette smoking (10 or more cigarettes per day), and low
HDL cholesterol (< 40 mg/dL). Because HDL cholesterol is
protective against CHD, a risk factor is subtracted if the level is >
60 mg/dL. Patients with two or more risk factors are then further
stratified by evaluating their 10-year risk of developing CHD using
Framingham projections of 10-year risk (Table 28–2). Because risk
factors alone are an imprecise measure of CHD risk, estimating the
10-year risk using Framingham data is helpful even in patients with
one or no risk factors.
Numerous other risk factors have been studied in an attempt to
better predict future CHD events. These include high-sensitivity C-
reactive protein (hs-CRP), electron beam computed tomography
(EBCT), homocysteine, fibrinogen, lipoprotein a, LDL subfractions,
ankle-brachial index, and others. Several of these, particularly hs-
CRP and EBCT, may add additional prognostic ability after
accounting for traditional risk factors, but no clinical trials have yet
examined the effect of these on health outcomes. Clinical guidelines
suggest limiting the use of additional risk factors such as hs-CRP to
patients at intermediate risk (by Framingham projections) if
additional data is likely to change a therapeutic decision.
 
Table 28–2. Framingham 10-year coronary heart disease risk
projections. Calculate the number of points for each risk factor.
Sum the total risk score and estimate the 10-year risk.
 
 
Reproduced from Executive Summary of the Third Report of The
National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in
Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA. 2001 May
16;285(19):2486–97.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/cholesterol/index.htm.
Several strategies for obtaining the initial cholesterol measurement
have been proposed, including: (1) measuring total cholesterol
alone, (2) measuring total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol, or (3)
measuring LDL and HDL cholesterol. Each is acceptable, but
treatment decisions are based on the LDL and HDL cholesterol
levels. Measurement of the total cholesterol alone is the least
expensive strategy and is adequate for low-risk individuals; those
with total cholesterol > 200 mg/dL (> 6.0 mmol/L) should then be
reevaluated with a fasting LDL and HDL cholesterol measurement.
Measure ment of the total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol allows
for better characterization of the risk factor profile but also requires
reevaluation if the total cholesterol is > 200 mg/dL (> 6.0 mmol/L)
as recommended by the USPSTF. Initial measurement of the LDL
and HDL cholesterol is least likely to lead to patient misinformation
and misclassification and is the strategy recommended by the
NCEP.
Treatment decisions are based on the LDL cholesterol, and the
patient's risk factor profile (including the HDL cholesterol level) and
estimated 10-year risk. Patients in the intermediate-risk group (two
or more risk factors) are selected for diet therapy (therapeutic
lifestyle changes) if LDL cholesterol is > 130 mg/dL. If the 10-year
risk of CHD is < 10%, drug treatment is recommended if LDL is >
160 mg/dL; if the 10-year CHD risk is between 10% and 20%,
drug treatment is recommended if LDL is > 130 mg/dL. Low-risk
individuals with one or no risk factors and estimated 10-year CHD
risk < 10% are selected for diet therapy if LDL cholesterol is > 160
mg/dL and for drug therapy if it is > 190 mg/dL (Table 28–3).
 Screening in Women
The foregoing screening and treatment guidelines, based largely on
LDL cholesterol levels, are designed for both men and women. Yet
several observational studies suggest that a low HDL cholesterol is
a more important risk factor for CHD in women than a high LDL
cholesterol. Meta-analysis of studies including women with known
heart disease, however, has found that medications that primarily
lower LDL cholesterol do prevent recurrent myocardial infarctions
in women. There is insufficient evidence to be certain of a similar
effect from LDL-lowering therapy in women without evidence of
CHD. Although most experts recommend application of the same
primary prevention guidelines for women as for men, clinicians
should be aware of the uncertainty in this area. Using estimates of
10-year CHD risk may be particularly helpful in women since a
larger percentage of women than men will have estimated 10-year
CHD risks below 10% per year and thus women are less likely to
benefit from therapy unless their LDL cholesterol is extremely high
(> 190 mg/dL or 4.94 mmol/L).
 
Table 28–3. LDL goals and treatment cutpoints: Recommendations
of the NCEP Adult Treatment Panel III.
 
1When LDL-lowering drug therapy is used, it is advised that intensity of
therapy be sufficient to achieve at least a 30–40% reduction in LDL
cholesterol levels.
2CHD includes history of myocardial infarction, unstable angina, coronary
artery procedures (angioplasty or bypass surgery), or evidence of clinically
significant myocardial ischemia.
3CHD risk equivalents include clinical manifestations of noncoronary
forms of atherosclerotic disease (peripheral arterial disease, abdominal
aortic aneurysm, and carotid artery disease [transient ischemic attacks or
stroke of carotid origin with ≥ 50% obstruction of a carotid artery]), diabetes
mellitus, and ≥ 2 risk factors with 10-year risk for CHD > 20%.
4Very high risk favors the optional LDL cholesterol goal of < 70 mg/dL, or in
patients with high triglycerides, non-high density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol < 100 mg/dL.
5Any person at high risk or moderately high risk who has lifestyle-related
risk factors (eg, obesity, physical inactivity, elevated triglyceride, low HDL
cholesterol, or metabolic syndrome) is a candidate for therapeutic lifestyle
changes to modify these risk factors regardless of LDL cholesterol.
6If baseline LDL cholesterol is < 100 mg/dL, institution of an LDL-lowering
drug is a therapeutic option on the basis of available clinical trial results. If
a high-risk person has high triglycerides or low HDL cholesterol,
combining a fibrate or nicotinic acid with an LDL-lowering drug can be
considered.
7Risk factors include cigarette smoking, hypertension (blood pressure ≥
140/90 mm Hg or on antihypertensive medication), low HDL cholesterol (<
40 mg/dL), family history of premature CHD (CHD in male first-degree
relative < 55 years of age; CHD in female first-degree relative < 65 years of
age), and age (men ≥ 45 years; women ≥ 55 years).
8Electronic 
10-year 
risk 
calculators 
are 
available 
at
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/cholesterol.
9Optional LDL cholesterol goal < 100 mg/dL.
10For moderately high-risk persons, when the LDL cholesterol level is
100–129 mg/dL at baseline or on lifestyle therapy, initiation of an LDL-
lowering drug to achieve an LDL cholesterol level < 100 mg/dL is a
therapeutic option on the basis of available clinical trial results.
11Almost all people with zero or one risk factor have a 10-year CHD risk <
10%, and 10-year risk assessment in these people is thus not necessary.
LDL, low-density lipoprotein; NCEP, National Cholesterol Education
Program; CHD, coronary heart disease.
Reproduced, with permission, from Grundy SM et al. Implications of recent
clinical trials for the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult
Treatment Panel III guidelines. Circulation. 2004 Jul 13;110(2):227–39.
 Screening in Older Patients
Meta-analysis of evidence relating cholesterol to CHD in the elderly
suggests that cholesterol is not a risk factor for CHD for persons
over age 75 years. Clinical trials have rarely included such
individuals. One exception is the Prospective Study of Pravastatin in
the Elderly at Risk (PROSPER). In this study, elderly patients with
cardiovascular disease (secondary prevention) benefited from statin
therapy, whereas those without cardiovascular disease (primary
prevention) did not. Although the NCEP recommends continuing
treatment in the elderly, many clinicians will prefer to stop screening
and treatment in patients age 75 years or older who do not have
CHD. In patients age 75 years or older who have CHD, LDL-
lowering therapy can be continued as recommended for younger
patients with the disease. Decisions to discontinue therapy should
be based on overall functional status and life expectancy,
comorbidities, and patient preference and should be made in
context with overall therapeutic goals and end-of-life decisions.
Bonow RO. Clinical practice. Should coronary calcium screening
be used in cardiovascular prevention strategies? N Engl J Med.
2009 Sep 3;361(10):990–7. [PMID: 19726773]
 
Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. Major lipids,
apolipoproteins, and risk of vascular disease. JAMA. 2009 Nov
11;302(18): 1993–2000. [PMID: 19903920]
 
Helfand M et al. Screening for lipid disorders in adults: selective
update of 2001 US Preventive Services Task Force Review
[Internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (US); 2008 Jun. Report No.: 08-05114-EF-1. [PMID:
20722146]
 
Kuklina EV et al. Prevalence of coronary heart disease risk factors
and screening for high cholesterol levels among young adults,
United States, 1999–2006. Ann Fam Med. 2010 Jul–
Aug;8(4):327–33. [PMID: 20644187]
 
Mora S et al. Fasting compared with nonfasting lipids and
apolipoproteins for predicting incident cardiovascular events.
Circulation. 2008 Sep 2;118(10):993–1001. [PMID: 18711012]
 
TREATMENT OF HIGH LOW-DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN
CHOLESTEROL
Reduction of LDL cholesterol is just one part of a program to
reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. Other measures—
including smoking cessation, hypertension control, and aspirin—are
also of central importance. Less well studied but of potential value is
raising the HDL cholesterol level. Quitting smoking reduces the
effect of other cardiovascular risk factors (such as a high cholesterol
level); it may also increase the HDL cholesterol level. Exercise (and
weight loss) may reduce the LDL cholesterol and increase the
HDL. Modest alcohol use (1–2 ounces a day) also raises HDL
levels and appears to have a salutary effect on CHD rates.
Several new classes of medications are being actively tested to
raise HDL cholesterol levels. One such class of these medications,
the cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibitors, raises HDL
cholesterol levels. However, studies to date of one agent in this
class, torcetrapib, have shown adverse effects on cardiovascular
outcomes and development of the drug has been halted. A second
drug, anacetrapib, is in phase two clinical trials. Results show
reductions of LDL cholesterol as well as increases in HDL
cholesterol and no significant adverse experiences compared with
placebo. Larger and longer trials are planned to assess the impact
of this drug on clinical outcomes.
 Diet Therapy
Studies of nonhospitalized adults have reported only modest
cholesterol-lowering benefits of dietary therapy, typically in the
range of a 5–10% decrease in LDL cholesterol, with even less in
the long term. The effect of diet therapy, however, varies
considerably among individuals, as some patients will have striking
reductions in LDL cholesterol—up to a 25–30% decrease—
whereas others will have clinically important increases. Thus, the
results of diet therapy should be assessed about 4 weeks after
initiation.
Cholesterol-lowering diets may also have a variable effect on
lipid fractions. Diets very low in total fat or in saturated fat may
lower HDL cholesterol as much as LDL cholesterol. It is not known
how these diet-induced changes affect coronary risk.
Several nutritional approaches to diet therapy are available. Most
Americans currently eat over 35% of calories as fat, of which 15%
is saturated fat. Dietary cholesterol intake averages 400 mg/d. A
cholesterol-lowering diet recommends reducing total fat to 25–30%
and saturated fat to < 7% of calories. Dietary cholesterol should be
limited to < 200 mg/d. These diets replace fat, particularly saturated
fat, with carbohydrate. In most instances, this approach will also
result in fewer total calories consumed and will facilitate weight loss
in overweight patients. Other diet plans, including the Dean Ornish
Diet, the Pritikin Diet, and most vegetarian diets, restrict fat even
further. Low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets may, however, result in
reductions in HDL cholesterol.
An alternative strategy is the “Mediterranean diet,” which
maintains total fat at approximately 35–40% of total calories but
replaces saturated fat with monounsaturated fat such as that found
in canola oil and in olives, peanuts, avocados, and their oils. This
diet is equally effective at lowering LDL cholesterol but is less likely
to lead to reductions in HDL cholesterol. Several studies have
suggested that this approach may also be associated with reductions
in endothelial dysfunction, insulin resistance, and markers of
vascular inflammation and may result in better resolution of the
metabolic syndrome than traditional cholesterol-lowering diets.
Other dietary changes may also result in beneficial changes in
blood lipids. Soluble fiber, such as that found in oat bran or
psyllium, may reduce LDL cholesterol by 5–10%. Garlic, soy
protein, vitamin C, pecans, and plant sterols may also result in
reduction of LDL cholesterol. Because oxidation of LDL
cholesterol is a potential initiating event in atherogenesis, diets rich in
antioxidants, found primarily in fruits and vegetables, may be helpful
(see Chapter 29). Studies have suggested that when all of these
elements are combined into a single dietary prescription, the impact
of diet on LDL cholesterol may approach that of statin medications,
lowering LDL cholesterol by close to 30%.
Cannon CP et al. Safety of anacetrapib in patients with or at high
risk for coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec
16;363(25):2406–15. [PMID: 21082868]
 
Coodley GO et al. Lowering LDL cholesterol in adults: a
prospective, community-based practice initiative. Am J Med. 2008
Jul;121(7):604–10. [PMID: 18538295]
 
Estruch R et al. Effects of a Mediterranean-style diet on
cardiovascular risk factors: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med.
2006 Jul 4;145(1):1–11. [PMID: 16818923]
 
Ferdowsian HR et al. Effects of plant-based diets on plasma lipids.
Am J Cardiol. 2009 Oct 1;104(7):947–56. [PMID: 19766762]
 
Jenkins DJ et al. Effect of plant sterols in combination with other
cholesterol-lowering foods. Metabolism. 2008 Jan;57(1): 130–
139. [PMID: 18078870]
 
Rumawas ME et al. Mediterranean-style dietary pattern, reduced
risk of metabolic syndrome traits, and incidence in the Framingham
Offspring Cohort. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Dec; 90(6):1608–14.
[PMID: 19828705]
 
Talati R et al. The comparative efficacy of plant sterols and stanols
on serum lipids: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Diet
Assoc. 2010 May;110(5):719–26. [PMID: 20430133]
 
Walker C et al. Diets for cardiovascular disease prevention: what
is the evidence? Am Fam Physician. 2009 Apr 1;79(7):571 8.
[PMID: 19378874]
 
 Pharmacologic Therapy
Most patients whose risk from CHD is considered high enough to
warrant pharmacologic therapy of an elevated LDL cholesterol
should be given aspirin prophylaxis at a dose of 81 mg/d unless
there are contraindications such as aspirin sensitivity, bleeding
diatheses, or active peptic ulcer disease. The benefit of aspirin in
reducing the risk of CHD is equivalent to that of cholesterol
lowering. Other CHD risk factors, such as hypertension and
smoking, should also be controlled.
If the decision to treat a patient with an LDL-lowering drug is
made, a goal for treatment is set. The National Cholesterol
Education Program's Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP ATP III)
guidelines remain the mainstay of clinical practice. For patients with
CHD or CHD risk equivalents, the goal is LDL < 100 mg/dL (<
2.6 mmol/L), but for patients with very high risk, a goal of LDL <
70 mg/dL (< 1.82 mmol/L) is a therapeutic option (see Table 28–
3). This goal may also be appropriate for patients with very high
risk who have a baseline LDL < 100 mg/dL (< 2.6mmol/L). For
patients with two or more risk factors and a 10-year CHD risk of
10–20%, the recommended goal is LDL < 130 mg/dL (< 3.38
mmol/L), but a goal of < 100 mg/dL (< 2.6 mmol/L is optional. For
those with two or more risk factors and a 10-year CHD risk of <
10%, the goal is < 130 mg/dL (< 3.38 mmol/L). For those with
zero or one risk factor, the goal is LDL < 160 mg/dL (< 4.16
mmol/L) (see Table 28–3). In most instances, intensity of therapy
should be sufficient to achieve a 30–40% reduction in LDL
cholesterol. Combinations of drugs may be necessary. Once the
goal is reached, the lipid profile should be monitored periodically
(every 6–12 months), with consideration given to periodic
reductions in drug dose. Most lipid-lowering agents are expensive
and may need to be given for decades. Thus, their cost
effectiveness is low for some groups of patients, especially in
primary prevention.
A. Niacin (Nicotinic Acid)
Niacin was the first lipid-lowering agent that was associated with a
reduction in total mortality. Long-term follow-up of a secondary
prevention trial of middle-aged men with previous myocardial
infarction disclosed that about half of those who had been
previously treated with niacin had died, compared with nearly 60%
of the placebo group. This favorable effect on mortality was not
seen during the trial itself, though there was a reduction in the
incidence of recurrent coronary events.
Niacin reduces the production of VLDL particles, with
secondary reduction in LDL and increases in HDL cholesterol
levels. The average effect of full-dose niacin therapy, 3–4.5 g/d, is a
15–25% reduction in LDL cholesterol and a 25–35% increase in
HDL cholesterol. Full doses are required to obtain the LDL effect,
but the HDL effect is observed at lower doses, eg, 1 g/d. Niacin
will also reduce triglycerides by half and will lower lipoprotein (a)
(Lp[a]) levels and will increase plasma homocysteine levels. Thus,
its effect on blood lipids and CHD risk is nearly optimal. Intolerance
to niacin is common; only 50–60% of patients can take full doses.
Niacin causes a prostaglandin-mediated flushing that patients may
describe as “hot flashes” or pruritus and that can be decreased with
aspirin (81–325 mg/d) or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
agents taken during the same day. Flushing may also be decreased
by initiating niacin therapy with a very small dose, eg, 100 mg with
the evening meal. The dose can be doubled each week until 1.5 g/d
is tolerated. After rechecking blood lipids, the dose is increased and
divided over three meals until the goal of 3–4.5 g/d is reached (eg,
1 g with each meal). Extended-release niacin is also available and is
better tolerated by most patients. It is not known whether routine
monitoring of liver enzymes results in early detection and thus
reduced severity of this side effect. Niacin can also exacerbate gout
and peptic ulcer disease. Although niacin may increase blood sugar
in some patients, clinical trials have shown that niacin can be safely
used in diabetic patients.
B. Bile Acid–Binding Resins
The bile acid–binding resins include cholestyramine, cole-sevelam,
and colestipol. Treatment with these agents reduces the incidence of
coronary events in middle-aged men by about 20%, with no
significant effect on total mortality. The resins work by binding bile
acids in the intestine. The resultant reduction in the enterohepatic
circulation causes the liver to increase its production of bile acids,
using hepatic cholesterol to do so. Thus, hepatic LDL receptor
activity increases, with a decline in plasma LDL levels. The
triglyceride level tends to increase slightly in some patients treated
with bile acid–binding resins; they should be used with caution in
those with elevated triglycerides and probably not at all in patients
who have triglyceride levels above 500 mg/dL. The clinician can
anticipate a reduction of 15–25% in the LDL cholesterol level, with
insignificant effects on the HDL level.
The usual dose of cholestyramine is 12–36 g of resin per day in
divided doses with meals, mixed in water or, more palatably, juice.
Doses of colestipol are 20% higher (each packet contains 5 g of
resin). The dose of colesevelam is 625 mg, 6–7 tablets per day.
These agents often cause gastrointestinal symptoms, such as
constipation and gas. They may interfere with the absorption of fat-
soluble vitamins (thereby complicating the management of patients
receiving warfarin) and may bind other drugs in the intestine.
Concurrent use of psyllium may ameliorate the gastrointestinal side
effects.
C. Hydroxymethylglutaryl-Coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) Reductase Inhibitors
(Statins)
The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) include atorvastatin,
fluvastatin, lovastatin, pitavastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin, and
simvastatin. These agents work by inhibiting the rate-limiting enzyme
in the formation of cholesterol. They reduce myocardial infarctions
and total mortality in secondary prevention, as well as in older
middle-aged men free of CHD. A meta-analysis has demonstrated
significant reduction in risk of stroke. Cholesterol synthesis in the
liver is reduced, with a compensatory increase in hepatic LDL
receptors (presumably so that the liver can take more of the
cholesterol that it needs from the blood) and a reduction in the
circulating LDL cholesterol level by up to 35%. There are also
modest increases in HDL levels and decreases in triglyceride levels.
Oral doses are as follows: atorvastatin, 10–80 mg/d; fluvastatin,
20–40 mg/d; lovastatin, 10–80 mg/d; pitavastatin 2-4 mg/d;
pravastatin, 10–40 mg/d; rosuvastatin, 5–40 mg/d; and simvastatin,
5–40 mg/d. There is no clear superiority of one HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitor over others. These agents are given once daily.
The most common side effects are muscle aches, occurring in up to
10% of patients, and mild gastrointestinal effects. More serious, but
extremely uncommon, side effects include liver failure and muscle
disease including myositis and rhabdomyolysis. Liver disease is
more common in patients taking fibrates or niacin. Muscle disease is
also more common with fibrates and niacin as well as with
erythromycin, antifungal medications, nefazadone, and cyclosporine.
Manufacturers of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors recommend
regular monitoring of liver and muscle enzymes.
D. Fibric Acid Derivatives
The fibrates are peroxisome proliferative-activated receptor-α
(PPAR-α) agonists that result in potent reductions of plasma
triglycerides and increases in HDL cholesterol. They reduce LDL
levels by about 10–15%, although the result is quite variable, and
triglyceride levels by about 40% and raise HDL levels by about 15–
20%. The fibric acid derivatives or fibrates approved for use in the
United States are gemfibrozil and fenofibrate. Ciprofibrate and
bezafibrate are also available for use internationally.
Gemfibrozil reduced CHD rates in hypercholesterolemic middle-
aged men free of coronary disease in the Helsinki Heart Study. The
effect was observed only among those who also had lower HDL
cholesterol levels and high triglyceride levels. In a VA study,
gemfibrozil was also shown to reduce cardiovascular events in men
with existing CHD whose primary lipid abnormality was a low HDL
cholesterol. There was no effect on all-cause mortality.
The usual dose of gemfibrozil is 600 mg once or twice a day.
Side effects include cholelithiasis, hepatitis, and myositis. The
incidence of the latter two conditions may be higher among patients
also taking other lipid-lowering agents. In the largest clinical trial that
used clofibrate, there were significantly more deaths—especially
due to cancer—in the treatment group; it should not be used.
E. Ezetimibe
Ezetimibe is a lipid-lowering drug that inhibits the intestinal
absorption of dietary and biliary cholesterol by blocking passage
across the intestinal wall by inhibiting a cholesterol transporter. The
usual dose of ezetimibe is 10 mg/d orally. Ezetimibe reduces LDL
cholesterol between 15% and 20% when used as monotherapy and
can further reduce LDL in patients taking statins who are not yet at
therapeutic goal.
However, the effects of ezetimide on CHD and its long-term
safety are not yet known. Results from one small clinical trial,
ENHANCE (a study of 720 persons with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia), showed no significant difference of intimal
media thickness with ezetimibe plus an HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor compared with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor alone. A
second study compared a statin plus ezetimibe with a statin plus
extended-release niacin. The statin plus niacin caused a significant
regression of carotid intima-media thickness and was superior to the
statin plus ezetimibe combination.
 Initial Selection of Medication
At present there are no absolute guidelines for selection of available
lipid-modifying medications in particular patients. Nonetheless,
clinical trials provide guidance (Table 28–4). For most patients who
require a lipid-modifying medication, an HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor is preferred. Although niacin will also have beneficial effects
on lipids in both men and women with CHD, there is less evidence
demonstrating the desired effects on CHD and all-cause mortality.
Resins are the only lipid-modifying medication considered safe in
pregnancy.
Combination therapy may be used to meet lipid targets in some
patients or to achieve other therapeutic goals. For example,
ezetimibe plus an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor will typically lower
the LDL cholesterol more than either medication alone. Similarly,
low-dose niacin (0.5–1 g/d), will substantially increase the HDL
cholesterol when added to an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor.
Despite improvements in the lipid profile, however, there are few
data demonstrating improved clinical outcomes of combination
therapy when compared with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
alone. Combinations may also increase the risk of complications of
drug therapy. The combination of gemfibrozil and HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitors increases the risk of muscle and liver disease
more than either drug alone.
 
Table 28–4. Effects of selected lipid-modifying drugs.
 
1Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; ± variable, if
any; others, indicates availability of less expensive generic preparations;
OTC, over the counter.
Abourbih S et al. Effect of fibrates on lipid profiles and
cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review. Am J Med. 2009
Oct; 122(10):962.e1–8. [PMID: 19698935]
 
ACCORD Study Group et al. Effects of combination lipid therapy
in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr
29;362(17):1563–74. [PMID: 20228404]
 
Brown BG et al. Nicotinic acid, alone and in combinations, for
reduction of cardiovascular risk. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Apr
17;101(8A):58B–62B. [PMID: 18375243]
 
Karalis DG. Intensive lowering of low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels for primary prevention of coronary artery
disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009 Apr;84(4):345–52. [PMID:
19339653]
 
Karp I et al. Statins and cancer risk. Am J Med. 2008 Apr;
121(4):302–9. [PMID: 18374689]
 
Kastelein JJ et al; ENHANCE Investigators. Simvastatin with or
without ezetimibe in familial hypercholesterolemia. N Engl J Med.
2008 Apr 3;358(14):1431–43. [PMID: 18376000]
 
Ladenson PW. Use of the thyroid hormone analogue eprotirome in
statin-treated dyslipidemia. N Engl J Med. 2010 Mar 11;
362(10):906–16. [PMID: 20220185]
 
Lewis SJ. Prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis: a
practitioner's guide for 2008. Am J Med. 2009 Jan;122(1 Suppl):
S38–50. [PMID: 19110087]
 
Maroo BP et al. Efficacy and safety of intensive statin therapy in
the elderly. Am J Geriatr Cardiol. 2008 Mar–Apr;17(2): 92–100.
[PMID: 18326948]
 
Peto R et al. Analyses of cancer data from three ezetimibe trials. N
Engl J Med. 2008 Sep 25;359(13):1357–66. [PMID: 18765432]
 
Raal FJ et al. Mipomersen, an apolipoprotein B synthesis inhibitor,
for lowering of LDL cholesterol concentrations in patients with
homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Mar
20;375(9719):998–1006. [PMID: 20227758]
 
Study of the Effectiveness of Additional Reductions in Cholesterol
and Homocysteine (SEARCH) Collaborative Group. Intensive
lowering of LDL cholesterol with 80 mg versus 20 mg simvastatin
daily in 12,064 survivors of myocardial infarction: a double-blind
randomised trial. Lancet. 2010 Nov 13; 376(9753):1658–69.
[PMID: 21067805]
 
Taylor AJ et al. Extended-release niacin or ezetimibe and carotid-
media thickness. N Engl J Med. 2009 Nov 26;361(22):2113–22.
[PMID: 19915217]
 
HIGH BLOOD TRIGLYCERIDES
Patients with very high levels of serum triglycerides (> 1000 mg/dL)
are at risk for pancreatitis. The pathophysiology is not certain, since
pancreatitis never develops in some patients with very high
triglyceride levels. Most patients with congenital abnormalities in
triglyceride metabolism present in childhood; hypertri glyceridemia-
induced pancreatitis first presenting in adults is more commonly due
to an acquired problem in lipid metabolism.
Although there are no clear triglyceride levels that predict
pancreatitis, most clinicians treat fasting levels above 500 mg/dL (5
mmol/L). The risk of pancreatitis may be more related to the
triglyceride level following consumption of a fatty meal. Because
postprandial increases in triglyceride are inevitable if fat-containing
foods are eaten, fasting triglyceride levels in persons prone to
pancreatitis should be kept well below that level.
The primary therapy for high triglyceride levels is dietary,
avoiding alcohol, simple sugars, refined starches, saturated and
trans fatty acids, and restricting total calories. Control of secondary
causes of high triglyceride levels (see Table 28–1) may also be
helpful. In patients with fasting triglycerides ≥ 500 mg/dL (≥ 5
mmol/L) despite adequate dietary compliance—and certainly in
those with a previous episode of pancreatitis—therapy with a
triglyceride-lowering drug (eg, niacin, a fibric acid derivative,
omega-3-acid ethyl esters, or an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor) is
indicated. Combinations of these medications may also be used.
Whether patients with elevated triglycerides (> 150 mg/dL or 1.5
mmol/L) should be treated to prevent CHD is not known. Meta-
analysis of 17 observational studies suggests that after adjustment
for other risk factors, elevated triglycerides increased CHD risk in
men by 14% and in women by 37%. Triglyceride-rich lipoproteins
(partially degraded VLDL, commonly called remnant lipoproteins)
have been found in human atheromas, and elevated triglycerides are
associated with small dense LDL in most instances. Elevated
triglycerides are also an important feature of the metabolic
syndrome, found in an estimated 25% of Americans—defined by
three or more of the following five abnormalities: waist
circumference > 102 cm in men or > 88 cm in women, serum
triglyceride level of at least 150 mg/dL, HDL level of < 40 mg/dL in
men or < 50 mg/dL in women, blood pressure of at least 130/85
mm Hg, and serum glucose level of at least 110 mg/dL. Other data,
however, suggest that triglyceride measurements do not improve
discrimination between those with and without CHD events, and
clinical trial data are not available to support the routine treatment of
high triglycerides in all patients.
The NCEP ATP III guidelines, however, recommend an
aggressive approach to triglyceride management. For those with
borderline levels (150–199 mg/dL or 1.5–1.99 mmol/L), emphasis
is placed on calorie restriction and exercise. For patients with high
triglycerides (> 200 mg/dL), the non-HDL cholesterol should be
measured (total cholesterol–HDL cholesterol). The ATP III report
recommends that non-HDL cholesterol should be treated with diet
and medications to result in levels 30 mg/dL higher than the LDL
goal. The ATP III report does not differentiate between primary
and secondary prevention. It is reasonable to use this approach for
patients with CHD and risk equivalents for that disease but not for
lower-risk patients.
Bays HE et al. Long-term up to 24-month efficacy and safety of
concomitant prescription omega-3-acid ethyl esters and
simvastatin in hypertriglyceridemic patients. Curr Med Res Opin.
2010 Apr;26(4):907–15. [PMID: 20156032]
 
Brunzell JD. Clinical practice. Hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J
Med. 2007 Sep 6;357(10):1009–17. [PMID: 17804845]
 
Faergeman O et al; Steering Committees of IDEAL and TNT
Trials. Plasma triglycerides and cardiovascular events in the
Treating to New Targets and Incremental Decrease in End-Points
through Aggressive Lipid Lowering trials of statins in patients with
coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol. 2009 Aug 15;104(4):459–
63. [PMID: 19660594]
 
Roth EM et al. Efficacy and safety of rosuvastatin and fenofibric
acid combination therapy versus simvastatin monotherapy in
patients with hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia: a
randomized, double-blind study. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs.
2010;10(3):175–86. [PMID: 20524719]
 
 
 
Nutritional Disorders
Robert B. Baron, MD, Ms
PROTEIN–ENERGY MALNUTRITION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Decreased intake of energy or protein, increased nutrient losses,
or increased nutrient requirements.
 Weight loss and growth failure.
 Kwashiorkor: caused by protein deficiency.
 Marasmus: caused by combined protein and energy deficiency.
 In severe cases, virtually all organ systems are affected.
 Protein loss correlates with weight loss: 35–40% total body
weight loss is usually fatal.
 
 General Considerations
Protein–energy malnutrition occurs as a result of a relative or
absolute deficiency of energy and protein. It may be primary, due to
inadequate food intake, or secondary, as a result of other illness.
For most developing nations, primary protein–energy malnutrition
remains among the most significant health problems. Protein–energy
malnutrition has been described as two distinct syndromes.
Kwashiorkor, caused by a deficiency of protein in the presence of
adequate energy, is typically seen in weaning infants at the birth of a
sibling in areas where foods containing protein are insufficiently
abundant. Marasmus, caused by combined protein and energy
deficiency, is most commonly seen where adequate quantities of
food are not available.
In industrialized societies, protein–energy malnutrition is most
often secondary to other diseases. Kwashiorkor-like secondary
protein–energy malnutrition occurs primarily in association with
hypermetabolic acute illnesses such as trauma, burns, and sepsis.
Marasmus-like secondary protein–energy malnutrition
typically results from chronic diseases such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), congestive heart failure, cancer, or
AIDS. These syndromes have been estimated to be present in at
least 20% of hospitalized patients. A substantially greater number of
patients have risk factors that could result in these syndromes. In
both syndromes, protein–energy malnutrition is caused either by
decreased intake of energy and protein, increased nutrient losses, or
increased nutrient requirements dictated by the underlying illness.
For example, diminished oral intake may result from poor dentition
or various gastrointestinal disorders. Loss of nutrients results from
malabsorption and diarrhea as well as from glycosuria. Nutrient
requirements are increased by fever, surgery, neoplasia, and burns.
 Pathophysiology
Protein–energy malnutrition affects every organ system. The most
obvious results are loss of body weight, adipose stores, and skeletal
muscle mass. Weight losses of 5–10% are usually tolerated without
loss of physiologic function; losses of 35–40% of body weight
usually result in death. Loss of protein from skeletal muscle and
internal organs is usually proportionate to weight loss. Protein mass
is lost from the liver, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, and heart.
As protein–energy malnutrition progresses, organ dysfunction
develops. Hepatic synthesis of serum proteins decreases, and
depressed levels of circulating proteins are observed. Cardiac
output and contractility are decreased, and the electrocardiogram
(ECG) may show decreased voltage and a rightward axis shift.
Autopsies of patients who die with severe undernutrition show
myofibrillar atrophy and interstitial edema of the heart.
Respiratory function is affected primarily by weakness and
atrophy of the muscles of respiration. Vital capacity and tidal
volume are depressed, and mucociliary clearance is abnormal. The
gastrointestinal tract is affected by mucosal atrophy and loss of villi
of small intestine, resulting in malabsorption. Intestinal
disaccharidase deficiency and mild pancreatic insufficiency also
occur.
Changes in immunologic function are among the most important
changes seen in protein–calorie undernutrition. T lymphocyte
number and function are depressed. Changes in B cell function are
more variable. Impaired complement activity, granulocyte function,
and anatomic barriers to infection are noted, and wound healing is
poor.
 Clinical Findings
The clinical manifestations of protein–energy malnutrition range from
mild growth retardation and weight loss to a number of distinct
clinical syndromes. Children in the developing world manifest
marasmus and kwashiorkor. In secondary protein–energy
malnutrition as seen in industrialized nations, clinical manifestations
are affected by the degree of protein and energy deficiency, the
underlying illness that resulted in the deficiency, and the patient's
nutritional status prior to illness.
Progressive wasting that begins with weight loss and proceeds to
more severe cachexia typically develops in most patients with
marasmus-like secondary protein–energy malnutrition. In the most
severe form of this disorder, most body fat stores disappear and
muscle mass decreases, most noticeably in the temporalis and
interosseous muscles. Laboratory studies may be unremarkable—
serum albumin, for example, may be normal or slightly decreased,
rarely decreasing to < 2.8 g/dL (< 28 g/L). In contrast, owing to its
rapidity of onset, kwashiorkor-like secondary protein–energy
malnutrition may develop in patients with normal subcutaneous fat
and muscle mass or, if the patient is obese, in patients with excess
fat and muscle. The serum protein level, however, typically declines
and the serum albumin is often < 2.8 g/dL (< 28 g/L). Dependent
edema, ascites, or anasarca may develop. As with primary protein–
energy malnutrition, combinations of the marasmus-like and
kwashiorkor-like syndromes can occur simultaneously, typically in
patients with progressive chronic disease in whom a superimposed
acute illness develops.
 Treatment
The treatment of severe protein–energy malnutrition is a slow
process requiring great care. Initial efforts should be directed at
correcting fluid and electrolyte abnormalities and infections. Of
particular concern are depletion of potassium, magnesium, and
calcium and acid–base abnormalities. The second phase of
treatment is directed at repletion of protein, energy, and
micronutrients. Treatment is started with modest quantities of
protein and calories calculated according to the patient's actual
body weight. Adult patients are given 1 g/kg of protein and 30
kcal/kg of calories. Concomitant administration of vitamins and
minerals is obligatory. Either the enteral or parenteral route can be
used, although the former is preferable. Enteral fat and lactose are
withheld initially. Patients with less severe protein–calorie
undernutrition can be given calories and protein simultaneously with
the correction of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Similar
quantities of protein and calories are recommended for initial
treatment.
Patients treated for protein–energy malnutrition require close
follow-up. In adults, both calories and protein are advanced as
tolerated, adults to 1.5 g/kg/d of protein and 40 kcal/kg/d of
calories.
Patients who are re-fed too rapidly may develop a number of
untoward clinical sequelae. During refeeding, circulating potassium,
magnesium, phosphorus, and glucose move intracellularly and can
result in low serum levels of each. The administration of water and
sodium with carbohydrate refeeding can result in congestive heart
failure in persons with depressed cardiac function. Enteral refeeding
can lead to malabsorption and diarrhea due to abnormalities in the
gastrointestinal tract.
Refeeding edema is a benign condition to be differentiated from
congestive heart failure. Changes in renal sodium reabsorption and
poor skin and blood vessel integrity result in the development of
dependent edema without other signs of heart disease. Treatment
includes reassurance, elevation of the dependent area, and modest
sodium restriction. Diuretics are usually ineffective, may aggravate
electrolyte deficiencies, and should not be used.
The prevention and early detection of protein–energy malnutrition
in hospitalized patients require awareness of its risk factors and
early symptoms and signs. Patients at risk require formal assessment
of nutritional status and close observation of dietary intake, body
weight, and nutritional requirements during the hospital stay.
Bejon P et al. Fraction of all hospital admissions and deaths
attributable to malnutrition among children in rural Kenya. Am J
Clin Nutr. 2008 Dec;88(6):1626–31. [PMID: 19064524]
 
Grover Z et al. Protein energy malnutrition. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2009 Oct;56(5):1055–68. [PMID: 19931063]
 
Huhmann MB et al. Review of American Society for Parenteral
and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) Clinical Guidelines for Nutrition
Support in Cancer Patients: nutrition screening and assessment.
Nutr Clin Pract. 2008 Apr–May;23(2):182–8. [PMID:
18390787]
 
Kovesdy CP et al. Outcome predictability of biomarkers of
protein-energy wasting and inflammation in moderate and
advanced chronic kidney disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Aug;
90(2):407–14. [PMID: 19535427]
 
Meijers JM et al. Defining malnutrition: Mission or mission
impossible? Nutrition. 2009 Nov 30. [Epub ahead of print]
[PMID: 19954929]
 
Milne AC et al. Protein and energy supplementation in elderly
people at risk from malnutrition. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2009 Apr 15; (2):CD003288. [PMID: 19370584]
 
OBESITY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Excess adipose tissue; body mass index (BMI) > 30.
 Upper body obesity (abdomen and flank) of greater health
consequence than lower body obesity (buttocks and thighs).
 Associated with health consequences, including diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.
 
 General Considerations
Obesity is one of the most common disorders in medical practice
and among the most frustrating and difficult to manage. Little
progress has been made in prevention or treatment, yet major
changes have occurred in our understanding of its causes and its
implications for health.
 Definition & Measurement
Obesity is defined as an excess of adipose tissue. Accurate
quantification of body fat requires sophisticated techniques not
usually available in clinical practice. Physical examination is usually
sufficient to detect excess body fat. More quantitative evaluation is
performed by calculating the BMI.
The BMI closely correlates with excess adipose tissue. It is
calculated by dividing measured body weight in kilograms by the
height in meters squared.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) define a normal BMI as
18.5–24.9. Overweight is defined as BMI = 25–29.9. Class I
obesity is 30–34.9, class II obesity is 35–39.9, and class III
(extreme) obesity is BMI > 40. Factors other than total weight,
however, are also important. Upper body obesity (excess fat
around the waist and flank) is a greater health hazard than lower
body obesity (fat in the thighs and buttocks). Obese patients with
increased abdominal circumference (> 102 cm in men and 88 cm in
women) or with high waist–hip ratios (> 1.0 in men and > 0.85 in
women) have a greater risk of diabetes mellitus, stroke, coronary
artery disease, and early death than equally obese patients with
lower ratios. Further differentiation of the location of excess fat
suggests that visceral fat within the abdominal cavity is more
hazardous to health than subcutaneous fat around the abdomen.
Current U.S. survey data demonstrate that 68% of Americans
are overweight and 33.8% are obese. Women in the United States
are more apt to be obese than men, and African-American and
Mexican-American women are more obese than whites. The poor
are more obese than the rich regardless of race.
 Health Consequences of Obesity
Obesity is associated with significant increases in both morbidity
and mortality. A great many disorders occur with greater frequency
in obese people. The most important and common of these are
hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, coronary
artery disease, degenerative joint disease, and psychosocial
disability. Approximately 60% of individuals with obesity in the
United States have the metabolic syndrome (including three or more
of the following factors: elevated abdominal circumference, blood
pressure, blood triglycerides, and fasting blood sugar, and low high-
density lipoprotein [HDL] cholesterol). Certain cancers (colon,
ovary, and breast), thromboembolic disorders, digestive tract
diseases (gallbladder disease, gastroesophageal reflux disease), and
skin disorders are also more prevalent in the obese. Surgical and
obstetric risks are greater. Obese patients also have a greater risk
of pulmonary functional impairment including sleep apnea, endocrine
abnormalities, proteinuria, and increased hemoglobin concentration.
Patients with obesity have increased rates of major depression and
binge eating disorder. Several studies have documented that obese
individuals are also subject to various forms of social discrimination.
In young and middle-aged adults, mortality from all causes and
mortality from cardiovascular disease increase in proportion to the
degree of obesity. The relative risk associated with obesity,
however, decreases with age, and weight is no longer a risk factor
in adults over age 75 years. Analysis of data from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) has
suggested that lesser amounts of excess weight (BMI between 25
and 29.9) may not be associated with excess mortality.
 Etiology
Until recently, obesity was considered to be the direct result of a
sedentary lifestyle plus chronic ingestion of excess calories.
Although these factors are undoubtedly the principal cause in many
cases, there is evidence for strong genetic influences on the
development of obesity. Adopted children demonstrate a close
relationship between their BMI and that of their biologic parents.
No such relationship is found between the children and their
adoptive parents. Twin studies also demonstrate substantial genetic
influences on BMI with little influence from the childhood
environment. As much as 40–70% of obesity may be explained by
genetic influences.
Genetic determinants of some types of obesity have now been
established. Five genes affecting control of appetite have been
identified in mice. Mutations of each gene result in obesity, and each
has a human homolog. One gene codes for a protein expressed by
adipose tissue—leptin—and another for the leptin receptor in the
brain. The other three genes affect brain pathways downstream
from the leptin receptor. Numerous other candidate genes for
human obesity have been identified. Only a small percentage (4–
6%) of human obesity is thought to be due to single gene mutations.
Most human obesity undoubtedly develops from the interactions of
multiple genes, environmental factors, and behavior. The rapid
increase in obesity in the last several decades clearly points to a
major role of environmental factors in the development of obesity.
 Medical Evaluation of the Obese
Patient
Historical information should be obtained about age at onset, recent
weight changes, family history of obesity, occupational history,
eating and exercise behavior, cigarette and alcohol use, previous
weight loss experience, and psychosocial factors including
assessment for depression and eating disorders. Particular attention
should be directed at use of laxatives, diuretics, hormones,
nutritional supplements, and over-the-counter medications.
Physical examination should assess the BMI, the degree and
distribution of body fat, overall nutritional status, and signs of
secondary causes of obesity.
Less than 1% of obese patients have an identifiable secondary,
nonpsychiatric, cause of obesity. Hypothyroidism and Cushing
syndrome are important examples that can usually be diagnosed by
physical examination in patients with unexplained recent weight gain.
Such patients require further endocrinologic evaluation, including
serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) determination and
dexamethasone suppression testing (see Chapter 26).
All obese patients should be assessed for medical consequences
of their obesity by screening for the metabolic syndrome. Blood
pressure, waist circumference, fasting glucose, low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) and HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides should be
measured.
 Treatment
Using conventional dietary techniques, only 20% of patients will
lose 20 lb and maintain the loss for over 2 years; 5% will maintain a
40-lb loss. Average weight loss is approximately 7% of baseline
weight. Continued close provider–patient contact appears to be
more important for success of treatment than the specific features of
any given treatment regimen. Careful patient selection will improve
success rates and decrease frustration of both patients and
therapists. Only sufficiently motivated patients should enter active
treatment programs. Specific attempts to identify motivated patients
—eg, requesting a 3-day diet record—are often useful.
Most successful programs employ a multidisciplinary approach to
weight loss, with hypocaloric diets, behavior modification to change
eating behavior, aerobic exercise, and social support. Emphasis
must be on maintenance of weight loss.
Dietary instructions for most patients incorporate the same
principles that apply to healthy people who are not obese. This is
achieved by emphasizing intake of a wide variety of predominantly
“unprocessed” foods. Special attention is usually paid to limiting
foods that provide large amounts of calories without other nutrients,
ie, fat, sucrose, and alcohol. There is no physiologic advantage to
diets that restrict carbohydrates, advocate relatively larger amounts
of protein or fats, or recommend ingestion of foods one at a time.
Diets that are restricted in carbohydrates (such as the Atkins and
South Beach diets), however, can be effective in achieving a lower
total calorie intake. Several studies have demonstrated that low-
carbohydrate diets can be used safely and effectively for weight loss
without adverse effects on lipids or other metabolic parameters.
Meal replacement diets can also be used effectively and safely to
achieve weight loss.
Long-term changes in eating behavior are required to maintain
weight loss. Although formal behavior modification programs are
available to which patients can be referred, the clinician caring for
obese patients can teach a number of useful behavioral techniques.
The most important technique is to emphasize planning and record
keeping. Patients can be taught to plan menus and exercise sessions
and to record their actual behavior. Record keeping not only aids in
behavioral change, but also helps the provider to make specific
suggestions for problem solving. Patients can be taught to recognize
“eating cues” (emotional, situational, etc) and how to avoid or
control them. Regular self-monitoring of weight is also associated
with improved long-term weight maintenance.
Exercise offers a number of advantages to patients trying to lose
weight and keep it off. Aerobic exercise directly increases the daily
energy expenditure and is particularly useful for long-term weight
maintenance. Exercise will also preserve lean body mass and
partially prevent the decrease in basal energy expenditure (BEE)
seen with semistarvation. When compared with no treatment,
exercise alone results in small amounts of weight loss. Exercise plus
diet results in greater weight loss than diet alone. A greater intensity
of exercise is associated with a greater amount of weight loss. Up to
1 hour of moderate exercise per day is associated with long-term
weight maintenance in individuals who have successfully lost weight.
Social support is essential for a successful weight loss program.
Continued close contact with clinicians and involvement of the
family and peer group are useful techniques for reinforcing
behavioral change and preventing social isolation.
Patients with severe obesity may require more aggressive
treatment regimens. Very-low-calorie diets (≤ 800 kcal/d) result in
rapid weight loss and marked initial improvement in obesity-related
metabolic complications. Patients are commonly maintained on such
programs for 4–6 months. Patients who adhere to the program lose
an average of 2 lb per week. Average maximum weight loss is
approximately 15% of initial weight. Most programs use meal
replacement diets to achieve the very-low-calorie intake. Long-term
weight maintenance following meal replacement programs is less
predictable and requires concurrent behavior modification, long-
term use of low-calorie diets, careful self-monitoring, and regular
exercise. Side effects such as fatigue, orthostatic hypotension, cold
intolerance, and fluid and electrolyte disorders are observed in
proportion to the degree of calorie reduction and require regular
supervision by a clinician. Other less common complications include
gout, gallbladder disease, and cardiac arrhythmias. Although weight
loss is more rapidly achieved with very-low-calorie diets as
compared with traditional diets, long-term outcomes are equivalent.
Medications for the treatment of obesity are available both over
the counter and by prescription. Considerable controversy exists as
to the appropriate use of medications for obesity. NIH clinical
obesity guidelines state that obesity drugs may be used as part of a
comprehensive weight loss program for patients with BMI > 30 or
those with BMI > 27 with obesity-related risk factors. There are
few data, however, to suggest that medications can improve long-
term outcomes associated with obesity.
Several medications are approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for treatment of obesity. Catecholaminergic
medications (eg, phentermine, diethylpropion, mazindol) are
approved for short-term use only and have limited utility.
Sibutramine, previously approved for the treatment of obesity, was
withdrawn from the United States market in 2010 following the
publication of a large study demonstrating an increase risk of
strokes and myocardial infarctions.
Orlistat works in the gastrointestinal tract rather than the central
nervous system. By inhibiting intestinal lipase, orlistat reduces fat
absorption. As expected, orlistat may result in diarrhea, gas, and
cramping and perhaps also reduced absorption of fat-soluble
vitamins. In randomized trials with up to 2 years of follow-up,
orlistat has resulted in 2–4 kg greater weight loss than placebo.
Orlistat (120 mg orally up to three times daily with each fat-
containing meal) is the only medication approved for longer-term
treatment of obesity in the United States. A lower dose formulation
(Alli 60 mg, one capsule orally up to three times daily with each fat-
containing meal; maximum of three capsules per day) is available
without a prescription. Long-term clinical benefits have not been
demonstrated. Although orlistat results in some additional weight
loss at the end of 1- and 2-year clinical trials and, in some studies,
improved obesity-related metabolic parameters, a beneficial impact
on obesity-related clinical outcomes has not been established.
Several combination medications are also being investigated.
Phentermine and topiramate resulted in excess psychiatric events,
increased heart rate and teratogenicity, and has not been approved
for use in the United States. Bupropion and zonisamide, and
bupropion and naltrexone are also being evaluated. Other
investigational medications for weight loss include exenatide and
other incretins, and cetilistat, another pancreatic lipase inhibitor.
Bariatric surgery is an increasingly prevalent treatment option for
patients with severe obesity. In the United States, gastric operations
are considered the procedures of choice. Most popular is the
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB). In most centers, the operation
can be done laparoscopically. RYGB typically results in substantial
amounts of weight loss—over 30% of initial body weight in some
studies. Complications occur in up to 40% of persons undergoing
RYGB surgery and include peritonitis due to anastomotic leak;
abdominal wall hernias; staple line disruption; gallstones;
neuropathy; marginal ulcers; stomal stenosis; wound infections;
thromboembolic disease; gastrointestinal symptoms; and nutritional
deficiencies, including iron, vitamin B12, folate, calcium, and vitamin
D. Operative mortality rates within 30 days are nil to 1% in low-risk
populations but have been reported to be substantially higher in
Medicare beneficiaries. One-year mortality rates have been
reported as high as 7.5% in men with Medicare. The surgical
volume (the number of cases performed by the surgeon or hospital)
has been demonstrated to be an important predictor of outcome.
Gastric banding (GB) surgeries are increasing as an alternative
procedure. GB results in less dramatic weight loss than RYGB but
with fewer short-term complications. Frequent follow-up is required
to adjust the gastric band. Longer-term follow-up suggests that both
procedures are associated with significant regaining of weight. NIH
consensus panel recommendations are to limit obesity surgery to
patients with BMIs over 40, or over 35 if obesity-related
comorbidities are present. The procedure is cost-effective for
patients with severe obesity and most third-party payers cover the
procedure in selected patients. Outcomes studies have suggested
that bariatric surgery is associated with a significant reduction in
deaths at 11-year follow-up. In one prospective study, the number
needed to treat to prevent one death in 11 years was 77 operations.
 When to Refer
Patients with BMI over 40 (or over 35 with obesity-related
morbidities) who are interested in considering weight loss surgery.
Benotti PN et al. Preoperative weight loss before bariatric surgery.
Arch Surg. 2009 Dec;144(12):1150–5. [PMID: 20026834]
 
Boltri JM et al. Clinical inquiries. Which strategies work best to
prevent obesity in adults? J Fam Pract. 2009 Dec;58(12):668-76.
[PMID: 19961823]
 
Chen L et al. Reduction in consumption of sugar-sweetened
beverages is associated with weight loss: the PREMIER trial. Am J
Clin Nutr. 2009 May;89(5):1299–306. [PMID: 19339405]
 
Corsica JA et al. Food addiction: true or false? Curr Opin
Gastroenterol. 2009 Dec 29. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
20042860]
 
Farrell TM et al. Clinical application of laparoscopic bariatric
surgery: an evidence-based review. Surg Endosc. 2009
May;23(5):930–49. [PMID: 19125308]
 
Field BC et al. Obesity treatment: novel peripheral targets. Br J
Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Dec;68(6):830–43. [PMID: 20002077]
 
Flegal KM et al. Prevalence and trends in obesity among US
adults, 1999–2008. JAMA. 2010 Jan 20;303(3):235–41. [PMID:
20071471]
 
Foster GD et al. Weight and metabolic outcomes after 2 years on
a low-carbohydrate versus low-fat diet: a randomized trial. Ann
Intern Med. 2010 Aug 3;153(3):147–57. [PMID: 20679559]
 
Idelevich E et al. Current pharmacotherapeutic concepts for the
treatment of obesity in adults. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2009
Feb;3(1):75–90. [PMID: 19144669]
 
James WP et al; SCOUT Investigators. Effect of sibutramine on
cardiovascular outcomes in overweight and obese subjects. N Engl
J Med. 2010 Sep 2;363(10):905–17. [PMID: 20818901]
 
King DE et al. Adherence to healthy lifestyle habits in US adults,
1988–2006. Am J Med. 2009 Jun;122(6):528–34. [PMID:
19486715]
 
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS) Consortium;
Flum DR et al. Perioperative safety in the longitudinal assessment
of bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jul 30;361(5): 445–54.
[PMID: 19641201]
 
Puhl MR et al. The stigma of obesity: A review and update.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Jan 22. 2009 May;17(5):941–64.
[PMID: 19165161]
 
Rao G. Office-based strategies for the management of obesity. Am
Fam Physician. 2010 Jun 15;81(12):1449–56. [PMID:
20540483]
 
Sacks FM et al. Comparison of weight-loss diets with different
compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates. N Engl J Med.
2009 Feb 26;360(9):859–73. [PMID: 19246357]
 
Sargent BJ et al. New central targets for the treatment of obesity.
Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Dec;68(6):852–60. [PMID:
20002079]
 
Siebenhofer A et al. Long-term effects of weight-reducing drugs in
hypertensive patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8;
(3):CD007654. [PMID: 19588440]
 
Tice JA et al. Gastric banding or bypass? A systematic review
comparing the two most popular bariatric procedures. Am J Med.
2008 Oct;121(10):885–93. [PMID: 18823860]
 
Tsai AG et al. Treatment of obesity in primary care practice in the
United States: a systematic review. J Gen Intern Med. 2009
Sep;24(9):1073–9. [PMID: 19562419]
 
Yancy WS Jret al. A randomized trial of a low-carbohydrate diet
vs orlistat plus a low-fat diet for weight loss. Arch Intern Med.
2010 Jan 25;170(2):136–45. [PMID: 20101008]
 
EATING DISORDERS
 
ANOREXIA NERVOSA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Disturbance of body image and intense fear of becoming fat.
 Weight loss leading to body weight 15% below expected.
 In females, absence of three consecutive menstrual cycles.
 
 General Considerations
Anorexia nervosa typically begins in the years between adolescence
and young adulthood. Ninety percent of patients are females, most
from the middle and upper socioeconomic strata. The diagnosis is
based on weight loss leading to body weight 15% below expected,
a distorted body image, fear of weight gain or of loss of control
over food intake and, in females, the absence of at least three
consecutive menstrual cycles. Other medical or psychiatric illnesses
that can account for anorexia and weight loss must be excluded.
The prevalence of anorexia nervosa is greater than previously
suggested. In Rochester, Minnesota, for example, the prevalence
per 100,000 population is estimated to be 270 for females and 22
for males. Many other adolescent girls have features of the disorder
without the severe weight loss.
The cause of anorexia nervosa is not known. Although multiple
endocrinologic abnormalities exist in these patients, most authorities
believe they are secondary to malnutrition and not primary
disorders. Most experts favor a primary psychiatric origin, but no
hypothesis explains all cases. The patient characteristically comes
from a family whose members are highly goal and achievement
oriented. Interpersonal relationships may be inadequate or
destructive. The parents are usually overly directive and concerned
with slimness and physical fitness, and much of the family
conversation centers around dietary matters. One theory holds that
the patient's refusal to eat is an attempt to regain control of her body
in defiance of parental control. The patient's unwillingness to inhabit
an “adult body” may also represent a rejection of adult
responsibilities and the implications of adult interpersonal
relationships. Patients are commonly perfectionistic in behavior and
exhibit obsessional personality characteristics. Marked depression
or anxiety may be present.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with anorexia nervosa may exhibit severe emaciation and
may complain of cold intolerance or constipation. Amenorrhea is
almost always present. Bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia
may be present in severe cases. Examination demonstrates loss of
body fat, dry and scaly skin, and increased lanugo body hair.
Parotid enlargement and edema may also occur.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings are variable but may include anemia,
leukopenia, electrolyte abnormalities, and elevations of blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine. Serum cholesterol levels are
often increased. Endocrine abnormalities include depressed levels of
luteinizing and follicle-stimulating hormones and impaired response
of luteinizing hormone to luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone.
 Diagnosis & Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis can be difficult, since many common social and
cultural factors promote and maintain anorexic behavior. The
diagnosis depends on identification of the common behavioral
features and exclusion of medical disorders that would account for
weight loss.
Behavioral features required for the diagnosis include intense fear
of becoming obese, disturbance of body image, weight loss of at
least 15%, and refusal to exceed a minimal normal weight.
The differential diagnosis includes endocrine and metabolic
disorders, such as panhypopituitarism, Addison disease,
hyperthyroidism, and diabetes mellitus; gastrointestinal disorders,
such as Crohn disease and celiac sprue; chronic infections and
cancers, such as tuberculosis and lymphoma; and rare central
nervous system disorders, such as hypothalamic tumors.
 Treatment
The goal of treatment is restoration of normal body weight and
resolution of psychological difficulties. Hospitalization may be
necessary. Treatment programs conducted by experienced teams
are successful in about two-thirds of cases, restoring normal weight
and menstruation. One-half continue to experience difficulties with
eating behavior and psychiatric problems. Occasional patients with
anorexia develop obesity after treatment. Two to 6% of patients die
of the complications of the disorder or commit suicide.
Various treatment methods have been used without clear
evidence of superiority of one over another. Supportive care by
clinicians and nurses is probably the most important feature of
therapy. Structured behavioral therapy, intensive psychotherapy,
and family therapy may be tried. A variety of medications including
tricyclic antidepressants, selected serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), and lithium carbonate are effective in some cases; overall,
however, clinical trial results have been disappointing. Patients with
severe malnutrition must be hemodynamically stabilized and may
require enteral or parenteral feeding. Forced feedings should be
reserved for life-threatening situations, since the goal of treatment is
to reestablish normal eating behavior.
 When to Refer
 
•    Adolescents and young adults with otherwise
unexplained weight loss should be evaluated by a
psychiatrist.
•    All patients with diagnosed anorexia nervosa should be
co-managed with a psychiatrist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Signs of hypovolemia, major electrolyte disorders, and
severe protein-energy malnutrition.
•    Failure to improve with outpatient management.
Attia E. Anorexia nervosa: current status and future directions.
Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:425–35. [PMID: 19719398]
 
Attia E et al. Behavioral management for anorexia nervosa. N Engl
J Med. 2009 Jan 29;360(5):500–6. [PMID: 19179317]
 
Court A et al. What is the scientific evidence for the use of anti-
psychotic medication in anorexia nervosa? Eat Disord. 2008 May–
Jun;16(3):217–23. [PMID: 18443980]
 
Mehler PS et al. Nutritional rehabilitation: practical guidelines for
refeeding the anorectic patient. J Nutr Metab. 2010;2010. pii:
625782 [PMID: 20798756]
 
Sim LA et al. Identification and treatment of eating disorders in the
primary care setting. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010 Aug;85(8):746–51.
[PMID: 20605951]
 
Treasure J et al. Eating disorders. Lancet. 2010 Feb
13;375(9714): 583–93. [PMID: 19931176]
 
BULIMIA NERVOSA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Uncontrolled episodes of binge eating at least twice weekly for 3
months.
 Recurrent inappropriate compensation to prevent weight gain
such as self-induced vomiting, laxatives, diuretics, fasting, or
excessive exercise.
 Overconcern with weight and body shape.
 
 General Considerations
Bulimia nervosa is the episodic uncontrolled ingestion of large
quantities of food followed by recurrent inappropriate
compensatory behavior to prevent weight gain such as self-induced
vomiting, diuretic or cathartic use, or strict dieting or vigorous
exercise.
Like anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa is predominantly a
disorder of young, white, middle- and upper-class women. It is
more difficult to detect than anorexia, and some studies have
estimated that the prevalence may be as high as 19% in college-
aged women.
 Clinical Findings
Patients with bulimia nervosa typically consume large quantities of
easily ingested high-calorie foods, usually in secrecy. Some patients
may have several such episodes a day for a few days; others report
regular and persistent patterns of binge eating. Binging is usually
followed by vomiting, cathartics, or diuretics and is usually
accompanied by feelings of guilt or depression. Periods of binging
may be followed by intervals of self-imposed starvation. Body
weights may fluctuate but generally are within 20% of desirable
weights.
Some patients with bulimia nervosa also have a cryptic form of
anorexia nervosa with significant weight loss and amenorrhea.
Family and psychological issues are generally similar to those
encountered among patients with anorexia nervosa. Bulimics,
however, have a higher incidence of premorbid obesity, greater use
of cathartics and diuretics, and more impulsive or antisocial
behavior. Menstruation is usually preserved.
Medical complications are numerous. Gastric dilatation and
pancreatitis have been reported after binges. Vomiting can result in
poor dentition, pharyngitis, esophagitis, aspiration, and electrolyte
abnormalities. Cathartic and diuretic abuse also cause electrolyte
abnormalities or dehydration. Constipation and hemorrhoids are
common.
 Treatment
Treatment of bulimia nervosa requires supportive care and
psychotherapy. Individual, group, family, and behavioral therapy
have all been utilized. Antidepressant medications may be helpful.
The best results have been with fluoxetine hydrochloride and other
SSRIs. Although death from bulimia is rare, the long-term
psychiatric prognosis in severe bulimia is worse than that in anorexia
nervosa.
 When to Refer
All patients with diagnosed bulimia should be co-managed with a
psychiatrist.
Crow SJ et al. Increased mortality in bulimia nervosa and other
eating disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2009 Dec;166(12):1342–6.
[PMID: 19833789]
 
Krysanki VL et al. Review of controlled psychotherapy treatment
trials for binge eating disorder. Psychol Rep. 2008 Apr;102(2):
339–68. [PMID: 18567205]
 
Reiter CS et al. Nutrition therapy for eating disorders. Nutr Clin
Pract. 2010 Apr;25(2):122–36. [PMID: 20413693]
 
Steinhausen HC et al. The outcome of bulimia nervosa: findings
from one-quarter century of research. Am J Psychiatry. 2009
Dec;166(12):1331–41. [PMID: 19884225]
 
DISORDERS OF VITAMIN
METABOLISM
 
THIAMINE (B1) DEFICIENCY
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most common in patients with chronic alcoholism.
 Early symptoms of anorexia, muscle cramps, paresthesias,
irritability.
 Advanced syndromes of high output heart failure (“wet beriberi”),
peripheral nerve disorders, and Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
(“dry beriberi”).
 
 General Considerations
Most thiamine deficiency in the United States is due to alcoholism.
Patients with chronic alcoholism may have poor dietary intakes of
thiamine and impaired thiamine absorption, metabolism, and
storage. Thiamine deficiency is also associated with malabsorption,
dialysis, and other causes of chronic protein–calorie undernutrition.
Thiamine deficiency can be precipitated in patients with marginal
thiamine status with intravenous dextrose solutions.
 Clinical Findings
Early manifestations of thiamine deficiency include anorexia, muscle
cramps, paresthesias, and irritability. Advanced deficiency primarily
affects the cardiovascular system (“wet beriberi”) or the nervous
system (“dry beriberi”). Wet beriberi occurs in thiamine deficiency
accompanied by severe physical exertion and high carbohydrate
intakes. Dry beriberi occurs in thiamine deficiency accompanied by
inactivity and low calorie intake.
Wet beriberi is characterized by marked peripheral vasodilation
resulting in high-output heart failure with dyspnea, tachycardia,
cardiomegaly, and pulmonary and peripheral edema, with warm
extremities mimicking cellulitis.
Dry beriberi involves both the peripheral and the central nervous
systems. Peripheral nerve involvement is typically a symmetric
motor and sensory neuropathy with pain, paresthesias, and loss of
reflexes. The legs are affected more than the arms. Central nervous
system involvement results in Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome.
Wernicke encephalopathy consists of nystagmus progressing to
ophthalmoplegia, truncal ataxia, and confusion. Korsakoff
syndrome includes amnesia, confabulation, and impaired learning.
 Diagnosis
A variety of biochemical tests are available to assess thia-mine
deficiency. In most instances, however, the clinical response to
empiric thiamine therapy is used to support a diagnosis of thiamine
deficiency. The most commonly used and widely available
biochemical tests are measurement of erythrocyte transketolase
activity and urinary thiamine excretion. A transketolase activity
coefficient > 15–20% suggests thiamine deficiency.
 Treatment
Thiamine deficiency is treated with large parenteral doses of
thiamine. Fifty to 100 mg/d is administered intravenously for the first
few days, followed by daily oral doses of 5–10 mg/d. All patients
should simultaneously receive therapeutic doses of other water-
soluble vitamins. Although treatment results in complete resolution in
half of patients (one-fourth immediately and another one-fourth over
days), the other half obtain only partial resolution or no benefit.
 When to Refer
Patients with signs of beriberi or Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
should be referred to a neurologist.
THIAMINE TOXICITY
There is no known toxicity of thiamine.
Galvin R et al. EFNS guidelines for diagnosis, therapy and
prevention of Wernicke encephalopathy. Eur J Neurol. 2010
Dec;17(12):1408–18. [PMID: 20642790]
 
Kumar N. Neurologic presentations of nutritional deficiencies.
Neurol Clin. 2010 Feb;28(1):107–70. [PMID: 19932379]
 
Malone M. Recommended nutritional supplements for bariatric
surgery patients. Ann Pharmacother. 2008 Dec;42(12):1851–8.
[PMID: 19017827]
 
RIBOFLAVIN (B2) DEFICIENCY
 Clinical Findings
Riboflavin deficiency almost always occurs in combination with
deficiencies of other vitamins. Dietary inadequacy, interactions with
a variety of medications, alcoholism, and other causes of protein–
calorie undernutrition are the most common causes of riboflavin
deficiency.
Manifestations of riboflavin deficiency include cheilosis, angular
stomatitis, glossitis, seborrheic dermatitis, weakness, corneal
vascularization, and anemia.
 Diagnosis
Riboflavin deficiency can be confirmed by measuring the riboflavin-
dependent enzyme erythrocyte glutathione reductase. Activity
coefficients > 1.2–1.3 are suggestive of riboflavin deficiency.
Urinary riboflavin excretion and serum levels of plasma and red cell
flavins can also be measured.
 Treatment
Riboflavin deficiency is usually treated empirically when the
diagnosis is suspected. It is easily treated with foods such as meat,
fish, and dairy products or with oral preparations of the vitamin.
Administration of 5–15 mg/d until clinical findings are resolved is
usually adequate. Riboflavin can also be given parenterally, but it is
poorly soluble in aqueous solutions.
RIBOFLAVIN TOXICITY
There is no known toxicity of riboflavin.
Hoey L et al. Studies of biomarker responses to intervention with
riboflavin: a systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009
Jun;89(6):1960S–1980S. [PMID: 19403631]
 
Koch TR et al. Postoperative metabolic and nutritional
complications of bariatric surgery. Gastroenterol Clin North Am.
2010 Mar;39(1):109–24. [PMID: 20202584]
 
McNulty H et al. Intake and status of folate and related B-
vitamins: considerations and challenges in achieving optimal status.
Br J Nutr. 2008 Jun;99(Suppl 3):S48–54. [PMID: 18598588]
 
NIACIN DEFICIENCY
 General Considerations
Niacin is a generic term for nicotinic acid and other derivatives with
similar nutritional activity. Unlike most other vita-mins, niacin can be
synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan. Niacin is an essential
component of the coenzymes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP),
which are involved in many oxidation-reduction reactions. The
major food sources of niacin are protein foods containing
tryptophan and numerous cereals, vegetables, and dairy products.
Niacin in the form of nicotinic acid is used therapeutically for the
treatment of hypercholesterolemia and hyper-triglyceridemia. Daily
doses of 3–6 g can result in significant reductions in levels of LDL
and very-low-density lipo-proteins (VLDL) and in elevation of
HDL. Niacinamide (the form of niacin usually used to treat niacin
deficiency) does not exhibit the lipid-lowering effects of nicotinic
acid. Historically, niacin deficiency occurred when corn, which is
relatively deficient in both tryptophan and niacin, was the major
source of calories. Currently, niacin deficiency is more commonly
due to alcoholism and nutrient–drug interactions. Niacin deficiency
can also occur in inborn errors of metabolism.
 Clinical Findings
As with other B vitamins, the early manifestations of niacin
deficiency are nonspecific. Common complaints include anorexia,
weakness, irritability, mouth soreness, glossitis, stomatitis, and
weight loss. More advanced deficiency results in the classic triad of
pellagra: dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia. The dermatitis is
symmetric, involving sun-exposed areas. Skin lesions are dark, dry,
and scaling. The dementia begins with insomnia, irritability, and
apathy and progresses to confusion, memory loss, hallucinations,
and psychosis. The diarrhea can be severe and may result in
malabsorption due to atrophy of the intestinal villi. Advanced
pellagra can result in death.
 Diagnosis
In early deficiency, diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion and
attempts at confirmation of niacin deficiency. Niacin metabolites,
particularly N-methylnicotinamide, can be measured in the urine.
Low levels suggest niacin deficiency but may also be found in
patients with generalized under nutrition. Serum and red cell levels
of NAD and NADP are also low but are similarly nonspecific. In
advanced cases, the diagnosis of pellagra can be made on clinical
grounds.
 Treatment
Niacin deficiency can be effectively treated with oral niacin, usually
given as nicotinamide. Doses ranging from 10 mg/d to 150 mg/d
have been used without difficulty.
NIACIN TOXICITY
At the high doses of niacin used to treat hyperlipidemia, side effects
are common. These include cutaneous flushing (partially prevented
by pretreatment with aspirin, 325 mg/d, and use of extended-
release preparations) and gastric irritation. Elevation of liver
enzymes, hyperglycemia, and gout are less common untoward
effects.
Brown TM. Pellagra: an old enemy of timeless importance.
Psychosomatics. 2010 Mar;51(2):93–7. [PMID: 20332283]
 
VITAMIN B6 DEFICIENCY
Vitamin B6 deficiency most commonly occurs as a result of
interactions with medications—especially isoniazid, cycloserine,
penicillamine, and oral contraceptives—or of alcoholism. A number
of inborn errors of metabolism and other pyridoxine-responsive
syndromes, particularly pyridoxine-responsive anemia, are not
clearly due to vita-min deficiency but commonly respond to high
doses of the vitamin. Patients with common variable
immunodeficiency may have concomitant vitamin B6 deficiency.
 Clinical Findings
Vitamin B6 deficiency results in a clinical syndrome similar to that
seen with deficiencies of other B vitamins, including mouth soreness,
glossitis, cheilosis, weakness, and irritability. Severe deficiency can
result in peripheral neuropathy, anemia, and seizures. Studies have
suggested a potential relationship of low vitamin B6 levels and a
variety of clinical conditions including cardiovascular diseases,
inflammatory diseases, and certain cancers.
 Diagnosis
The diagnosis of vitamin B6 deficiency can be confirmed by
measurement of pyridoxal phosphate in blood. Normal levels are >
50 ng/mL.
 Treatment
Vitamin B6 deficiency can be effectively treated with oral vitamin B6
supplements. Doses of 10–20 mg/d are usually adequate, though
some patients taking medications that interfere with pyridoxine
metabolism may need doses as high as 100 mg/d. Inborn errors of
metabolism and the pyridoxine-responsive syndromes often require
doses up to 600 mg/d.
Vitamin B6 should be routinely prescribed for patients receiving
medications (such as isoniazid) that interfere with pyridoxine
metabolism to prevent vitamin B6 deficiency. This is particularly true
for patients who are more likely to have diets marginally adequate in
vitamin B6, such as the elderly, alcoholic patients, or the urban
poor. Clinical trials have shown that vitamin B6 supplementation,
combined with other B vitamins, has no benefit on cardiovascular
disease outcomes.
VITAMIN B6 TOXICITY
A sensory neuropathy, at times irreversible, occurs in patients
receiving large doses of vitamin B6. Although most patients have
taken 2 g or more per day, some patients have taken only 200
mg/d.
Biewirth J et al. Association of common variable immunodeficiency
with vitamin B6 deficiency. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2008 Mar;62(3):332–
5. [PMID: 17311052]
 
Hisano M et al. Vitamin B6 deficiency and anemia in pregnancy.
Eur J Clin Nutr. 2010 Feb;64(2):221–3. [PMID: 19920848]
 
Keith ME et al. B-vitamin deficiency in hospitalized patients with
heart failure. J Am Diet Assoc. 2009 Aug;109(8):1406–10.
[PMID: 19631047]
 
Larsson SC et al. Vitamin B6 and risk of colorectal cancer: a
meta-analysis of prospective studies. JAMA. 2010 Mar
17;303(11):1077–83. [PMID: 20233826]
 
Shen J et al. Association of vitamin B-6 status with inflammation,
oxidative stress, and chronic inflammatory conditions: the Boston
Puerto Rican Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Feb;91(2):337–
42. [PMID: 19955400]
 
Skarupski KA et al. Longitudinal association of vitamin B-6,
folate, and vitamin B-12 with depressive symptoms among older
adults over time. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Aug;92(2):330–5. [PMID:
20519557]
 
VITAMIN B12 & FOLATE
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) and folate are discussed in Chapter 13.
VITAMIN C (ASCORBIC ACID) DEFICIENCY
Most cases of vitamin C deficiency seen in the United States are
due to dietary inadequacy in the urban poor, the elderly, and
patients with chronic alcoholism. Patients with chronic illnesses such
as cancer and chronic kidney disease and individuals who smoke
cigarettes are also at risk.
 Clinical Findings
Early manifestations of vitamin C deficiency are nonspecific and
include malaise and weakness. In more advanced stages, the typical
features of scurvy develop. Manifestations include perifollicular
hemorrhages, perifollicular hyper keratotic papules, petechiae and
purpura, splinter hemorrhages, bleeding gums, hemarthroses, and
subperiosteal hemorrhages. Periodontal signs do not occur in
edentulous patients. Anemia is common, and wound healing is
impaired. The late stages of scurvy are characterized by edema,
oliguria, neuropathy, intracerebral hemorrhage, and death.
 Diagnosis
The diagnosis of advanced scurvy can be made clinically on the
basis of the skin lesions in the proper clinical situation. Atraumatic
hemarthrosis is also highly suggestive. The diagnosis can be
confirmed with decreased plasma ascorbic acid levels, typically
below 0.1 mg/dL.
 Treatment
Adult scurvy can be treated orally with 300–1000 mg of ascorbic
acid per day. Improvement typically occurs within days. Clinical
trials have shown that supplemental vitamin C has no benefit on
cardiovascular disease or cancer outcomes.
VITAMIN C TOXICITY
Very large doses of vitamin C can cause gastric irritation, flatulence,
or diarrhea. Oxalate kidney stones are of theoretic concern because
ascorbic acid is metabolized to oxalate, but stone formation has not
been frequently reported. Vitamin C can also confound common
diagnostic tests by causing false-negative tests for fecal occult blood
and both false-negative and false-positive tests for urine glucose.
Berger MM. Vitamin C requirements in parenteral nutrition.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5 Suppl):S70–8. [PMID:
19874953]
 
Choh CT et al. Unrecognised scurvy. BMJ. 2009 Sep
17;339:b3580. [PMID: 19762412]
 
Hemilä H. Vitamin C for the common cold should not be rejected
on the basis of old and erroneous articles. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2009 Oct;124(4):859. [PMID: 19660806]
 
Pemberton J. Unrecognised scurvy. Signs and requirements. BMJ.
2010 Feb 2;340:c590. [PMID: 20124375]
 
Popovich D et al. Scurvy: forgotten but definitely not gone. J
Pediatr Health Care. 2009 Nov–Dec;23(6):405–15. [PMID:
19875028]
 
VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY
 Clinical Findings
Vitamin A deficiency is one of the most common vitamin deficiency
syndromes, particularly in developing countries. In many such
regions, it is the most common cause of blindness. In the United
States, vitamin A deficiency is usually due to fat malabsorption
syndromes or mineral oil laxative abuse and occurs most commonly
in the elderly and urban poor.
Night blindness is the earliest symptom. Dryness of the
conjunctiva (xerosis) and the development of small white patches on
the conjunctiva (Bitot spots) are early signs. Ulceration and necrosis
of the cornea (keratomalacia), perforation, endophthalmitis, and
blindness are late manifestations. Xerosis and hyperkeratinization of
the skin and loss of taste may also occur.
 Diagnosis
Abnormalities of dark adaptation are strongly suggestive of vitamin
A deficiency. Serum levels below the normal range of 30–65 mg/dL
are commonly seen in advanced deficiency.
 Treatment
Night blindness, poor wound healing, and other signs of early
deficiency can be effectively treated orally with 30,000 international
units of vitamin A daily for 1 week. Advanced deficiency with
corneal damage calls for administration of 20,000 international
units/kg orally for at least 5 days. The potential antioxidant effects of
β-carotene can be achieved with supplements of 25,000–50,000
international units of β-carotene.
VITAMIN A TOXICITY
Excess intake of β-carotenes (hypercarotenosis) results in staining
of the skin a yellow-orange color but is otherwise benign. Skin
changes are most marked on the palms and soles, while the scleras
remain white, clearly distinguishing hypercarotenosis from jaundice.
Excessive vitamin A (hypervitaminosis A), on the other hand, can
be quite toxic. Chronic toxicity usually occurs after ingestion of daily
doses of over 50,000 international units/d for > 3 months. Early
manifestations include dry, scaly skin, hair loss, mouth sores, painful
hyperostoses, anorexia, and vomiting. More serious findings include
hypercalcemia; increased intracranial pressure, with papilledema,
headaches, 
and 
decreased 
cognition; 
and hepatomegaly,
occasionally progressing to cirrhosis. Excessive vitamin A has also
recently been related to increased risk of hip fracture. Acute toxicity
can result from ingestion of massive doses of vitamin A, such as in
drug overdoses or consumption of polar bear liver. Manifestations
include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, headache, papilledema,
and lethargy.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by elevations of serum vitamin A
levels. The only treatment is withdrawal of vitamin A from the diet.
Most symptoms and signs improve rapidly.
Braunstein A et al. Vitamin A deficiency in New York City.
Lancet. 2010 Jul 24;376(9737):267. [PMID: 20663549]
 
Checkley W et al. Maternal vitamin A supplementation and lung
function in offspring. N Engl J Med. 2010 May 13;362(19):
1784–94. [PMID: 20463338]
 
Olson CR et al. Significance of vitamin A to brain function,
behavior and learning. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2010 Apr;54(4): 489–
95 [PMID: 20077419]
 
Rogovik AL et al. Safety considerations and potential interactions
of vitamins: should vitamins be considered drugs? Ann
Pharmacother. 2010 Feb;44(2):311–24. [PMID: 20040703]
 
West KP Jr et al. Vitamin A intake and status in populations facing
economic stress. J Nutr. 2010 Jan;140(1):201S–7S. [PMID:
19939993]
 
VITAMIN D
Vitamin D is discussed in Chapter 26. The major food source of
vitamin D is fortified milk, but sunlight on the skin is a prime
resource as well.
VITAMIN E DEFICIENCY
 Clinical Findings
Clinical deficiency of vitamin E is most commonly due to severe
malabsorption, the genetic disorder abetalipoproteinemia, or, in
children with chronic cholestatic liver disease, biliary atresia or
cystic fibrosis. Manifestations of deficiency include areflexia,
disturbances of gait, decreased proprioception and vibration, and
ophthalmoplegia.
 Diagnosis
Plasma vitamin E levels can be measured; normal levels are 0.5–0.7
mg/dL or higher. Since vitamin E is normally transported in
lipoproteins, the serum level should be interpreted in relation to
circulating lipids.
 Treatment
The optimum therapeutic dose of vitamin E has not been clearly
defined. Large doses, often administered parenter-ally, can be used
to 
improve 
the 
neurologic 
complications 
seen 
in
abetalipoproteinemia and cholestatic liver disease. The potential
antioxidant benefits of vitamin E can be achieved with supplements
of 100–400 international units/d. Clinical trials of supplemental
vitamin E to prevent cardiovascular disease, however, have shown
no beneficial effects.
VITAMIN E TOXICITY
Vitamin E has been thought to be the least toxic of the fat-soluble
vitamins. Large doses—many times the recommended daily
requirement—have been taken for extended periods of time without
apparent harm, though nausea, flatulence, and diarrhea have been
reported. Clinical trials, however, have suggested an increase in all-
cause mortality with high dose (≥ 400 international units/d) vitamin
E supplements. Large doses of vitamin E can also increase the
vitamin K requirement and can result in bleeding in patients taking
oral anticoagulants.
Biesalski HK. Vitamin E requirements in parenteral nutrition.
Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5 Suppl):S92–104. [PMID:
19874955]
 
Brewer GJ. Why vitamin E therapy fails for treatment of
Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010 Jan;19(1):27–30.
[PMID: 20061623]
 
Devore EE et al. Dietary antioxidants and long-term risk of
dementia. Arch Neurol. 2010 Jul;67(7):819–25. [PMID:
20625087]
 
McCance DR et al; Diabetes and Pre-eclampsia Intervention Trial
(DAPIT) Study Group. Vitamins C and E for prevention of pre-
eclampsia in women with type 1 diabetes (DAPIT): a randomised
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Jul 24;376(9737):259–66.
[PMID: 20580423]
 
Sanyal AJ et al. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo for
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2010 May 6;362(18):
1675–85. [PMID: 20427778]
 
Traber MG et al. Vitamin E revisited: do new data validate benefits
for chronic disease prevention? Curr Opin Lipidol. 2008
Feb;19(1):30–8. [PMID: 18196984]
 
VITAMIN K
Vitamin K is discussed in Chapter 14. Vitamin K is synthesized by
intestinal bacteria.
DIET THERAPY
 
Specific therapeutic diets can be designed to facilitate the medical
management of most common illnesses. In most cases, consultation
with a registered dietitian is necessary in order to design and
implement major dietary changes. Clinicians should be familiar with
the indications for special diets and their basic composition to
facilitate patient referrals and to maximize patient compliance. Diet
therapy is a difficult process, and not all patients are able to
cooperate fully. Requesting the patient to record dietary intake for
3–5 days may provide useful insight into the patient's motivation as
well as providing nutrient information about the current diet.
Therapeutic diets can be divided into three groups: (1) diets that
alter the consistency of food, (2) diets that restrict or otherwise
modify dietary components, and (3) diets that supplement dietary
components.
DIETS THAT ALTER CONSISTENCY
 Clear Liquid Diet
This diet provides adequate water, 500–1000 kcal as simple sugar,
and some electrolytes. It is fiber free and requires minimal digestion
or intestinal motility.
A clear liquid diet is useful for patients with resolving
postoperative ileus, acute gastroenteritis, partial intestinal
obstruction, and as preparation for diagnostic gastrointestinal
procedures. It is commonly used as the first diet for patients who
have been taking nothing by mouth for long periods. Because of the
low calorie and minimal protein content of the clear liquid diet, it is
used only for short periods.
 Full Liquid Diet
The full liquid diet provides adequate water and can be designed to
provide adequate calories and protein. Vitamins and minerals—
especially folic acid, iron, and vitamin B6—may be inadequate and
should be provided in the form of supplements. Dairy products,
soups, eggs, and soft cereals are used to supplement clear liquids.
Commercial oral supplements can also be incorporated into the diet
or used alone.
This diet is low in residue and can be used in many instances
instead of the clear liquid diet described above—especially in
patients with difficulty in chewing or swallowing, with partial
obstructions, or in preparation for some diagnostic procedures. Full
liquid diets are commonly used following clear liquid diets to
advance diets in patients who have been taking nothing by mouth
for long periods.
 Soft Diets
Soft diets are designed for patients unable to chew or swallow hard
or coarse food. Tender foods are used, and most raw fruits and
vegetables and coarse breads and cereals are eliminated. Soft diets
are commonly used to assist in progression from full liquid diets to
regular diets in postoperative patients, in patients who are too weak
or those whose dentition is too poor to handle a general diet, in
head and neck surgical patients, in patients with esophageal
strictures, and in other patients who have difficulty with chewing or
swallowing.
The soft diet can be designed to meet all nutritional requirements.
DIETS THAT RESTRICT NUTRIENTS
Diets can be designed to restrict (or eliminate) virtually any nutrient
or food component. The most commonly used restricted diets are
those that limit sodium, fat, and protein. Other restrictive diets
include gluten restriction in sprue, potassium and phosphate
reduction in chronic kidney disease, and various elimination diets for
food allergies.
 Sodium-Restricted Diets
Low-sodium diets are useful in the management of hypertension and
in conditions in which sodium retention and edema are prominent
features, particularly congestive heart failure, chronic liver disease,
and chronic kidney disease. Sodium restriction is beneficial with or
without diuretic therapy. When used in conjunction with diuretics,
sodium restriction allows lower dosage of the diuretic medication
and may prevent side effects. Potassium excretion, in particular, is
directly related to distal renal tubule sodium delivery, and sodium
restriction will decrease diuretic-related potassium losses.
Typical American diets contain a minimum of 4–6 g (175–260
mEq) of sodium per day. A no-added-salt diet contains
approximately 3 g (132 mEq) of sodium per day. Further restriction
can be achieved with sodium diets of 2 or 1 g/d. Diets with more
severe restriction are poorly accepted by patients and are rarely
used.
Dietary sodium includes sodium naturally occurring in foods,
sodium added during food processing, and sodium added by the
consumer during cooking and at the table. About a third of current
dietary intake is derived from each. Diets that allow 2000 mg of
sodium daily are easiest to design and implement. Such diets
generally eliminate added salt, most processed foods, and selected
foods with particularly high sodium content. Patients who follow
such diets for 2–3 months lose their craving for salty foods and can
often continue to restrict their sodium intake indefinitely. Many
patients with mild hypertension will achieve significant reductions in
blood pressure (approximately 5 mm Hg diastolic) with this degree
of sodium restriction. Other patients require more severe sodium
restriction (approximately 1000 mg of sodium per day) for
reduction in blood pressure.
Diets allowing 1000 mg of sodium require further restriction of
commonly eaten foods. Special “low-sodium” products are now
available to facilitate such diets. These diets are difficult for most
people to follow and are generally reserved for hospitalized patients
and highly motivated outpatients—most commonly those with
severe liver disease and ascites.
 Fat-Restricted Diets
Traditional fat-restricted diets are useful in the treatment of fat
malabsorption syndromes. Such diets will improve the symptoms of
diarrhea with steatorrhea independently of the primary physiologic
abnormality by limiting the quantity of fatty acids that reach the
colon. The degree of fat restriction necessary to control symptoms
must be individualized. Patients with severe malabsorption can be
limited to 40–60 g of fat per day. Diets containing 60–80 g of fat
per day can be designed for patients with less severe abnormalities.
In general, fat-restricted diets require broiling, baking, or boiling
meat and fish; discarding the skin of poultry and fish and using those
foods as the main protein source; using nonfat dairy products; and
avoiding desserts, sauces, and gravies.
 Low-Cholesterol, Low-Saturated-Fat
Diets
Fat-restricted diets that specifically restrict saturated fats and
dietary cholesterol are the mainstay of dietary treatment of
hyperlipidemia (see Chapter 28). Similar diets are recommended
also for diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 27) and for the prevention of
coronary 
artery 
disease 
(see Chapter 
10). 
Current
recommendations for the prevention of cancer by dietary
modification also include fat restriction. The large Women's Health
Initiative Dietary Modification Trial, however, did not show any
significant benefit of a low-fat diet on weight control or prevention
of cardiovascular disease or cancer.
The aim of these diets is to restrict total fat to < 30% of calories
and to achieve a normal body weight by caloric restriction and
increased physical activity. Saturated fat is restricted to 7% of
calories and dietary cholesterol to 200 mg/d. Saturated fat can be
replaced either with complex carbohydrates or, if energy balance
permits, with monounsaturated fats. Saturated fat, total fat, and
dietary cholesterol can be restricted further, but studies suggest that
more extreme restriction offers little further advantage in overall
modification of serum lipids. Cholesterol-lowering diets can be
further augmented with the addition of plant stanols and sterols and
with soluble dietary fiber.
 Protein-Restricted Diets
Protein-restricted diets are most commonly used in patients with
hepatic encephalopathy due to chronic liver disease and in patients
with advanced chronic kidney disease to slow the progression of
early disease and to decrease symptoms of uremia in more severe
disease. Patients with selected inborn errors of amino acid
metabolism and other abnormalities resulting in hyperammonemia
also require restriction of protein or of specific amino acids.
Protein restriction is intended to limit the production of
nitrogenous waste products. Energy intake must be adequate to
facilitate the efficient use of dietary protein. Proteins must be of high
biologic value and be provided in sufficient quantity to meet minimal
requirements. For most patients, the diet should contain at least 0.6
g/kg/d of protein. Patients with encephalopathy who do not respond
to this degree of restriction are unlikely to respond to more severe
restriction.
DIETS THAT SUPPLEMENT NUTRIENTS
 High-Fiber Diet
Dietary fiber is a diverse group of plant constituents that is resistant
to digestion by the human digestive tract. Typical American diets
contain about 5–10 g of dietary fiber per day. Epidemiologic
evidence has suggested that populations consuming greater
quantities of fiber have a lower incidence of certain gastrointestinal
disorders, including diverticulitis and colon cancer. Most authorities
currently recommend higher intakes of dietary fiber for health
maintenance.
Diets high in dietary fiber (20–35 g/d) are also commonly used in
the management of a variety of gastrointestinal disorders,
particularly irritable bowel syndrome and recurrent diverticulitis.
Diets high in fiber may also be useful to reduce blood sugar in
patients with diabetes and to reduce cholesterol levels in patients
with hypercholesterolemia. Such diets include greater intakes of
fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains, legumes and seeds, and
bran products. For some patients, the addition of psyllium seed (2
tsp per day) or natural bran (one-half cup per day) may be
preferable.
 High-Potassium Diets
Potassium-supplemented diets are used most commonly to
compensate for potassium losses caused by diuretics. Although
potassium losses can be partially prevented by using lower doses of
diuretics, concurrent sodium restriction, and potassium-sparing
diuretics, some patients require additional potassium to prevent
hypokalemia. High-potassium diets may also have a direct
antihypertensive effect. Typical American diets contain about 3 g
(80 mEq) of potassium per day. High-potassium diets commonly
contain 4.5–7 g (120–180 mEq) of potassium per day.
Most fruits, vegetables, and their juices contain high
concentrations of potassium. Supplemental potassium can also be
provided with potassium-containing salt substitutes (up to 20 mEq
in one-quarter tsp) or as potassium chloride in solution or capsules,
but this is rarely necessary if the above measures are followed to
prevent potassium losses and supplement dietary potassium.
 High-Calcium Diets
Additional intakes of dietary calcium have been recommended for
the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis, the prevention and
treatment of hypertension, and the prevention of colon cancer. The
Women's Health Initiative, however, suggested that calcium and
vitamin D supplementation did not prevent fractures or colon
cancer. Nonetheless, many authorities recommend intakes of 1 g of
calcium per day for most adults and 1.5 g/d for post-menopausal
women. Average American daily intakes are approximately 700
mg/d.
Dairy products are the primary dietary sources of calcium in the
United States. Patients with lactose intolerance who cannot tolerate
liquid dairy products may be able to tolerate nonliquid products
such as cheese and yogurt. Leafy green vegetables and canned fish
with bones also contain high concentrations of calcium, although the
latter is also high in sodium.
Chrysohoou C et al. The Mediterranean diet contributes to the
preservation of left ventricular systolic function and to the long-
term favorable prognosis of patients who have had an acute
coronary event. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Jul;92(1):47–54. [PMID:
20484450]
 
Delahanty LM et al. Implications of the diabetes prevention
program and Look AHEAD clinical trials for lifestyle interventions.
J Am Diet Assoc. 2008 Apr;108(4 Suppl 1):S66–72. [PMID:
18358260]
 
Esposito K et al. Effects of a Mediterranean-style diet on the need
for antihyperglycemic drug therapy in patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med.
2009 Sep 1;151(5):306–14. [PMID: 19721018]
 
Ho-Pham LT et al. Effect of vegetarian diets on bone mineral
density: a Bayesian meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009
Oct;90(4):943–50. [PMID: 19571226]
 
Kelly RB. Diet and exercise in the management of hyperlipidemia.
Am Fam Physician. 2010 May 1;81(9):1097–102. [PMID:
20433126]
 
Mente A et al. A systematic review of the evidence supporting a
causal link between dietary factors and coronary heart disease.
Arch Intern Med. 2009 Apr 13;169(7):659–69. [PMID:
19364995]
 
Mochari-Greenberger H et al. Does stage of change modify the
effectiveness of an educational intervention to improve diet among
family members of hospitalized cardiovascular disease patients? J
Am Diet Assoc. 2010 Jul;110(7):1027–35. [PMID: 20630159]
 
Pan Y et al. Low-protein diet for diabetic nephropathy: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008
Sep;88(3):660–6. [PMID: 18779281]
 
Sacks FM et al. Comparison of weight-loss diets with different
compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates. N Engl J Med.
2009 Feb 26;360(9):859–73. [PMID: 19246357]
 
Sacks FM et al. Dietary therapy in hypertension. N Engl J Med.
2010 Jun 3;362(22):2102–12. [PMID:20519681]
 
NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT
 
Nutritional support is the provision of nutrients to patients who
cannot meet their nutritional requirements by eating standard diets.
Nutrients may be delivered enterally, using oral nutritional
supplements, nasogastric and nasoduodenal feeding tubes, and tube
enterostomies, or parenterally, using lines or catheters placed in
peripheral or central veins, respectively. Current nutritional support
techniques permit adequate nutrient delivery to most patients.
Nutrition support should be utilized, however, only if it is likely to
improve the patient's clinical outcome. The financial costs and risks
of side effects must be balanced against the potential advantages of
improved nutritional status in each clinical situation.
INDICATIONS FOR NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT
The precise indications for nutritional support remain controversial.
Most authorities agree that nutritional support is indicated for at
least four groups of adult patients: (1) those with inadequate bowel
syndromes, (2) those with severe prolonged hypercatabolic states
(eg, due to extensive burns, multiple trauma, mechanical ventilation),
(3) those requiring prolonged therapeutic bowel rest, and (4) those
with severe protein–calorie undernutrition with a treatable disease
who have sustained a loss of over 25% of body weight.
It has been difficult to prove the efficacy of nutritional support in
the treatment of most other conditions. In most cases it has not been
possible to show a clear advantage of treatment by means of
nutritional support over treatment without such support.
The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
(ASPEN) has published recommendations for the rational use of
nutritional support. The recommendations emphasize the need to
individualize the decision to begin nutritional support, weighing the
risks and costs against the benefits to each patient. They also
reinforce the need to identify high-risk malnourished patients by
nutritional assessment.
NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT METHODS
Selection of the most appropriate nutritional support method
involves consideration of gastrointestinal function, the anticipated
duration of nutritional support, and the ability of each method to
meet the patient's nutritional requirements. The method chosen
should meet the patient's nutritional needs with the lowest risk and
lowest cost possible. For most patients, enteral feeding is safer and
cheaper and offers significant physiologic advantages. An algorithm
for selection of the most appropriate nutritional support method is
presented in Figure 29–1.
Prior to initiating specialized enteral nutritional support, efforts
should be made to supplement food intake. Attention to patient
preferences, timing of meals and diagnostic procedures and use of
medications, and the use of foods brought to the hospital by family
and friends can often increase oral intake. Patients unable to eat
enough at regular mealtimes to meet nutritional requirements can be
given oral supplements as snacks or to replace low-calorie
beverages. Oral supplements of differing nutritional composition are
available for the purpose of individualizing the diet in accordance
with specific clinical requirements. Fiber and lactose content, caloric
density, protein level, amino acid profiles, vitamin K, and calcium
can all be modified as necessary.
Figure 29–1. Nutritional support method decision tree.
 
Patients unable to take adequate oral nutrients who have
functioning gastrointestinal tracts and who meet the criteria for
nutritional support are candidates for tube feedings. Small-bore
feeding tubes are placed via the nose into the stomach or
duodenum. Patients able to sit up in bed who can protect their
airways can be fed into the stomach. Because of the increased risk
of aspiration, patients who cannot adequately protect their airways
should be fed nasoduodenally. Feeding tubes can usually be passed
into the duodenum by leaving an extra length of tubing in the
stomach and placing the patient in the right decubitus position.
Metoclopramide, 10 mg intravenously, can be given 20 minutes
prior to insertion and continued every 6 hours thereafter to facilitate
passage through the pylorus. Occasionally patients will require
fluoroscopic or endoscopic guidance to insert the tube distal to the
pylorus. Placement of nasogastric and, particularly, nasoduodenal
tubes should be confirmed radiographically before delivery of
feeding solutions.
Feeding tubes can also be placed directly into the gastrointestinal
tract using tube enterostomies. Most tube enterostomies are
placed in patients who require long-term enteral nutritional support.
Gastrostomies have the advantage of allowing bolus feedings, while
jejunostomies require continuous infusions. Gastrostomies—like
nasogastric feeding—should be used only in patients at low risk for
aspiration. Gastrostomies can also be placed percutaneously with
the aid of endoscopy. These tubes can then be advanced to
jejunostomies. Tube enterostomies can also be placed surgically.
Patients who require nutritional support but whose
gastrointestinal tracts are nonfunctional should receive parenteral
nutritional support. Most patients receive parenteral feedings via a
central vein—most commonly the subclavian vein. Peripheral veins
can be used in some patients, but because of the high osmolality of
parenteral solutions this is rarely tolerated for more than a few
weeks.
Peripheral vein nutritional support is most commonly used in
patients with nonfunctioning gastrointestinal tracts who require
immediate support but whose clinical status is expected to improve
within 1–2 weeks, allowing enteral feeding. Peripheral vein
nutritional support is administered via standard intravenous lines.
Solutions should always include lipid and dextrose in combination
with amino acids to provide adequate nonprotein calories. Serious
side effects are infrequent, but there is a high incidence of phlebitis
and infiltration of intravenous lines.
Central vein nutritional support is delivered via intravenous
catheters placed percutaneously using aseptic technique. Proper
placement in the superior vena cava is documented radiographically
before the solution is infused. Catheters must be carefully
maintained by experienced nursing personnel and used solely for
nutritional support to prevent infection and other catheter-related
complications.
NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Each patient's nutritional requirements should be determined
independently of the method of nutritional support. In most
situations, solutions of equal nutrient value can be designed for
delivery via enteral and parenteral routes, but differences in
absorption must be considered. A complete nutritional support
solution must contain water, energy, amino acids, electrolytes,
vitamins, minerals, and essential fatty acids.
 Water
For most patients, water requirements can be calculated by allowing
1500 mL for the first 20 kg of body weight plus 20 mL for every
kilogram over 20. Additional losses should be replaced as they
occur. For average-sized adult patients, fluid needs are about 30–
35 mL/kg, or approximately 1 mL/kcal of energy required (see
below).
 Energy
Energy requirements can be estimated by one of three methods: (1)
by using standard equations to calculate BEE plus additional
calories for activity and illness, (2) by applying a simple calculation
based on calories per kilogram of body weight, or (3) by measuring
energy expenditure with indirect calorimetry.
BEE can be estimated by the Harris–Benedict equation: for
men, BEE = 666 + (13.7 × weight in kg) + (5 × height in cm) −
(6.8 × age in years). For women, BEE = 655 + (9.5 × weight in
kg) + (1.8 × height in cm) − (4.7 × age in years). For
undernourished patients, actual body weight should be used; for
obese patients, ideal body weight should be used. For most
patients, an additional 20–50% of BEE is administered as
nonprotein calories to accommodate energy expenditures during
activity or relating to the illness. Occasional patients are noted to
have energy expenditures > 150% of BEE.
Energy requirements can be estimated also by multiplying actual
body weight in kilograms (for obese patients, ideal body weight) by
30–35 kcal.
Both of these methods provide imprecise estimates of actual
energy expenditures, especially for the markedly underweight,
overweight, and critically ill patient. Studies using indirect
calorimetry have demonstrated that as many as 30–40% of patients
will have measured expenditures 10% above or below estimated
values. For accurate determination of energy expenditure, indirect
calorimetry should be used.
 Protein
Protein and energy requirements are closely related. If adequate
calories are provided, most patients can be given 0.8–1.2 g of
protein per kilogram per day. Patients undergoing moderate to
severe stress should receive up to 1.5 g/kg/d. As in the case of
energy requirements, actual weights should be used for normal and
underweight patients and ideal weights for patients with significant
obesity.
Patients who are receiving protein without adequate calories will
catabolize protein for energy rather than utilizing it for protein
synthesis. Thus, when energy intake is low, excess protein is needed
for nitrogen balance. If both energy and protein intakes are low,
extra energy will have a more significant positive effect on nitrogen
balance than extra protein.
 Electrolytes & Minerals
Requirements for sodium, potassium, and chloride vary widely.
Most patients require 45–145 mEq/d of each. The actual
requirement in individual patients will depend on the patient's
cardiovascular, renal, endocrine, and gastrointestinal status as well
as measurements of serum concentration.
Patients receiving enteral nutritional support should receive
adequate vitamins and minerals according to the recommended
daily allowances. Most premixed enteral solutions provide adequate
vitamins and minerals as long as adequate calories are administered.
Patients receiving parenteral nutritional support require smaller
amounts of minerals: calcium, 10–15 mEq/d; phosphorus, 15–20
mEq per 1000 nonprotein calories; and magnesium, 16–24 mEq/d.
Most patients receiving nutritional support do not require
supplemental iron because body stores are adequate. Iron nutrition
should be monitored closely by following the hemoglobin
concentration, mean corpuscular volume, and iron studies.
Parenteral administration of iron is associated with a number of
adverse effects and should be reserved for iron-deficient patients
unable to take oral iron.
Patients receiving parenteral nutritional support should be given
the trace elements zinc (about 5 mg/d) and copper (about 2 mg/d).
Patients with diarrhea will require additional zinc to replace fecal
losses. 
Additional 
trace 
elements—especially 
chromium,
manganese, and selenium—are provided to patients receiving long-
term parenteral nutrition.
Parenteral vitamins are provided daily. Standardized multivitamin
solutions are currently available to provide adequate quantities of
vitamins A, B12, C, D, E, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic
acid, pyridoxine, folic acid, and biotin. Vitamin K is not given
routinely but administered when the prothrombin time becomes
abnormal.
 Essential Fatty Acids
Patients receiving nutritional support should be given 2–4% of their
total calories as linoleic acid to prevent essential fatty acid
deficiency. Most prepared enteral solutions contain adequate
linoleic acid. Patients receiving parenteral nutrition should be given
at least 250 mL of a 20% intravenous fat (emulsified soybean or
safflower oil) about two or three times a week. Intravenous fat can
also be used as an energy source in place of dextrose.
ENTERAL NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT SOLUTIONS
Most patients who require enteral nutritional support can be given
commercially prepared enteral solutions (Table 29–1). Nutritionally
complete solutions have been designed to provide adequate
proportions of water, energy, protein, and micronutrients.
Nutritionally incomplete solutions are also available to provide
specific macronutrients (eg, protein, carbohydrate, and fat) to
supplement complete solutions for patients with unusual
requirements or to design solutions that are not available
commercially.
Nutritionally complete solutions are characterized as follows: (1)
by osmolality (isotonic or hypertonic), (2) by lactose content
(present or absent), (3) by the molecular form of the protein
component (intact proteins; peptides or amino acids), (4) by the
quantity of protein and calories provided, and (5) by fiber content
(present or absent). For most patients, iso-tonic solutions containing
no lactose or fiber are preferable. Such solutions generally contain
moderate amounts of fat and intact protein. Most commercial
isotonic solutions contain 1000 kcal and about 37–45 g of protein
per liter.
 
Table 29–1. Enteral solutions.
 
Complete
     Blenderized (eg, Compleat Regular, Compleat
Modified,1 Vitaneed1)
     Whole protein, lactose-containing (eg, Mentene,
Carnation and Delmark Instant Breakfast, Forta Shake)
     Whole protein, lactose-free, low-residue:
         1 kcal/mL (eg, Ensure, Isocal, Osmolite, Nutren 1.0,1
Nutrilan, Isolan,1 Sustacal, Resource)
         1.5 kcal/mL (eg, Ensure Plus, Sustacal HC, Comply,
Nutren 1.5, Resource Plus)
         2 kcal/mL (eg, Isocal HCN, Magnacal, TwoCal HN)
         High-nitrogen: > 15% total calories from protein (eg,
Ensure
                HN, Attain,1 Osmolite HN,1 Replete, Entrition
HN,1 Isolan,1
                Isocal HN,1 Sustacal HC, Isosource HN,1
Ultralan)
     Whole protein, lactose-free, high-residue:
         1 kcal/mL (eg, Jevity,1 Profiber,1 Nutren 1.0 with
fiber,1 Fiberian,1
             Sustacal with fiber, Ultracal,1 Ensure with fiber,
Fibersource)
         Chemically defined peptide- or amino acid-based
(eg, Accupep
             HPF, Criticare HN, Peptamen,1 Reabfin, Vital HN,
AlitraQ,
             Tolerex, Vivonex TEN)
“Disease-specific” formulas
     Advanced chronic kidney disease: with essential amino
acids (eg, Amin-Aid, Travasorb Renal, Aminess)
     Malabsorption: with medium-chain triglycerides (eg,
Portagen,1 Travasorb MCT)
     Respiratory failure: with > 50% calories from fat (eg,
Pulmocare, NutriVent)
     Hepatic encephalopathy: with high amounts of
branched-chain amino acids (eg, Hepatic-Acid II,
Travasorb Hepatic)
Incomplete (modular)
     Protein (eg, Nutrisource Protein, Promed, Propac)
     Carbohydrate (eg, Nutrisource Carbohydrate,
Polycose, Sumacal)
     Fat (eg, MCT Oil, Microlipid, Nutrisource Lipid)
     Vitamins (eg, Nutrisource Vitamins)
     Minerals (eg, Nutrisource Minerals)
1Isotonic.
Solutions containing hydrolyzed proteins or crystalline amino
acids and with no significant fat content are called elemental
solutions, since macronutrients are provided in their most
“elemental” form. These solutions have been designed for patients
with malabsorption, particularly pancreatic insufficiency and limited
fat absorption. Elemental diets are extremely hypertonic and often
result in more severe diarrhea. Their use should be limited to
patients who cannot tolerate isotonic solutions.
Although formulas have been designed for specific clinical
situations—solutions containing primarily essential amino acids (for
advanced chronic kidney disease), medium-chain triglycerides (for
fat malabsorption), more fat (for respiratory failure and CO2
retention), and more branched-chain amino acids (for hepatic
encephalopathy and severe trauma)—they have not been shown to
be superior to standard formulas for most patients.
Enteral solutions should be administered via continuous infusion,
preferably with an infusion pump. Isotonic feedings should be
started at full strength at about 25–33% of the estimated final
infusion rate. Feedings can be advanced by similar amounts every
12 hours as tolerated. Hypertonic feedings should be started at half
strength. The strength and the rate can then be advanced every 6
hours as tolerated.
COMPLICATIONS OF ENTERAL NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT
Minor complications of tube feedings occur in 10–15% of patients.
Gastrointestinal complications include diarrhea (most common),
inadequate gastric emptying, emesis, esophagitis, and occasionally
gastrointestinal bleeding. Diarrhea associated with tube feeding may
be due to intolerance to the osmotic load or to one of the
macronutrients (eg, fat, lactose) in the solution. Patients being fed in
this way may also have diarrhea from other causes (as side effects
of antibiotics or other drugs, associated with infection, etc), and
these possibilities should always be investigated in appropriate
circumstances.
Mechanical complications of tube feedings are potentially the
most serious. Of particular importance is aspiration. All patients
receiving nasogastric tube feedings are at risk for this life-threatening
complication. Limiting naso-gastric feedings to those patients who
can adequately protect their airway and careful monitoring of
patients being fed by tube should limit these serious complications to
1–2% of cases. Minor mechanical complications are common and
include tube obstruction and dislodgment.
Metabolic complications during enteral nutritional support are
common but in most cases are easily managed. The most important
problem is hypernatremic dehydration, most commonly seen in
elderly patients given excessive protein intake who are unable to
respond to thirst. Abnormalities of potassium, glucose, CO2
production, and acid–base balance may also occur.
PARENTERAL NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT SOLUTIONS
Parenteral nutritional support solutions can be designed to deliver
adequate nutrients to most patients. The basic parenteral solution is
composed of dextrose, amino acids, and water. Electrolytes,
minerals, trace elements, vitamins, and medications can also be
added. Most commercial solutions contain the monohydrate form of
dextrose that provides 3.4 kcal/g. Crystalline amino acids are
available in a variety of concentrations, so that a broad range of
solutions can be made up that will contain specific amounts of
dextrose and amino acids as required.
Typical solutions for central vein nutritional support contain 25–
35% dextrose and 2.75–6% amino acids depending upon the
patient's estimated nutrient and water requirements. These solutions
typically have osmolalities in excess of 1800 mosm/L and require
infusion into a central vein. A typical formula for patients without
organ failure is shown in Table 29–2.
 
Table 29–2. Typical parenteral nutrition solution (for stable patients
without organ failure).
 
Dextrose (3.4 kcal/g)
25%
Amino acids (4 kcal/g)
6%
Na+
50 mEq/L
K+
40 mEq/L
Ca2+
5 mEq/L
Mg2+
8 mEq/L
Cl−
60 mEq/L
P
12 mEq/L
Acetate
Balance
MVI-12 (vitamins)
10 mL/d
MTE (trace elements)
5 mL/d
Fat emulsion 20%
250 mL five times a week
Typical rate
Day 1: 30 mL/h
 
Day 2: 60 mL/h
By day 2, solution provides: Calories: 1925 kcal total
 
Protein: 86 g
 
Fat: 19% of total kcal
 
Fluid: 1690 mL
Solutions with lower osmolalities can also be designed for
infusion into peripheral veins. Typical solutions for peripheral
infusion contain 5–10% dextrose and 2.75–4.25% amino acids.
These solutions have osmolalities between 800 and 1200 mosm/L
and result in a high incidence of thrombophlebitis and line infiltration.
These solutions will provide adequate protein for most patients but
inadequate energy. Additional energy must be provided in the form
of emulsified soybean or safflower oil. Such intravenous fat solutions
are currently available in 10% and 25% solutions providing 1.1 and
2.2 kcal/mL, respectively. Intravenous fat solutions are isosmotic
and well tolerated by peripheral veins.
Typical patients are given 200–500 mL of a 20% solution each
day. As much as 60% of total calories can be administered in this
manner.
Intravenous fat can also be provided to patients receiving central
vein nutritional support. In this instance, dextrose concentrations
should be decreased to provide a fixed concentration of energy.
Intravenous fat has been shown to be equivalent to intravenous
dextrose in providing energy to spare protein. Intravenous fat is
associated with less glucose intolerance, less production of carbon
dioxide, and less fatty infiltration of the liver and has been
increasingly utilized in patients with hyperglycemia, respiratory
failure, and liver disease. Intravenous fat has also been increasingly
used in patients with large estimated energy requirements. The
maximum glucose utilization rate is approximately 5–7 mg/min/kg.
Patients who require additional calories can be given them as fat to
prevent excess administration of dextrose. Intravenous fat can also
be used to prevent essential fatty acid deficiency. The optimal ratio
of carbohydrate and fat in parenteral nutritional support has not
been determined.
Infusion of parenteral solutions should be started slowly to
prevent hyperglycemia and other metabolic complications. Typical
solutions are given initially at a rate of 50 mL/h and advanced by
about the same amount every 24 hours until the desired final rate is
reached.
COMPLICATIONS OF PARENTERAL NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT
Complications of central vein nutritional support occur in up to 50%
of patients. Although most are minor and easily managed, significant
complications will develop in about 5% of patients. Complications
of central vein nutritional support can be divided into catheter-
related complications and metabolic complications.
Catheter-related complications can occur during insertion or
while the catheter is in place. Pneumothorax, hemothorax, arterial
laceration, air emboli, and brachial plexus injury can occur during
catheter placement. The incidence of these complications is
inversely related to the experience of the physician performing the
procedure but will occur in at least 1–2% of cases even in major
medical centers. Each catheter placement should be documented by
chest radiograph prior to initiation of nutritional support.
Catheter thrombosis and catheter-related sepsis are the most
important complications of indwelling catheters. Patients with
indwelling central vein catheters in whom fever develops without an
apparent source should have their lines changed over a wire or
removed immediately, the tip quantitatively cultured, and antibiotics
begun empirically. Quantitative tip cultures and blood cultures will
help guide further antibiotic therapy. Catheter-related sepsis occurs
in 2–3% of patients even if maximal efforts are made to prevent
infection.
Metabolic complications of central vein nutritional support occur
in over 50% of patients (Table 29–3). Most are minor and easily
managed, and termination of support is seldom necessary.
PATIENT MONITORING DURING NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT
Every patient receiving enteral or parenteral nutritional support
should be monitored closely. Formal nutritional support teams
composed of a physician, a nurse, a dietitian, and a pharmacist have
been shown to decrease the rate of complications.
Patients should be monitored both for the adequacy of treatment
and to prevent complications or detect them early when they occur.
Because estimates of nutritional requirements are imprecise,
frequent reassessment is necessary. Daily intakes should be
recorded and compared with estimated requirements. Body weight,
hydration status, and overall clinical status should be followed.
Patients who do not appear to be responding as anticipated can be
evaluated for nitrogen balance by means of the following equation:
Patients with positive nitrogen balances can be continued on their
current regimens; patients with negative balances should receive
moderate increases in calorie and protein intake and then be
reassessed. Monitoring for metabolic complications includes daily
measurements of electrolytes; serum glucose, phosphorus,
magnesium, calcium, and creatinine; and BUN until the patient is
stabilized. Once the patient is stabilized, electrolytes, phosphorus,
calcium, magnesium, and glucose should be obtained at least twice
weekly. Red blood cell folate, zinc, and copper should be checked
at least once a month.
 
Table 29–3. Metabolic complications of parenteral nutritional
support.
 
Bankhead R et al. A.S.P.E.N. Board of Directors. Enteral
Nutrition Practice Recommendations. JPEN J Parenter Enteral
Nutr. 2009 Mar–Apr;33(2):122–67. [PMID: 19171692]
 
Cahill NE et al. Nutrition therapy in the critical care setting: what is
“best achievable” practice? An international multi-center
observational study. Crit Care Med. 2010 Feb;38(2): 395–401.
[PMID: 19851094]
 
Calder PC et al. Lipid emulsions in parenteral nutrition of intensive
care patients: current thinking and future directions. Intensive Care
Med. 2010 May;36(5):735-49. [PMID: 20072779]
 
Han-Geurts IJ et al. Randomized clinical trial of the impact of early
enteral feeding on postoperative ileus and recovery. Br J Surg.
2007 May;94(5):555–61. [PMID: 17443854]
 
Heidegger CP et al. Enteral vs. parenteral nutrition for the critically
ill patient: a combined support should be preferred. Curr Opin Crit
Care. 2008 Aug;14(4):408–14. [PMID: 18614904]
 
Koretz RL. Enteral nutrition: a hard look at some soft evidence.
Nutr Clin Pract. 2009 Jun–Jul;24(3):316–24. [PMID: 19483061]
 
Murray SM et al. Nutrition support for bone marrow transplant
patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jan 21; (1):
CD002920. [PMID: 19160213]
 
Oertel MF et al. Parenteral and enteral nutrition in the management
of neurosurgical patients in the intensive care unit. J Clin Neurosci.
2009 Sep;16(9):1161–7. [PMID: 19570684]
 
Peterson SJ et al. Adequacy of oral intake in critically ill patients 1
week after extubation. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010 Mar;110(3): 427–
33. [PMID: 20184993]
 
Rabadi MH et al. Intensive nutritional supplements can improve
outcomes in stroke rehabilitation. Neurology. 2008 Dec
2;71(23):1856–61. [PMID: 18946003]
 
Sampson EL et al. Enteral tube feeding for older people with
advanced dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr 15;
(2):CD007209. [PMID: 19370678]
 
Singer P et al. Considering energy deficit in the intensive care unit.
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2010 Mar;13(2):170-6.
[PMID: 20019607]
 
Tappenden KA. Emerging therapies for intestinal failure. Arch
Surg. 2010 Jun;145(6):528–32. [PMID: 20566971]
 
Thomson A. The enteral vs parenteral nutrition debate revisited.
JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2008;Jul–Aug;32(4):474–81.
[PMID: 18596321]
 
Wooley JA. American Dietetic Association endorses A.S.P.E.N.
enteral nutrition practice recommendations. J Am Diet Assoc.
2010 May;110(5):683–5. [PMID: 20430127]
 
Ziegler TR. Parenteral nutrition in the critically ill patient. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Sep 10;361(11):1088–97. [PMID: 19741230]
 
 
 
Common Problems in
infectious Diseases &
antimicrobial therapy
Peter V. Chin-Hong, MD
B. Joseph Guglielmo, PharmD
COMMON PROBLEMS IN
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
 
FEVER OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN (FUO)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Illness of at least 3 weeks duration.
 Fever over 38.3 °C on several occasions.
 Diagnosis has not been made after three outpatient visits or 3
days of hospitalization.
 
 General Considerations
The intervals specified in the criteria for the diagnosis of FUO are
arbitrary ones intended to exclude patients with protracted but self-
limited viral illnesses and to allow time for the usual radiographic,
serologic, and cultural studies to be performed. Because of costs of
hospitalization and the availability of most screening tests on an
outpatient basis, the original criterion requiring 1 week of
hospitalization has been modified to accept patients in whom a
diagnosis has not been made after three outpatient visits or 3 days
of hospitalization.
Several additional categories of FUO have been added: (1)
Hospital-associated FUO refers to the hospitalized patient with
fever of 38.3 °C or higher on several occasions, due to a process
not present or incubating at the time of admission, in whom initial
cultures are negative and the diagnosis remains unknown after 3
days of investigation (see Hospital-Associated Infections, below).
(2) Neutro penic FUO includes patients with fever of 38.3 °C or
higher on several occasions with < 500 neutrophils per microliter in
whom initial cultures are negative and the diagnosis remains
uncertain after 3 days (see Chapter 2 and Infections in the
Immunocompromised Patient, below). (3) HIV-associated FUO
pertains to HIV-positive patients with fever of 38.3 °C or higher
who have been febrile for 4 weeks or more as an outpatient or 3
days as an inpatient, in whom the diagnosis remains uncertain after 3
days of investigation with at least 2 days for cultures to incubate
(see Chapter 31). Although not usually considered separately, FUO
in solid organ transplant recipients is a common scenario with a
unique differential diagnosis and is discussed below.
For a general discussion of fever, see the section on fever and
hyperthermia in Chapter 2.
A. Common Causes
Most cases represent unusual manifestations of common diseases
and not rare or exotic diseases—eg, tuberculosis, endocarditis,
gallbladder disease, and HIV (primary infection or opportunistic
infection) are more common causes of FUO than Whipple disease
or familial Mediterranean fever.
B. Age of Patient
In adults, infections (25–40% of cases) and cancer (25–40% of
cases) account for the majority of FUOs. In children, infections are
the most common cause of FUO (30–50% of cases) and cancer a
rare cause (5–10% of cases). Autoimmune disorders occur with
equal frequency in adults and children (10–20% of cases), but the
diseases differ. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis is particularly common
in children, whereas systemic lupus erythematosus, granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis), and
polyarteritis nodosa are more common in adults. Still disease, giant
cell arteritis, and polymyalgia rheumatica occur exclusively in adults.
In the elderly (over 65 years of age), multisystem immune-mediated
diseases such as temporal arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica,
sarcoidosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis) account for 25–
30% of all FUOs.
C. Duration of Fever
The cause of FUO changes dramatically in patients who have been
febrile for 6 months or longer. Infection, cancer, and autoimmune
disorders combined account for only 20% of FUOs in these
patients. Instead, other entities such as granulomatous diseases
(granulomatous hepatitis, Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis) and
factitious fever become important causes. One-fourth of patients
who say they have been febrile for 6 months or longer actually have
no true fever or underlying disease. Instead, the usual normal
circadian variation in temperature (temperature 0.5–1 °C higher in
the afternoon than in the morning) is interpreted as abnormal.
Patients with episodic or recurrent fever (ie, those who meet the
criteria for FUO but have fever-free periods of 2 weeks or longer)
are similar to those with prolonged fever. Infection, malignancy, and
auto-immune disorders account for only 20–25% of such fevers,
whereas various miscellaneous diseases (Crohn disease, familial
Mediterranean fever, allergic alveolitis) account for another 25%.
Approximately 50% of cases remain undiagnosed but have a benign
course with eventual resolution of symptoms.
D. Immunologic Status
In the neutropenic patient, fungal infections and occult bacterial
infection are important causes of FUO. In the patient taking
immunosuppressive medications (particularly organ transplant
patients), cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections are a frequent cause of
fever, as are fungal infections, nocardiosis, Pneumocystis jiroveci
(formerly P carinii) pneumonia, and mycobacterial infections.
E. Classification of Causes of FUO
Most patients with FUO will fit into one of five categories.
1. Infection—Both systemic and localized infections can cause
FUO. Tuberculosis and endocarditis are the most common systemic
infections, but mycoses, viral diseases (particularly infection with
Epstein-Barr virus and CMV), toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, Q fever,
cat-scratch disease, salmonellosis, malaria, and many other less
common infections have been implicated. Primary infection with
HIV or opportunistic infections associated with AIDS—particularly
mycobacterial infections—can also present as FUO. The most
common form of localized infection causing FUO is an occult
abscess. Liver, spleen, kidney, brain, and bone abscesses may be
difficult to detect. A collection of pus may form in the peritoneal
cavity or in the subdiaphragmatic, subhepatic, paracolic, or other
areas. Cholangitis, osteomyelitis, urinary tract infection, dental
abscess, or paranasal sinusitis may cause prolonged fever.
2. Neoplasms—Many cancers can present as FUO. The most
common are lymphoma (both Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin) and
leukemia. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders may also
present with fever. Other diseases of lymph nodes, such as
angioimmunoblastic lymphoma and Castleman disease, can also
cause FUO. Primary and meta-static tumors of the liver are
frequently associated with fever, as are renal cell carcinomas. Atrial
myxoma is an often forgotten neoplasm that can result in fever.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma are rarely
associated with fever, and the presence of fever in patients with
these diseases should prompt a search for infection.
3. Autoimmune disorders—Still disease, systemic lupus
erythematosus, cryoglobulinemia, and polyarteritis nodosa are the
most common causes of autoimmune-associated FUO. Giant cell
arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica are seen almost exclusively in
patients over 50 years of age and are nearly always associated with
an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (> 40 mm/h).
4. Miscellaneous causes—Many other conditions have been
associated with FUO but less commonly than the foregoing types of
illness. Examples include thyroiditis, sarcoidosis, Whipple disease,
familial Mediterranean fever, recurrent pulmonary emboli, alcoholic
hepatitis, drug fever, and factitious fever.
5. Undiagnosed FUO—Despite extensive evaluation, the diagnosis
remains elusive in 15% or more of patients. Of these patients, the
fever abates spontaneously in about 75% with no diagnosis; in the
remainder, more classic manifestations of the underlying disease
appear over time.
 Clinical Findings
Because the evaluation of a patient with FUO is costly and time-
consuming, it is imperative to first document the presence of fever.
This is done by observing the patient while the temperature is being
taken to ascertain that fever is not factitious (self-induced).
Associated findings that accompany fever include tachycardia,
chills, and piloerection. A thorough history—including family,
occupational, social (sexual practices, use of injection drugs),
dietary (unpasteurized products, raw meat), exposures (animals,
chemicals), and travel—may give clues to the diagnosis. Repeated
physical examination may reveal subtle, evanescent clinical findings
essential to diagnosis.
A. Laboratory Tests
In addition to routine laboratory studies, blood cultures should
always be obtained, preferably when the patient has not taken
antibiotics for several days, and should be held by the laboratory for
2 weeks to detect slow-growing organisms. Cultures on special
media are requested if Legionella, Bartonella, or nutritionally
deficient streptococci are possible pathogens. “Screening tests” with
immunologic or microbiologic serologies (“febrile agglutinins”) are of
low yield and should not be done. If the history or physical
examination suggests a specific diagnosis, specific serologic tests
with an associated fourfold rise or fall in titer may be useful.
Because infection is the most common cause of FUO, other body
fluids are usually cultured, ie, urine, sputum, stool, cerebrospinal
fluid, and morning gastric aspirates (if one suspects tuberculosis).
Direct examination of blood smears may establish a diagnosis of
malaria or relapsing fever (Borrelia).
B. Imaging
All patients with FUO should have a chest radiograph. Studies such
as sinus films, upper gastrointestinal series with small bowel follow-
through, barium enema, proctosigmoidoscopy, and evaluation of
gallbladder function are reserved for patients who have symptoms,
signs, or a history that suggest disease in these body regions. CT
scan of the abdomen and pelvis is also frequently performed and is
particularly useful for looking at the liver, spleen, and
retroperitoneum. When the CT scan is abnormal, the findings often
lead to a specific diagnosis. A normal CT scan is not quite as useful;
more invasive procedures such as biopsy or exploratory laparotomy
may be needed. The role of MRI in the investigation of FUO has
not been evaluated. In general, however, MRI is better than CT for
detecting lesions of the nervous system and is useful in diagnosing
various vasculitides. Ultrasound is sensitive for detecting lesions of
the kidney, pancreas, and biliary tree. Echocardiography should be
used if one is considering endocarditis or atrial myxoma.
Transesophageal echocardiography is more sensitive than surface
echocardiography for detecting valvular lesions, but even a negative
transesophageal study does not exclude endocarditis (10% false-
negative rate). The usefulness of radionuclide studies in diagnosing
FUO is variable. Theoretically, a gallium or positron emission
tomography (PET) scan would be more helpful than an indium-
labeled white blood cell scan, because gallium and fluorodeoxy-
glucose may be useful for detecting infection, inflammation, and
neoplasm whereas the indium scan is useful only for detecting
infection. Indium-labeled immunoglobulin may prove to be useful in
detecting infection and neoplasm and can be used in the neutropenic
patient. It is not sensitive for lesions of the liver, kidney, and heart
because of high background activity. In general, radionuclide scans
are plagued by high rates of false-positive and false-negative results
that are not useful when used as screening tests and, if done at all,
are limited to those patients whose history or examination suggests
local inflammation or infection.
C. Biopsy
Invasive procedures are often required for diagnosis. Any abnormal
finding should be aggressively evaluated: Headache calls for lumbar
puncture to rule out meningitis; skin rash should be biopsied for
cutaneous manifestations of collagen vascular disease or infection;
and enlarged lymph nodes should be aspirated or biopsied for
neoplasm and sent for culture. Bone marrow aspiration with biopsy
is a relatively low-yield procedure (15–25%; except in HIV-
positive patients, in whom mycobacterial infection is a common
cause of FUO), but the risk is low and the procedure should be
done if other less invasive tests have not yielded a diagnosis,
particularly in persons with hematologic abnormalities. Liver biopsy
will yield a specific diagnosis in 10–15% of patients with FUO and
should be considered in any patient with abnormal liver function
tests even if the liver is normal in size. CT scanning and MRI have
decreased the need for exploratory laparotomy; however, surgical
visualization and biopsies should be considered when there is
continued deterioration or lack of diagnosis.
 Treatment
An empiric course of antimicrobials (eg, quinolones for possible
cystitis) should be considered if an infectious diagnosis is strongly
suspected. However, if there is no clinical response, it is imperative
to stop therapy and reevaluate. Once definitive culture results
return, streamlining therapy to the most narrow spectrum
antimicrobial should take place.
Empiric administration of corticosteroids should be discouraged
because they can suppress fever and exacerbate many infections.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any patient with FUO and progressive weight loss and
other constitutional signs.
•    Any immunocompromised patient (eg, transplant
recipients and HIV-infected patients).
•    Infectious diseases specialists may also be able to
coordinate and interpret specialized testing (eg, Q fever
serologies) with outside agencies, such as the US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention.
 When to Admit
 
•    Any patient who is rapidly declining with weight loss
where hospital admission may expedite work-up.
•    If FUO is present in immunocompromised patients, such
as those who are neutropenic from recent chemo-therapy
or those who have undergone transplantation (particularly in
the previous 6 months).
Bleeker-Rovers et al. A prospective multicenter study on fever of
unknown origin: the yield of a structured diagnostic protocol.
Medicine. 2007 Jan;86(1):26–38. [PMID: 17220753]
 
Cunha BA. Fever of unknown origin: clinical overview of classic
and current concepts. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2007;21(4):867–
915. [PMID: 18061081]
 
Hot A et al. Yield of bone marrow examination in diagnosing the
source of fever of unknown origin. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Nov
23;169(21):2018–23. [PMID: 19933965]
 
Zernone T. Fever of unknown origin in adults: evaluation of 144
cases in a non-university hospital. Scand J Infect Dis.
2006;38(8):632–8. [PMID: 16857607]
 
INFECTIONS IN THE IMMUNOCOMPROMISED
PATIENT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever and other symptoms may be blunted because of
immunosuppression.
 A contaminating organism in an immunocompetent individual may
be a pathogen in an immunocompromised one.
 The interval since transplantation and the degree of
immunosuppression can narrow the differential diagnosis.
 Empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics may be appropriate in high-
risk patients whether or not symptoms are localized.
 
 General Considerations
Immunocompromised patients have defects in their natural defense
mechanisms resulting in an increased risk for infection. In addition,
infection is often severe, rapidly progressive, and life threatening.
Organisms that are not usually problematic in the immunocompetent
person may be important pathogens in the compromised patient (eg,
Staphylococcus 
epidermidis, 
Corynebacterium 
jeikeium,
Propionibacterium acnes, Bacillus species). Therefore, culture
results must be interpreted with caution, and isolates should not be
disregarded as merely contaminants. Although the type of
immunodeficiency is associated with specific infectious disease
syndromes, any pathogen can cause infection in any
immunosuppressed patient at any time. Thus, a systematic
evaluation is required to identify a specific organism.
A. Impaired Humoral Immunity
Defects in humoral immunity are often congenital, although
hypogammaglobulinemia can occur in multiple myeloma, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, and in patients who have undergone
splenectomy. Patients with ineffective humoral immunity lack
opsonizing antibodies and are at particular risk for infection with
encapsulated organisms, such as Haemophilus influenzae,
Neisseria meningitidis and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
B. Granulocytopenia (Neutropenia)
Granulocytopenia is common following hematopoietic cell
transplantation (“stem cell transplantation”) and among patients with
solid tumors—as a result of myelosuppressive chemotherapy—and
in acute leukemias. The risk of infection begins to increase when the
absolute granulocyte count falls below 1000/mcL, with a dramatic
increase in frequency and severity when the granulocyte count falls
below 100/mcL. The infection risk is also increased with a rapid
rate of decline of neutrophils and with a prolonged period of
neutropenia. The granulocytopenic patient is particularly susceptible
to infections with gram-negative enteric organisms, Pseudomonas,
gram-positive cocci (particularly Staphylococcus aureus, S
epidermidis, and viridans streptococci), Candida, Aspergillus,
and other fungi that have recently emerged as pathogens such as
Trichosporon, Scedosporium, Fusarium, and the mucormycoses.
C. Impaired Cellular Immunity
Patients with cellular immune deficiency encompass a large and
heterogeneous group, including patients with HIV infection (see
Chapter 31); patients with lymphoreticular malignancies, such as
Hodgkin disease; and patients receiving immunosuppressive
medications, such as corticosteroids, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and
other cytotoxic drugs. This latter group—those who are
immunosuppressed as a result of medications—includes patients
who have undergone solid organ transplantation, many patients
receiving therapy for solid tumors, and patients receiving prolonged
high-dose corticosteroid treatment (eg, for asthma, temporal
arteritis, systemic lupus). Patients taking tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) inhibitors, such as etanercept and infliximab, for a variety of
inflammatory conditions are also included in this category. Patients
with cellular immune dysfunction are susceptible to infections by a
large number of organisms, particularly ones that replicate
intracellularly. Examples include bacteria, such as Listeria,
Legionella, Salmonella, and Mycobacterium; viruses, such as
herpes simplex, varicella, and CMV; fungi, such as Cryptococcus,
Coccidioides, Histoplasma, and Pneumocystis; and protozoa,
such as Toxoplasma. Patients taking TNF inhibitors have specific
defects that increase risk of bacterial, mycobacterial (particularly
tuberculosis), and fungal infections (primary and reactivation).
D. Hematopoietic Cell Transplant Recipients
The length of time it takes for complications to occur in
hematopoietic cell transplant recipients can be helpful in determining
the etiologic agent. In the early (preengraftment) posttransplant
period (day 1–21), patients will become severely neutropenic for
7–21 days. Patients are at risk for gram-positive (particularly
catheter-related) and gram-negative bacterial infections, as well as
herpes simplex virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and fungal
infections. In contrast to solid organ transplant recipients, the source
of fever is unknown in 60–70% of hematopoietic cell transplant
patients. Between 3 weeks and 3 months posttransplant, infections
with CMV, adenovirus, Aspergillus, and Candida are most
common. P jiroveci pneumonia is possible, particularly in patients
who receive additional immunosuppression for treatment of graft-
versus-host disease. Patients continue to be at risk for infectious
complications beyond 3 months following transplantation,
particularly those who have received allogeneic transplantation and
those who are taking immunosuppressive therapy for chronic graft-
versus-host disease. Varicellazoster is common, and Aspergillus
and CMV infections are increasingly seen in this period as well.
E. Solid Organ Transplant Recipients
The length of time it takes for infection to occur following solid
organ transplantation can also be helpful in determining the
infectious origin. Immediate postoperative infections often involve
the transplanted organ. Following lung transplantation, pneumonia
and mediastinitis are particularly common; following liver
transplantation, intra-abdominal abscess, cholangitis, and peritonitis
may be seen; after kidney transplantation, urinary tract infections,
perinephric abscesses, and infected lymphoceles can occur.
Most infections that occur in the first 2–4 weeks post-transplant
are related to the operative procedure and to hospitalization itself
(wound infection, intravenous catheter infection, urinary tract
infection from a Foley catheter) or are related to the transplanted
organ. In rare instances, donor derived infections (eg, West Nile
virus, tuberculosis) may present during this time period. Infections
that occur between the first and sixth months are often related to
immunosuppression. During this period, reactivation of viruses, such
as herpes simplex, varicella-zoster, and CMV is quite common.
Opportunistic infections with fungi (eg, Candida, Aspergillus,
Cryptococcus, 
Pneumocystis)
, Listeria 
monocytogenes,
Nocardia, and Toxoplasma are also common. After 6 months, if
immunosuppression has been reduced to maintenance levels,
infections that would be expected in any population occur. Patients
with 
poorly 
functioning 
allografts 
receiving 
long-term
immunosuppression therapy continue to be at risk for opportunistic
infections.
F. Other Immunocompromised States
A large group of patients who are not specifically immuno-deficient
are at increased risk for infection due to debilitating injury (eg, burns
or severe trauma), invasive procedures (eg, chronic central
intravenous catheters, Foley catheters, dialysis catheters), central
nervous system dysfunction (which predisposes patients to
aspiration pneumonia and decubitus ulcers), obstructing lesions (eg,
pneumonia due to an obstructed bronchus, pyelonephritis due to
nephrolithiasis, cholangitis secondary to cholelithiasis), and use of
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Patients with diabetes mellitus have
alterations in cellular immunity, resulting in mucormycosis,
emphysematous pyelonephritis, and foot infections.
 Clinical Findings
A. Laboratory Findings
Routine evaluation includes complete blood count with differential,
chest radiograph, and blood cultures; urine and respiratory cultures
should be obtained if indicated clinically or radiographically. Any
focal complaints (localized pain, headache, rash) should prompt
imaging and cultures appropriate to the site.
Patients who remain febrile without an obvious source should be
evaluated for viral infection (serum CMV antigen test or polymerase
chain reaction), abscesses (which usually occur near previous
operative sites), candidiasis involving the liver or spleen, or
aspergillosis. Serologic evaluation may be helpful if toxoplasmosis
or an endemic fungal infection (coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis)
is a possible cause. Antigen based assays may be useful for the
diagnosis of aspergillosis (detected by galactomannan level in serum
or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid), or other invasive fungal disease
(serum (1
-β-d-glucan level).
B. Special Diagnostic Procedures
Special diagnostic procedures should also be considered. The
cause of pulmonary infiltrates can be easily determined with simple
techniques in some situations—eg, induced sputum yields a
diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia in 50–80% of AIDS
patients with this infection. In other situations, more invasive
procedures 
may 
be 
required 
(bronchoalveolar 
lavage,
transbronchial biopsy, open lung biopsy). Skin, liver, or bone
marrow biopsy may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Transplant rejection, organ ischemia and necrosis, thrombophlebitis,
and lymphoma (posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease) may all
present as fever and must be considered in the differential diagnosis.
 Prevention
There is great interest in preventing infection with prophylactic
antimicrobial regimens but no uniformity of opinion about optimal
drugs or dosage regimens. Hand washing is the simplest and most
effective means of decreasing hospital-associated infections,
especially in the compromised patient. Invasive devices such as
central and peripheral lines and Foley catheters are potential
sources of infection. Some centers use laminar airflow isolation or
high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtering in hematopoietic cell
transplant patients. Rates of infection and episodes of febrile
neutropenia, but not mortality, are decreased if colony-stimulating
factors are used during chemotherapy or during stem-cell
transplantation.
A. Pneumocystis & Herpes Simplex Infections
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ), one double-strength
tablet orally three times a week, one double-strength tablet twice
daily on weekends, or one single-strength tablet daily for 3–6
months, is frequently used to prevent Pneumocystis infections in
transplant patients. In patients allergic to TMP-SMZ, dapsone, 50
mg orally daily or 100 mg three times weekly, is recommended.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) levels should be
determined before therapy when the latter is instituted. Acyclovir
prevents herpes simplex infections in bone marrow and solid organ
transplant recipients and is given to seropositive patients who are
not receiving acyclovir or ganciclovir for CMV prophylaxis. The
usual dose is 200 mg orally three times daily for 4 weeks
(hematopoietic cell transplants) to 12 weeks (other solid organ
transplants).
B. CMV
No uniformly accepted approach has been adopted for prevention
of CMV. Prevention strategies often depend on the serologic status
of the donor and recipient and the organ transplanted, which
determines the level of immunosuppression after transplant. In solid
organ transplants (liver, kidney, heart, lung), the greatest risk of
developing CMV disease is in seronegative patients who receive
organs from seropositive donors. These high-risk patients usually
receive oral valganciclovir, 900 mg daily for 3–6 months (longer in
lung transplant recipients). Other solid organ transplant recipients
(seropositive recipients) are at lower risk for developing CMV
disease but still usually receive oral valganciclovir for 3 months. The
lowest risk group for the development of CMV disease is in
seronegative patients who receive organs from seronegative donors.
Typically, no CMV prophylaxis is used in this group. Ganciclovir
and valganciclovir also prevent herpes virus reactivation. Because
immunosuppression is increased during periods of rejection, patients
treated for rejection usually receive CMV prophylaxis during
rejection therapy.
Recipients of hematopoietic cell transplants are more severely
immunosuppressed than recipients of solid organ transplants, are at
greater risk for developing serious CMV infection (usually CMV
reactivation), and thus usually receive more aggressive prophylaxis.
Two approaches have been used: universal prophylaxis or
preemptive therapy. In the former, all high-risk patients
(seropositive patients who receive allogeneic transplants) may
receive oral valganciclovir, 900 mg daily to day 100. This method is
costly and associated with significant bone marrow toxicity.
Alternatively, patients can be monitored without specific prophylaxis
and have blood sampled weekly for the presence of CMV. If CMV
is detected by an antigenemia assay or by polymerase chain
reaction, preemptive therapy is instituted with oral valganciclovir,
900 mg twice daily for a minimum of 2–3 weeks followed by oral
valganciclovir at 900 mg daily until day 100. This preemptive
approach is effective but does miss a small number of patients in
whom CMV disease would have been prevented had prophylaxis
been used. Other preventive strategies include use of CMV-
negative or leukocyte-depleted blood products for CMV-
seronegative recipients.
C. Other Organisms
Routine decontamination of the gastrointestinal tract to prevent
bacteremia in the neutropenic patient is not recommended.
Prophylactic administration of antibiotics in the afebrile,
asymptomatic neutropenic patient is controversial, although many
centers have adopted this strategy. Rates of bacteremia are
decreased, but overall mortality is not affected and emergence of
resistant organisms is a risk. Use of intravenous immunoglobulin is
reserved for the small number of patients with severe
hypogammaglobulinemia following bone marrow transplantation and
should not be routinely administered to all transplant patients.
Prophylaxis with antifungal agents to prevent invasive mold
(primarily Aspergillus) and yeast (primarily Candida) infections is
routinely used, but the optimal agent, dose, and duration have not
been standardized. Lipid-based preparations of amphotericin B,
aerosolized amphotericin B, intravenous and oral fluconazole or
voriconazole, and oral posaconazole solution are all prophylactic
options in the neutropenic patient. Because voriconazole is superior
to amphotericin for documented Aspergillus infections and because
posaconazole prophylaxis (compared with fluconazole) has been
shown to result in fewer cases of invasive aspergillosis among
allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients with graft-versus-host
disease, one approach to prophylaxis is to use oral fluconazole (400
mg/d) for patients at low risk for developing fungal infections (those
who receive autologous bone marrow transplants) and oral
voriconazole (200 mg twice daily) or oral posaconazole (200 mg
solution three times daily) for those at high risk (allogeneic
transplants, graft-versus-host disease) at least until engraftment
(usually 30 days). In solid organ transplant recipients, the risk of
invasive fungal infection varies considerably (1–2% in liver,
pancreas, and kidney transplants and 6–8% in heart and lung
transplants). Whether universal prophylaxis or observation with
preemptive therapy is the best approach has not been determined.
Although fluconazole is effective in preventing yeast infections,
emergence of fluconazole-resistant Candida and molds (Fusarium,
Aspergillus, Mucor) has raised concerns about its routine use as a
prophylactic agent.
Given the high risk of reactivation of tuberculosis in patients
taking TNF inhibitors, all patients should be screened for latent
tuberculosis infection (LTBI) with a tuberculin skin test or an
interferon-gamma release assay prior to the start of therapy. If
LTBI is diagnosed, treatment with the TNF inhibitors should be
delayed until treatment for LTBI is completed.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Because infections in the immunocompromised patient can be
rapidly progressive and life-threatening, diagnostic procedures must
be performed promptly, and empiric therapy is usually instituted.
While reduction or discontinuation of immunosuppressive
medication may jeopardize the viability of the transplanted organ,
this measure may be necessary if the infection is life-threatening.
Hematopoietic growth factors (granulocyte and granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factors) stimulate proliferation of
bone marrow stem cells, resulting in an increase in peripheral
leukocytes. These agents shorten the period of neutropenia and
have been associated with reduction in infection.
B. Specific Measures
Antimicrobial drug therapy ultimately should be tailored to culture
results. While combinations of antimicrobials may be used to
provide synergy or to prevent resistance, the primary reason for
empiric combination therapy is broad-spectrum coverage of
multiple pathogens (since infections in these patients are often
polymicrobial).
Empiric therapy is often instituted at the earliest sign of infection
in the immunosuppressed patient because prompt therapy favorably
affects outcome. The antibiotic or combination of antibiotics used
depends on the degree of immune compromise and the site of
infection. For example, in the febrile neutropenic patient, an
algorithmic approach to therapy is often used. Febrile neutropenic
patients should be empirically treated with broad-spectrum agents
active against gram-positive organisms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
and other gram-negative bacilli (such as cefepime 2 g every 8 hours
intravenously). The addition of vancomycin, 10–15 mg/kg/dose
intravenously every 12 hours, should be considered in those patients
with suspected infection due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA), S epidermidis, and enterococcus. Continued
neutropenic fever necessitates broadening of antibacterial coverage
from cefepime to agents such as imipenem 500 mg every 6 hours or
meropenem 1 g every 8 hours intravenously with or without
tobramycin 5 mg/kg intravenously every 24 hours. Antifungal agents
(such as voriconazole, 200 mg intravenously or orally every 12
hours, or caspofungin, 50 mg daily intravenously) should be added
if fevers continue after 5–7 days of broad-spectrum antibacterial
therapy. Regardless of whether the patient becomes afebrile,
therapy is continued until resolution of neutropenia. Failure to
continue antibiotics through the period of neutropenia has been
associated with increased morbidity and mortality.
Patients with fever and low-risk neutropenia (neutropenia
expected to persist for < 10 days, no comorbid complications
requiring hospitalization, and cancer adequately treated) can be
treated with oral antibiotic regimens, such as ciprofloxacin, 750 mg
every 12 hours, plus amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 500 mg every 8
hours. Antibiotics are continued as long as the patient is neutropenic
even if a source is not identified. In the organ transplant patient with
interstitial infiltrates, the main concern is infection with
Pneumocystis or Legionella species, so that empiric treatment
with a macrolide (or fluoroquinolone) and TMP-SMZ, 15 mg/kg/d
orally or intravenously (based on trimethoprim component) would
be reasonable in those patients not receiving TMP-SMZ
prophylaxis. If the patient does not respond to empiric treatment, a
decision must be made to add more antimicrobial agents or perform
invasive procedures (see above) to make a specific diagnosis. By
making a definite diagnosis, therapy can be specific, thereby
reducing selection pressure for resistance and superinfection.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any immunocompromised patient with an opportunistic
infection.
•    Patients with potential drug toxicities and drug
interactions related to antimicrobials where alternative
agents are sought.
•    Patients with LTBI in whom therapy with TNF inhibitors
is planned.
 When to Admit
Immunocompromised patients who are febrile, or those without
fevers in whom an infection is suspected, particularly in the following
groups: solid-organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipient
(particularly in the first 6 months), neutropenic patients, patients
receiving TNF inhibitors, transplant recipients who have had recent
rejection episodes (including graft-versus-host disease).
Fishman JA. Infection in solid-organ transplant recipients. N Engl J
Med. 2007;357(25):2601–14. [PMID: 18094380]
 
Koo S et al. Diagnostic performance of the (1→-β-d-glucan assay
for invasive fungal disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Dec
1;49(11):1650–9. [PMID: 19863452]
 
Morris MI et al. Infections transmitted by transplantation. Infect
Dis Clin North Am. 2010 Jun;24(2):497–514. [PMID:
20466280]
 
Neofytos D et al. Epidemiology and outcome of invasive fungal
infection in adult hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients:
analysis of Multicenter Prospective Antifungal Therapy (PATH)
Alliance registry. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Feb 1;48(3):265–73.
[PMID: 19115967]
 
Palmer SM et al. Extended valganciclovir prophylaxis to prevent
cytomegalovirus after lung transplantation: a randomized,
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010 Jun 15;152(12):761–9.
[PMID: 20547904]
 
Ullmann AJ et al. Posaconazole or fluconazole for prophylaxis in
severe graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan
25;356(4):335–47. [PMID: 17251530]
 
Walsh TJ et al. Treatment of aspergillosis: clinical practice
guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin
Infect Dis. 2008 Feb 1;46(3):327–60. [PMID: 18177225]
 
Winthrop KL et al. Mycobacterial and other serious infections in
patients receiving anti-tumor necrosis factor and other newly
approved biologic therapies: case finding through the Emerging
Infections Network. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Jun 1;46(11):1738–40.
[PMID: 18419421]
 
HEALTH CARE–ASSOCIATED INFECTIONS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 Health care–associated infections are acquired during the course
of receiving health care treatment for other conditions.
 Hospital-associated infections are a subset of health care–
associated infections defined as those not present or incubating at
the time of hospital admission and developing 48 hours or more
after admission.
 Most health care–associated infections are preventable.
 Hand washing is the most effective means of preventing health
care–associated infections and should be done routinely even
when gloves are worn.
 
 General Considerations
In the United States, approximately 5% of patients acquire a health
care–associated infection, resulting in prolongation of the hospital
stay, increase in cost of care, significant morbidity, and a 5%
mortality rate. The most common infections are urinary tract
infections, usually associated with Foley catheters or urologic
procedures; bloodstream infections, most commonly from
indwelling catheters but also from secondary sites, such as surgical
wounds, abscesses, pneumonia, the genitourinary tract, and the
gastrointestinal tract; pneumonia in intubated patients or those with
altered levels of consciousness; surgical wound infections; MRSA
infections; and Clostridium difficile colitis.
Some general principles are helpful in preventing, diagnosing, and
treating health care–associated infections:
1. Many infections are a direct result of the use of invasive
devices for monitoring or therapy, such as intravenous
catheters, Foley catheters, shunts, surgical drains,
catheters placed by interventional radiology for drainage,
nasogastric tubes, and orotracheal or nasotracheal tubes
for ventilatory support. Early removal of such devices
reduces the possibility of infection.
2. Patients in whom health care–associated infections
develop are often critically ill, have been hospitalized for
extended periods, and have received several courses of
broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. As a result, health care–
associated infections are often due to multidrug resistant
pathogens and are different from those encountered in
community-acquired infections. For example, S aureus and
S epidermidis (a frequent cause of prosthetic device
infection) are often resistant to nafcillin and cephalosporins
and require vancomycin for therapy; Enterococcus faecium
resistant to ampicillin and vancomycin; gram-negative
infections 
caused 
by Pseudomonas, 
Citrobacter,
Enterobacter, Acinetobacter, 
and Stenotrophomonas,
which may be resistant to most antibacterials. When
choosing antibiotics to treat the seriously ill patient with a
health care–associated infection, antimicrobial history and
the “local ecology” must be considered. In the most
seriously ill patients, broad-spectrum coverage with
vancomycin and a carbapenem with or without an
aminoglycoside is recommended. Once a pathogen is
isolated and susceptibilities are known, the most narrow
spectrum, least toxic, most cost-effective drug should be
used.
Widespread use of antimicrobial drugs contributes to the
selection of drug-resistant organisms, thus every effort should be
made to limit the spectrum of coverage and unnecessary duration.
All too often, unreliable or uninterpretable specimens are obtained
for culture that result in unnecessary use of antibiotics. The best
example of this principle is the diagnosis of line-related or
bloodstream infection in the febrile patient (see below). To avoid
unnecessary use of antibiotics, thoughtful consideration of culture
results is mandatory. A positive wound culture without signs of
inflammation or infection, a positive sputum culture without
pulmonary infiltrates on chest radiograph, or a positive urine culture
in a catheterized patient without symptoms or signs of pyelonephritis
are all likely to represent colonization, not infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Catheter-associated infections have a variable presentation,
depending on the type of catheter used (peripheral or central
venous catheters, nontunneled or tunneled). Local signs of infection
may be present at the insertion site, with pain, erythema, and
purulence. Fever is often absent in uncomplicated infections and if
present, may indicate more disseminated disease such as
bacteremia, cellulitis and septic thrombophlebitis. Often signs of
infection at the insertion site are absent.
1. Fever in an intensive care unit patient—Fever complicates
up to 70% of patients in intensive care units, and the etiology of the
fever may be infectious or noninfectious. Common infectious causes
include catheter-associated infections, hospital-acquired and
ventilator-associated pneumonia (see Chapter 9), surgical site
infections, urinary tract infections, and sepsis. Clinically relevant
sinusitis is relatively uncommon in the patient in the intensive care
unit.
An important noninfectious cause is thromboembolic disease.
Fever in conjunction with refractory hypotension and shock may
suggest sepsis; however, adrenal insufficiency, thyroid storm, and
transfusion reaction may have a similar clinical presentation. Drug
fever is difficult to diagnose and is usually a diagnosis of exclusion
unless there are other signs of hypersensitivity, such as a typical
maculopapular rash.
2. Fever in the postoperative patient—Postoperative fever is
very common and in many cases resolves spontaneously. Etiologies
are both infectious and noninfectious. Timing of the fever in relation
to the surgery and the nature of the surgical procedure may help
diagnostically.
A. IMMEDIATE FEVER (IN THE FIRST FEW HOURS AFTER SURGERY)
—Immediate fever can be due to medications that were given
perioperatively, to the trauma of surgery itself, or to infections that
were present before surgery. Necrotizing fasciitis due to group A
streptococci or mixed organisms may present in this period.
Malignant hyperthermia is rare and presents 30 minutes to several
hours following inhalational anesthesia and is characterized by
extreme hyperthermia, muscle rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, electrolyte
abnormalities, and hypotension. Aggressive cooling and dantrolene
are the mainstays of therapy. Aspiration of acidic gastric contents
during surgery can cause a chemical pneumonitis (Mendelson
syndrome) that rapidly develops but is transient and does not
require antibiotics. Fever due to the trauma of surgery itself usually
resolves in 2–3 days, longer in more complicated operative cases
and in patients with head trauma.
B. ACUTE FEVER (WITHIN 1 WEEK OF SURGERY)—Acute fever is
usually due to common causes of hospital-associated infections,
such as ventilator-associated pneumonia (including aspiration
pneumonia in patients with decreased gag reflex) and line infections.
Noninfectious causes include alcohol withdrawal, gout, pulmonary
embolism, and pancreatitis. Atelectasis following surgery is
commonly invoked as a cause of postoperative fever but there is no
good evidence to support a causal association between the
presence or degree of atelectasis and fever.
C. SUBACUTE FEVER (AT LEAST 1 WEEK AFTER SURGERY)—Surgical
site infections commonly present at least 1 week after surgery. The
type of surgery that was performed predicts specific infectious
etiologies. Patients undergoing cardiothoracic surgery may be at
higher risk for pneumonia and deep and superficial sternal wound
infections. Meningitis without typical signs of meningismus may
complicate neurosurgical procedures. Abdominal surgery may result
in deep abdominal abscesses that require drainage.
B. Laboratory Findings
Blood cultures are universally recommended, and chest radiographs
are frequently obtained. A properly prepared sputum Gram stain
and semi-quantitative sputum cultures may be useful in selected
patients where there is a high pretest probability of pneumonia but
multiple exclusion criteria probably limit generalizability in most
patients, such as immunocompromised patients and those with drug
resistance. Other diagnostic strategies will be dictated by the clinical
context (eg, transesophageal echocardiogram in a patient with S
aureus bacteremia).
Any fever in a patient with a central venous catheter should
prompt the collection of blood. The best method to evaluate
bacteremia is to gather at least two peripherally obtained blood
cultures. Blood cultures from unidentified sites, a single blood
culture from any site, or a blood culture through an existing line will
often be positive for S epidermidis, resulting in the inappropriate
use of vancomycin. Unless two separate venipuncture cultures are
obtained—not through catheters—interpretation of results is
impossible and unnecessary therapy may be given. Every such
“pseudo-bacteremia” increases laboratory costs, antibiotic use, and
length of stay. Microbiologic evaluation of the removed catheter can
sometimes be helpful, but only in addition to (not instead of) blood
cultures drawn from peripheral sites. The differential time to
positivity measures the difference in time that cultures simultaneously
drawn through a catheter and a peripheral site become positive. A
positive test (about 120 minutes difference in time) supports a
catheter-related bloodstream infection, and a negative test may
permit catheters to be retained.
 Complications
Patients who have persistent bacteremia and fever despite removal
of the infected catheter may have complications such as septic
thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, or meta-static foci of infection
(particularly with S aureus). Additional studies such as venous
Doppler studies, transesophageal echocardiogram, and chest
radiographs may be indicated, and 4–6 weeks of antibiotics may be
needed. In the case of septic thrombophlebitis, anticoagulation with
heparin is also recommended if there are no contraindications.
 Differential Diagnosis
Although most fevers are due to infections, about 25% of patients
will have fever of noninfectious origin, including drug fever,
nonspecific postoperative fevers (tissue damage or necrosis),
hematoma, pancreatitis, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction,
and ischemic bowel disease.
 Prevention
The concept of universal precautions emphasizes that all patients are
treated as though they have a potential blood-borne transmissible
disease, and thus all body secretions are handled with care to
prevent spread of disease. Body substance isolation requires use of
gloves whenever a health care worker anticipates contact with
blood or other body secretions. Even though gloves are worn,
health care workers should routinely wash their hands, since it is the
easiest and most effective means of preventing hospital-associated
infections. Application of a rapid drying, alcohol-based antiseptic is
simple, takes less time than traditional hand washing with soap and
water, is more effective at reducing hand colonization, and
promotes compliance with hand decontamination.
Peripheral intravenous lines should be replaced every 3 days.
Arterial lines and lines in the central venous circulation (including
those placed peripherally) can be left in place indefinitely and are
changed or removed when they are clinically suspected of being
infected, when they are nonfunctional, or when they are no longer
needed. Using sterile barrier precautions (including cap, mask,
gown, gloves, and drape) is recommended while inserting central
venous catheters. Silver alloy–impregnated Foley catheters reduce
the incidence of catheter-associated bacteriuria, and antibiotic-
impregnated (minocycline plus rifampin or chlorhexidine plus silver
sulfadiazine) venous catheters reduce line infections and bacteremia.
Silver-coated endotracheal tubes may reduce the incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Whether the increased cost of
these devices justifies their routine use should be determined by
individual institutions. As of 2008, Medicare has included catheter-
related urinary tract infections and intravenous catheter-associated
infections as non-reimbursable conditions. Preoperative skin
preparation with chlorhexidine and alcohol (versus povidone-iodine)
has been shown to reduce the incidence of infection following
surgery. Another strategy that can prevent surgical-site infections is
the identification and treatment of S aureus nasal carriers with 2%
mupirocin nasal ointment and chlorhexidine soap. Daily bathing of
ICU patients with chlorhexidine-impregnated washcloths versus
soap and water may result in lower risk of catheter-associated
bloodstream infections. Selective decontamination of the digestive
tract with nonabsorbable or parenteral antibiotics, or both, may
prevent hospital-acquired pneumonia and decrease mortality.
Attentive nursing care (positioning to prevent decubitus ulcers,
wound care, elevating the head during tube feedings to prevent
aspiration) is critical in preventing hospital-associated infections. In
addition, monitoring of high-risk areas by hospital epidemiologists is
critical in the prevention of infection. Some guidelines advocate
rapid screening for MRSA on admission to acute care facilities
among certain subpopulations of patients (eg, those recently
hospitalized, admission to the intensive care unit, patients
undergoing hemodialysis). However, it is not clear whether this
strategy decreases the incidence of hospital-associated MRSA
infections.
Vaccines, including hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and the varicella,
pneumococcal, influenza vaccination are important adjuncts. (See
section below on Immunization against Infectious Diseases.)
 Treatment
A. Fever in an Intensive Care Unit Patient
Unless the patient has a central neurologic injury with elevated
intracranial pressure or has a temperature > 41 °C, there is less
physiologic need to maintain euthermia. Empiric broad-spectrum
antibiotics (as noted above) are recommended for neutropenic and
other immunocom-promised patients and in patients who are
clinically unstable.
B. Catheter-Associated Infections
Factors that inform treatment decisions include the type of catheter,
the causative pathogen, the availability of alternate catheter access
sites, the need for ongoing intravascular access, and the severity of
disease.
In general, catheters should be removed if there is purulence at
the exit site; if the organism is S aureus, gram-negative rods, or
Candida species; if there is persistent bacteremia (> 48 hours while
receiving antibiotics); or if complications, such as septic
thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, or other metastatic disease exist.
Central venous catheters may be exchanged over a guidewire
provided there is no erythema or purulence at the exit site and the
patient does not appear to be septic. Methicillin-resistant,
coagulase-negative staphylococci are the most common pathogens;
thus, empiric therapy with vancomycin, 15 mg/kg intravenously
twice daily, should be given assuming normal kidney function.
Empiric gram-negative coverage may be considered in patients who
are immunocompromised or who are critically ill (see Table 30–5).
Antibiotic treatment duration depends on the pathogen and the
extent of disease. For uncomplicated bacteremia, 5–7 days of
therapy is usually sufficient for coagulase-negative staphylococci,
even if the original catheter is retained. Fourteen days of therapy is
generally recommended for uncomplicated bacteremia caused by
gram-negative rods, Candida species, and S aureus. Antibiotic
lock therapy involves the instillation of supratherapeutic
concentrations of antibiotics with heparin in the lumen of catheters.
The purpose is to achieve adequate concentrations of antibiotics to
kill microbes in the biofilm. Antibiotic lock therapy can be used for
catheter-related bloodstream infections caused by coagulase-
negative staphylococci or enterococci and when the catheter is
being retained in a salvage situation.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any patient with multidrug-resistant infection.
•    Any patient with fungemia or persistent bacteremia.
•    Patients with multisite infections.
•    Patients with impaired or fluctuating kidney function for
assistance with dosing of antimicrobials.
Bode LG et al. Preventing surgical-site infections in nasal carriers
of Staphylococcus aureus. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jan 7;362(1):9–
17. [PMID: 20054045]
 
Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. A randomized trial of
diagnostic techniques for ventilator-associated pneumonia. N Engl
J Med. 2006 Dec 21;355(25):2619–30. [PMID: 17182987]
 
Climo MW et al. The effect of daily bathing with chlorhexidine on
the acquisition of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, and healthcare-associated
bloodstream infections: results of a quasi-experimental multicenter
trial. Crit Care Med. 2009 Jun;37(6): 1858-65. [PMID:
19384220]
 
Darouiche RO et al. Chlorhexidine-alcohol versus povidoneiodine
for surgical-site antisepsis. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jan 7;362(1):18–
26. [PMID: 20054046]
 
Harbarth S et al. Universal screening for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus at hospital admission and nosocomial
infection in surgical patients. JAMA. 2008 Mar 12;299(10):
1149–57. [PMID: 18334690]
 
Kollef MH et al. Silver-coated endotracheal tubes and incidence
of ventilator-associated pneumonia: the NASCENT randomized
trial. JAMA. 2008 Aug 20;300(7):805–13. [PMID: 18714060]
 
Mermel LA et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of intravascular catheter-related infection: 2009
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect
Dis. 2009 Jul 1;49(1):1–45. [PMID: 19489710]
 
Peleg AY et al. Hospital-acquired infections due to gram-negative
bacteria. N Engl J Med. 2010 May 13;362(19):1804–13. [PMID:
20463340]
 
Pronovost P et al. An intervention to decrease catheter-related
bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J Med. 2006 Dec
28;355(26):2725–32. [PMID: 17192537]
 
Yokoe DS et al. A compendium of strategies to prevent
healthcare-associated infections in acute care hospitals. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2008 Oct;29(Suppl 1):S12–21. [PMID:
18840084]
 
INFECTIONS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Central nervous system infection is a medical emergency.
 Symptoms and signs common to all central nervous system
infections include headache, fever, sensorial disturbances, neck
and back stiffness, positive Kernig and Brudzinski signs, and
cerebro-spinal fluid abnormalities.
 
 General Considerations
Infections of the central nervous system can be caused by almost
any infectious agent, including bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi,
spirochetes, protozoa, helminths, and viruses.
 Etiologic Classification
Central nervous system infections can be divided into several
categories that usually can be readily distinguished from each other
by cerebrospinal fluid examination as the first step toward etiologic
diagnosis (Table 30–1).
A. Purulent Meningitis
Patients with bacterial meningitis usually seek medical attention
within hours or 1–2 days after onset of symptoms. The organisms
responsible depend primarily on the age of the patient as
summarized in Table 30–2. The diagnosis is usually based on the
Gram-stained smear (positive in 60–90%) or culture (positive in
over 90%) of the cerebrospinal fluid.
B. Chronic Meningitis
The presentation of chronic meningitis is less acute than purulent
meningitis. Patients with chronic meningitis usually have a history of
symptoms lasting weeks to months. The most common pathogens
are Mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, fungi
(Cryptococcus, Coccidioides, Histoplasma), and spirochetes
(Treponema pallidum and Borrelia burgdorferi, the cause of
Lyme disease). The diagnosis is made by culture or in some cases
by serologic tests (cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, syphilis,
Lyme disease).
C. Aseptic Meningitis
Aseptic meningitis—a much more benign and self-limited syndrome
than purulent meningitis—is caused principally by viruses, especially
herpes simplex virus and the entero-virus group (including
coxsackieviruses and echoviruses). Infectious mononucleosis may
be accompanied by aseptic meningitis. Leptospiral infection is also
usually placed in the aseptic group because of the lymphocytic
cellular response and its relatively benign course. This type of
meningitis also occurs during secondary syphilis and disseminated
Lyme disease. Prior to the routine administration of measles-
mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccines, mumps was the most common
cause of viral meningitis. Drug-induced aseptic meningitis has been
reported with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, sulfonamides
and certain solid organ transplant agents, including muromonab-
CD3 (OKT3).
 
Table 30–1. Typical cerebrospinal fluid findings in various central
nervous system diseases.
 
1Cerebrospinal fluid glucose must be considered in relation to blood
glucose level. Normally, cerebrospinal fluid glucose is 20–30 mg/dL lower
than blood glucose, or 50–70% of the normal value of blood glucose.
2Organisms 
in 
smear 
or 
culture 
of 
cerebrospinal 
fluid;
counterimmunoelectrophoresis or latex agglutination may be diagnostic.
3Polymorphonuclear neutrophils may predominate early.
4Viral isolation from cerebrospinal fluid early; antibody titer rise in paired
specimens of serum; polymerase chain reaction for herpesvirus.
5May occur in mastoiditis, brain abscess, epidural abscess, sinusitis,
septic thrombus, brain tumor. Cerebrospinal fluid culture results usually
negative.
D. Encephalitis
Encephalitis (due to herpesviruses, arboviruses, rabies virus,
flaviviruses [West Nile encephalitis, Japanese encephalitis]), and
many others, produces disturbances of the sensorium, seizures, and
many other manifestations. Patients are more ill than those with
aseptic meningitis. Cerebrospinal fluid may be entirely normal or
may show some lymphocytes and in some instances (eg, herpes
simplex) red cells as well. Influenza has been associated with
encephalitis, but the relationship is not clear.
E. Partially Treated Bacterial Meningitis
Previous effective antibiotic therapy given for 12–24 hours will
decrease the rate of positive Gram stain results by 20% and culture
by 30–40% of the cerebrospinal fluid but will have little effect on
cell count, protein, or glucose. Occasionally, previous antibiotic
therapy will change a predominantly polymorphonuclear response
to a lymphocytic pleocytosis, and some of the cerebrospinal fluid
findings may be similar to those seen in aseptic meningitis.
 
Table 30–2. Initial antimicrobial therapy for purulent meningitis of
unknown cause.
 
1The dose of vancomycin is 10–15 mg/kg/dose IV every 6 hours.
2The usual dose of cefotaxime is 2 g IV every 6 hours and that of
ceftriaxone is 2 g IV every 12 hours. If the organism is sensitive to
penicillin, 3–4 million units IV every 4 hours is given.
3The dose of ampicillin is usually 2 g IV every 4 hours.
4Cefepime is given in a dose of 50–100 mg/kg IV every 8 hours.
F. Neighborhood Reaction
As noted in Table 30–1, this term denotes a purulent infectious
process in close proximity to the central nervous system that spills
some of the products of the inflammatory process—white blood
cells or protein—into the cerebrospinal fluid. Such an infection
might be a brain abscess, osteomyelitis of the vertebrae, epidural
abscess, subdural empyema, or bacterial sinusitis or mastoiditis.
G. Noninfectious Meningeal Irritation
Carcinomatous 
meningitis, 
sarcoidosis, 
systemic 
lupus
erythematosus, chemical meningitis, and certain drugs—nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, OKT3, TMP-SMZ, and others—can also
produce symptoms and signs of meningeal irritation with associated
cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis, increased protein, and low or
normal glucose. Meningismus with normal cerebrospinal fluid
findings occurs in the presence of other infections such as
pneumonia and shigellosis.
H. Brain Abscess
Brain abscess presents as a space-occupying lesion; symptoms may
include vomiting, fever, change of mental status, or focal neurologic
manifestations. When brain abscess is suspected, a CT scan should
be performed. If positive, lumbar puncture should not be performed
since results rarely provide clinically useful information and
herniation can occur. The bacteriology of brain abscess is usually
polymicrobial and includes S aureus, gram-negative bacilli,
streptococci, and anaerobes (including anaerobic streptococci and
Prevotella species).
I. Amebic Meningoencephalitis
These infections are caused by free-living amebas and present as
two distinct syndromes. The diagnosis is confirmed by culture
(Acanthamoeba species and Balamuthia mandrillaris) or
identification of the organism in a wet mount of cerebrospinal fluid
(Naegleria fowleri) or on biopsy specimens. No effective therapy
is available.
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis is caused by N fowleri and
is an acute fulminant disease, usually seen in children and young
adults with recent fresh water exposure, and is characterized by
signs of meningeal irritation that rapidly progresses to encephalitis
and death. Rare cures have been reported with intravenous and
intraventricular administration of amphotericin B.
Granulomatous amebic encephalitis is caused by Acanthamoeba
species. It is an indolent disease, frequently seen in
immunocompromised patients and associated with cutaneous
lesions. Central nervous system disease is characterized by
headache, nausea, vomiting, cranial neuropathies, seizures, and
hemiparesis. 
Infections 
with Balamuthia are similar to
Acanthamoeba in that the course is subacute to chronic, but unlike
Acanthamoeba both immunocom-promised and immunocompetent
persons can be affected.
J. Health Care–Associated Meningitis
This infection may arise as a result of invasive neurosurgical
procedures (eg, craniotomy, internal or external ventricular
catheters, external lumbar catheters), complicated head trauma, or
from hospital-acquired bloodstream infections. In general, the
microbiology is distinct from community-acquired meningitis, with
gram-negative organisms (eg, Pseudomonas) , S aureus, and
coagulase-negative staphylococci playing a larger role.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The classic triad of fever, stiff neck, and altered mental status has a
low sensitivity (44%) for bacterial meningitis. However, nearly all
patients with bacterial meningitis have at least two of the following
symptoms—fever, headache, stiff neck, or altered mental status.
B. Laboratory Tests
Evaluation of a patient with suspected meningitis includes a blood
count, blood culture, lumbar puncture followed by careful study and
culture of the cerebrospinal fluid, and a chest film. The fluid must be
examined for cell count, glucose, and protein, and a smear stained
for bacteria (and acid-fast organisms when appropriate) and
cultured for pyogenic organisms and for mycobacteria and fungi
when indicated. Latex agglutination tests can detect antigens of
encapsulated 
organisms (S pneumoniae, H influenzae, N
meningitidis, and Cryptococcus neoformans) but are rarely used
except for detection of Cryptococcus or in partially treated
patients. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of cerebrospinal
fluid has been used to detect bacteria (S pneumoniae, H
influenzae, N meningitidis, M tuberculosis, B burgdorferi, and
Tropheryma whippelii) and viruses (herpes simplex, varicella-
zoster, CMV, Epstein-Barr virus, and enteroviruses) in patients with
meningitis. The greatest experience is with PCR for herpes simplex
and varicella-zoster, and the tests are very sensitive (> 95%) and
specific. Tests to detect the other organisms may not be any more
sensitive than culture, but the real value is the rapidity with which
results are available, ie, hours compared with days or weeks. At
present, with the exception of PCR for herpes simplex, these tests
are performed only in reference laboratories.
C. Lumbar Puncture and Imaging
Since performing a lumbar puncture in the presence of a space-
occupying lesion (brain abscess, subdural hematoma, subdural
empyema, necrotic temporal lobe from herpes encephalitis) may
result in brainstem herniation, a CT scan is performed prior to
lumbar puncture if a space-occupying lesion is suspected on the
basis of papilledema, seizures, or focal neurologic findings. Other
indications for CT scan are an immunocompromised patient or
moderate to severely impaired level of consciousness. If delays are
encountered in obtaining a CT scan and bacterial meningitis is
suspected, blood cultures should be drawn and antibiotics and
corticosteroids administered even before cerebrospinal fluid is
obtained for culture to avoid delay in treatment (Table 30–1).
Antibiotics given within 4 hours before obtaining cerebrospinal fluid
probably do not affect culture results.
 Treatment
Although it is difficult to prove with existing clinical data that early
antibiotic therapy improves outcome in bacterial meningitis, prompt
therapy is still recommended. In purulent meningitis, the identity of
the causative microorganism may remain unknown or doubtful for a
few days and initial antibiotic treatment as set forth in Table 30–2
should be directed against the microorganisms most common for
each age group.
The duration of therapy for bacterial meningitis varies depending
on the etiologic agent: H influenzae, 7 days; N meningitidis, 3–7
days; S pneumoniae, 10–14 days; L monocytogenes, 14–21
days; and gram-negative bacilli, 21 days.
Dexamethasone therapy is recommended for adults with
pneumococcal meningitis. Ten milligrams of dexamethasone
administered intravenously 15–20 minutes before or simultaneously
with the first dose of antibiotics and continued every 6 hours for 4
days decreases morbidity and mortality. Patients most likely to
benefit from corticosteroids are those infected with gram-positive
organisms (Streptococcus pneumoniae or S. suis), and those who
are HIV negative. The number of patients with meningitis due to N
meningitidis and other bacterial pathogens studied does not
support similar conclusions. Increased intracranial pressure due to
brain edema often requires therapeutic attention. Hyperventilation,
mannitol (25–50 g as a bolus intravenous infusion), and even
drainage of cerebrospinal fluid by repeated lumbar punctures or by
placement of ventricular catheters have been used to control
cerebral edema and increased intracranial pressure. Dexamethasone
(4 mg intravenously every 4–6 hours) may also decrease cerebral
edema.
Therapy of brain abscess consists of drainage (excision or
aspiration) in addition to 3–4 weeks of systemic antibiotics directed
against organisms isolated. An empiric regimen often includes
metronidazole, 500 mg intravenously or orally every 8 hours, plus
ceftriaxone, 2 g intravenously every 12 hours, with or without
vancomycin, 10–15 mg/kg/dose intravenously every 12 hours. In
cases where abscesses are < 2 cm in size, where there are multiple
abscesses that cannot be drained, or if an abscess is located in an
area where significant neurologic sequelae would result from
drainage, antibiotics for 6–8 weeks without drainage can be used.
In addition to antibiotics, in cases of health care–associated
meningitis associated with an external ventricular catheter, the
probability of cure is increased if the catheter is removed. In
infections associated with internal ventricular catheters, removal of
the internal components and insertion of an external drain is
recommended.
Therapy of other types of meningitis is discussed elsewhere in this
book (fungal meningitis, Chapter 36; syphilis and Lyme borreliosis,
Chapter 34; 
tuberculous 
meningitis, Chapter 33; herpes
encephalitis, Chapter 32).
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with acute meningitis, particularly if culture
negative or atypical (eg, fungi, syphilis, Lyme disease, M
tuberculosis), or if the patient is immunosuppressed.
•    Patients with chronic meningitis.
•    All patients with brain abscesses and encephalitis.
•    Patients with suspected hospital-acquired meningitis
(eg, in patients who have undergone recent neurosurgery).
•    Patients with recurrent meningitis.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with suspected acute meningitis, encephalitis,
and brain abscess should be admitted for urgent evaluation
and treatment.
•    There is less urgency to admit patients with chronic
meningitis; these patients may be admitted to expedite
diagnostic procedures and coordinate care, particularly if
no diagnosis has been made in the outpatient setting.
Glaser CA et al. Beyond viruses: Clinical profiles and etiologies
associated with encephalitis. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Dec
15;43(12):1565–77. [PMID: 17109290]
 
Granerod J et al; UK Health Protection Agency (HPA) Aetiology
of Encephalitis Study Group. Causes of encephalitis and
differences in their clinical presentations in England: a multi-centre,
population-based prospective study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010
Dec;10(12):835–44. [PMID: 20952256]
 
Honda H et al. Central nervous system infections: meningitis and
brain abscess. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2009 Sep;23(3):609–23.
[PMID: 19665086]
Logan SA et al. Viral meningitis. BMJ. 2008 Jan 5;336(7634):36–
40. [PMID: 18174598]
 
Nguyen TH et al. Dexamethasone in Vietnamese adolescents and
adults with bacterial meningitis. N Engl J Med. 2007 Dec
13;357(24):2431–40. [PMID: 18077808]
 
van de Beek D et al. Community-acquired bacterial meningitis in
adults. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jan 5;354(1):44–53. [PMID:
16394301]
 
van de Beek D et al. Corticosteroids for acute bacterial meningitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24; (1):CD004405.
[PMID: 17253505]
 
van de Beek D et al. Nosocomial bacterial meningitis. N Engl J
Med. 2010 Jan 14;362(2):146–54. [PMID: 20071704]
 
ANIMAL & HUMAN BITE WOUNDS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cat and human bites have higher rates of infection than dog bites.
 Hand bites are particularly concerning for the possibility of
closed-space infection.
 Antibiotic prophylaxis indicated for noninfected bites of the hand
and hospitalization required for infected hand bites.
 All infected wounds need to be cultured to direct therapy.
 
 General Considerations
About 1000 dog bite injuries require emergency department
attention each day, most often in urban areas. Dog bites occur most
commonly in the summer months. Biting animals are usually known
by their victims, and most biting incidents are provoked (ie, bites
occur while playing with the animal or after surprising the animal or
waking it abruptly from sleep). Failure to elicit a history of
provocation is important, because an unprovoked attack raises the
possibility of rabies. Human bites are usually inflicted by children
while playing or fighting; in adults, bites are associated with alcohol
use and closed-fist injuries that occur during fights.
The animal inflicting the bite, the location of the bite, and the type
of injury inflicted are all important determinants of whether they
become infected. Cat bites are more likely to become infected than
human bites—between 30% and 50% of all cat bites become
infected. Infections following human bites are variable. Bites inflicted
by children rarely become infected because they are superficial, and
bites by adults become infected in 15–30% of cases, with a
particularly high rate of infection in closed-fist injuries. “Through and
through” bites (eg involving the mucosa and the skin) have an
infection rate similar to closed-fist injuries. Dog bites, for unclear
reasons, become infected only 5% of the time. Bites of the head,
face, and neck are less likely to become infected than bites on the
extremities. Puncture wounds become infected more frequently than
lacerations, probably because the latter are easier to irrigate and
debride.
The bacteriology of bite infections is polymicrobial. Following
dog and cat bites, over 50% of infections are caused by aerobes
and anaerobes and 36% are due to aerobes alone. Pure anaerobic
infections are rare. Pasteurella species are the single most common
isolate (75% of cat bites and 50% of dog bites). Other common
aerobic isolates include streptococci, staphylococci, Moraxella,
and Neisseria; the most common anaerobes are Fusobacterium,
Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, 
and Prevotella. The median
number of isolates following human bites is four (three aerobes and
one anaerobe). Like dog and cat bites, most human bites are a
mixture of aerobes and anaerobes (54%) or are due to aerobes
alone (44%). Streptococci and S aureus are the most common
aerobes. Eikenella corrodens (found in up to 30% of patients),
Prevotella and Fusobacterium are the most common anaerobes.
Although the organisms noted are the most common, innumerable
others have been isolated—including Capnocytophaga (dog and
cats), Pseudomonas, and Haemophilus—emphasizing the point
that all infected bites should be cultured to define the microbiology.
HIV can be transmitted from bites (either from biting or receiving
a bite from an HIV-infected patient) but has rarely been reported.
 Treatment
A. Local Care
Vigorous cleansing and irrigation of the wound as well as
debridement of necrotic material are the most important factors in
decreasing the incidence of infections. Radiographs should be
obtained to look for fractures and the presence of foreign bodies.
Careful examination to assess the extent of the injury (tendon
laceration, joint space penetration) is critical to appropriate care.
B. Suturing
If wounds require closure for cosmetic or mechanical reasons,
suturing can be done. However, one should never suture an infected
wound, and wounds of the hand should generally not be sutured
since a closed-space infection of the hand can result in loss of
function.
C. Prophylactic Antibiotics
Prophylaxis is indicated in high-risk bites and in high-risk patients.
Cat bites in any location and hand bites by any animal, including
humans, should receive prophylaxis. Individuals with certain
comorbidities (diabetes, liver disease) are at increased risk for
severe complications and should receive prophylaxis even for low-
risk bites, as should patients without functional spleens who are at
increased risk for overwhelming sepsis (primarily with
Capnocytophaga species). Amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin)
500 mg orally three times daily for 5–7 days is the regimen of
choice. For patients with serious allergy to penicillin, a combination
of clindamycin 300 mg orally three times daily plus doxycycline 100
mg orally twice daily, or double-strength TMP-SMZ orally twice
daily, or a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally twice daily
or levofloxacin 500–750 mg orally once daily) is recommended.
Agents such as dicloxacillin, cephalexin, erythromycin, and
clindamycin should not be used alone because they lack activity
against Pasteurella species. Doxycycline and TMP-SMZ have
poor activity against anaerobes and should only be used in
combination with clindamycin. Moxifloxacin, a fluoroquinolone with
good aerobic and anaerobic activity, may be suitable as
monotherapy.
Because the risk of HIV transmission is so low following a bite,
routine postexposure prophylaxis is not recommended. Each case
should be evaluated individually and consideration for prophylaxis
should be given to those who present within 72 hours of the
incident, the source is known to be HIV infected, and the exposure
is high risk.
D. Antibiotics for Documented Infection
For wounds that are infected, antibiotics are clearly indicated. How
they are given (orally or intravenously) and the need for
hospitalization are individualized clinical decisions. The most
commonly encountered pathogens require treatment with either a
combination of a β-lactam plus a β-lactamase inhibitor (ampicillin-
sulbactam [Unasyn], 1.5–3.0 g intravenously every 6–8 hours;
piperacillintazobactam [Zosyn], 3.375 g intravenously every 6–8
hours; or amoxicillin-clavulanate [Augmentin], 500 mg orally three
times daily) or with a carbapenem (ertapenem, 1 g intravenously
daily; imipenem, 500 mg intravenously every 6–8 hours;
meropenem, 1 g intravenously every 8 hours). For the patient with
severe penicillin allergy, a combination of clindamycin 600–900 mg
intravenously every 8 hours plus a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin,
400 mg intravenously every 12 hours; levofloxacin, 500–750 mg
intravenously once daily) or TMP-SMZ (10 mg/kg of trimethoprim
daily in two or three divided doses) is indicated. Duration of therapy
is usually 2–3 weeks unless complications such as septic arthritis or
osteomyelitis are present; if these complications are present, therapy
should be extended to 4 and 6 weeks, respectively.
E. Tetanus and Rabies
All patients must be evaluated for the need for tetanus (see Chapter
33) and rabies (see Chapter 32) prophylaxis.
 When to Refer
 
•    If septic arthritis or osteomyelitis is suspected.
•    For exposure to bites by dogs, cats, reptiles,
amphibians, and rodents.
•    When rabies is a possibility.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with infected hand bites.
•    Deep bites, particularly if over joints.
Oehler RL et al. Bite-related and septic syndromes caused by cats
and dogs. Lancet Infect Dis. 2009 Jul;9(7):439–47. [PMID:
19555903]
 
Stevens DL et al; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Practice
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft-tissue
infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Nov 15;41(10): 1373–406.
[PMID: 16231249]
 
Warrell MJ. Emerging aspects of rabies infection: with a special
emphasis on children. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008 Jun;21(3): 251–
7. [PMID: 18448969]
 
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 All sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) have subclinical or latent
periods, and patients may be asymptomatic.
 Simultaneous infection with several organisms is common.
 All patients who seek STD testing should be screened for syphilis
and HIV.
 Partner notification and treatment are important to prevent further
transmission and reinfection in the index case.
 
 General Considerations
The most common STDs are gonorrhea,* syphilis,* human
papillomavirus 
(HPV)-associated 
condyloma 
acuminatum,
chlamydial genital infections,* herpesvirus genital infections,
trichomonas vaginitis, chancroid,* granuloma inguinale, scabies,
louse infestation, and bacterial vaginosis (among women who have
sex with women). However, shigellosis*; hepatitis A, B, and C*;
amebiasis; giardiasis*; cryptosporidiosis*; salmonellosis*; and
campylobacteriosis may also be transmitted by sexual (oral-anal)
contact, especially in men who have sex with men. Both
homosexual and heterosexual contact are risk factors for the
transmission of HIV (see Chapter 31). All STDs have subclinical or
latent phases that play an important role in long-term persistence of
the infection or in its transmission from infected (but largely
asymptomatic) persons to other contacts. Simultaneous infection by
several different agents is common.
_________
* Reportable to public health authorities.
 
Infections typically present in one of several ways, each of which
has a defined differential diagnosis, which should prompt
appropriate diagnostic tests.
A. Genital Ulcers
Common etiologies include herpes simplex virus, primary syphilis,
and chancroid. Other possibilities include lymphogranuloma
venerum 
(see Chapter 33), granuloma inguinale caused by
Klebsiella granulomatis (see Chapter 33), as well as lesions
caused by infection with Epstein-Barr virus and HIV. Noninfectious
causes are Behçet disease (see Chapter 20), neoplasm, trauma,
drugs, and irritants.
B. Urethritis with or without Urethral Discharge
The most common infections causing urethral discharge are
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
and Chlamydia trachomatis. N
gonorrhoeae and C trachomatis are also frequent causes of
prostatitis among sexually active men. Other sexually transmitted
infections that can cause urethritis include Mycoplasma genitalium,
Ureaplasma 
urealyticum, 
and Trichomonas 
vaginalis.
Noninfectious causes of urethritis includes reactive arthritis with
associated urethritis (Reiter syndrome).
C. Vaginal Discharge
Common causes of vaginitis are bacterial vaginosis (caused by
overgrowth of anaerobes such as Gardnerella vaginalis),
candidiasis, and T vaginalis (see Chapter 18). Less common
infectious causes of vaginitis include HPV-associated condyloma
acuminata and group A streptococcus. Noninfectious causes are
physiologic changes related to the menstrual cycle, irritants, and
lichen planus. Even though N gonorrhoeae and C trachomatis are
frequent causes of cervicitis, they rarely produce vaginal discharge.
 Screening & Prevention
All persons who seek STD testing should undergo routine screening
for HIV infection, using rapid HIV-testing (if patients may not
follow-up for results obtained by standard methods) or nucleic acid
amplification followed by confirmatory serology (if primary HIV
infection may be a possibility) as indicated. Patients in whom STDs
have been diagnosed and treated (in particular, chlamydia or
gonorrhea) are at a high risk for reinfection and should be
encouraged to be rescreened for STDs at 3 months following the
initial STD diagnosis.
Asymptomatic patients often request STD screening at the time
of initiating a new sexual relationship. Routine HIV testing and
hepatitis B serology testing should be offered to all such patients. In
sexually active women who have not been recently screened,
cervical Papanicolaou testing and nucleic acid amplification testing
of a urine specimen for gonorrhea and chlamydia are
recommended. Among men who have sex with men, additional
screening is recommended for syphilis; hepatitis A; urethral,
pharyngeal, and rectal gonorrhea; as well as urethral and rectal
chlamydia. Nucleic acid amplification testing is FDA-approved for
testing urine for gonorrhea or chlamydia. However, the use of
nucleic acid amplification testing in the rectum and pharynx has not
been validated in many laboratories. There are no recommendations
to screen heterosexual men for urethral chlamydia but this could be
considered in STD clinics, adolescent clinics, or in correctional
facilities. The periodicity of screening thereafter depends on sexual
risk, but most screening should be offered at least annually to
sexually active adults (particularly to those 25-years-old and under).
If not immune, hepatitis B vaccination is recommended for all
sexually active adults, and hepatitis A vaccination in men who have
sex with men. Persons between the ages of 9 and 26 may be
offered vaccination against HPV.
The risk of developing an STD following a sexual assault has
not been established. Victims of assault have a high baseline rate of
infection (N gonorrhoeae, 6%; C trachomatis, 10%; T vaginalis,
15%; and bacterial vaginosis, 34%), and the risk of acquiring
infection as a result of the assault is significant but is often lower than
the preexisting rate (N gonorrhoeae, 6–12%; C trachomatis, 4–
17%; T vaginalis, 12%; syphilis, 0.5–3%; and bacterial vaginosis,
19%). Victims should be evaluated within 24 hours after the assault,
and nucleic acid amplification tests for N gonorrhoeae and C
trachomatis should be performed. Vaginal secretions are obtained
for Trichomonas wet mount and culture, or point-of-care testing. If
a discharge is present, if there is itching, or if secretions are
malodorous, a wet mount should be examined for Candida and
bacterial vaginosis. In addition, a blood sample should be obtained
for immediate serologic testing for syphilis, hepatitis B, and HIV.
Follow-up examination for STD should be repeated within 1–2
weeks, since concentrations of infecting organisms may not have
been sufficient to produce a positive test at the time of initial
examination. If prophylactic treatment was given (may include
postexposure hepatitis B vaccination without hepatitis B immune
globulin; treatment for chlamydial, gonorrheal, or trichomonal
infection; and emergency contraception), tests should be repeated
only if the victim has symptoms. If prophylaxis was not
administered, the individual should be seen in 1 week so that any
positive tests can be treated. Follow-up serologic testing for syphilis
and HIV infection should be performed in 6, 12, and 24 weeks if
the initial tests are negative. The usefulness of presumptive therapy
is controversial, some feeling that all patients should receive it and
others that it should be limited to those in whom follow-up cannot
be ensured or to patients who request it.
Although seroconversion to HIV has been reported following
sexual assault when this was the only known risk, this risk is
believed to be low. The likelihood of HIV transmission from vaginal
or anal receptive intercourse when the source is known to be HIV
positive is 1 per 1000 and 5 per 1000, respectively. Although
prophylactic antiretroviral therapy has not been studied in this
setting, the Department of Health and Human Services recommends
the prompt institution of postexposure prophylaxis with highly active
antiretroviral therapy if the person seeks care within 72 hours of the
assault, the source is known to be HIV positive, and the exposure
presents a substantial risk of transmission.
In addition to screening asymptomatic patients with STDs, other
strategies for preventing further transmission include evaluating sex
partners and administering preexposure vaccination of preventable
STDs to individuals at risk; other strategies include the consistent
use of male and female condoms. For each patient, there are one or
more sexual contacts who require diagnosis and treatment. Prompt
treatment of contacts by giving antibiotics to the index case to
distribute to all sexual contacts (patient-delivered therapy) is an
important strategy for preventing further transmission and to prevent
reinfection in the index case.
Note that vaginal spermicides and condoms containing
nonoxynol-9 provide no additional protection against STDs. Male
circumcision has been demonstrated to protect against HIV and
HPV acquisition in heterosexual men with HIV-infected partners.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with a new diagnosis of HIV.
•    Patients with persistent, refractory or recurrent STDs,
particularly when drug resistance is suspected.
Jena AB et al. Sexually transmitted diseases among users of
erectile dysfunction drugs: analysis of claims data. Ann Intern Med.
2010 Jul 6;153(1):1–7. [PMID: 20621899]
 
Peterman TA et al. High incidence of new sexually transmitted
infections in the year following a sexually transmitted infection: a
case for rescreening. Ann Intern Med. 2006 Oct 17;145(8):564–
72. [PMID: 17043338]
 
Screening for chlamydial infection: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med.
2007;147(2):128–34. [PMID: 17576996]
 
Smith DK et al. Antiretroviral postexposure prophylaxis after
sexual, injection-drug use, or other nonoccupational exposure to
HIV in the United States: recommendations from the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. MMWR Recomm
Rep. 2005 Jan 21;54(RR-2):1–20. [PMID: 15660015]
 
Tobian AA et al. Male circumcision for the prevention of HSV-2
and HPV infections and syphilis. N Engl J Med. 2009 Mar
26;360(13):1298–309. [PMID: 19321868]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum
in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in
article text. [PMID: 21160459]
 
INFECTIONS IN DRUG USERS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Common infections that occur with greater frequency in drug users
include:
 Skin infections, aspiration pneumonia, tuberculosis.
 Hepatitis A, B, C, D; STDs; AIDS.
 Pulmonary septic emboli, infective endocarditis.
 Osteomyelitis and septic arthritis.
 
 General Considerations
There is a high incidence of infection among drug users, particularly
those who inject drugs. Increased risk of infection is likely
associated with poor hygiene and colonization with potentially
pathogenic organisms, contamination of drugs and equipment,
increased sexual risk behaviors, and impaired immune defenses.
The use of parenterally administered recreational drugs has
increased enormously in recent years. There are now an estimated
300,000 or more injection drug users in the United States.
Skin infections are associated with poor hygiene and use of
nonsterile technique when injecting drugs. S aureus (including
community-acquired methicillin-resistant strains) and oral flora
(streptococci, Eikenella, Fusobacterium, Peptostreptococcus)
are the most common organisms, with enteric gram-negatives
generally more likely seen in those who inject into the groin.
Cellulitis and subcutaneous abscesses occur most commonly,
particularly in association with subcutaneous (“skin-popping”) or
intramuscular injections and the use of cocaine and heroin mixtures
(probably due to ischemia). Myositis, clostridial myonecrosis, and
necrotizing fasciitis occur infrequently but are life-threatening.
Wound botulism in association with black tar heroin occurs
sporadically but often in clusters.
Aspiration pneumonia and its complications (lung abscess,
empyema, brain abscess) result from altered consciousness
associated with drug use. Mixed aerobic and anaerobic mouth flora
are usually involved.
Tuberculosis also occurs in drug users, and infection with HIV
has fostered the spread of tuberculosis in this population. Morbidity
and mortality rates are increased in HIV-infected individuals with
tuberculosis. Classic radiographic findings are often absent;
tuberculosis is suspected in any patient with infiltrates who does not
respond to antibiotics.
Hepatitis is very common among habitual drug users and is
transmissible both by the parenteral (hepatitis B, C, and D) and by
the fecal-oral route (hepatitis A). Multiple episodes of hepatitis with
different agents can occur.
Pulmonary septic emboli may originate from venous thrombi or
right-sided endocarditis.
STDs are not directly related to drug use, but the practice of
exchanging sex for drugs has resulted in an increased frequency of
STDs. Syphilis, gonorrhea, and chancroid are the most common.
AIDS has a high incidence among injection drug users and their
sexual contacts and among the offspring of infected women (see
Chapter 31).
Infective endocarditis in persons who use drugs intravenously
is most commonly caused by S aureus, Candida (usually C
albicans 
or C parapsilosis) , Enterococcus faecalis, other
streptococci, and gram-negative bacteria (especially Pseudomonas
and Serratia marcescens). See Chapter 33.
Other vascular infections include septic thrombophlebitis and
mycotic aneurysms. Mycotic aneurysms resulting from direct trauma
to a vessel with secondary infection most commonly occur in
femoral arteries and less commonly in arteries of the neck.
Aneurysms resulting from hematogenous spread of organisms
frequently involve intracerebral vessels and thus are seen in
association with endocarditis.
Osteomyelitis and septic arthritis involving vertebral bodies,
sternoclavicular joints, the pubic symphysis, the sacroiliac joints,
and other sites usually results from hematogenous distribution of
injected organisms or septic venous thrombi. Pain and fever
precede radiographic changes, sometimes by several weeks. While
staphylococci—often methicillin-resistant—are common organisms,
Serratia, Pseudomonas, Candida (often not C albicans), and
other pathogens rarely encountered in spontaneous bone or joint
disease are found in injection drug users.
 Treatment
A common and difficult clinical problem is management of the
parenteral drug user who presents with fever. In general, after
obtaining appropriate cultures (blood, urine, and sputum if the chest
radiograph is abnormal), empiric therapy is begun. If the chest
radiograph is suggestive of a community-acquired pneumonia
(consolidation), therapy for outpatient pneumonia is begun with a
third-generation cephalosporin, such as ceftriaxone, 1 g
intravenously every 24 hours, plus azithromycin, 500 mg orally or
intravenously every 24 hours, or doxycycline, 100 mg orally or
intravenously twice daily. If the chest radiograph is suggestive of
septic emboli (nodular infiltrates), therapy for presumed
endocarditis is initiated, usually with vancomycin 15 mg/kg/dose
every 12 hours intravenously (due to the high prevalence of MRSA
and the possibility of enterococcus). If the chest radiograph is
normal and no focal site of infection can be found, endocarditis is
presumed. While awaiting the results of blood cultures, empiric
treatment with vancomycin is started. If blood cultures are positive
for organisms that frequently cause endocarditis in drug users (see
above), endocarditis is presumed to be present and treated
accordingly. If blood cultures are positive for an organism that is an
unusual cause of endocarditis, evaluation for an occult source of
infection should go forward. In this setting, a transesophageal
echocardiogram may be quite helpful since it is 90% sensitive in
detecting vegetations and a negative study is strong evidence against
endocarditis. If blood cultures are negative and the patient responds
to antibiotics, therapy should be continued for 7–14 days (oral
therapy can be given once an initial response has occurred). In
every patient, careful examination for an occult source of infection
(eg, genitourinary, dental, sinus, gallbladder) should be done.
 When to Refer
 
•    Any patient with suspected or proven infective
endocarditis.
•    Patients with persistent bacteremia.
 When to Admit
 
•    Injection drug users with fever.
•    Patients with abscesses or progressive skin and soft
tissue infection that require debridement.
Deiss RG et al. Tuberculosis and illicit drug use: review and
update. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Jan 1;48(1):72–82. [PMID:
19046064]
 
Gordon RJ et al. Bacterial infections in drug users. N Engl J Med.
2005 Nov 3;353(18):1945–54. [PMID: 16267325]
 
Paintsil E et al. Survival of hepatitis C virus in syringes: implication
for transmission among injection drug users. J Infect Dis. 2010 Oct
1;202(7):984–90. [PMID: 20726768]
 
Rajendran PM et al. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial of cephalexin for treatment of uncomplicated skin
abscesses in a population at risk for community-acquired
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. 2007;51(11):4044–8. [PMID: 17846141]
 
Jain V et al. Infective endocarditis in an urban medical center:
association of individual drugs with valvular involvement. J Infect.
2008 Aug;57(2):132–8. [PMID: 18597851]
 
ACUTE INFECTIOUS DIARRHEA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute diarrhea lasts < 2 weeks; chronic diarrhea lasts > 2
weeks.
 Mild diarrhea: ≤ 3 stools per day.
 Moderate diarrhea: ≥ 4 stools per day with local symptoms
(abdominal cramps, nausea, tenesmus).
 Severe diarrhea: ≥ 4 stools per day with systemic symptoms
(fever, chills, dehydration).
 
 General Considerations
Acute diarrhea can be caused by a number of different factors,
including emotional stress, food intolerance, inorganic agents (eg,
sodium nitrite), organic substances (eg, mushrooms, shellfish),
drugs, and infectious agents (including viruses, bacteria, and
protozoa) (Table 30–3). From a diagnostic and therapeutic
standpoint, it is helpful to classify infectious diarrhea into syndromes
that produce inflammatory or bloody diarrhea and those that are
noninflammatory, nonbloody, or watery. In general, the term
“inflammatory diarrhea” suggests colonic involvement by invasive
bacteria or parasites or by toxin production. Patients complain of
frequent bloody, small-volume stools, often associated with fever,
abdominal cramps, tenesmus, and fecal urgency. Common causes
of this syndrome include Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter,
Yersinia, invasive strains of Escherichia coli, E coli O157:H7,
Entamoeba histolytica, and C difficile. Tests for fecal leukocytes
or the neutrophil marker lactoferrin are frequently positive, and
definitive etiologic diagnosis requires stool culture. Noninflammatory
diarrhea is generally milder and is caused by viruses or toxins that
affect the small intestine and interfere with salt and water balance,
resulting in large-volume watery diarrhea, often with nausea,
vomiting, and cramps. Common causes of this syndrome include
viruses (eg, rotavirus, Norwalk virus, enteric adenoviruses, astro-
virus, 
corona 
virus), 
vibriones (Vibrio cholerae, Vibrio
parahaemolyticus), 
enterotoxin-producing E coli, Giardia
lamblia, cryptosporidia, and agents that can cause food-borne
gastroenteritis.
The term “food poisoning” denotes diseases caused by toxins
present in consumed foods. When the incubation period is short (1–
6 hours after consumption), the toxin is usually preformed. Vomiting
is usually a major complaint, and fever is usually absent. Examples
include intoxication from S aureus or Bacillus cereus, and toxin
can be detected in the food. When the incubation period is longer—
between 8 hours and 16 hours—the organism is present in the food
and produces toxin after being ingested. Vomiting is less prominent,
abdominal cramping is frequent, and fever is often absent. The best
example of this disease is that due to Clostridium perfringens.
Toxin can be detected in food or stool specimens.
The inflammatory and noninflammatory diarrheas discussed
above can also be transmitted by food and water and usually have
incubation periods between 12 and 72 hours. Cyclospora,
cryptosporidia, and Isospora are protozoans capable of causing
disease in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised
patients. Characteristics of disease include profuse watery diarrhea
that is prolonged but usually self-limited (1–2 weeks) in the
immunocompetent patient but can be chronic in the compromised
host. Epidemiologic features may be helpful in determining etiology.
Recent hospitalization or antibiotic use suggests C difficile; recent
foreign travel suggests Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, E
coli, or V cholerae; undercooked hamburger suggests E coli,
especially O157:H7; and fried rice consumption is associated with
B cereus toxin. Prominent features of some of these causes of
diarrhea are listed in Table 30–3.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
In general, most cases of acute gastroenteritis are self-limited and
do not require therapy other than supportive measures. Treatment
usually consists of replacement of fluids and electrolytes and, very
rarely, management of hypovolemic shock and respiratory
compromise. In mild diarrhea, increasing ingestion of juices and
clear soups is adequate. In more severe cases of dehydration
(postural lightheadedness, decreased urination), oral glucose-based
rehydration solutions can be used (Ceralyte, Pedialyte).
B. Specific Measures
When symptoms persist beyond 3–4 days, initial presentation is
accompanied by fever or bloody diarrhea, or if the patient is
immunocompromised, cultures of stool are usually obtained.
Symptoms have often resolved by the time cultures are completed.
In this case, even if a pathogen is isolated, therapy is not needed
(except for Shigella, since the infecting dose is so small that therapy
to eradicate organisms from the stool is indicated for epidemiologic
reasons). If symptoms persist and a pathogen is isolated, it is
reasonable to institute specific treatment even though therapy has
not been conclusively shown to alter the natural history of disease
for most pathogens. Exceptions include infection with Shigella
where antibiotic therapy has been shown to shorten the duration of
symptoms by 2–3 days, and Campylobacter infections (early
therapy, within 4 days of onset of symptoms, shortens the course of
disease). Conversely, antibiotic therapy for infections with E coli
O157:H7 does not ameliorate symptoms and may increase the risk
of developing hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Uncomplicated
gastroenteritis due to Salmonella does not require therapy because
the disease is usually self-limited and therapy may prolong carriage
and perhaps increase relapses. Because bacteremia with
complications can occur in high-risk patients, some experts have
recommended therapy for Salmonella in patients over the age of
50, in organ transplant recipients, in those with HIV, in patients
taking corticosteroids, in those with lymphoproliferative diseases,
and in those with vascular grafts. Ciprofloxacin, 500 mg orally every
12 hours for 5 days, is effective in shortening the course of illness
compared with placebo in patients presenting with diarrhea,
whether a pathogen is isolated or not. However, because of
concerns about selecting for resistant organisms (especially
Campylobacter, where increasing resistance to fluoroquinolones
has been documented and erythromycin is the drug of choice)
coupled with the fact that most infectious diarrhea is self-limited,
routine use of antibiotics for all patients with diarrhea is not
recommended. Antibiotics should be considered in patients with
evidence of invasive disease (white cells in stool, dysentery), with
symptoms 3–4 days or more in duration, with multiple stools (eight
to ten or more per day), and in those with impaired immune
responses. Antimotility drugs are useful in mild cases. Their use
should be limited to patients without fever and without dysentery
(bloody stools), and they should be used in low doses because of
the risk of producing toxic megacolon.
 
Table 30–3. Acute bacterial diarrheas and “food poisoning.”
 
PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Therapeutic recommendations for specific agents can be found
elsewhere in this book.
American Medical Association; American Nurses Association-
American Nurses Foundation; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention; Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food
and Drug Administration; Food Safety and Inspection Service, US
Department of Agriculture. Diagnosis and management of
foodborne illnesses: a primer for physicians and other health care
professionals. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2004 Apr 16;53(RR-4):1–
33. [PMID: 15123984]
 
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee; Shen B et al. The role of
endoscopy in the management of patients with diarrhea.
Gastrointest Endosc. 2010 May;71(6):887–92. [PMID:
20346452]
 
DuPont HL. Clinical practice. Bacterial diarrhea. N Engl J Med.
2009 Oct 15;361(16):1560–9. [PMID: 19828533]
 
Musher DM et al. Contagious acute gastrointestinal infections. N
Engl J Med. 2004 Dec 2;351(23):2417–27. [PMID: 15575058]
 
Prince Christopher RH et al. Antibiotic therapy for Shigella
dysentery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Jan 10;
(1):CD006784. [PMID: 20091606]
 
INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN THE RETURNING
TRAVELER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most infections are common and self-limited.
 Identify patients with transmissible diseases that require isolation.
 The incubation period may be helpful in diagnosis.
 Less than 3 weeks following exposure may suggest dengue,
leptospirosis and yellow fever; > 3 weeks suggest typhoid fever,
malaria, and tuberculosis.
 
 General Considerations
The differential diagnosis of fever in the returning traveler is broad,
ranging from self-limited viral infections to life-threatening illness.
The evaluation is best done by identifying whether a particular
syndrome is present, then refining the differential diagnosis based on
an exposure history. The travel history should include directed
questions regarding geography (rural versus urban), animal or
arthropod contact, unprotected sexual intercourse, ingestion of
untreated water or raw foods, historical or pretravel immunizations,
and adherence to malaria prophylaxis.
 Etiologies
The most common infectious causes of fever—excluding simple
causes such as upper respiratory infections, bacterial pneumonia
and urinary tract infections—in returning travelers are malaria (see
Chapter 35), diarrhea (see next section), and dengue (see Chapter
32). Others include respiratory infections, including seasonal
influenza, influenza A/H1N1 ‘swine’ influenza, and influenza
A/H5N1 ‘avian’ influenza (see Chapter 32); leptospirosis (see
Chapter 34); typhoid fever (see Chapter 33); and rickettsial
infections 
(see Chapter 32). Foreign travel is increasingly
recognized as a risk factor for colonization and disease with
resistant pathogens, such as extended-spectrum β-lactamases
(ESBL)–producing gram-negative organisms. Systemic febrile
illnesses without a diagnosis also occurs commonly, particularly in
travelers returning from sub-Saharan Africa or Southeast Asia.
A. Fever and Rash
Potential etiologies include dengue, Chikungunya, viral hemorrhagic
fever, leptospirosis, meningococcemia, yellow fever, typhus,
Salmonella typhi, and acute HIV infection.
B. Pulmonary Infiltrates
Tuberculosis, ascaris, Paragonimus, and Strongyloides can all
cause pulmonary infiltrates.
C. Meningoencephalitis
Etiologies 
include N meningitidis, leptospirosis, arboviruses,
rabies, and (cerebral) malaria.
D. Jaundice
Consider hepatitis A, yellow fever, hemorrhagic fever, lepto
spirosis, and malaria.
E. Fever without Localizing Symptoms or Signs
Malaria, typhoid fever, acute HIV infection, rickettsial illness,
visceral leishmaniasis, trypanosomiasis, and dengue are possible
etiologies.
F. Traveler's Diarrhea
See next section.
 Clinical Findings
Fever and rash in the returning traveler should prompt blood
cultures and serologic tests based on the exposure history. The
work-up of a pulmonary infiltrate should include the placement of
a PPD, examination of sputum for acid-fast bacilli and possibly for
ova and parasites. Patients with evidence of meningoencephalitis
should receive lumbar puncture, blood cultures, thick/thin smears of
peripheral blood, history-guided serologies, and a nape biopsy (if
rabies is suspected). Jaundice in a returning traveler should be
evaluated for hemolysis (for malaria), and the following tests should
be performed: liver function tests, thick/thin smears of peripheral
blood, and directed serologic testing. The work-up of traveler's
diarrhea is presented in the following section. Finally, patients with
fever but no localizing signs or symptoms should have blood
cultures performed. Routine laboratory studies usually include
complete blood count with differential, electrolytes, liver function
tests, urinalysis, and blood cultures. Thick and thin peripheral blood
smears should be done (and repeated in 12–24 hours if clinical
suspicion remains high) for malaria if there has been travel to
endemic areas. Other studies are directed by the results of history,
physical examination, and initial laboratory tests. They may include
stool for ova and parasites, chest radiograph, HIV test, and specific
serologies (eg, dengue, leptospirosis, rickettsial disease,
schistosomiasis, Strongyloides). Bone marrow biopsy to diagnose
typhoid fever could be helpful in the appropriate patient.
 When to Refer
Travelers with fever, particularly if immunocompromised.
 When to Admit
Any evidence of hemorrhage, respiratory distress, hemodynamic
instability, and neurologic deficits.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Detection of
Enterobacteriaceae isolates carrying metallo-beta-lactamase—
United States, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Jun
25;59(24):750. [PMID: 20577157]
 
Freedman DO et al; GeoSentinel Surveillance Network. Spectrum
of disease and relation to place of exposure among ill returned
travelers. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jan 12;354(2):119–30. [PMID:
16407507]
 
Gregory CJ et al. Clinical and laboratory features that differentiate
dengue from other febrile illnesses in an endemic area—Puerto
Rico, 2007–2008. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 May;82(5):922–9.
[PMID: 20439977]
 
Griffith KS et al. Treatment of malaria in the United States: a
systematic review. JAMA. 2007 May 23;297(20):2264–77.
[PMID: 17519416]
 
Hochedez P et al. Management of travelers with fever and
exanthema, notably dengue and chikungunya infections. Am J Trop
Med Hyg. 2008 May;78(5):710–3. [PMID: 18458301]
 
Luna LK et al. Spectrum of viruses and atypical bacteria in
intercontinental air travelers with symptoms of acute respiratory
infection. J Infect Dis. 2007 Mar 1;195(5):675–9. [PMID:
17262708]
 
Monsel G et al. Recent developments in dermatological syndromes
in returning travelers. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008 Oct;21(5): 495–
9. [PMID: 18725799]
 
Mukherjee P et al. Epidemiology of travel-associated pandemic
(H1N1) 2009 infection in 116 patients, Singapore. Emerg Infect
Dis. 2010 Jan;16(1):21–6. [PMID: 20031038]
 
Taylor WR et al. Avian influenza–a review for doctors in travel
medicine. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2010 Jan;8(1):1–12. [PMID:
20188299]
 
TRAVELER'S DIARRHEA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually a benign, self-limited disease occurring about 1 week into
travel.
 Prophylaxis not recommended unless there is a comorbid disease
(inflammatory bowel syndrome, HIV, immunosuppressive
medication).
 Single-dose therapy of a fluoroquinolone usually effective if
significant symptoms develop.
 
 General Considerations
Whenever a person travels from one country to another—
particularly if the change involves a marked difference in climate,
social conditions, or sanitation standards and facilities—diarrhea
may develop within 2–10 days. Bacteria cause 80% of cases of
traveler's diarrhea, with enterotoxigenic E coli, Shigella species,
and Campylobacter jejuni being the most common pathogens.
Less common are Aeromonas, Salmonella, noncholera vibriones,
E histolytica, and G lamblia. Contributory causes include unusual
food and drink, change in living habits, occasional viral infections
(adenoviruses or rotaviruses), and change in bowel flora. Chronic
watery diarrhea may be due to amebiasis or giardiasis or, rarely,
tropical sprue.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
There may be up to ten or even more loose stools per day, often
accompanied by abdominal cramps and nausea, occasionally by
vomiting, and rarely by fever. The stools are usually watery and not
associated with fever when caused by enterotoxigenic E coli. With
invasive 
bacterial 
pathogens 
(Shigella, 
Campylobacter,
Salmonella) stools can be bloody and fever may be present. The
illness usually subsides spontaneously within 1–5 days, although
10% remain symptomatic for 1 week or longer, and symptoms
persist for longer than 1 month in 2%. Traveler's diarrhea is also a
significant risk factor for developing irritable bowel syndrome.
B. Laboratory Findings
In patients with fever and bloody diarrhea, stool culture is indicated,
but in most cases, cultures are reserved for those who do not
respond to antibiotics.
 Prevention
A. General Measures
Avoidance of fresh foods and water sources that are likely to be
contaminated is recommended for travelers to developing countries,
where infectious diarrheal illnesses are endemic.
B. Specific Measures
Because not all travelers will have diarrhea and because most
episodes are brief and self-limited, the currently recommended
approach is to provide the traveler with a supply of antimicrobials to
be taken if significant diarrhea occurs during the trip. In areas where
toxin-producing bacteria are the major cause of diarrhea (Latin
America and Africa), loperamide (4 mg oral loading dose, then 2
mg after each loose stool to a maximum of 16 mg/d) with a single
oral dose of ciprofloxacin (750 mg), levofloxacin (500 mg), or
ofloxacin (200 mg), cures most cases of traveler's diarrhea. If
diarrhea is associated with bloody stools or persists despite a single
dose of a fluoroquinolone, 1000 mg of azithromycin should be
taken. In pregnant women and in areas where invasive bacteria
more commonly cause diarrhea (Indian subcontinent, Asia,
especially 
Thailand 
where 
fluoroquinolone-resistant
Campylobacter is prevalent), azithromycin is the drug of choice.
Rifaximin, a nonabsorbable agent, is also approved for therapy of
traveler's diarrhea at a dose of 200 mg orally three times per day or
400 mg twice a day for 3 days. Because luminal concentrations are
high, but tissue levels are insufficient, it should not be used in
situations where there is a high likelihood of invasive disease (eg,
fever, systemic toxicity, or bloody stools). Prophylaxis is
recommended for those with significant underlying disease
(inflammatory bowel disease, AIDS, diabetes, heart disease in the
elderly, conditions requiring immunosuppressive medications) and
for those whose full activity status during the trip is so essential that
even short periods of diarrhea would be unacceptable.
Prophylaxis is started upon entry into the destination country and
is continued for 1 or 2 days after leaving. For stays of more than 3
weeks, prophylaxis is not recommended because of the cost and
increased toxicity. For prophylaxis, numerous oral antimicrobial
once-daily regimens are effective, such as norfloxacin, 400 mg;
ciprofloxacin, 500 mg; or rifaximin, 200 mg. Bismuth subsalicylate is
effective but turns the tongue and the stools black and can interfere
with doxycycline absorption, which may be needed for malaria
prophylaxis; it is rarely used.
 Treatment
For most individuals, the affliction is short-lived, and symptomatic
therapy with loperamide is all that is required, provided the patient
is not systemically ill (fever ≥ 39 °C) and does not have dysentery
(bloody stools), in which case antimotility agents should be avoided.
Packages of oral rehydration salts to treat dehydration are available
over the counter in the United States (Infalyte, Pedialyte, others)
and in many foreign countries.
 When to Refer
 
•    Cases refractory to treatment.
•    Persistent infection.
•    Immunocompromised patient.
 When to Admit
Patients who are severely dehydrated or hemodynamically unstable
should be admitted to the hospital.
DuPont HL. Azithromycin for the self-treatment of traveler's
diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Feb 1;44(3):347–9. [PMID:
17205439]
 
Hill DR et al. Management of travellers’ diarrhoea. BMJ. 2008
Oct 6;337:a1746. [PMID: 18838421]
 
Hill DR et al. The practice of travel medicine: guidelines by the
Infectious Disease Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Dec
15;43(12):1499–539. [PMID: 17109284]
 
Tuteja AK et al. Development of functional diarrhea, constipation,
irritable bowel syndrome, and dyspepsia during and after traveling
outside the USA. Dig Dis Sci. 2008 Jan;53(1):271–6. [PMID:
17549631]
 
ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
 
SELECTED PRINCIPLES OF ANTIMICROBIAL
THERAPY
Specific steps (outlined below) are required when considering
antibiotic therapy for patients. Drugs within classes, drugs of first
choice, and alternative drugs are presented in Table 30–4.
A. Etiologic Diagnosis
Based on the organ system involved, the organism causing infection
can often be predicted. See Tables 30–5 and 30–6.
 
Table 30–4. Drugs of choice for suspected or proved microbial
pathogens, 2011.1
 
1Adapted, with permission, from Treat Guide Med Lett. 2007 May;5(57):33–
50.
2Fluoroquinolones 
include 
ciprofloxacin, 
ofloxacin, 
levofloxacin,
moxifloxacin, and others (see text). Gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, and
moxifloxacin have the best activity against gram-positive organisms,
including penicillin-resistant S pneumoniae and methicillin-sensitive S
aureus. Activity against enterococci and S epidermidis is variable.
3Erythromycin estolate is best absorbed orally but carries the highest risk
of hepatitis; erythromycin stearate and erythromycin ethylsuccinate are also
available.
4All tetracyclines have similar activity against most microorganisms.
Minocycline, doxycycline, tetracycline have increased activity against S
aureus.
5TMP-SMZ is a mixture of 1 part trimethoprim and 5 parts
sulfamethoxazole.
6Penicillin G is preferred for parenteral injection; penicillin V for oral
administration—to be used only in treating infections due to highly
sensitive organisms.
7Infections caused by isolates with intermediate resistance may respond
to high doses of penicillin, cefotaxime, or ceftriaxone. Infections caused by
highly resistant strains should be treated with vancomycin. Many strains of
penicillin-resistant 
pneumococci 
are 
resistant 
to 
macrolides,
cephalosporins, tetracyclines, and TMP-SMZ.
8Most intravenous cephalosporins (with the exception of ceftazidime) have
good activity against gram-positive cocci.
9Parenteral nafcillin or oxacillin; oral dicloxacillin, cloxacillin, or oxacillin.
10Addition of gentamicin indicated only for severe enterococcal infections
(eg, endocarditis, meningitis).
11Linezolid, daptomycin, tigecycline, quinupristin-dalfopristin should be
reserved for the treatment of vancomycin resistant isolates or in patients
intolerant of vancomycin.
12Aminoglycosides—gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, netilmicin—
should be chosen on the basis of local patterns of susceptibility.
13Extended β-lactamase–producing isolates should be treated with a
carbapenem.
14Resistance is common and susceptibility testing should be done.
15Ciprofloxacin has inferior antichlamydial activity compared with newer
fluoroquinolones.
Key: ±, alone or combined with.
B. “Best Guess”
Select an empiric regimen that is likely to be effective against the
suspected pathogens.
C. Laboratory Control
Specimens for laboratory examination should be obtained before
institution of therapy to determine susceptibility.
D. Clinical Response
Based on clinical response and other data, the laboratory reports
are evaluated and then the desirability of changing the regimen is
considered. If the specimen was obtained from a normally sterile
site (eg, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, pleural fluid, joint fluid), the
recovery of a microorganism in significant amounts is meaningful
even if the organism recovered is different from the clinically
suspected agent, and this may force a change in treatment. Isolation
of unexpected microorganisms from the respiratory tract, gastro
intestinal tract, or surface lesions (sites that have a complex flora)
may represent colonization or contamination, and cultures must be
critically evaluated before drugs are abandoned that were
judiciously selected on a “best guess” basis.
E. Drug Susceptibility Tests
Some microorganisms are predictably inhibited by certain drugs; if
such organisms are isolated, they need not be tested for drug
susceptibility. For example, all group A hemolytic streptococci are
inhibited by penicillin. Other organisms (eg, enteric gram-negative
rods) are variably susceptible and generally require susceptibility
testing whenever they are isolated. Organisms that once had
predictable susceptibility patterns have now become resistant and
require testing. Examples include the pneumococci, which may be
resistant to multiple drugs (including penicillin, macrolides, and
TMP-SMZ); the enterococci, which may be resistant to penicillin,
aminoglycosides, and vancomycin; and extended-spectrum β-
lactamase producing–E coli resistant to third-generation
cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones.
 
Table 30–5. Examples of initial antimicrobial therapy for acutely ill,
hospitalized adults pending identification of causative organism.
 
1Some strains may be resistant to penicillin.
2Most studies on meningitis have been with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone (see
text).
3TMP-SMZ can be used to treat Listeria monocytogenes in patients allergic
to penicillin in a dosage of 15–20 mg/kg/d of TMP in three or four divided
doses.
4Depending on local drug susceptibility pattern, use tobramycin, 5
mg/kg/d, or amikacin, 15 mg/kg/d, in place of gentamicin.
5Levofloxacin 750 mg/d, moxifloxacin 400 mg/d.
 
Over the past several years, pharmaceutical companies have
shifted away from developing and producing antibacterial
medications, particularly those active against gram-negative
pathogens. The lack of new drugs and increasing bacterial
resistance reinforce the need to use these drugs judiciously. When
culture and susceptibility results have been finalized, it is important
p
y
,
p
to utilize the most narrow spectrum agent possible to decrease the
selection pressure for antibacterial resistance.
Antimicrobial drug susceptibility tests may be performed on solid
media as disk diffusion tests, in broth, in tubes, in wells of
microdilution plates, or as E-tests (strips with increasing
concentration of antibiotic). The latter three methods yield results
expressed as MIC (minimal inhibitory concentration). In most
infections, the MIC is the appropriate in vitro test to guide selection
of an antibacterial agent. When there appear to be marked
discrepancies between susceptibility testing and clinical response,
the following possibilities must be considered:
 
Table 30–6. Examples of empiric choices of antimicrobials for
adult outpatient infections.
 
1. Selection of an inappropriate drug, drug dosage, or
route of administration.
2. Failure to drain a collection of pus or to remove a foreign
body.
3. Failure of a poorly diffusing drug to reach the site of
infection (eg, central nervous system) or to reach intra-
cellular phagocytosed bacteria.
4. Superinfection in the course of prolonged chemotherapy.
5. Emergence of drug-resistant organisms.
6. Participation of two or more microorganisms in the
infectious process, of which only one was originally
detected and used for drug selection.
7. Inadequate host defenses, including immunodeficiencies
and diabetes.
8. Noninfectious causes, including drug fever, malignancy,
and autoimmune disease.
F. Promptness of Response
Response depends on a number of factors, including the patient
(immunocompromised 
patients 
respond 
slower 
than
immunocompetent patients), the site of infection (deep-seated
infections such as osteomyelitis and endocarditis respond more
slowly than superficial infections such as cystitis or cellulitis), the
pathogen (virulent organisms such as S aureus respond more slowly
than viridans streptococci; mycobacterial and fungal infections
respond slower than bacterial infections), and the duration of illness
(in general, the longer the symptoms are present, the longer it takes
to respond). Thus, depending on the clinical situation, persistent
fever and leukocytosis several days after initiation of therapy may
not indicate improper choice of antibiotics but may be due to the
natural history of the disease being treated. In most infections, either
a bacteriostatic or a bactericidal agent can be used. In some
infections (eg, infective endocarditis and meningitis), a bactericidal
agent should be used. When potentially toxic drugs (eg,
aminoglycosides, flucytosine) are used, serum levels of the drug are
measured to minimize toxicity and ensure appropriate dosage. In
patients with altered renal or hepatic clearance of drugs, the dosage
or frequency of administration must be adjusted; it is best to
measure levels in the elderly, morbidly obese patients, or those with
altered kidney function when possible and adjust therapy
accordingly.
G. Duration of Antimicrobial Therapy
Generally, effective antimicrobial treatment results in reversal of the
y,
clinical and laboratory parameters of active infection and marked
clinical improvement. However, varying periods of treatment may
be required for cure. Key factors include (1) the type of infecting
organism (bacterial infections generally can be cured more rapidly
than fungal or mycobacterial ones), (2) the location of the process
(eg, endocarditis and osteomyelitis require prolonged therapy), and
(3) the immunocompetence of the patient. Recommendations about
duration of therapy are often given based on clinical experience, not
prospective controlled studies of large numbers of patients.
H. Adverse Reactions and Toxicity
These 
include 
hypersensitivity 
reactions, 
direct 
toxicity,
superinfection by drug-resistant microorganisms, and drug
interactions. If the infection is life threatening and treatment cannot
be stopped, the reactions are managed symptomatically or another
drug is chosen that does not cross-react with the offending one
(Table 30–4). If the infection is less serious, it may be possible to
stop all antimicrobials and monitor the patient closely.
I. Route of Administration
Intravenous therapy is preferred for acutely ill patients with serious
infections (eg, endocarditis, meningitis, sepsis, severe pneumonia)
when dependable levels of antibiotics are required for successful
therapy. Certain drugs (eg, fluconazole, voriconazole, rifampin,
metronidazole, TMPSMZ, and fluoroquinolones) are so well
absorbed that they generally can be administered orally in seriously
ill—but not hemodynamically unstable—patients.
Food does not significantly influence the bioavailability of most
oral antimicrobial agents. However, the tetracyclines and the
quinolones chelate multivalent cations resulting in decreased
antibacterial absorption. Azithromycin capsules are associated with
decreased bioavailability when taken with food and should be given
1 hour before or 2 hours after meals. Posaconazole solution should
always be administered with food.
A major complication of intravenous antibiotic therapy is catheter
infections. Peripheral catheters are changed every 48–72 hours to
prevent phlebitis, and antimicrobial-coated central venous catheters
(minocycline and rifampin, chlorhexidine and sulfadiazine) have been
associated with a decreased incidence of catheter-related infections.
Most of these infections present with local signs of infection
(erythema, tenderness) at the insertion site. In a patient with fever
who is receiving intravenous therapy, the catheter must always be
considered a potential source. Small-gauge (20–23F) peripherally
inserted silicone or polyurethane catheters (Per Q Cath, A-Cath,
Ven-A-Cath, and others) are associated with a low infection rate
and can be maintained for 3–6 months without replacement. Such
catheters are ideal for long-term outpatient antibiotic therapy.
J. Cost of Antibiotics
The cost of these agents can be substantial. In addition to
acquisition cost, monitoring costs, (drug levels, liver function tests,
electrolytes, etc), the cost of treating adverse reactions, the cost of
treatment failure, and the costs associated with drug administration
must be considered.
Boucher HW et al. Bad bugs, no drugs: no ESKAPE! An update
from the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis.
2009 Jan 1;48(1):1–12. [PMID: 19035777]
 
Drusano GL. Antimicrobial pharmacodynamics: critical interactions
of ‘bug and drug’. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004 Apr;2(4):289–300.
[PMID: 15031728]
 
HYPERSENSITIVITY TESTS & DESENSITIZATION
 Penicillin Allergy
All penicillins are cross-sensitizing and cross-reacting. The
responsible antigenic determinants appear to be degradation
products of penicillins, particularly penicilloic acid and products of
alkaline hydrolysis (minor antigenic determinants) bound to host
protein. Skin tests with penicilloyl-polylysine, with minor antigenic
determinants, and with undegraded penicillin can identify most
individuals with IgE-mediated reactions (hives, bronchospasm).
Among positive reactors to skin tests, the incidence of subsequent
immediate severe penicillin reactions is high. Although IgG
antibodies to antigenic determinants of penicillin develop in many
persons, the presence of such antibodies is not correlated with
allergic reactivity (except for rare instances of hemolytic anemia),
and serologic tests have little predictive value. A history of a
penicillin reaction in the past is not reliable. Only 15–20% of
patients with a history of penicillin allergy have an adverse reaction
when challenged with the drug. The decision to administer penicillin
or related drugs (other β-lactams) to patients with an allergic history
depends on the severity of the reported reaction, the severity of the
infection being treated, and the availability of alternative drugs. For
patients with a history of severe reaction (anaphylaxis), alternative
drugs should be used. In the rare situations when there is a strong
indication for using penicillin (eg, syphilis in pregnancy) in allergic
patients, desensitization can be performed. If the reaction is mild
(nonurticarial rash), the patient may be rechallenged with penicillin
or may be given another β-lactam antibiotic.
Allergic reactions include anaphylaxis, serum sickness (urticaria,
fever, joint swelling, angioedema 7–12 days after exposure), skin
rashes, fever, interstitial nephritis, eosinophilia, hemolytic anemia,
other hematologic disturbances, and vasculitis. The incidence of
hypersensitivity to penicillin is estimated to be 1–5% among adults
in the United States. Life-threatening anaphylactic reactions are very
rare (0.05%). Ampicillin produces maculopapular skin rashes more
frequently than other penicillins, but many ampicillin (and other β-
lactam) rashes are not allergic in origin. The nonallergic ampicillin
rash usually occurs after 3–4 days of therapy, is maculopapular, is
more common in patients with coexisting viral illness (especially
Epstein-Barr infection), and resolves with continued therapy. The
maculopapular rash may or may not reappear with rechallenge.
Rarely, penicillins can induce nephritis with primary tubular lesions
associated with anti-basement membrane antibodies.
If the intradermal test described below is negative, desensitization
is not necessary, and a full dose of the material may be given. If the
test is positive, alternative drugs should be strongly considered. If
that is not feasible, desensitization is necessary.
Patients with a history of allergy to penicillin are also at an
increased risk for having a reaction to cephalosporins or
carbapenems. Skin testing with carbapenems has been
recommended in patients with confirmed accelerated reaction to
penicillins. A common approach to these patients is to assess the
severity of the reaction. If an IgE-mediated reaction to penicillin can
be excluded by history, a cephalosporin can be administered. When
the history justifies concern about an immediate-type reaction,
penicillin skin testing should be performed. If the test is negative, the
cephalosporin or carbapenem can be given. If the test is positive,
there is a 5–10% chance of cross reactivity with cephalosporins,
and the decision whether to use cephalosporins depends on the
availability of alternative agents and the severity of the infection.
While carbapenems historically have been considered highly cross
reactive with penicillins, the cross reactivity appears to be minimal
(1-5%).
 Intradermal Test for Hypersensitivity
Penicillin is the drug that most frequently serves as an indication for
sensitivity testing and desensitization. A clinical history of penicillin
allergy has a positive predictive value of only 15%. IgG-mediated
delayed reactions such as erythe matous or maculopapular skin rash
or serum sickness should be distinguished from immediate-type
IgE-mediated reactions, such as urticaria, angioedema, and
anaphylaxis.
Penicillin skin testing traditionally was used to identify those
patients with an accelerated reaction to penicillin. This process
involves the introduction of penicillin breakdown products by
intradermal or prick application to detect a localized allergic
reaction. At the present time, no products are available for penicillin
allergy skin testing. In 2004, the only commercially available
product 
(Pre-Pen; 
HollisterStier 
Laboratories; 
Spokane,
Washington) was voluntarily withdrawn by the manufacturer from
US and Canadian markets due to product irregularities. However,
AllerQuest (West Hartford, Connecticut) is pursuing approval from
the US Food and Drug Administration to manufacture and market
Pre-Pen.
 Desensitization
A. Precautions
1. The desensitization procedure is not innocuous—deaths
from anaphylaxis have been reported. If extreme
hypersensitivity is suspected, it is advisable to use an
alternative structurally unrelated drug and to reserve
desensitization for situations when treatment cannot be
withheld and no alternative drug is available.
2. An antihistaminic drug (25–50 mg of hydroxyzine or
diphenhydramine intramuscularly or orally) should be
administered before desensitization is begun in order to
lessen any reaction that occurs.
3. Desensitization should be conducted in an intensive care
unit where cardiac monitoring and emergency endotracheal
intubation can be performed.
4. Epinephrine, 1 mL of 1:1000 solution, must be ready for
immediate administration.
B. Desensitization Method
Several methods of desensitization have been described for
penicillin, including use of both oral and intravenous preparations.
All methods start with very small doses of drug and gradually
increase the dose until therapeutic doses are achieved. For
penicillin, 1 unit of drug is given intravenously and the patient
observed for 15–30 minutes. If there is no reaction, some
recommend doubling the dose while others recommend increasing it
tenfold every 15–30 minutes until a dosage of 2 million units is
reached; then give the remainder of the desired dose.
For recommendations on skin testing and desensitization for
other preparations (eg, botulism antitoxin and diphtheria antitoxin),
the manufacturer's package inserts should be consulted.
 Treatment of Reactions
A. Mild Reactions
If a mild reaction occurs, drop back to the next lower dose and
continue with desensitization. If a severe reaction occurs, administer
epinephrine (see below) and discontinue the drug unless treatment is
urgently needed. If desensitization is imperative, continue slowly,
increasing the dosage of the drug more gradually.
B. Severe Reactions
If bronchospasm occurs, epinephrine, 0.3–0.5 mL of 1:1000
dilution, should be given subcutaneously every 10–20 minutes,
followed by corticosteroids (250 mg of hydrocortisone or 50 mg of
methylprednisolone intravenously every 6 hours for two to four
doses), if needed. Hypotension should be treated with intravenous
fluids (saline or colloid), epinephrine (1 mL of 1:1000 dilution in
500 mL of D5W intravenously at a rate of 0.5–5 mcg/min), and
antihistamines (25–50 mg of hydroxyzine or diphenhydramine
intramuscularly or orally every 6–8 hours as needed). Cutaneous
reactions, manifested as urticaria or angioedema, respond to
epinephrine subcutaneously and antihistamines in the doses set forth
above.
Arroliga ME et al. Penicillin allergy: consider trying penicillin again.
Cleve Clin J Med. 2003 Apr;70(4):313–4, 317–8, 320–1 passim.
[PMID: 12701985]
 
Gruchalla RS et al. Clinical practice. Antibiotic allergy. N Engl J
Med. 2006 Feb 9;354(6):601–9. [PMID: 16467547]
 
IMMUNIZATION AGAINST
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
 
RECOMMENDED IMMUNIZATION OF INFANTS,
CHILDREN, & ADOLESCENTS
The recommended schedules and dosages of vaccination change
often, so the manufacturer's package inserts should always be
consulted.
The schedule for active immunizations in children can be
accessed at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules. All adolescents
should see a health care provider to ensure vaccination of those
who have not received varicella or hepatitis B vaccine, to make
certain that a second dose of MMR has been given, to receive a
booster of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular
pertussis vaccine (Tdap adolescent preparation), to receive
meningococcal vaccine conjugate vaccine, to obtain HPV vaccine if
not given previously, and to receive immunizations (influenza and
pneumococcal vaccines) that may be indicated for certain high-risk
individuals.
RECOMMENDED IMMUNIZATION FOR ADULTS
Immunization is one of the most important tools (along with
sanitation) used to prevent morbidity and mortality from infectious
diseases. In general, the administration of most vaccinations induces
a durable antibody response (active immunity). In contrast, passive
immunization occurs when preformed antibodies are given (eg,
immune globulin from pooled serum), resulting in temporary
protection which is a less durable response. The two variants of
active immunization are live attenuated vaccines (which are believed
to result in an immunologic response more like natural infection),
and inactivated or killed vaccines.
The schedule of vaccinations varies based on the risk of the
disease being prevented by vaccination, whether a vaccine has been
given previously, the immune status of the patient (probability of
responding to vaccine) and safety of the vaccine (live versus killed
product, as well implications for the fetus in pregnant women).
Recommendations for healthy adults as well as special populations
based on medical conditions are summarized in Table 30–7, which
can be accessed online at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/recs/schedules.
1. Healthy Adults
Vaccination recommendations are made by the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) of the US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (Table 30–7). In general, all
adults should be immune to diphtheria, tetanus, varicella, measles,
mumps and rubella, and vaccinated if not immune. Pertussis (via
Tdap) boosters should be given once to all persons between the
ages of 11 and 64 years. A pertussis booster should be
administered to persons aged 65 years and older if there is close
child contact. The following vaccines are recommended for certain
adult subgroups: HPV (women [and men as a permissive
recommendation] up to age 26), herpes zoster (adults aged 60
years and older), hepatitis A (men who have sex with men, injection
drug users, patients with chronic liver disease), hepatitis B (sexually
active adults, injection drug users, health care workers, patients with
chronic kidney and liver disease), and meningococcal vaccination
(college freshmen, military recruits, patients with asplenia and
terminal complement deficiencies). Pneumococcal polysaccharide
vaccination (PPSV23) should be offered to persons 65 years and
older, any adult with chronic medical comorbidities, and all cigarette
smokers. Influenza vaccination should be offered annually to all
persons aged 6 months and older.
2. Pregnant Women
Given the uncertainty of risks to the fetus, vaccination during
pregnancy is generally avoided with the following exceptions:
tetanus (transfer of maternal antibodies across the placenta
important to prevent neonatal tetanus), diphtheria, and influenza.
Live vaccines are avoided during pregnancy. If the woman is
pregnant and > 10 years has elapsed since tetanus and diphtheria
toxoid vaccine (Td), then a Td booster vaccination should be given
during the second or third trimester. ACIP also recommends
prevention of pertussis in pregnant women (given the repercussions
of transmission to the infant) since immunity wanes by adulthood.
Women should therefore receive the combined tetanus toxoid,
reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis vaccine (Tdap) if
possible. However, pregnant women should not receive Tdap.
Instead, Tdap should be administered prior to conception or in the
immediate postpartum period if the mother has not previously
received Tdap or if she only received Td during pregnancy.
Influenza can be a serious infection if acquired in pregnancy, and
all pregnant women should be offered influenza (inactivated)
vaccination. The live attenuated (intranasal) influenza vaccine is not
recommended during pregnancy.
3. HIV-Infected Adults
HIV-infected patients have impaired cellular and B cell responses.
Inactivated or killed vaccinations can generally be given without any
consequence, but the recipient may not be able to mount an
adequate antibody response. Live or attenuated vaccines are
generally avoided with some exceptions (ie, in patients with CD4+ T
lymphocytes > 200 cells/mcL). Guidelines for vaccinating HIV-
infected patients have been issued jointly by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, the US National Institutes of Health, and
the HIV Medical Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America. The following non-live vaccines are recommended for all
HIV-infected patients: tetanus and diphtheria toxoid (Tdap as a
booster once, followed by Td boosters every 10 years), HPV (in
women and men until age 26), inactivated influenza, pneumococcal
polysaccharide (PPSV23), hepatitis A (for HIV-infected men who
have sex with men, injection drug users, patients with chronic liver
disease), hepatitis B, and meningococcal vaccines (for those at
risk). Several live vaccines are now recommended for eligible HIV-
infected patients with CD4+ T cells > 200 cells/mcL: measles,
mumps, and rubella (MMR); varicella; and zoster. Timing of
vaccination is important to optimize response. If possible,
vaccination should be given early in the course of HIV-disease, or
following immune reconstitution.
4. Hematopoietic Cell Transplant Recipients
Hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) recipients have varying rates of
immune reconstitution following transplantation, depending on (1)
the type of chemotherapy or radiotherapy used pretransplant (in
autologous HCT), (2) the preparative regimen used for the
transplant (3) whether graft-versus-host disease is present, and (4)
the type of immunosuppression used posttransplantation (in
allogeneic HCT). Vaccines may not work immediately in the
posttransplant period. B cells may take 3–12 months to return to
normal posttransplant, and naïve T cells that can respond to new
antigens only appear 6–12 months post-transplant. B cells of
posttransplant patients treated with rituximab may take up to 6
months to fully recover after the last dose of the drug. Vaccines are
therefore administered 6–12 months following transplantation with a
minimum of 1 month between doses to maximize the probability of
response. The following vaccines are recommended for HCT
recipients: tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis (three doses of Tdap,
although full-dose DTaP currently given to children < 7 years may
be more immunogenic), inactivated polio (three doses), H
influenzae (three doses), pneumococcal vaccine (can start at 3
months posttransplant; use three doses of pneumococcal conjugate
vaccine [PCV; more immunogenic but covers only 7 strains of
pneumococcus], followed by the polysaccharide vaccine [PPSV23,
covers 23 strains]), and inactivated influenza (annually). Patients
may receive the live vaccines of MMR and varicella if at least 24
months have passed since the transplant and if they do not have
graft-versus-host disease and are not receiving immunosuppressive
medications. However, data supporting these recommendations are
limited.
 
Table 30–7. Recommended adult immunization schedule—United
States, 2011.
 
5. Solid Organ Transplant Recipients
Solid organ transplant recipients demonstrate a broad spectrum of
immunosuppression, depending on the reason for and type of organ
transplanted and the nature of the immunosuppression (including T-
cell depleting agents during treatment of organ rejection). These
factors affect the propensity for infection posttransplantation and the
ability to develop antibody responses to vaccination. In many cases,
the time between placing a patient on a transplant list and
undergoing the transplantation takes months or years. Providers
should take this opportunity to ensure that indicated vaccines are
given during this pretransplant period to optimize antibody
responses. If this is not possible, most experts give vaccines 3–6
months following transplantation. Live vaccines are contraindicated
in the posttransplant period. The American Society of Trans
plantation Infectious Diseases Community of Practice last issued
vaccination guidelines in 2009. The following inactivated vaccines
are recommended for patients posttransplantation if not given
before transplantation: tetanus and diphtheria toxoid (Tdap as a
booster once if no tetanus booster in the past 10 years, followed by
Td boosters every 10 years), inactivated polio, HPV (until age 26),
inactivated influenza, pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPSV23),
hepatitis A (for HIV-infected men who have sex with men, injection
drug users, patients with chronic liver disease), hepatitis B, and
meningococcal vaccines (for those at risk).
RECOMMENDED IMMUNIZATIONS FOR
TRAVELERS
Individuals traveling to other countries frequently require
immunizations in addition to those routinely recommended and may
benefit from chemoprophylaxis against various diseases.
Vaccinations against yellow fever and meningococcus are the only
ones required by certain countries. These and other travel-specific
vaccines 
are 
listed
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/vaccinations.htm.
Various vaccines can be given simultaneously at different sites.
Some, such as cholera, plague, and typhoid vaccine, cause
significant discomfort and are best given at different times. In
general, live attenuated vaccines (measles, mumps, rubella, yellow
fever, and oral typhoid vaccine) should not be given to
immunosuppressed individuals or household members of
immunosuppressed people or to pregnant women. Immunoglobulin
should not be given for 3 months before or at least 2 weeks after
live virus vaccines, because it may attenuate the antibody response.
Chemoprophylaxis of malaria is discussed in Chapter 35.
 Cholera
Because cholera among travelers is rare and the vaccine marginally
effective, the World Health Organization (WHO) does not require
immunization for persons traveling to endemic areas or to areas with
recent outbreaks (eg, Haiti). No country requires vaccination for
entry, but some local authorities may require documentation for
entry. In such cases, a medical waiver will suffice or a single dose of
the oral vaccine is usually sufficient.
 Hepatitis B
The risk of hepatitis B infection for most international travelers is
low. Hepatitis B vaccination should be considered for those
traveling to areas with high (≥ 8%) or intermediate (2–7%) rates of
endemic hepatitis B infection if the individual will have contact with
blood or secretions, have unprotected sex, or will be using illicit
drugs. Examples of high and intermediate risk areas include all of
Africa and most of South Asia and the Middle East. Vaccination
should begin at least 6 months before travel to allow for completion
of the series.
 Hepatitis A
Protection is recommended for susceptible persons traveling to
areas where sanitation is poor and the risk of exposure to hepatitis
A high because of contaminated food and water supplies and
contact with infected persons (eg, anywhere except Canada,
western Europe, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand). Either
hepatitis A vaccine or immunoglobulin can be used, although
vaccination is preferred. The first dose of vaccine should be given
as soon as travel is considered. In healthy individuals, a single dose
of vaccine administered any time prior to travel will provide
adequate protection. In older patients, those who are
immunocompromised, and those with chronic liver disease or other
chronic medical problems who are planning to travel in 2 weeks or
less should receive hepatitis A vaccine and immunoglobulin 0.02
mL/kg simultaneously at different anatomic sites. Those who choose
not to receive vaccine should receive immunoglobulin.
 Meningococcal Meningitis
If travel is contemplated to an area where meningococcal meningitis
is epidemic (Nepal, sub-Saharan Africa, the “meningitis belt” from
Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east, northern India) or highly
endemic, vaccination with MCV4 is indicated for those 2–55 years
of age, otherwise MPSV should be used. (Saudi Arabia requires
immunization for pilgrims to Mecca.)
 Plague
The risk of plague is so small to travelers that vaccine is no longer
commercially available and vaccination is not required for entry into
any country. Travelers at unavoidable high risk of exposure to
rodents should consider chemoprophylaxis with doxycycline or
TMP-SMZ.
 Poliomyelitis
Polio remains endemic in five countries (Afghanistan, India,
Pakistan, Nigeria, and Niger), and sporadic outbreaks from
reinfection continues to occur in Somalia, Ethiopia, Angola, and
Bangladesh. Adults traveling to endemic or epidemic areas who
have not previously been immunized against poliomyelitis should
receive a primary series of three doses of inactivated enhanced-
potency poliovaccine (IPV). Travelers who have previously been
fully immunized with oral polio vaccine (OPV) or inactivated polio
vaccine (IPV) should receive a one-time booster dose with IPV.
Live attenuated poliovaccine is no longer recommended because of
the risk of vaccine-associated disease and is no longer available in
the United States, although it continues to be used in many other
countries.
 Rabies
For travelers to areas where rabies is common in domestic animals
(eg, India, Asia, Mexico, Africa, areas of Central and South
America), with extensive outdoor activities or certain professional
activities (veterinarians, animal handlers, field biologists),
preexposure prophylaxis with human diploid cell vaccine (HDCV),
rabies vaccine adsorbed (RVA), or purified chick embryo cell
culture (PCEC) vaccine should be considered. Chloroquine can
blunt the immunologic response to rabies vaccine. If malaria
prophylaxis with chloroquine (or mefloquine) is required,
vaccination should be given intramuscularly (not intradermally) to
ensure adequate antibody response.
 Typhoid
Typhoid vaccination is recommended for travelers to developing
countries (especially the Indian subcontinent, Asia, Africa, Central
and South America, and the Caribbean) who will have prolonged
exposure to contaminated food and water. Two preparations of
approximately equal efficacy (50–75% effective) are available in the
United States: (1) an oral live attenuated Ty21a vaccine supplied as
enteric-coated capsules, and (2) a Vi capsular polysaccharide (Vi
CPS) vaccine for parenteral use. The Ty21a vaccine is given as one
capsule every other day for four doses. The capsules must be
refrigerated and taken with cool liquids (37 °C or less) at least 1
hour before meals. All four doses must be taken for maximum
protection and should be completed 1 week before travel. It is not
recommended for infants or children younger than 6 years. The Vi
CPS vaccine is given as a single intramuscular injection at least 2
weeks prior to travel. It is not recommended for infants younger
than 2 years. If continued or repeated exposures are anticipated,
boosters are recommended every 2 years for the Vi CPS and every
5 years for the Ty21a. The live attenuated vaccine should not be
used in immunosuppressed patients, including those with HIV
infection.
 Yellow Fever
The live attenuated yellow fever virus vaccine is administered once
subcutaneously. Although the risk of yellow fever is low for most
travelers, a number of countries require vaccination for all visitors
and others require it for travelers to or from endemic areas (mainly
equatorial Africa and parts of South and Central America). The
WHO certificate requires registration of the manufacturer and the
batch number of the vaccine. Vaccination is available in the United
States only at approved centers; the local health department should
be contacted for available resources. Reimmunization is
recommended at 10-year intervals if continued risk exists.
Because it is a live attenuated vaccine prepared in embryonated
eggs, the yellow fever vaccine should not be given to
immunosuppressed individuals or those with a history of anaphylaxis
to eggs. Pregnancy is a relative contraindication to vaccination.
Two very severe adverse reactions have been associated with
yellow fever vaccination. Viscerotropic disease presents with fever,
jaundice, and multiple organ system failure within 30 days of yellow
fever vaccination. Clinically and histopathologically, the illness is
identical to yellow fever and is associated with a high mortality rate.
The other adverse reaction is neurotropic disease and presents as
encephalitis, encephalomyelitis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome.
 Japanese B Encephalitis
Japanese B encephalitis is a mosquito-borne viral encephalitis that
affects primarily children and older adults (65 years and older) and
usually occurs from May to September. It is the leading cause of
encephalitis in Asia. Because the risk of infection is low and
because adverse effects of the vaccine can be serious, not all
travelers to Asia should be vaccinated. Vaccine should be given to
travelers to endemic areas who will be staying at least 30 days and
who are traveling during the transmission season, particularly if they
are visiting rural areas. Travelers who spend < 30 days in the region
should be considered for vaccination if they intend to visit areas of
epidemic transmission or if extensive outdoor activities are planned
in rural rice-growing areas. Of the two vaccines currently available
in the United States, only one is for adults (inactivated Vero cell
derived vaccine, IXIARO) aged 17 and older. The schedule is 0.5
mL intramuscularly at 0 and 28 days. Only children are eligible to
receive the other vaccine (inactivated mouse brain derived vaccine,
JE-VAX) given its limited supply in the United States.
VACCINE SAFETY
Most vaccines are safe to administer. In general, it is recommended
that the use of live vaccines be avoided in immunocompromised
patients, including pregnant women. Vaccines are generally not
contraindicated in the following situations: mild, acute illness with
low-grade fevers (< 40.5 °C); concurrent antibiotic therapy;
soreness or redness at the site; family history of adverse reactions to
vaccinations. Absolute contraindications to vaccines are rare (Table
30–8).
 
Table 30–8. Adverse effects and contraindications to vaccinations.
 
1The inactivated influenza vaccine can be given during any trimester.
2The vaccine is prepared using embryonated chicken eggs.
3MMR vaccine can be safely given to patients with a history of egg allergy
even when severe.
4Although vaccination of pregnant women is not recommended, with the
currently available RA27/3 vaccine strain the congenital rubella syndrome
does not occur in the offspring of those inadvertently vaccinated during
pregnancy or within 3 months before conception.
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Recommended
adult immunization schedule: United States, 2010. Ann Intern
Med. 2010 Jan 5;152(1):36–9. [PMID: 20048270]
 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Update: Prevention of
hepatitis A after exposure to hepatitis A virus and in international
travelers. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2007 Oct
19;56(41):1080–4. [PMID: 17947967]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Health
Information for International Travel 2010.
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/ content/yellowbook/home-
2010.aspx
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Vaccine
safety. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/
 
Danzinger-Isakov L et al; Infectious Diseases Community of
Practice. Guidelines for vaccination of solid organ transplant
candidates and recipients. Am J Transplant. 2009 Dec; 9(Suppl
4):S258–62. [PMID: 20070687]
 
Deer B. Wakefield's “autistic enterocolitis” under the microscope.
BMJ. 2010 Apr 15;340:c1127. [PMID: 20395277]
 
Kaplan JE et al. Guidelines for prevention and treatment of
opportunistic infections in HIV-infected adults and adolescents:
recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and
the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2009 Apr 10;58(RR-4):1–
207. [PMID: 19357635]
 
Kimberlin DW et al. Varicella-zoster vaccine for the prevention of
herpes zoster. N Engl J Med. 2007 Mar 29;356(13):1338–13.
[PMID: 17392303]
 
Kretsinger K et al. Preventing tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis
among adults: use of tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and
acellular pertussis vaccine recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and
recommendation of ACIP, supported by the Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC), for use of
Tdap among health-care personnel. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006
Dec 15;55(RR-17):1–37. [PMID: 17167397]
 
Markowitz LE et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC); Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
Quadrivalent Human Papillomavirus Vaccine: Recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2007 Mar 23;56(RR-2):1–24. [PMID:
17380109]
 
Tomblyn M et al. Guidelines for preventing infectious
complications among hematopoietic cell transplant recipients: a
global perspective. Preface. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2009
Oct;44(8):453–5. [PMID: 19861977]
 
 
 
HIV Infection & AIDS
Andrew R. Zolopa, MD
Mitchell H. Katz, MD
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Risk factors: sexual contact with an infected person, parenteral
exposure to infected blood by transfusion or needle sharing,
perinatal exposure.
 Prominent systemic complaints such as sweats, diarrhea, weight
loss, and wasting.
 Opportunistic infections due to diminished cellular immunity—
often life-threatening.
 Aggressive cancers, particularly Kaposi sarcoma and extranodal
lymphoma.
 Neurologic manifestations, including dementia, aseptic meningitis,
and neuropathy.
 
 General Considerations
When AIDS was first recognized in the United States in 1981,
cases were identified by finding severe opportunistic infections such
a s Pneumocystis pneumonia that indicated profound defects in
cellular immunity in the absence of other causes of
immunodeficiency. When HIV was identified as the cause of the
syndrome, it became obvious that severe opportunistic infections
and unusual neoplasms were at one end of a spectrum of disease,
while healthy seropositive individuals were at the other end.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) AIDS
case definition (Table 31–1) includes opportunistic infections and
malignancies that rarely occur in the absence of severe
immunodeficiency (eg, Pneumocystis pneumonia, central nervous
system lymphoma). It also classifies persons as having AIDS if they
have positive HIV serology and certain infections and malignancies
that can occur in immunocompetent hosts but that are more
common among persons infected with HIV (pulmonary
tuberculosis, invasive cervical cancer). Several nonspecific
conditions, including dementia and wasting (documented weight
loss)—in the presence of a positive HIV serology—are considered
AIDS. The definition includes criteria for both definitive and
presumptive diagnoses of certain infections and malignancies.
Finally, persons with positive HIV serology who have ever had a
CD4 lymphocyte count below 200 cells/mcL or a CD4 lymphocyte
percentage below 14% are considered to have AIDS. Inclusion of
persons with low CD4 counts as AIDS cases reflects the
recognition that immunodeficiency is the defining characteristic of
AIDS. The choice of a cutoff point at 200 cells/mcL is supported
by several cohort studies showing that AIDS will develop within 3
years in over 80% of persons with counts below this level in the
absence of effective antiretroviral therapy (ART). The 1993
definition was also expanded to include persons with positive HIV
serology and pulmonary tuberculosis (see Figure 9–5), recurrent
pneumonia, and invasive cervical cancer. The prognosis of persons
with HIV/AIDS has dramatically improved due to the introduction
of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in the mid 1990s.
One consequence is that fewer persons with HIV ever develop an
infection or malignancy or have a low enough CD4 count to classify
them as having AIDS, which means that the CDC definition has
become a less useful measure of the impact of HIV/AIDS in the
United States. Conversely, persons in whom AIDS had been
diagnosed based on a serious opportunistic infection, malignancy, or
immunodeficiency may now be markedly healthier, with high CD4
counts, due to the use of HAART. Therefore, the Social Security
Administration as well as most social service agencies focus on
functional assessment for determining eligibility for benefits rather
than the simple presence or absence of an AIDS-defined illness.
 Epidemiology
The modes of transmission of HIV are similar to those of hepatitis
B, in particular with respect to sexual, parenteral, and vertical
transmission. Although certain sexual practices (eg, receptive anal
intercourse) are significantly riskier than other sexual practices (eg,
oral sex), it is difficult to quantify per-contact risks. The reason is
that studies of sexual transmission of HIV show that most people at
risk for HIV infection engage in a variety of sexual practices and
have sex with multiple persons, only some of whom may actually be
HIV infected. Thus, it is difficult to determine which practice with
which person actually resulted in HIV transmission.
 
Table 31–1. CDC AIDS case definition for surveillance of adults
and adolescents.
 
Definitive AIDS diagnoses (with or without laboratory
evidence of HIV infection)
1. Candidiasis of the esophagus, trachea, bronchi, or
lungs.
2. Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary.
3. Cryptosporidiosis with diarrhea persisting > 1 month.
4. Cytomegalovirus disease of an organ other than liver,
spleen, or lymph nodes.
5. Herpes simplex virus infection causing a
mucocutaneous ulcer that persists longer than 1 month; or
bronchitis, pneumonitis, or esophagitis of any duration.
6. Kaposi sarcoma in a patient < 60 years of age.
7. Lymphoma of the brain (primary) in a patient < 60 years
of age.
8. Mycobacterium avium complex or Mycobacterium
kansasii disease, disseminated (at a site other than or in
addition to lungs, skin, or cervical or hilar lymph nodes).
9. Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia.
10. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
11. Toxoplasmosis of the brain.
Definitive AIDS diagnoses (with laboratory evidence
of HIV infection)
1. Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated (at a site other than
or in addition to lungs or cervical or hilar lymph nodes).
2. HIV encephalopathy.
3. Histoplasmosis, disseminated (at a site other than or in
addition to lungs or cervical or hilar lymph nodes).
4. Isosporiasis with diarrhea persisting > 1 month.
5. Kaposi sarcoma at any age.
6. Lymphoma of the brain (primary) at any age.
7. Other non-Hodgkin lymphoma of B cell or unknown
immunologic phenotype.
8. Any mycobacterial disease caused by mycobacteria
other than Mycobacterium tuberculosis, disseminated (at
a site other than or in addition to lungs, skin, or cervical or
hilar lymph nodes).
9. Disease caused by extrapulmonary M tuberculosis.
10. Salmonella (nontyphoid) septicemia, recurrent.
11. HIV wasting syndrome.
12. CD4 lymphocyte count below 200 cells/mcL or a CD4
lymphocyte percentage below 14%.
13. Pulmonary tuberculosis.
14. Recurrent pneumonia.
15. Invasive cervical cancer.
Presumptive AIDS diagnoses (with laboratory
evidence of HIV infection)
1. Candidiasis of esophagus: (a) recent onset of
retrosternal pain on swallowing; and (b) oral candidiasis.
2. Cytomegalovirus retinitis. A characteristic appearance
on serial ophthalmoscopic examinations.
3. Mycobacteriosis. Specimen from stool or normally
sterile body fluids or tissue from a site other than lungs,
skin, or cervical or hilar lymph nodes, showing acid-fast
bacilli of a species not identified by culture.
4. Kaposi sarcoma. Erythematous or violaceous plaque-
like lesion on skin or mucous membrane.
5. Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia: (a) a history of
dyspnea on exertion or nonproductive cough of recent
onset (within the past 3 months); and (b) chest x-ray
evidence of diffuse bilateral interstitial infiltrates or gallium
scan evidence of diffuse bilateral pulmonary disease; and
(c) arterial blood gas analysis showing an arterial oxygen
partial pressure of < 70 mm Hg or a low respiratory
diffusing capacity of < 80% of predicted values or an
increase in the alveolar-arterial oxygen tension gradient;
and (d) no evidence of a bacterial pneumonia.
6. Toxoplasmosis of the brain: (a) recent onset of a focal
neurologic abnormality consistent with intracranial disease
or a reduced level of consciousness; and (b) brain
imaging evidence of a lesion having a mass effect or the
radiographic appearance of which is enhanced by
injection of contrast medium; and (c) serum antibody to
toxoplasmosis or successful response to therapy for
toxoplasmosis.
7. Recurrent pneumonia: (a) more than one episode in a
1-year period; and (b) acute pneumonia (new symptoms,
signs, or radiologic evidence not present earlier)
diagnosed on clinical or radiologic grounds by the
patient's physician.
8. Pulmonary tuberculosis: (a) apical or miliary infiltrates
and (b) radiographic and clinical response to
antituberculous therapy.
Nonetheless, the best available estimates indicate that the risk of
HIV transmission with receptive anal intercourse is between 1:100
and 1:30, with insertive anal intercourse 1:1000, with receptive
vaginal intercourse 1:1000, with insertive vaginal intercourse
1:10,000, and with receptive fellatio with ejaculation 1:1000. The
per-contact risk of HIV transmission with other behaviors, including
receptive fellatio without ejaculation, insertive fellatio, and
cunnilingus, is not known.
All per-contact risk estimates assume that the source is HIV
infected. If the HIV status of the source is unknown, the risk of
transmission is the risk of transmission multiplied by the probability
that the source is HIV infected. This would vary by risk practices,
age, and geographic area. A number of cofactors are known to
increase the risk of HIV transmission during a given encounter,
including the presence of ulcerative or inflammatory sexually
transmitted diseases, trauma, menses, and lack of male
circumcision.
The risk of acquiring HIV infection from a needlestick with
infected blood is approximately 1:300. Factors known to increase
the risk of transmission include depth of penetration, hollow bore
needles, visible blood on the needle, and advanced stage of disease
in the source. The risk of HIV transmission from a mucosal splash
with infected blood is unknown but is assumed to be significantly
lower.
The risk of acquiring HIV infection from illicit drug use with
sharing of needles from an HIV-infected source is estimated to be
1:150. Use of clean needles markedly decreases the chance of HIV
transmission but does not eliminate it if other drug paraphernalia are
shared (eg, cookers).
When blood transfusion from an HIV-infected donor occurs, the
risk of transmission is 95%. Fortunately, since 1985, blood donor
screening using the HIV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) has been universally practiced in the United States. Also,
persons who have recently engaged in unsafe behaviors (eg, sex
with a person at risk for HIV, injection drug use) are not allowed to
donate. This eliminates donations from persons who are HIV
infected but have not yet developed antibodies (ie, persons in the
“window” period). In recent years, HIV antigen and viral load
testing have been added to the screening of blood to further lower
the chance of HIV transmission. With these precautions, the chance
of HIV transmission with receipt of blood transfusion is about
1:1,000,000.
In the absence of perinatal HIV prophylaxis, between 13% and
40% of children born to HIV-infected mothers contract HIV
infection. The risk is higher with vaginal than with cesarean delivery,
higher among mothers with high viral loads, and higher among those
who breast-feed their children. The risk can be decreased by
administering anti-retroviral treatment to the mother during
pregnancy and to the infant immediately after birth (see below).
HIV has not been shown to be transmitted by respiratory droplet
spread, by vectors such as mosquitoes, or by casual nonsexual
contact.
There are an estimated 1,106,400 Americans infected with HIV,
about 51,000 new infections each year and an estimated 468,578
persons in the United States living with AIDS. Of those, 76% are
men, of whom 60% were exposed through male-to-male sexual
contact, 18% were exposed through injection drug use, 11% were
exposed through heterosexual contact, and 8% were exposed
through male-to-male sexual contact and injection drug use.
Women account for 23% of living persons, of whom 66% were
infected through heterosexual contact and 32% were exposed
through injection drug use. Children account for < 1% of living
cases. African Americans have been disproportionately hard hit by
the epidemic. The estimated rate of new AIDS cases in the United
States per 100,000 adult/adolescent population is 59.2 among
African Americans, 20.4 among Latinos, 8.6 among native
Americans and native Alaskans, 6.1 among whites, 4.3 among
Asians, and 22.3 among Pacific Islanders.
In general, the progression of HIV-related illness is similar in men
and women. However, there are some important differences.
Women are at risk for gynecologic complications of HIV, including
recurrent candidal vaginitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, and
cervical dysplasia. Violence directed against women, pregnancy,
and frequent occurrence of drug use and poverty all complicate the
treatment of HIV-infected women. Although “safer sex” campaigns
dramatically decreased the rates of sero-conversions among men
who have sex with men (MSM) living in metropolitan areas in the
United States by the mid 1980s, relapse to unsafe sexual practices
among MSM in several large cities in the United States and in
western Europe has been observed. The higher rates of unsafe sex
appear to be related to decreased concern about acquiring HIV
due to the availability of HAART. Decreased interest in following
safer sex recommendations and increasing use of crystal
methamphetamine among certain risk groups also appears to be
playing a role in the increased unsafe sex rates.
Worldwide there are an estimated 33.4 million persons infected
with HIV, with heterosexual spread being the most common mode
of transmission for men and women. In Central and East Africa, in
some urban areas, as many as one-third of sexually active adults are
infected. The reason for the greater risk for transmission with
heterosexual intercourse in Africa and Asia than in the United States
may relate to cofactors such as general health status, the presence
of genital ulcers, relative lack of male circumcision, the number of
sexual partners, and different HIV serotypes.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: HIV/AIDS
Surveillance Reports. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/resources/reports/index.htm.
 
Hall HI et al; HIV Incidence Surveillance Group. Estimation of HIV
incidence in the United States. JAMA. 2008 Aug 6;300(5): 520–9.
[PMID: 18677024]
 
Public Health Service Task Force recommendations for use of anti-
retroviral drugs in pregnant HIV-infected women for maternal health
and interventions to reduce perinatal HIV-1 transmission in the
United States. April 29, 2009 Guideline. Available at
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PerinatalGL.pdf
 
Stevens LM et al. JAMA patient page. HIV infection: the basics.
JAMA. 2008 Aug 6;300(5):614. [PMID: 18677034]
http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/full/300/5/614
 
 Etiology
HIV, like other retroviruses, depends on a unique enzyme, reverse
transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA polymerase), to replicate
within host cells. The other major pathogenic human retrovirus,
human T cell lymphotropic/leukemia virus (HTLV)-I, is associated
with lymphoma, while HIV is not known to be directly oncogenic.
The HIV genomes contain genes for three basic structural proteins
and at least five other regulatory proteins; gag codes for group
antigen proteins, pol codes for polymerase, and env codes for the
external envelope protein. The greatest variability in strains of HIV
occurs in the viral envelope. Since neutralizing activity is found in
antibodies directed against the envelope, this variability presents
problems for vaccine development.
In addition to the classic AIDS virus (HIV-1), a group of related
viruses, HIV-2, has been isolated in West African patients. HIV-2
has the same genetic organization as HIV-1, but there are significant
differences in the envelope glycoproteins. Some infected individuals
exhibit AIDS-like illnesses, but the rate of progression in individuals
infected with HIV-2 appears to be slower than that of HIV-1
infection. HIV-2 remains relatively rare in the United States but has
become more common in Western Europe due to immigration from
endemic areas. Cases have been documented in which AIDS-like
illnesses have occurred in the absence of HIV infection or other
known infectious causes of immunodeficiency.
 Pathogenesis
The hallmark of symptomatic HIV infection is immunodeficiency
caused by continuing viral replication. The virus can infect all cells
expressing the T4 (CD4) antigen, which HIV uses to attach to the
cell. Chemokine co-receptors (CCR5 and CXCR4) are required
for virus entry, and individuals with CCR5 deletions are less likely
to become infected and, once infected, the disease is more likely to
progress slowly. Once it enters a cell, HIV can replicate and cause
cell fusion or death. A latent state is also established, with
integration of the HIV genome into the cell's genome. The cell
principally infected is the CD4 (helper-inducer) lymphocyte, which
directs many other cells in the immune network. With increasing
duration of infection, the number of CD4 lymphocytes falls. Some
of the immunologic defects, however, are explained not by
quantitative abnormalities of lymphocyte subsets but by
qualitative defects in CD4 responsiveness induced by HIV.
Other cells in the immune network that are infected by HIV
include B lymphocytes and macrophages. The defect in B cells is
partly due to disordered CD4 lymphocyte function. These direct
and 
indirect 
effects 
can 
lead 
to 
generalized
hypergammaglobulinemia and can also depress B cell responses to
new antigen challenges. Because of these defects, the
immunodeficiency of HIV is mixed. Elements of humoral and
cellular immunodeficiency are present, especially in children.
Macrophages act as a reservoir for HIV and serve to disseminate it
to other organ systems (eg, the central nervous system).
Apart from the immunologic effects of HIV, the virus can also
directly cause a variety of neurologic effects. Neuropathology
largely results from the release of cytokines and other neurotoxins
by 
infected 
macrophages. 
Perturbations 
of 
excitatory
neurotransmitters and calcium flux may contribute to neurologic
dysfunction. Direct HIV infection of renal tubular cells and
gastrointestinal epithelium may contribute to these organ system
manifestations of infection.
 Pathophysiology
Clinically, the syndromes caused by HIV infection are usually
explicable by one of three known mechanisms: immunodeficiency,
autoimmunity, and allergic and hypersensitivity reactions.
A. Immunodeficiency
Immunodeficiency is a direct result of the effects of HIV upon
immune cells. A spectrum of infections and neoplasms is seen, as in
other congenital or acquired immunodeficiency states. Two
remarkable features of HIV immunodeficiency are the low incidence
of certain infections such as listeriosis and aspergillosis and the
frequent occurrence of certain neoplasms such as lymphoma or
Kaposi sarcoma. This latter complication has been seen primarily in
MSM or in bisexual men, and its incidence has steadily declined
through the first 15 years of the epidemic. A herpesvirus (KSHV or
HHV-8) is the cause of Kaposi sarcoma.
B. Autoimmunity/Allergic & Hypersensitivity Reactions
Autoimmunity can occur as a result of disordered cellular immune
function or B lymphocyte dysfunction. Examples of both
lymphocytic infiltration of organs (eg, lymphocytic interstitial
pneumonitis) and autoantibody production (eg, immunologic
thrombocytopenia) occur. These phenomena may be the only
clinically apparent disease or may coexist with obvious
immunodeficiency. Moreover, HIV-infected individuals appear to
have higher rates of allergic reactions to unknown allergens as seen
with eosinophilic pustular folliculitis (“itchy red bump syndrome”) as
well as increased rates of hypersensitivity reactions to medications
(for example, the fever and sunburn-like rash seen with
trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole reactions).
 Clinical Findings
The complications of HIV-related infections and neoplasms affect
virtually every organ. The general approach to the HIV-infected
person with symptoms is to evaluate the organ systems involved,
aiming to diagnose treatable conditions rapidly. As can be seen in
Figure 31–1, the CD4 lymphocyte count provides very important
prognostic information. Certain infections may occur at any CD4
count, while others rarely occur unless the CD4 lymphocyte count
has dropped below a certain level. For example, a patient with a
CD4 count of 600 cells/mcL, cough, and fever may have a bacterial
pneumonia but would be very unlikely to have Pneumocystis
pneumonia.
Figure 31–1. Relationship of CD4 count to development of
opportunistic infections. MAC, Mycobacterium avium complex;
CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous system.
 
A. Symptoms and Signs
Many individuals with HIV infection remain asymptomatic for years
even without ART, with a mean time of approximately 10 years
between infection and development of AIDS. When symptoms
occur, they may be remarkably protean and nonspecific. Since
virtually all the findings may be seen with other diseases, a
combination of complaints is more suggestive of HIV infection than
any one symptom.
Physical examination may be entirely normal. Abnormal findings
range from completely nonspecific to highly specific for HIV
infection. Those that are specific for HIV infection include hairy
leukoplakia of the tongue, disseminated Kaposi sarcoma, and
cutaneous bacillary angiomatosis. Generalized lymphadenopathy is
common early in infection.
1. Systemic complaints—Fever, night sweats, and weight loss are
common symptoms in HIV-infected patients and may occur without
a complicating opportunistic infection. Patients with persistent fever
and no localizing symptoms should nonetheless be carefully
examined, and evaluated with a chest radiograph (Pneumocystis
pneumonia can present without respiratory symptoms), bacterial
blood cultures if the fever is > 38.5 °C, serum cryptococcal antigen,
and mycobacterial cultures of the blood. Sinus CT scans or sinus
radiographs should be considered to evaluate occult sinusitis. If
these studies are normal, patients should be observed closely.
Antipyretics are useful to prevent dehydration.
Weight loss is a particularly distressing complication of long-
standing HIV infection. Patients typically have disproportionate loss
of muscle mass, with maintenance or less substantial loss of fat
stores. The mechanism of HIV-related weight loss is not completely
understood but appears to be multifactorial.
AIDS patients frequently suffer from anorexia, nausea, and
vomiting, all of which contribute to weight loss by decreasing caloric
intake. In some cases, these symptoms are secondary to a specific
infection, such as viral hepatitis. In other cases, however, evaluation
of the symptoms yields no specific pathogen, and it is assumed to
be due to a primary effect of HIV. Malabsorption also plays a role
in decreased caloric intake. Patients may suffer diarrhea from
infections with bacterial, viral, or parasitic agents.
Exacerbating the decrease in caloric intake, many AIDS patients
have an increased metabolic rate. This increased rate has been
shown to exist even among asymptomatic HIV-infected persons,
but it accelerates with disease progression and secondary infection.
AIDS patients with secondary infections also have decreased
protein synthesis, which makes maintaining muscle mass difficult.
Several strategies have been developed to slow AIDS wasting.
Effective fever control decreases the metabolic rate and may slow
the pace of weight loss, as does treating the underlying opportunistic
infection. Food supplementation with high-calorie drinks may enable
patients with not much appetite to maintain their intake. Selected
patients with otherwise good functional status and weight loss due
to unrelenting nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea may benefit from total
parenteral nutrition (TPN). It should be noted, however, that TPN
is more likely to increase fat stores than to reverse the muscle
wasting process.
Two pharmacologic approaches for increasing appetite and
weight gain are the progestational agent megestrol acetate (80 mg
four times a day) and the antiemetic agent dronabinol (2.5–5 mg
three times a day). Side effects from megestrol acetate are rare, but
thromboembolic phenomena, edema, nausea, vomiting, and rash
have been reported. Euphoria, dizziness, paranoia, and somnolence
and even nausea and vomiting have been reported in 3–10% of
patients using dronabinol. Dronabinol contains only one of the active
ingredients in smoked marijuana, and many patients report better
relief of nausea and improvement of appetite with smoking
marijuana. Thirteen states allow patients to obtain marijuana for
medicinal purposes with a letter of recommendation from their
doctor. However, the use and sale of marijuana is still illegal under
federal law. The Supreme Court has ruled that physicians cannot be
prosecuted for recommending marijuana to their patients (it would
be an infringement of freedom of speech). Therefore, while a
physician's recommendation may not completely protect patients,
letters decrease the chance that patients will be prosecuted for use
of marijuana. Unfortunately, neither megestrol acetate nor
dronabinol increases lean body mass.
Two regimens that have resulted in increases in lean body mass
are growth hormone and anabolic steroids. Growth hormone at a
dose of 0.1 mg/kg/d (up to 6 mg) subcutaneously for 12 weeks has
resulted in modest increases in lean body mass. Treatment with
growth hormone can cost as much as $10,000 per month. Anabolic
steroids also increase lean body mass among HIV-infected patients.
They seem to work best for patients who are able to do weight
training. The most commonly used regimens are testosterone
enanthate or testosterone cypionate (100–200 mg intramuscularly
every 2–4 weeks). Testosterone transdermal system (apply 5 mg
system each evening) and testosterone gel (1%; apply a 5-g packet
[50 mg testosterone] to clean, dry skin daily) are also available. The
anabolic steroid oxandrolone (20 mg orally in two divided doses)
has also been found to increase lean body mass.
Nausea leading to weight loss is sometimes due to esophageal
candidiasis. Patients with oral candidiasis and nausea should be
empirically treated with an oral antifungal agent. Patients with weight
loss due to nausea of unclear origin may benefit from use of
antiemetics prior to meals (prochlorperazine, 10 mg three times
daily; metoclopramide, 10 mg three times daily; or ondansetron, 8
mg three times daily). Dronabinol (5 mg three times daily) can also
be used to increase appetite. Depression and adrenal insufficiency
are two potentially treatable causes of weight loss.
2. Pulmonary disease—
A. Pneumocystis PNEUMONIA—(See also discussions in Chapter
36. ) Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is the most common
opportunistic infection associated with AIDS. Pneumocystis
pneumonia may be difficult to diagnose because the symptoms—
fever, cough, and shortness of breath—are nonspecific.
Furthermore, the severity of symptoms ranges from fever and no
respiratory symptoms through mild cough or dyspnea to frank
respiratory distress.
Hypoxemia may be severe, with a Po2 < 60 mm Hg. The
cornerstone of diagnosis is the chest radiograph. Diffuse or perihilar
infiltrates are most characteristic, but only two-thirds of patients
with Pneumocystis pneumonia have this finding. Normal chest
radiographs are seen in 5–10% of patients with Pneumocystis
pneumonia, while the remainder have atypical infiltrates. Apical
infiltrates are commonly seen among patients with Pneumocystis
pneumonia who have been receiving aerosolized pentamidine pro
phylaxis. Large pleural effusions are uncommon with Pneumocystis
pneumonia; their presence suggests bacterial pneumonia, other
infections such as tuberculosis, or pleural Kaposi sarcoma.
Definitive diagnosis can be obtained in 50–80% of cases by
Wright-Giemsa stain or direct fluorescence antibody (DFA) test of
induced sputum. Sputum induction is performed by having patients
inhale an aerosolized solution of 3% saline produced by an
ultrasonic nebulizer. Patients should not eat for at least 8 hours and
should not use toothpaste or mouthwash prior to the procedure
since they can interfere with test interpretation. The next step for
patients with negative sputum examinations in whom Pneumocystis
pneumonia is still suspected should be bronchoalveolar lavage. This
technique establishes the diagnosis in over 95% of cases.
In patients with symptoms suggestive of Pneumocystis
pneumonia but with negative or atypical chest radio-graphs and
negative sputum examinations, other diagnostic tests may provide
additional information in deciding whether to proceed to
bronchoalveolar lavage. Elevation of serum lactate dehydrogenase
occurs in 95% of cases of Pneumocystis pneumonia, but the
specificity of this finding is at best 75%. Recently, a serum beta-
glucan test has been shown to be a more sensitive and specific test
fo r Pneumocystis pneumonia compared with serum lactate
dehydrogenase and may avoid more invasive tests when used in the
appropriate clinical setting. Either a normal diffusing capacity of
carbon monoxide (DLCO) or a high-resolution CT scan of the chest
that demonstrates no interstitial lung disease makes the diagnosis of
Pneumocystis pneumonia very unlikely. In addition, a CD4 count >
250 cells/mcL within 2 months prior to evaluation of respiratory
symptoms makes a diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia unlikely;
only 1–5% of cases occur above this CD4 count level (Figure 31–
1). This is true even if the patient previously had a CD4 count lower
than 200 cells/mcL but has had an increase with ART. Pneumo
thoraces can be seen in HIV-infected patients with a history of
Pneumocystis pneumonia, especially if they have received
aerosolized pentamidine treatment.
B. OTHER INFECTIOUS PULMONARY DISEASES—Other infectious
causes of pulmonary disease in AIDS patients include bacterial,
mycobacterial, and viral pneumonias. Community-acquired
pneumonia is the most common cause of pulmonary disease in
HIV-infected persons. An increased incidence of pneumococcal
pneumonia 
with 
septicemia 
and Haemophilus influenzae
pneumonia has been reported. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an
important respiratory pathogen in advanced disease. The incidence
of infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis has markedly
increased in metropolitan areas because of HIV infection as well as
homelessness. Tuberculosis occurs in an estimated 4% of persons in
the United States who have AIDS. Apical infiltrates and
disseminated disease occur more commonly than among
immunocompetent persons. Although a purified protein derivative
(PPD) test should be performed on all HIV-infected persons in
whom a diagnosis of tuberculosis is being considered, the lower the
CD4 cell count, the greater the likelihood of anergy. Because
“anergy” skin test panels do not accurately classify those patients
who are infected with tuberculosis but unreactive to the PPD, they
are not recommended. Treatment of HIV-infected persons with
active tuberculosis is similar to treatment of HIV-uninfected
tubercular individuals (see Figure 31–1). However, rifampin should
not be given to patients receiving a boosted protease inhibitor (PI)-
regimen. In these cases, rifabutin may be substituted, but it may
require dosing modifications depending on the anti-retroviral
regimen. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis has been a major problem
in several metropolitan areas of the developed world, and reports
from South Africa of “extremely resistant” tuberculosis in AIDS
patients is a growing global concern. Noncompliance with
prescribed antituberculous drugs is a major risk factor. Several of
the reported outbreaks appear to implicate nosocomial spread. The
emergence of drug resistance makes it essential that antibiotic
sensitivities be performed on all positive cultures. Drug therapy
should be individualized. Patients with multidrug-resistant M
tuberculosis infection should receive at least three drugs to which
their organism is sensitive. Atypical mycobacteria can cause
pulmonary disease in AIDS patients with or without preexisting lung
disease and responds variably to treatment. Making a distinction
between M tuberculosis and atypical mycobacteria requires culture
of sputum specimens. If culture of the sputum produces acid-fast
bacilli, definitive identification may take several weeks using
traditional techniques. DNA probes allow for presumptive
identification usually within days of a positive culture. While awaiting
definitive diagnosis, clinicians should err on the side of treating
patients as if they have M tuberculosis infection. In cases in which
the risk of atypical mycobacteria is very high (eg, a person without
risk for tuberculosis exposure with a CD4 count under 50 cells/mcL
—see Figure 31–1), clinicians may wait for definitive diagnosis if the
person is smear-negative for acid-fast bacilli, clinically stable, and
not living in a communal setting. Isolation of cytomegalovirus
(CMV) from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid occurs commonly in
AIDS patients but does not establish a definitive diagnosis.
Diagnosis of CMV pneumonia requires biopsy; response to
treatment is poor. Histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and
cryptococcal disease should also be considered in the differential
diagnosis of unexplained pulmonary infiltrates.
C. NONINFECTIOUS PULMONARY DISEASES—Noninfectious causes
of lung disease include Kaposi sarcoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma,
and interstitial pneumonitis. In patients with known Kaposi sarcoma,
pulmonary involvement complicates the course in approximately
one-third of cases. However, pulmonary involvement is rarely the
presenting manifestation of Kaposi sarcoma. Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma may involve the lung as the sole site of disease but more
commonly involves other organs as well, especially the brain, liver,
and gastrointestinal tract. Both of these processes may show
nodular or diffuse parenchymal involvement, pleural effusions, and
mediastinal adenopathy on chest radiographs.
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis may mimic Pneumocystis
pneumonia. Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis seen in lung
biopsies has a variable clinical course. Typically, these patients
present with several months of mild cough and dyspnea; chest
radiographs show interstitial infiltrates. Many patients with this entity
undergo trans-bronchial biopsies in an attempt to diagnose
Pneumocystis pneumonia. Instead, the tissue shows interstitial
inflammation ranging from an intense lymphocytic infiltration
(consistent with lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis) to a mild
mononuclear inflammation. Corticosteroids may be helpful in some
cases refractory to ART.
D. SINUSITIS—Chronic sinusitis can be a frustrating problem for
HIV-infected patients even in those on adequate ART. Symptoms
include sinus congestion and discharge, headache, and fever. Some
patients may have radiographic evidence of sinus disease on sinus
CT scan or sinus x-ray in the absence of significant symptoms.
Nonsmoking patients with purulent drainage should be treated with
amoxicillin (500 mg orally three times a day). Patients who smoke
should be treated with amoxicillin-potassium clavulanate (500 mg
orally three times a day) to cover H influenzae. Prolonged
treatment (3–6 weeks) with an antibiotic and guaifenesin (600 mg
orally twice daily) to decrease sinus congestion may be required.
For patients not responding to amoxicillin-potassium clavulanate,
levofloxacin may be tried (400 mg orally daily). In patients with
advanced immunodeficiency, Pseudomonas infections should be
suspected, especially if there is not a response to first-line
antibiotics. Some patients may require referral to an otolaryngologist
for sinus drainage.
3. Central nervous system disease—Central nervous system
disease in HIV-infected patients can be divided into intracerebral
space-occupying lesions, encephalopathy, meningitis, and spinal
cord processes. Many of these complications have declined
markedly in prevalence in the era of effective ART. Recent reports,
however, suggest that cognitive declines may be more common in
HIV patients, even those who are taking fully suppressive ART.
A. TOXOPLASMOSIS—Toxoplasmosis is the most common space-
occupying lesion in HIV-infected patients. Headache, focal
neurologic deficits, seizures, or altered mental status may be
presenting symptoms. The diagnosis is usually made presumptively
based on the characteristic appearance of cerebral imaging studies
in an individual known to be seropositive for Toxoplasma.
Typically, toxoplasmosis appears as multiple contrast-enhancing
lesions on CT scan. Lesions tend to be peripheral, with a
predilection for the basal ganglia.
Single lesions are atypical of toxoplasmosis. When a single lesion
has been detected by CT scanning, MRI scanning may reveal
multiple lesions because of its greater sensitivity. If a patient has a
single lesion on MRI and is neurologically stable, clinicians may
pursue a 2-week empiric trial of toxoplasmosis therapy. A repeat
scan should be performed at 2 weeks. If the lesion has not
diminished in size, biopsy of the lesion should be performed. Since
many HIV-infected patients will have detectable titers, a positive
Toxoplasma serologic test does not confirm the diagnosis.
Conversely, < 3% of patients with toxoplasmosis have negative
titers. Therefore, negative Toxoplasma titers in an HIV-infected
patient with a space-occupying lesion should be a cause for
aggressively pursuing an alternative diagnosis.
B. CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LYMPHOMA—Primary non-
Hodgkin lymphoma is the second most common space-occupying
lesion in HIV-infected patients. Symptoms are similar to those with
toxoplasmosis. While imaging techniques cannot distinguish these
two diseases with certainty, lymphoma more often is solitary. Other
less common lesions should be suspected if there is preceding
bacteremia, positive tuberculin test, fungemia, or injection drug use.
These include bacterial abscesses, cryptococcomas, tuberculomas,
and Nocardia lesions.
Because techniques for stereotactic brain biopsy have improved,
this procedure plays an increasing role in diagnosing cerebral
lesions. Biopsy should be strongly considered if lesions are solitary
or do not respond to toxoplasmosis treatment, especially if they are
easily accessible. Diagnosis of lymphoma is important because
many patients benefit from treatment (radiation therapy). In the
future, it may be possible to avoid brain biopsy by utilizing
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay of cerebrospinal fluid for
Epstein–Barr virus DNA, which is present in 90% of CNS
lymphoma cases.
C. AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX—The diagnosis of AIDS dementia
complex (HIV-associated cognitive-motor complex) is one of
exclusion based on a brain imaging study and on spinal fluid analysis
that excludes other pathogens. Neuropsychiatric testing is helpful in
distinguishing patients with dementia from those with depression.
Patients with AIDS dementia complex typically have difficulty with
cognitive tasks and exhibit diminished motor speed. Patients may
first notice a deterioration in their handwriting. The manifestations of
dementia may wax and wane, with persons exhibiting periods of
lucidity and confusion over the course of a day. Many patients
improve with effective antiretroviral treatment. Metabolic
abnormalities may also cause changes in mental status:
hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hypoxia, and drug overdose are
important considerations in this population. Other less common
infectious causes of encephalopathy include progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (discussed below), CMV, syphilis, and
herpes simplex encephalitis.
D. 
CRYPTOCOCCAL 
MENINGITIS—Cryptococcal 
meningitis
typically presents with fever and headache. Less than 20% of
patients have meningismus. Diagnosis is based on a positive latex
agglutination test that detects cryptococcal antigen (or “CRAG”) or
positive culture of spinal fluid for Cryptococcus. Seventy to 90% of
patients with cryptococcal meningitis have a positive serum CRAG.
Thus, a negative serum CRAG test makes a diagnosis of
cryptococcal meningitis unlikely and can be useful in the initial
evaluation of a patient with headache, fever, and normal mental
status. HIV meningitis, characterized by lymphocytic pleocytosis of
the spinal fluid with negative culture, is common early in HIV
infection.
E. HIV MYELOPATHY—Spinal cord function may also be impaired
in HIV-infected individuals. HIV myelopathy presents with leg
weakness and incontinence. Spastic paraparesis and sensory ataxia
are seen on neurologic examination. Myelopathy is usually a late
manifestation of HIV disease, and most patients will have
concomitant HIV encephalopathy. Pathologic evaluation of the
spinal cord reveals vacuolation of white matter. Because HIV
myelopathy is a diagnosis of exclusion, symptoms suggestive of
myelopathy should be evaluated by lumbar puncture to rule out
CMV polyradiculopathy (described below) and an MRI or CT
scan to exclude epidural lymphoma.
F. PROGRESSIVE MULTIFOCAL LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY (PML)
—PML is a viral infection of the white matter of the brain seen in
patients with very advanced HIV infection. It typically results in
focal neurologic deficits such as aphasia, hemiparesis, and cortical
blindness. Imaging studies are strongly suggestive of the diagnosis if
they show nonenhancing white matter lesions without mass effect.
Extensive lesions may be difficult to differentiate from the changes
caused by HIV. Several patients have stabilized or improved after
the institution of effective ART or cidofovir, or both.
4. Peripheral nervous system—Peripheral nervous system
syndromes include inflammatory polyneuropathies, sensory
neuropathies, and mononeuropathies.
An inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy similar to
Guillain-Barré syndrome occurs in HIV-infected patients, usually
prior to frank immunodeficiency. The syndrome in many cases
improves with plasmapheresis, supporting an autoimmune basis of
the disease. CMV can cause an ascending polyradiculopathy
characterized by lower extremity weakness and a neutrophilic
pleocytosis on spinal fluid analysis with a negative bacterial culture.
Transverse myelitis can be seen with herpes zoster or CMV.
Peripheral neuropathy is common among HIV-infected persons.
Patients typically complain of numbness, tingling, and pain in the
lower extremities. Symptoms are disproportionate to findings on
gross sensory and motor evaluation. Beyond HIV infection itself,
the most common cause is prior ART with stavudine or didanosine.
Patients who report these symptoms should be switched to an
alternative agent if possible. Caution should be used when
administering these agents to patients with a history of peripheral
neuropathy. Unfortunately, drug-induced neuropathy is not always
reversed when the offending agent is discontinued. Patients with
advanced disease may also develop peripheral neuropathy even if
they have never taken ART. Evaluation should rule out other causes
of sensory neuropathy such as alcoholism, thyroid disease, vitamin
B12 deficiency, and syphilis.
Treatment of peripheral neuropathy is aimed at symptomatic
relief. Patients should be initially treated with gabapentin (start at
300 mg at bedtime and increase to 300–900 mg orally three times a
day).
5. Rheumatologic manifestations—Arthritis, involving single or
multiple joints, with or without effusion, has been commonly noted
in HIV-infected patients. Involvement of large joints is most
common. Although the cause of HIV-related arthritis is unknown,
most patients will respond to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Patients with a sizable effusion, especially if the joint is warm or
erythematous, should have the joint tapped, followed by culture of
the fluid to rule out suppurative arthritis as well as fungal and
mycobacterial disease.
Several rheumatologic syndromes, including reactive arthritis
(Reiter syndrome), psoriatic arthritis, sicca syndrome, and systemic
lupus erythematosus, have been reported in HIV-infected patients
(see Chapter 20). However, it is unclear if the prevalence is greater
than in the general population. Cases of avascular necrosis of the
femoral heads have been reported sporadically, generally in the
setting of advanced disease with long-standing infection and in
patients receiving long-term ART. The etiology is not clear but is
probably multifactorial in nature.
6. Myopathy—Myopathies are infrequent in the era of effective
ART but can be related to either HIV-infection or ART, particularly
with use of zidovudine (azidothymidine [AZT]). Proximal muscle
weakness is typical, and patients may have varying degrees of
muscle tenderness. A muscle biopsy can distinguish HIV myopathy
from zidovudine myopathy and should be considered in patients for
whom continuation of zidovudine is essential.
7. Retinitis—Complaints of visual changes must be evaluated
immediately in HIV-infected patients. CMV retinitis, characterized
by perivascular hemorrhages and white fluffy exudates, is the most
common retinal infection in AIDS patients and can be rapidly
progressive. In contrast, cotton wool spots, which are also common
in HIV-infected people, are benign, remit spontaneously, and
appear as small indistinct white spots without exudation or
hemorrhage. This distinction may be difficult at times for the
nonspecialist, and patients with visual changes should be seen by an
ophthalmologist. Other rare retinal processes include other
herpesvirus infections or toxoplasmosis.
8. Oral lesions—The presence of oral candidiasis or hairy
leukoplakia is significant for several reasons. First, these lesions are
highly suggestive of HIV infection in patients who have no other
obvious cause of immunodeficiency. Second, several studies have
indicated that patients with candidiasis have a high rate of
progression to AIDS even with statistical adjustment for CD4
count.
Hairy leukoplakia is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus. The lesion
is not usually troubling to patients and sometimes regresses
spontaneously. Hairy leukoplakia is commonly seen as a white
lesion on the lateral aspect of the tongue. It may be flat or slightly
raised, is usually corrugated, and has vertical parallel lines with fine
or thick (“hairy”) projections. Oral candidiasis can be bothersome
to patients, many of whom report an unpleasant taste or mouth
dryness. There are two major types of oral candidiasis:
pseudomembranous (removable white plaques) and erythematous
(red friable plaques). Treatment is with topical agents such as
clotrimazole 10-mg troches (one troche four or five times a day).
Patients with candidiasis who do not respond to topical antifungals
can be treated with fluconazole (50–100 mg orally once a day for
3–7 days). Angular cheilitis—fissures at the sides of the mouth—is
usually due to Candida as well and can be treated topically with
ketoconazole cream (2%) twice a day.
Gingival disease is common in HIV-infected patients and is
thought to be due to an overgrowth of microorganisms. It usually
responds to professional dental cleaning and chlorhexidine rinses. A
particularly aggressive gingivitis or periodontitis will develop in some
HIV-infected patients; these patients should be given antibiotics that
cover anaerobic oral flora (eg, metronidazole, 250 mg four times a
day for 4 or 5 days) and referred to oral surgeons with experience
with these entities.
Aphthous ulcers are painful and may interfere with eating. They
can be treated with fluocinonide (0.05% ointment mixed 1:1 with
plain Orabase and applied six times a day to the ulcer). For lesions
that are difficult to reach, patients should use dexamethasone
swishes (0.5 mg in 5 mL elixir three times a day). The pain of the
ulcers can be relieved with use of an anesthetic spray (10%
lidocaine). For patients with refractory ulcers, thalidomide, starting
at a dose of 50 mg orally daily and increasing to 100–200 mg daily,
has proved useful. Because it is teratogenic it should be
administered only to patients at zero risk of procreation. The most
common side effects are sedation and peripheral neuropathy. Other
lesions seen in the mouths of HIV-infected patients include Kaposi
sarcoma (usually on the hard palate) and warts.
9. Gastrointestinal manifestations—
A. CANDIDAL ESOPHAGITIS—(See also discussion in Chapter 15.)
Esophageal candidiasis is a common AIDS complication. In a
patient with characteristic symptoms, empiric antifungal treatment is
begun with fluconazole (200 mg daily for 10–14 days). Further
evaluation to identify other causes of esophagitis (herpes simplex,
CMV) is reserved for patients who do not improve with antifungal
treatment.
B. HEPATIC DISEASE—Autopsy studies have demonstrated that the
liver is a frequent site of infections and neoplasms in HIV-infected
patients. However, many of these infections are not clinically
symptomatic. Clinicians may note elevations of alkaline phosphatase
and aminotransferases on routine chemistry panels. Mycobacterial
disease, CMV, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and lymphoma
cause liver disease and can present with varying degrees of nausea,
vomiting, right upper quadrant abdominal pain, and jaundice.
Sulfonamides, imidazole drugs, antituberculous medications,
pentamidine, clarithromycin, and didanosine have also been
associated with hepatitis. HIV-infected patients with chronic
hepatitis may have more rapid progression of liver disease because
of the concomitant immunodeficiency or hepatotoxicity of ART.
Percutaneous liver biopsy may be helpful in diagnosing liver disease,
but some common causes of liver disease (eg, Mycobacterium
avium complex, lymphoma) can be determined by less invasive
measures (eg, blood culture, biopsy of a more accessible site). With
patients living longer as a result of advances in ART, advanced liver
disease and hepatic failure due to chronic active hepatitis B and or
C are increasing causes of morbidity and mortality. HIV-infected
individuals who are coinfected with hepatitis B, should be treated
with antiretroviral regimens that include drugs with activity against
both viruses (eg, lamivudine [3TC], emtricitabine [FTC], tenofovir
[TDF]). Treatment of HIV-infected persons with hepatitis C with
peginterferon and ribavirin has been shown to be efficacious,
although less so than in HIVuninfected persons. HIV-infected
persons are also more likely to have difficulty tolerating treatment
with peginterferon than uninfected persons. Liver transplants have
been performed successfully in HIV-infected patients. This strategy
is most likely to be successful in persons who have CD4 counts >
100 cells/mcL and nondetectable viral loads.
C. BILIARY DISEASE—Cholecystitis presents with manifestations
similar to those seen in immunocompetent hosts but is more likely to
be acalculous. Sclerosing cholangitis and papillary stenosis have
also been reported in HIV-infected patients. Typically, the
syndrome presents with severe nausea, vomiting, and right upper
quadrant pain. Liver function tests generally show alkaline
phosphatase elevations disproportionate to elevation of the
aminotransferases. Although dilated ducts can be seen on
ultrasound, the diagnosis is made by endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography, which reveals intraluminal irregularities
of the proximal intrahepatic ducts with “pruning” of the terminal
ductal branches. Stenosis of the distal common bile duct at the
papilla is commonly seen with this syndrome. CMV,
Cryptosporidium, and microsporidia are thought to play inciting
roles in this syndrome.
D. ENTEROCOLITIS—Enterocolitis is a common problem in HIV-
infected individuals. Organisms known to cause enterocolitis include
bacteria (Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella), viruses (CMV,
adenovirus), and protozoans (Cryptosporidium, Entamoeba
histolytica, Giardia, Isospora, microsporidia). HIV itself may
cause enterocolitis. Several of the organisms causing enterocolitis in
HIV-infected individuals also cause diarrhea in immunocompetent
persons. However, HIV-infected patients tend to have more severe
and more chronic symptoms, including high fevers and severe
abdominal pain that can mimic acute abdominal catastrophes.
Bacteremia and concomitant biliary involvement are also more
common with enterocolitis in HIV-infected patients. Relapses of
enterocolitis following adequate therapy have been reported with
both Salmonella and Shigella infections.
Because of the wide range of agents known to cause
enterocolitis, a stool culture and multiple stool examinations for ova
and parasites (including modified acid-fast staining for
Cryptosporidium) should be performed. Those patients who have
Cryptosporidium in one stool with improvement in symptoms in <
1 month should not be considered to have AIDS, as
Cryptosporidium is a cause of self-limited diarrhea in HIV-
negative persons. More commonly, HIV-infected patients with
Cryptosporidium infection have persistent enterocolitis with
profuse watery diarrhea.
To date, no consistently effective treatments have been
developed for Cryptosporidium infection. The most effective
treatment of cryptosporidiosis is to improve immune function
through the use of effective antiretroviral treatment. The diarrhea
can be treated symptomatically with diphenoxylate with atropine
(one or two tablets orally three or four times a day). Those who do
not respond may be given paregoric with bismuth (5–10 mL orally
three or four times a day). Octreotide in escalating doses (starting at
0.05 mg subcutaneously every 8 hours for 48 hours) has been
found to ameliorate symptoms in approximately 40% of patients
with cryptosporidia or idiopathic HIV-associated diarrhea.
Patients with a negative stool examination and persistent
symptoms should be evaluated with colonoscopy and biopsy.
Patients whose symptoms last longer than 1 month with no identified
cause of diarrhea are considered to have a presumptive diagnosis of
AIDS enteropathy. Patients may respond to institution of effective
antiretroviral treatment. Upper endoscopy with small bowel biopsy
is not recommended as a routine part of the evaluation.
E. OTHER DISORDERS—Two other important gastrointestinal
abnormalities in HIV-infected patients are gastropathy and
malabsorption. It has been documented that some HIV-infected
patients do not produce normal levels of stomach acid and therefore
are unable to absorb drugs that require an acid medium. This
decreased acid production may explain, in part, the susceptibility of
HIV-infected patients to Campylobacter, Salmonella, and
Shigella, all of which are sensitive to acid concentration. There is
no evidence that Helicobacter pylori is more common in HIV-
infected persons.
A malabsorption syndrome occurs commonly in AIDS patients.
It can be due to infection of the small bowel with M avium
complex, Cryptosporidium, or microsporidia.
10. Endocrinologic manifestations—Hypogonadism is probably
the most common endocrinologic abnormality in HIV-infected men.
The adrenal gland is also a commonly afflicted endocrine gland in
patients with AIDS. Abnormalities demonstrated on autopsy include
infection (especially with CMV and M avium complex), infiltration
with Kaposi sarcoma, and injury from hemorrhage and presumed
autoimmunity. The prevalence of clinically significant adrenal
insufficiency is low. Patients with suggestive symptoms should
undergo a cosyntropin stimulation test.
Although frank deficiency of cortisol is rare, an isolated defect in
mineralocorticoid metabolism may lead to salt-wasting and
hyperkalemia. Such patients should be treated with fludrocortisone
(0.1–0.2 mg daily).
AIDS patients appear to have abnormalities of thyroid function
tests different from those of patients with other chronic diseases.
AIDS patients have been shown to have high levels of
triiodothyronine (T3), thyroxine (T4), and thyroid-binding globulin
and low levels of reverse triiodothyronine (rT3). The causes and
clinical significance of these abnormalities are unknown.
11. Skin manifestations—The skin manifestations that commonly
develop in HIV-infected patients can be grouped into viral,
bacterial, fungal, neoplastic, and nonspecific dermatitides.
Herpes simplex infections occur more frequently, tend to be
more severe, and are more likely to disseminate in AIDS patients
than in immunocompetent persons. Because of the risk of
progressive local disease, all herpes simplex attacks should be
treated with acyclovir (400 mg orally three times a day until healed,
usually 7 days), famciclovir (500 mg orally twice daily until healed),
or valacyclovir (500 mg orally twice daily until healed). To avoid the
complications of attacks, many clinicians recommend suppressive
therapy for HIV-infected patients with a history of recurrent herpes.
Options for suppressive therapy include acyclovir (400 mg orally
twice daily), famciclovir (250 mg orally twice daily), and
valacyclovir (500 mg orally daily). A randomized trial of women
infected with both herpes simplex and HIV showed that suppressive
therapy with valacyclovir at a dose of 500 mg orally twice daily
decreased genital and plasma HIV-1 RNA levels, suggesting the
possibility that suppressive treatment may reduce HIV transmission.
However, a recent large randomized clinical trial failed to show a
reduction in HIV transmission with suppressive acyclovir therapy.
Herpes zoster is a common manifestation of HIV infection. As
with herpes simplex infections, patients with zoster should be
treated with acyclovir to prevent dissemination (800 mg orally four
or five times per day for 7 days). Alternatively, famciclovir (500 mg
orally three times a day) or valacyclovir (500 mg three times a day)
may be used. Vesicular lesions should be cultured if there is any
question about their origin, since herpes simplex responds to much
lower doses of acyclovir. Disseminated zoster and cases with ocular
involvement should be treated with intravenous (10 mg/kg every 8
hours for 7–10 days) rather than oral acyclovir.
Molluscum contagiosum caused by a pox virus is seen in
HIV-infected patients, as in other immunocompromised patients.
The characteristic umbilicated fleshy papular lesions have a
propensity for spreading widely over the patient's face and neck
and should be treated with topical liquid nitrogen.
Staphylococcus is the most common bacterial cause of skin
disease in HIV-infected patients; it usually presents as folliculitis,
superficial abscesses (furuncles), or bullous impetigo. Because
dissemination with sepsis has been reported, attempts should be
made to treat these lesions aggressively. Folliculitis is initially treated
with topical clindamycin or mupirocin, and patients may benefit from
regular washing with an antibacterial soap such as chlorhexidine.
Intranasal mupirocin has been used successfully for staphylococcal
decolonization in other settings. In HIV-infected patients with
recurrent staphylococcal infections, weekly intranasal mupirocin
should be considered in addition to topical care and systemic
antibiotics. Abscesses often require incision and drainage. Patients
may need anti-staphylococcal antibiotics as well. Due to high
frequency of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
skin infections in HIV-infected populations, lesions should be
cultured prior to initiating empiric antistaphylococcal therapy.
Although there is limited experience treating MRSA with oral
antibiotics, current recommendations for empiric treatment are
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet orally
twice daily) with or without clindamycin (500 mg orally three times
daily) or doxycycline (100 mg orally twice daily) with close follow-
up.
Bacillary angiomatosis is a well-described entity in HIV-
infected patients. It is caused by two closely related organisms:
Bartonella henselae and Bartonella quintana. The epidemiology
of these infections suggests zoonotic transmission from fleas of
infected domestic cats. The most common manifestation is raised,
reddish, highly vascular skin lesions that can mimic the lesions of
Kaposi sarcoma. Fever is a common manifestation of this infection;
involvement of bone, lymph nodes, and liver has also been
reported. The infection responds to doxycycline, 100 mg orally
twice daily, or erythromycin, 250 mg orally four times daily.
Therapy is continued for at least 14 days, and patients who are
seriously ill with visceral involvement may require months of
therapy.
The majority of fungal rashes afflicting AIDS patients are due
to dermatophytes and Candida. These are particularly common in
the inguinal region but may occur anywhere on the body. Fungal
rashes generally respond well to topical clotrimazole (1% twice a
day) or ketoconazole (2% twice a day).
Seborrheic dermatitis is more common in HIV-infected
patients. Scrapings of seborrhea have revealed Malassezia furfur
(Pityrosporum ovale), implying that the seborrhea is caused by this
fungus. Consistent with the isolation of this fungus is the clinical
finding that seborrhea responds well to topical clotrimazole (1%
cream) as well as hydrocortisone (1% cream).
Xerosis presents in HIV-infected patients with severe pruritus.
The patient may have no rash, or nonspecific excoriations from
scratching. Treatment is with emollients (eg, absorption base cream)
and antipruritic lotions (eg, camphor 9.5% and menthol 0.5%).
Psoriasis can be very severe in HIV-infected patients.
Phototherapy and etretinate (0.25–9.75 mg/kg/d orally in divided
doses) may be used for recalcitrant cases in consultation with a
dermatologist.
12. HIV-related malignancies—Four cancers are currently
included in the CDC classification of AIDS: Kaposi sarcoma, non-
Hodgkin lymphoma, primary lymphoma of the brain, and invasive
cervical carcinoma. Epidemiologic studies have shown that between
1973 and 1987 among single men in San Francisco, the risk of
Kaposi sarcoma increased more than 5000-fold and the risk of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma more than tenfold. The increase in
incidence of malignancies is probably a function of impaired cell-
mediated immunity.
Kaposi sarcoma lesions may appear anywhere; careful
examination of the eyelids, conjunctiva, pinnae, palate, and toe
webs is mandatory to locate potentially occult lesions. In light-
skinned individuals, Kaposi lesions usually appear as purplish,
nonblanching lesions that can be papular or nodular (see Figure 6–
41). In dark-skinned individuals, the lesions may appear more
brown. In the mouth, lesions are most often palatal papules, though
exophytic lesions of the tongue and gingivae may also be seen.
Kaposi lesions may be confused with other vascular lesions such as
angiomas and pyogenic granulomas. Visceral disease (eg,
gastrointestinal, pulmonary) will develop in about 40% of patients
with dermatologic Kaposi sarcoma. Rapidly progressive
dermatologic or visceral disease is best treated with systemic
chemotherapy. Liposomally encapsulated doxorubicin given
intravenously every 3 weeks has a response rate of approximately
70%. α-Interferon (10 million units subcutaneously three times a
week) also has activity against Kaposi sarcoma. However,
symptoms such as malaise and anorexia limit the utility of this
therapy. Patients with milder forms of Kaposi sarcoma do not
require specific treatment as the lesions usually improve and can
completely resolve with ART. However, it should be noted that the
lesions may flare when ART is first initiated—probably as a result of
an immune reconstitution process (see Inflammatory reactions
below).
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma in HIV-infected persons tends to be
very aggressive. The malignancies are usually of B cell origin and
characterized as diffuse large-cell tumors. Over 70% of the
malignancies are extranodal.
The prognosis of patients with systemic non-Hodgkin lymphoma
depends primarily on the degree of immunodeficiency at the time of
diagnosis. Patients with high CD4 counts do markedly better than
those diagnosed at a late stage of illness. Patients with primary
central nervous system lymphoma are treated with radiation.
Response to treatment is good, but prior to the availability of
HAART, most patients died within a few months after diagnosis due
to their underlying disease. Systemic disease is treated with
chemotherapy. Common regimens are CHOP (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) and modified M-BACOD
(methotrexate, 
bleomycin, 
doxorubicin, 
cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, and dexamethasone). Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (G-CSF; filgrastim) is used to maintain white blood counts
with this latter regimen. Intrathecal chemotherapy is administered to
prevent or treat meningeal involvement.
Although Hodgkin disease is not included as part of the CDC
definition of AIDS, studies have found that HIV infection is
associated with a fivefold increase in the incidence of Hodgkin
disease. HIV-infected persons with Hodgkin disease are more
likely to have mixed cellularity and lymphocyte depletion subtypes
of Hodgkin disease and to seek medical attention at an advanced
stage of disease.
Anal dysplasia and squamous cell carcinoma have been
noted in HIV-infected men and women. These lesions have been
strongly correlated with previous infection by human papillomavirus
(HPV). Although many of the infected MSM report a history of
anal warts or have visible warts, a significant percentage have silent
papillomavirus infection. Cytologic (using Papanicolaou smears) and
papillomavirus DNA studies can easily be performed on specimens
obtained by anal swab. Because of the risk of progression from
dysplasia to cancer in immunocompromised patients, some experts
suggest that annual anal swabs for cytologic examination should be
done in all HIV-infected persons. An anal Papanicolaou smear is
performed by rotating a moistened Dacron swab about 2 cm into
the anal canal. The swab is immediately inserted into a cytology
bottle. However, there is no evidence that screening for anal cancer
with Papanicolaou smears decreases the incidence of invasive
cancer.
HPV also appears to play a causative role in cervical dysplasia
and neoplasia. The incidence and clinical course of cervical disease
in HIV-infected women are discussed below.
13. Gynecologic manifestations—Vaginal candidiasis, cervical
dysplasia and neoplasia, and pelvic inflammatory disease are more
common in HIV-infected women than in uninfected women. These
manifestations also tend to be more severe when they occur in
association with HIV infection. Therefore, HIV-infected women
need frequent gynecologic care. Vaginal candidiasis may be treated
with topical agents (see Chapter 36). However, HIV-infected
women with recurrent or severe vaginal candidiasis may need
systemic therapy.
The incidence of cervical dysplasia in HIV-infected women is
40%. Because of this finding, HIV-infected women should have
Papanicolaou smears every 6 months (as opposed to the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality [AHRQ] Guideline
recommendation for every 12 months). Some clinicians recommend
routine colposcopy or cervicography because cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia has occurred in women with negative Papani colaou
smears. Cone biopsy is indicated in cases of serious cervical
dysplasia. For 1 year following treatment of an abnormal
Papanicolaou smear, women should have repeat smears every 3 to
4 months.
Cervical neoplasia appears to be more aggressive among HIV-
infected women. Most HIV-infected women with cervical cancer
die of that disease rather than of AIDS. Because of its frequency
and severity, cervical neoplasia was added to the CDC definition of
AIDS in 1993.
While pelvic inflammatory disease appears to be more common
in HIV-infected women, the bacteriology of this condition appears
to be the same as among HIV-uninfected women. At present, HIV-
infected women with pelvic inflammatory disease should be treated
with the same regimens as uninfected women (see Chapter 18).
However, inpatient therapy is generally recommended.
14. Coronary artery disease—HIV-infected persons are at
higher risk for coronary artery disease than age- and sex-matched
controls. Part of this increase in coronary artery disease is due to
changes in lipids caused by antiretroviral agents (see Treatment
section on Antiretroviral Therapy below), especially stavudine and
several of the PIs. However, some of the risk appears to be due to
HIV infection, independent of its therapy. It is important that
clinicians pay close attention to this issue because the first
presentation of coronary artery disease in HIV-infected persons
may be sudden death. HIV-infected patients with symptoms of
coronary artery disease such as chest pain or dyspnea should be
rapidly evaluated. Clinicians should aggressively treat conditions that
result in increased risk of heart disease, especially smoking,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and
sedentary lifestyle.
15. 
Inflammatory 
reactions 
(immune 
reconstitution
syndromes)—With initiation of HAART, some patients experience
inflammatory reactions that appear to be associated with immune
reconstitution as indicated by a rapid increase in CD4 count. These
inflammatory reactions may present with generalized signs of fevers,
sweats, and malaise with or without more localized manifestations
that usually represent unusual presentations of opportunistic
infections. For example, vitreitis has developed in patients with
CMV retinitis after they have been treated with HAART. M avium
can present as focal even suppurative lymphadenitis or
granulomatous masses in patients receiving HAART. Tuberculosis
may paradoxically worsen with new or evolving pulmonary
infiltrates and lymphadenopathy. PML and cryptococcal meningitis
may also behave atypically. Clinicians should be alert to these
syndromes, which are most often seen in patients who have initiated
ART in the setting of advanced disease and who show rapid
increases in CD4 counts with treatment. The diagnosis of IRIS is
one of exclusion and can be made only after recurrence or new
opportunistic infection has been ruled out as the cause of the clinical
deterioration. Management of IRIS is conservative and supportive
with use of corticosteroids only for severe reactions. Most
authorities recommend that ART be continued unless the reaction is
life-threatening.
B. Laboratory Findings
Specific tests for HIV include antibody and antigen detection (Table
31–2). Conventional HIV antibody testing is done by ELISA.
Positive specimens are then confirmed by a different method (eg,
Western blot). The sensitivity of screening serologic tests is >
99.9%. The specificity of positive results by two different
techniques approaches 100% even in low-risk populations. False-
positive screening tests may occur as normal biologic variants or in
association with recent influenza vaccination or other disease states,
such as connective tissue disease. These are usually detected by
negative confirmatory tests. Molecular biology techniques (PCR)
show a small incidence of individuals (< 1%) who are infected with
HIV for up to 36 months without generating an antibody response.
However, antibodies that are detectable by screening serologic tests
will develop in 95% of persons within 6 weeks after infection.
Rapid HIV antibody tests are now available. They provide
results within 10–20 minutes and can be performed in physician
offices, including by personnel without laboratory training and
without a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment (CLIA)
approved laboratory. Persons who test positive on a rapid test
should be told that they may be HIV-infected or their test may be
falsely reactive. Standard testing (ELISA with Western blot
confirmation) should be performed to distinguish these two
possibilities. Rapid testing is particularly helpful in settings where a
result is needed immediately (eg, a woman in labor who has not
recently been tested for HIV) or when the patient is unlikely to
return for a result.
 
Table 31–2. Laboratory findings with HIV infection.
 
Test
Significance
HIV enzyme-
linked
immunosorbent
assay (ELISA)
Screening test for HIV infection. Of
ELISA tests 50% are positive within 22
days after HIV transmission; 95% are
positive within 6 weeks after
transmission. Sensitivity > 99.9%; to
avoid false-positive results, repeatedly
reactive results must be confirmed with
Western blot.
 
Western blot
Confirmatory test for HIV. Specificity
when combined with ELISA > 99.99%.
Indeterminate results with early HIV
infection, HIV-2 infection, autoimmune
disease, pregnancy, and recent tetanus
toxoid administration.
 
HIV rapid
antibody test
Screening test for HIV. Produces results
in 10–20 minutes. Can be performed by
personnel with limited training. Positive
results must be confirmed with standard
HIV test (ELISA and Western blot).
 
Complete
blood count
Anemia, neutropenia, and
thrombocytopenia common with
advanced HIV infection.
 
Absolute CD4
lymphocyte
count
Most widely used predictor of HIV
progression. Risk of progression to an
AIDS opportunistic infection or
malignancy is high with CD4 < 200
cells/mcL in the absence of treatment.
 
CD4
lymphocyte
Percentage may be more reliable than
the CD4 count. Risk of progression to an
AIDS opportunistic infection or
lymphocyte
percentage
malignancy is high with percentage <
14% in the absence of treatment.
 
HIV viral load
tests
These tests measure the amount of
actively replicating HIV virus. Correlate
with disease progression and response
to antiretroviral drugs. Best tests
available for diagnosis of acute HIV
infection (prior to seroconversion);
however, caution is warranted when the
test result shows low-level viremia (ie, <
500 copies/mL) as this may represent a
false-positive test.
 
Nonspecific laboratory findings with HIV infection may include
anemia, 
leukopenia 
(particularly 
lymphopenia), 
and
thrombocytopenia in any combination, elevation of the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, and
hypocholesterolemia. Cutaneous anergy is common.
Several laboratory markers are available to provide prognostic
information and guide therapy decisions (Table 31–2). The most
widely used marker is the absolute CD4 lymphocyte count. As
counts decrease, the risk of serious opportunistic infection over the
subsequent 3–5 years increases (Figure 31–1).
There are many limitations to using the CD4 count, including
diurnal variation, depression with intercurrent illness, and
intralaboratory and interlaboratory variability. Therefore, the trend is
more important than a single determination. The frequency of
performance of counts depends on the patient's health status and
whether or not they are receiving antiretroviral treatment. Patients
not receiving treatment whose CD4 counts are substantially above
the threshold for initiation of antiviral therapy (500 cells/mcL) should
have counts performed every 6 months. Those who have counts
near or below 500 cells/mcL should have counts performed every 3
months. For patients receiving ART, with undetectable viral loads,
and CD4 counts > 350 cells/mcL, CD4 counts need only be
performed every 3-6 months. In patients who have detectable viral
loads, CD4 counts should be performed every 3 months to evaluate
the need for a change in therapy or for initiation of P jiroveci
prophylactic therapy when the CD4 count drops below 200
cells/mcL, or initiation of M avium prophylaxis when the CD4
count drops below 75-100 cells/mcL. Some studies suggest that the
percentage of CD4 lymphocytes is a more reliable indicator of
prognosis than the absolute counts because the percentage does not
depend on calculating a manual differential. While the CD4 count
measures immune dysfunction, it does not provide a measure of
how actively HIV is replicating in the body. HIV viral load tests
(discussed below) assess the level of viral replication and provide
useful prognostic information that is independent of the information
provided by CD4 counts.
Celum C et al; Partners in Prevention HSV/HIV Transmission
Study Team. Acyclovir and transmission of HIV-1 from persons
infected with HIV-1 and HSV-2. N Engl J Med. 2010 Feb
4;362(5):427–39. [PMID: 20089951]
 
Dominguez S et al. Efficacy of early treatment of acute hepatitis C
infection with pegylated interferon and ribavirin in HIV-infected
patients. AIDS. 2006 May 12;20(8):1157–61. [PMID:
16691067]
 
Fitch KV et al. Effects of a lifestyle modification program in HIV-
infected patients with the metabolic syndrome. AIDS. 2006 Sep
11;20(14):1843–50. [PMID: 16954725]
 
Grubb JR et al. The changing spectrum of pulmonary disease in
patients with HIV infection on antiretroviral therapy. AIDS. 2006
May 12;20(8):1095–107. [PMID: 16691060]
 
Kohli R et al; HER Study Group. Bacterial pneumonia, HIV
therapy, and disease progression among HIV-infected women in
the HIV epidemiologic research (HER) study. Clin Infect Dis.
2006 Jul 1;43(1):90–8. [PMID: 16758423]
 
Koziel MJ et al. Viral hepatitis in HIV infection. N Engl J Med.
2007 Apr 5;356(14):1445–54. [PMID: 17409326]
 
Nath A et al. Influence of highly active antiretroviral therapy on
persistence of HIV in the central nervous system. Curr Opin
Neurol. 2006 Aug;19(4):358–61. [PMID: 16914973]
 
Sullivan PS et al. Effect of hepatitis C infection on progression of
HIV disease and early response to initial antiretroviral therapy.
AIDS. 2006 May 12;20(8):1171–9. [PMID: 16691069]
 
Thorne JE et al. Effect of cytomegalovirus retinitis on the risk of
visual acuity loss among patients with AIDS. Ophthalmology. 2007
Mar;114(3):591–8. [PMID: 17123624]
 
Weis N et al. Impact of hepatitis C virus coinfection on response
to highly active antiretroviral therapy and outcome in HIV-infected
individuals: a nationwide cohort study. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 May
15;42(10):1481–7. [PMID: 16619163]
 
 Differential Diagnosis
HIV infection may mimic a variety of other medical illnesses.
Specific differential diagnosis depends on the mode of presentation.
In patients presenting with constitutional symptoms such as weight
loss and fevers, differential considerations include cancer, chronic
infections such as tuberculosis and endocarditis, and endocrinologic
diseases such as hyperthyroidism. When pulmonary processes
dominate the presentation, acute and chronic lung infections must be
considered as well as other causes of diffuse interstitial pulmonary
infiltrates. When neurologic disease is the mode of presentation,
conditions that cause mental status changes or neuropathy—eg,
alcoholism, liver disease, kidney dysfunction, thyroid disease, and
vitamin deficiency—should be considered. If a patient presents with
headache and a cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis, other causes of
chronic meningitis enter the differential. When diarrhea is a
prominent complaint, infectious enterocolitis, antibiotic-associated
colitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and malabsorptive symptoms
must be considered.
 Prevention
A. Primary Prevention
Until vaccination is a reality, prevention of HIV infection will depend
on effective precautions regarding sexual practices and injection
drug use, use of perinatal HIV prophylaxis, screening of blood
products, and infection control practices in the health care setting.
Primary care clinicians should routinely obtain a sexual history and
provide risk factor assessment of their patients. Because
approximately one-fifth of the HIV-infected persons in the United
States do not know they are infected, the CDC recommends all
adults be tested for HIV as a routine part of medical care. Clinicians
should review the risk factors for HIV infection with the patient and
discuss safer sex and safer needle use as well as the meaning of a
positive test. Although the CDC recommends “opt-out” testing in
medical settings, some states require specific written consent. For
persons whose test results are positive, referrals for partner-
notification services, social services, mental health services, and
HIV-prevention services should be provided. Prevention
interventions focused on the importance of HIV-infected persons
not putting others at risk have been successful. For patients whose
test results are negative, clinicians should review safer sex and
needle use practices, including counseling not to exchange bodily
fluids unless they are in a long-term mutually monogamous
relationship with someone who has tested HIV antibody-negative
and has not engaged in unsafe sex, injection drug use, or other HIV
risk behaviors for at least 6 months prior to or at any time since the
negative test.
Only latex condoms should be used, along with a water-soluble
lubricant. Although nonoxynol-9, a spermicide, kills HIV, it is
contraindicated because in some patients it may cause genital ulcers
that could facilitate HIV transmission. Patients should be counseled
that condoms are not 100% effective. They should be made familiar
with the use of condoms, including, specifically, the advice that
condoms must be used every time, that space should be left at the
tip of the condom as a receptacle for semen, that intercourse with a
condom should not be attempted if the penis is only partially erect,
that men should hold on to the base of the condom when
withdrawing the penis to prevent slippage, and that condoms should
not be reused. Although anal intercourse remains the sexual practice
at highest risk for transmitting HIV, serocon-versions have been
documented with vaginal and oral intercourse as well. Therefore,
condoms should be used when engaging in these activities. Women
as well as men should understand how to use condoms so as to be
sure that their partners are using them correctly. Several recent
randomized trials in Africa demonstrated that male circumcision
significantly reduced HIV incidence in men, but there are a number
of barriers to performing widespread circumcisions among men in
Africa.
Two major studies have demonstrated the proof of concept that
HIV transmission can be reduced by drugs that are used to treat
HIV infection. In a study from South Africa, women who used a
tenofovir-containing vaginal gel reduced their risk of HIV infection
by 39% and those who followed the recommended application
schedule (use before and after intercourse) had a more than 50%
reduction in risk of infection. In a randomized placebo-controlled
study of MSM across several different countries, researchers
showed that risk of HIV transmission was reduced by 44% in those
men receiving daily tenofovir/emtricitabine fixed-dose combination;
in those who were over 90% adherent, the risk was reduced more
70%. Although transmission was not universally prevented in either
of these studies, they demonstrate that “biological methods” could
serve as a useful adjunct to current behavioral approaches in
preventing HIV transmission.
Persons using injection drugs should be cautioned never to
exchange needles or other drug paraphernalia. When sterile needles
are not available, bleach does appear to inactivate HIV and should
be used to clean needles.
Current efforts to screen blood and blood products have
lowered the risk of HIV transmission with transfusion of a unit of
blood to 1:1,000,000.
In health care settings, universal body fluid precautions should be
used, including use of gloves when handling body fluids and the
addition of gown, mask, and goggles for procedures that may result
in splash or droplet spread, and use of specially designed needles
with sheath devices to decrease the risk of needle sticks. Because
transmission of tuberculosis may occur in health care settings, all
patients with cough should be encouraged to wear masks.
Hospitalized HIV-infected patients with cough should be placed in
respiratory isolation until tuberculosis can be excluded by chest
radio-graph and sputum smear examination.
Primate model data have suggested that development of a
protective vaccine may be possible, but clinical trials in humans have
been disappointing. However, in 2009, the first vaccine trial
demonstrating some success was reported, breathing new life into
the effort to create a protective vaccine. In this randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial, a recombinant canarypox vector
vaccine plus two booster injections of a recombinant gp120 vaccine
was moderately efficacious (26-31%) in reducing the risk of HIV
among a primarily heterosexual population in Thailand.
B. Secondary Prevention
In the era prior to the development of highly effective anti-retroviral
treatment, cohort studies of individuals with documented dates of
seroconversion demonstrate that AIDS develops within 10 years in
approximately 50% of untreated seropositive persons. With
currently available treatment, progression of disease has been
markedly decreased. In addition to antiretroviral treatment,
prophylactic regimens can prevent opportunistic infections and
improve survival. Prophylaxis and early intervention prevent several
infectious diseases, including tuberculosis and syphilis, which are
transmissible to others. Recommendations for screening tests,
vaccinations, and prophylaxis are listed in Table 31–3.
Because of the increased occurrence of tuberculosis among
HIV-infected patients, all such individuals should undergo PPD
testing. Although anergy is common among AIDS patients, the
likelihood of a false-negative result is much lower when the test is
done early in infection. Those with positive tests (defined for HIV-
infected patients as > 5 mm of induration) need a chest radiograph.
Patients with an infiltrate in any location, especially if accompanied
by mediastinal adenopathy, should have sputum sent for acid-fast
staining. Patients with a positive PPD but negative evaluations for
active disease should receive isoniazid (300 mg daily) with
pyridoxine (50 mg daily) for 9 months to a year. Although not yet
widely available, a blood test (QuantiFERON Gold test) can be
used to assess prior tuberculosis exposure. Blood samples are
mixed with synthetic antigens representing M tuberculosis. Patients
infected 
with M tuberculosis produce interferon-gamma in
response to contact with the antigens. Unlike the PPD, the patient
does not have to return for a second visit. The test is less likely to
result in false-positive results than a PPD. Unfortunately, HIV-
infected persons may not produce sufficient interferon-gamma, in
which case the test may be falsely negative.
 
Table 31–3. Health care maintenance of HIV-infected individuals.
 
For all HIV-infected individuals:
     CD4 counts every 3–6 months
     Viral load tests every 3–6 months and 1 month following
a change in therapy
     PPD
     INH for those with positive PPD and normal chest
radiograph
     RPR or VDRL
     Toxoplasma IgG serology
     Hepatitis serologies: hepatitis A antibody, hepatitis B
surface antigen, hepatitis B surface antibody, hepatitis B
core antibody, hepatitis C antibody
     Pneumococcal vaccine
     Inactivated influenza vaccine in season
     Hepatitis A vaccine for those without immunity to
hepatitis A.
     Hepatitis B vaccine for those who are hepatitis B
surface antigen and antibody negative. (Use 40 mcg
formulation at 0, 1, and 6 months; repeat if no immunity 1
month after three-shot series.)
     Tetanus/diphtheria vaccine
     Human papillomavirus vaccine for HIV-infected women
age 26 years or less.
     Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccination
     Papanicolaou smears every 6 months for women
     Consider anal swabs for cytologic evaluation
For HIV-infected individuals with CD4 < 200 cells/mcL:
     Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis (see Prophylaxis of
Opportunistic Infections section under Treatment and
Table 31–4)
For HIV-infected individuals with CD4 < 75 cells/mcL:
     Mycobacterium avium complex prophylaxis (see
Prophylaxis of Opportunistic Infections section under
Treatment)
For HIV-infected individuals with CD4 < 50 cells/mcL:
     Consider CMV prophylaxis
PPD, purified protein derivative; INH, isoniazid; RPR, rapid plasma reagin;
VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratories; IgG, immunoglobulin G.
Because of recent increases in the number of cases of syphilis
among MSM, including those who are HIV infected, all such men
should be screened for syphilis by rapid plasma reagin (RPR) or
Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL) test every 6
months. Increases of syphilis cases among HIV-infected persons
are of particular concern because these individuals are at increased
risk for reactivation of syphilis and progression to tertiary syphilis
despite standard treatment. Because the only widely available tests
for syphilis are serologic and because HIV-infected individuals are
known to have disordered antibody production, there is concern
about the interpretation of these titers. This concern has been fueled
by a report of an HIV-infected patient with secondary syphilis and
negative syphilis serologic testing. Furthermore, HIV-infected
individuals may lose fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption
(FTA-ABS) reactivity after treatment for syphilis, particularly if they
have low CD4 counts. Thus, in this population, a nonreactive
treponemal test does not rule out a past history of syphilis. In
addition, persistence of treponemes in the spinal fluid after one dose
of benzathine penicillin has been demonstrated in HIV-infected
patients with primary and secondary syphilis. Therefore, the CDC
has recommended an aggressive diagnostic approach to HIV-
infected patients with reactive RPR or VDRL tests of > 1 year or
unknown duration. All such patients should have a lumbar puncture
with cerebrospinal fluid cell count and cerebrospinal fluid VDRL.
Those with a normal cerebrospinal fluid evaluation are treated as
having late latent syphilis (benzathine penicillin G, 2.4 million units
intramuscularly weekly for 3 weeks) with follow-up titers. Those
with a pleocytosis or a positive cerebrospinal fluid-VDRL test are
treated as having neurosyphilis (aqueous penicillin G, 2–4 million
units intravenously every 4 hours, or procaine penicillin G, 2.4
million units intramuscularly daily, with probenecid, 500 mg four
times daily, for 10 days). Some clinicians take a less aggressive
approach to patients who have low titers (< 1:8), a history of having
been treated for syphilis, and a normal neurologic examination.
Close follow-up of titers is mandatory if such a course is taken. For
a more detailed discussion of this topic, see Chapter 34.
HIV-infected individuals should receive the pneumococcal
vaccine and the inactivated influenza vaccine. Patients without
immunity to hepatitis A should be vaccinated against it. Patients
without evidence of hepatitis B surface antigen or surface antibody
should receive hepatitis B vaccination, using the 40 mcg formulation;
the higher dose is to increase the chance of developing protective
immunity. If the patient does not have immunity 1 month after the
three-shot series, then the series should be repeated. HIV-infected
persons should also receive the standard inactivated vaccines such
as tetanus and diphtheria boosters that would be given to uninfected
persons. Live vaccines, such as yellow fever vaccine, should be
avoided. Measles vaccination, while a live virus vaccine, appears
relatively safe when administered to HIV-infected individuals and
should be given if the patient has never had measles or been
adequately vaccinated. Herpes zoster vaccine is contraindicated in
HIV-infected persons with evidence of immune suppression.
A randomized study found that multivitamin supplementation
decreased HIV disease progression and mortality in HIV-infected
women in Africa. However, supplementation is unlikely to be as
effective in well-nourished populations.
HIV-infected individuals should be counseled with regard to safe
sex. Because of the risk of transmission, they should be warned to
use condoms with sexual intercourse, including oral intercourse.
Partners of HIV-infected women should use latex barriers such as
dental dams (available at dental supply stores) to prevent direct oral
contact with vaginal secretions. Substance abuse treatment should
be recommended for persons who are using recreational drugs.
They should be warned to avoid consuming raw meat or eggs to
avoid 
infections 
with Toxoplasma, Campylobacter, and
Salmonella. HIV-infected patients should wash their hands
thoroughly after cleaning cat litter or should forgo this household
chore to avoid possible exposure to toxoplasmosis. To reduce the
likelihood of infection with Bartonella species, patients should
avoid activities that might result in cat scratches or bites. Although
the data are not conclusive, many clinicians recommend that HIV-
infected persons—especially those with low CD4 counts—drink
bottled water instead of tap water to prevent cryptosporidia
infection.
Because of the emotional impact of HIV infection and
subsequent illness, many patients will benefit from supportive
counseling.
C. HIV Risk for Health Care Professionals
Epidemiologic studies show that needle sticks occur commonly
among health care professionals, especially among surgeons
performing invasive procedures, inexperienced hospital house staff,
and medical students. Efforts to reduce needle sticks should focus
on avoiding recapping needles and use of safety needles whenever
doing invasive procedures under controlled circumstances. The risk
of HIV transmission from a needle stick with blood from an HIV-
infected patient is about 1:300. The risk is higher with deep
punctures, large inocula, and source patients with high viral loads.
The risk from mucous membrane contact is too low to quantitate.
Health care professionals who sustain needle sticks should be
counseled and offered HIV testing as soon as possible. HIV testing
is done to establish a negative baseline for worker's compensation
claims in case there is a subsequent conversion. Follow-up testing is
usually performed at 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months.
A case-control study by the CDC indicates that administration of
zidovudine following a needle stick decreases the rate of HIV
seroconversion by 79%. Therefore, providers should be offered
therapy with Combivir (zidovudine 300 mg plus lamivudine 150 mg
orally twice daily). Providers who have exposures to persons who
are likely to have antiretroviral drug resistance (eg, persons
receiving therapy who have detectable viral loads) should have their
therapy individualized, using at least two drugs to which the source
is unlikely to be resistant. Some clinicians recommend triple
combination regimens, including a PI for all occupational exposures,
because of uncertainty about drug resistance. Others save these
more aggressive regimens for the higher-risk exposures listed
above. Because reports have noted hepatotoxicity due to nevirapine
in this setting, this agent should be avoided. Therapy should be
started as soon as possible after exposure and continued for 4
weeks. Unfortunately, there have been documented cases of
seroconversion following potential parenteral exposure to HIV
despite prompt use of zidovudine prophylaxis. Counseling of the
provider should include “safer sex” guidelines.
D. Postexposure Prophylaxis for Sexual and Drug Use Exposures to HIV
Following publication of a case-control study indicating that ART
decreased the odds of seroconversion among health care workers
who had occupational exposure, some experts have recommended
offering ART following potential exposure to HIV through sexual
activity or drug use. Although there are no efficacy data to support
this practice, there are similarities between the immune response
following transcutaneous and transmucosal exposures. The goal of
postexposure prophylaxis is to reduce or prevent local viral
replication prior to dissemination such that the infection can be
aborted.
The choice of antiretroviral agents and the duration of treatment
are the same as those for exposures that occur through the
occupational route (see above). In contrast to those with
occupational exposures, some individuals may present very late
after exposure. Because the likelihood of success declines with
length of time from HIV exposure, it is not recommended that
treatment be offered after 72 hours. In addition, because the
psychosocial issues involved with postexposure prophylaxis for
sexual and drug use exposures are complex, it should be offered
only in the context of prevention counseling. Counseling should
focus on how to prevent future exposures. Clinicians needing more
information on postexposure prophylaxis for occupational or
nonoccupational exposures should contact the National Clinician's
Post-exposure 
Hotline 
(1-888-448-4911;
http://www.nccc.ucsf.edu/aboot_nccc/pepline/).
E. Preventing Perinatal Transmission of HIV
A multicenter trial showed that when zidovudine is administered to
women during pregnancy, labor, and delivery and to their
newborns, the rate of HIV transmission is decreased by two-thirds.
An observational trial demonstrated that zidovudine treatment is
almost as effective when begun during labor or when administered
only to the infant, as long as treatment is begun within 48 hours after
birth. Nonetheless, treatment begun by at least the second trimester
is still recommended. Many women are currently being offered
combination antiretroviral treatment to further lower the risk of
transmission. The availability of treatment makes it essential that all
women who are pregnant or considering pregnancy be offered HIV
counseling and testing. Many obstetricians recommend combination
antiretroviral treatment, especially if zidovudine resistance is
suspected. HIV-infected women receiving ART in whom pregnancy
is recognized during the first trimester should be counseled about
the benefits and potential risks to the fetus of treatment during the
first trimester. Because healthy mothers make healthy babies,
continuation of therapy should be strongly considered. Because
about half of fetal infections in non–breast-feeding women occur
shortly before or during the birth process, ART should be
administered whenever a woman initiates perinatal care even if she
did not begin therapy in the second trimester. Breast-feeding is
thought to increase the rate of transmission by 10–20% and should
be avoided.
Abdool Karim Q et al; CAPRISA 004 Trial Group. Effectiveness
and safety of tenofovir gel, an antiretroviral microbicide, for the
prevention of HIV infection in women. Science. 2010 Sep
3;329(5996):1168–74. [PMID: 20643915]
 
Branson BM et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults,
adolescents, and pregnant women in health-care settings. MMWR
Recomm Rep. 2006 Sep 22;55(RR-14):1–17. [PMID:
16988643]
 
Grant RM et al; iPrEx Study Team. Preexposure
chemoprophylaxis for HIV prevention in men who have sex with
men. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 30;363(27):2587–99. [PMID:
21091279]
 
Gray RH et al. Male circumcision for HIV prevention in men in
Rakai, Uganda: a randomized trial. Lancet 2007 Feb
24;369(9562):657–66. [PMID: 17321311]
 
Landovitz RJ et al. Clinical practice. Postexposure prophylaxis for
HIV infection. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct 29;361(18): 1768–75.
[PMID: 19864675]
 
Mahajan AP et al. Consistency of state statutes with the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention HIV testing recommendations
for health care settings. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Feb
17;150(4):263–9. [PMID: 19221378]
 
Noar SM. Behavioral interventions to reduce HIV-related sexual
risk behavior: review and synthesis of meta-analytic evidence.
AIDS Behav. 2008 May;12(3):335–53. [PMID: 17896176]
 
 Treatment
Treatment for HIV infection can be broadly divided into the
following categories: (1) prophylaxis for opportunistic infections,
malignancies, and other complications of HIV infection; (2)
treatment of opportunistic infections, malignancies, and other
complications of HIV infection; and (3) treatment of the HIV
infection itself with combination ART.
Treatment regimens for HIV infection are constantly changing.
Clinicians may obtain up-to-date information on new and
experimental treatments by calling the AIDS Clinical Trials
Information Service (ACTIS), 800-TRIALS-A (English and
Spanish), and the National AIDS Hot Line, 800-342-AIDS
(English), 800-344-SIDA (Spanish), and 800-AIDS-TTY
(hearing-impaired).
A. Prophylactic Treatment of Complications of HIV Infection
In general, decisions about prophylaxis of opportunistic infections
are based on the CD4 count, other evidence of severe
immunosuppression (eg, oral candidiasis), and a history of having
had the infection in the past. In the era prior to HAART, patients
who started taking prophylactic regimens were maintained on them
indefinitely. However, studies have shown that in patients with
robust improvements in immune function—as measured by
increases in CD4 counts above the levels that are used to initiate
treatment—prophylactic regimens can safely be discontinued.
Because individuals with advanced HIV infection are susceptible
to a number of opportunistic pathogens, the use of agents with
activity against more than one pathogen is preferable. It has been
shown, for example, that trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole confers
some protection against toxoplasmosis in individuals receiving this
drug for Pneumocystis prophylaxis.
1. Prophylaxis against Pneumocystis pneumonia— Patients
with CD4 counts below 200 cells/mcL, a CD4 lymphocyte
percentage below 14%, or weight loss or oral candidiasis should be
offered primary prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia. Patients
with a history of Pneumocystis pneumonia should receive
secondary prophylaxis until they have had a durable virologic
response to HAART for at least 3–6 months and maintain a CD4
count of > 250 cells/mcL. Regimens for Pneumocystis prophylaxis
are given in Table 31–4.
2. Prophylaxis against M avium complex infection— Patients
whose CD4 counts fall to below 75–100 cells/mcL should be given
prophylaxis against M avium complex infection. Clarithromycin
(500 mg orally twice daily) and azithromycin (1200 mg orally
weekly) have both been shown to decrease the incidence of
disseminated M avium complex infection by approximately 75%,
with a low rate of breakthrough of resistant disease. The
azithromycin regimen is generally preferred based on high
compliance and low cost. Adding rifabutin increases the toxicity of
the regimen but does not significantly increase its efficacy and is
therefore not recommended. Prophylaxis against M avium complex
infection may be discontinued in patients whose CD4 counts rise
above 100 cells/mcL in response to HAART and whose plasma
viral load has been optimally suppressed to < 50–75 copies/mL.
 
Table 31–4. Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis.
 
3. Prophylaxis against M tuberculosis infection— Isoniazid,
300 mg daily, plus pyridoxine, 50 mg orally daily, for 9-12 months
should be given to all HIV-infected patients with positive PPD
reactions (defined as > 5 mm of induration for HIV-infected
patients).
4. 
Prophylaxis 
against 
toxoplasmosis—Toxoplasmosis
prophylaxis is desirable in patients with a positive IgG toxoplasma
serology and CD4 counts below 100 cells/mcL. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet daily) offers good
protection against toxoplasmosis, as does a combination of
pyrimethamine, 25 mg orally once a week, plus dapsone, 50 mg
orally daily, plus leucovorin, 25 mg orally once a week. A glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) level should be checked prior
to dapsone therapy, and a methemoglobin level should be checked
at 1 month.
5. Prophylaxis against CMV infection—Oral ganciclovir (1000
mg orally three times daily with food) is approved for CMV
prophylaxis among HIV-infected persons with advanced disease
(eg, CD4 counts below 50 cells/mcL). However, because the drug
causes neutropenia, it is not widely used. Clinicians should consider
performing serum CMV IgG antibody testing prior to starting
ganciclovir. Persons who are CMV IgG-negative are not at risk for
development of CMV disease, although it is important that such
patients receive only CMV-negative blood if they require
transfusion. Because over 99% of MSM are positive for CMV
IgG, it is appropriate to reserve such testing for heterosexuals with
HIV.
6. Prophylaxis against cryptococcosis, candidiasis, and
endemic fungal diseases—One trial showed a decreased
incidence of cryptococcal disease with prophylaxis using
fluconazole, 200 mg orally daily, but the treated group had no
benefit in terms of mortality. Fluconazole (200 mg orally once a
week) was found to prevent oral and vaginal candidiasis in women
with CD4 counts below 300 cells/mcL. In areas of the world where
histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis are endemic and are
frequent complications of HIV infection, prophylactic use of
fluconazole or itraconazole may prove to be useful strategies.
However, the problem of identifying individuals at highest risk
makes appropriate targeting of prophylaxis difficult.
B. Treatment of Complications of HIV Infection
Treatment of common AIDS-related complications is detailed in
Table 31–5. In the era prior to the use of HAART, patients
required lifelong treatment for many infections, including CMV
retinitis, toxoplasmosis, and cryptococcal meningitis. However,
among patients who have a good response to HAART,
maintenance therapy for some opportunistic infections can be
terminated. For example, in consultation with an ophthalmologist,
maintenance treatment for CMV infection can be discontinued when
persons receiving HAART have durable suppression of viral load
(ie, < 50 copies/mL) and a CD4 count > 100–150 cells/mcL.
Similar results have been observed in patients with M avium
complex bacteremia. Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia is
also commonly discontinued in patients who have achieved and
maintained a CD4 > 200 cells/mcL with good virologic control.
Treating patients with repeated episodes of the same
opportunistic infection can pose difficult therapeutic challenges. For
example, patients with second or third episodes of Pneumocystis
pneumonia may have developed allergic reactions to standard
treatments with a prior episode. Fortunately, there are several
alternatives available for the treatment of Pneumocystis infection.
Trimethoprim with dapsone and primaquine with clindamycin are
two combinations that often are tolerated in patients with a prior
allergic reaction to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and intravenous
pentamidine. On the positive side, patients in whom second
episodes 
of Pneumocystis pneumonia develop while taking
prophylaxis tend to have milder courses.
Well-established alternative regimens now also exist for most
AIDS-related opportunistic infections: amphotericin B or
fluconazole for cryptococcal meningitis; ganciclovir, cidofovir, or
foscarnet for CMV infection; and sulfadiazine or clindamycin with
pyrimethamine for toxoplasmosis.
Adjunctive Treatments—Although conceptually it would seem
that corticosteroids should be avoided in HIV-infected patients,
corticosteroid therapy has been shown to improve the course of
patients with moderate to severe Pneumocystis jiroveci
pneumonia (oxygen saturation < 90%, Po2 < 65 mm Hg) when
administered within 72 hours after diagnosis. The mechanism of
action is presumed to be a decrease in alveolar inflammation.
Corticosteroids have also been used to treat immune
reconstitution and inflammatory syndromes (IRIS) that can
sometimes complicate the early treatment course when ART is
initiated in patients with advanced AIDS (see section Inflammatory
reactions [immune reconstitution syndromes]).
Epoetin alfa (erythropoietin) is approved for use in HIV-infected
patients with anemia, including those with anemia secondary to
zidovudine use. It has been shown to decrease the need for blood
transfusions. The drug is expensive, and therefore an erythropoietin
level < 500 mU/mL should be demonstrated before starting
therapy. The starting dose of epoetin alfa is 8000 units
subcutaneously three times a week. The target hematocrit is 35–
40%. The dose may be increased by 12,000 units every 4–6 weeks
as needed to a maximum dose of 48,000 units per week.
Hypertension is the most common side effect.
Human G-CSF (filgrastim) and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF [sargramostim]) have
been shown to increase the neutrophil counts of HIV-infected
patients. Because of the high cost of this therapy, the dosage should
be closely monitored and minimized, aiming for a neutrophil count of
1000/mcL. When the drug is used for indications other than
cytotoxic chemo-therapy, one or two doses at 5 mcg/kg per week
are usually sufficient.
 
Table 31–5. Treatment of AIDS-related opportunistic infections
and malignancies.1
 
1 For treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, see Chapter 9.
2 For moderate to severe P jiroveci infection (oxygen saturation > 90%),
corticosteroids should be given with specific treatment. The dose of
prednisone is 40 mg orally twice daily for 5 days, then 40 mg daily for 5
days, and then 20 mg daily until therapy is complete.3When considering
use of dapsone, check glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) level
in black patients and those of Mediterranean origin.
CHOP, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxydaunomycin), vincristine
(Oncovin), and prednisone; G-CSF, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
(filgrastim); GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(sargramostim); modified M-BACOD, methotrexate, bleomycin, doxorubicin
(Adriamycin), 
cyclophosphamide, 
vincristine 
(Oncovin), 
and
dexamethasone.
C. Antiretroviral Therapy
The availability of agents that in combination suppress HIV
replication (Table 31–6) has had a profound impact on the natural
history of HIV infection. Indeed, with the advent of antiretroviral
treatment, the life expectancy of HIV-infected persons approaches
that of uninfected persons when treatment is initiated early in the
course of the disease.
The greater potency and the improved side effect profile have led
to recommendations to start treatment earlier in the course of HIV
disease. Treatment should be initiated for all symptomatic patients,
and for asymptomatic persons who (1) have CD4 cell counts below
500 cells/mcL, (2) have rapidly dropping CD4 counts (> 100
cells/mcL/yr) or very high viral loads (> 100,000/mcL), (3) have
active infection with hepatitis B or C (rapid HIV replication is
thought to hasten progression of hepatitis B and C), (4) have risk
factors for cardiac disease (ongoing HIV replication may increase
the risk of cardiac disease), (5) have HIV-related renal impairment,
(6) pregnancy, or (7) have risk factors for non–AIDS-related
cancers (rapid HIV replication may increase such cancers). Current
guidelines suggest that patients who have none of the above
conditions but are at high risk for transmitting HIV to another
person should be considered for ART. However, for patients with
difficulty adhering to therapy, deferring ART until the patient is
willing to commit to therapy may be a better strategy. In addition,
because 5–20% of patients in developed countries who are
treatment-naïve have a virus that is resistant to some drugs,
resistance testing is recommended for all patients prior to initiating
ART.
Once a decision to initiate therapy has been made, several
important principles should guide therapy. First, because drug
resistance to antiretroviral agents develops in HIV-infected patients,
a primary goal of therapy should be complete suppression of viral
replication as measured by the serum viral load. Therapy that
achieves a plasma viral load of < 40 or < 50 copies/mL (depending
on the test used) has been shown to provide a durable response to
the therapy. To achieve this and maintain virologic control over
time, combination therapy with at least 3 drugs from at least two
different classes is necessary, and partially suppressive
combinations such as dual nucleo-side therapy should be avoided.
Similarly, if toxicity develops, it is preferable to either interrupt the
entire regimen or change the offending drug rather than reduce
individual doses.
 
Table 31–6. Antiretroviral therapy.
 
1 Standard monitoring is complete blood count (CBC) and differential, and
serum aminotransferases.
Average wholesale price (AWP, for AB-rated generic when available) for
quantity listed. Source: Red Book 2010, Thomson Reuters (Healthcare)
Inc. AWP may not accurately represent the actual pharmacy cost because
wide contractual variations exist among institutions.
Two randomized trials compared early initiation of ART (within 2
weeks of starting treatment for an opportunistic infection or
tuberculosis) with ART that was deferred until after treatment of the
opportunistic infection was completed (6 weeks after its start);
results demonstrated that early initiation reduced death or AIDS
progression by 50%. The reduced progression rates were related to
more rapid improvements in CD4 counts in patients with advanced
immunodeficiency. Furthermore, IRIS and other adverse events
were no more frequent in the early ART arm. Based on these
results, most treatment guidelines recommend that ART be initiated
as early as is clinically feasible for patients with an acute AIDS-
related opportunistic infection. For hospitalized patients, this
recommendation requires close coordination between inpatient and
outpatient physicians to ensure that treatment is continued once
patients are discharged.
The current standard is to use at least three agents simultaneously
from at least two different classes. Because the number of drugs is
finite, it is important to avoid drug resistance, which occurs when
patients take medications in the setting of ongoing viral replication.
Therefore, the best method for avoiding resistance is for the patient
to be compliant with an efficacious regimen. Adherence can be
promoted through the use of medication boxes with compartments
(eg, Medisets), supportive counseling, or daily supervision of
therapy. Therefore, decisions to withhold treatment should not be
based on a patient's circumstances (eg, active drug use or housing
status) alone. Often, a trial intervention such as offering
Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis may be helpful in determining
the likelihood of adherence to a more complex antiretroviral
regimen.
Monitoring of ART has two goals. Laboratory evaluation for
toxicity depends on the specific drugs in the combination but
generally should be done approximately every 3-4 months once a
patient is on a stable regimen. Patients who are intolerant of their
initial regimen (eg, patients who cannot tolerate the neurologic side
effects of efavirenz) should be changed to an alternative drug or
regimen. The second aspect of monitoring is to regularly measure
objective markers of efficacy. The CD4 cell count and HIV viral
load should be repeated 1–2 months after the initiation or change of
antiretroviral regimen and every 4-6 months thereafter in clinically
stable patients (those with higher CD4 counts can have testing every
6 months). In a patient who is adherent to an effective regimen, viral
loads should be undetectable within 12–24 weeks. For patients in
whom viral loads are not suppressed or who have viral rebound
after suppression, the major question facing the clinician is whether
the patient is nonadherent or has resistance to the regimen, or both.
The issue is complicated because many patients report being more
compliant than they really are, not because they wish to be
untruthful but because they wish to tell the clinician what he or she
wants to hear. Patients who are having trouble adhering to their
treatment should receive counseling on how to better comply to
their treatment. In patients who are adherent or who have missed
enough doses to make resistance possible, resistance testing should
be performed. Based on the results of resistance testing, and
assessment of the patient's ability to comply with complicated
regimens or to tolerate predictable side effects, the clinician should
prescribe a combination of three medications to which there is no or
only minimal resistance. Some patients whose counts rise
dramatically on ART and who are fully suppressed (ie, plasma viral
load < 50 copies/mL) may be successfully transitioned from a high
potency regimen to a lower potency regimen with fewer side
effects; however, this “induction-maintenance” strategy is still being
evaluated in clinical trials. Stopping therapy in patients with high
CD4 counts will generally result in patients reverting to their
pretreatment nadir CD4 count in a matter of months and is therefore
not recommended.
Although the ideal combination of drugs has not yet been defined
for all possible clinical situations, possible choices can be better
understood after a review of the available agents. These drugs can
be grouped into five major categories: nucleoside and nucleotide
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI); PI; nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI); entry inhibitors, which include a
fusion inhibitor and CCR5 antagonists; and integrase inhibitors.
Once ART has been initiated in a patient, it is not advisable to stop
the therapy unless there is a compelling reason (eg, toxicity, poor
adherence, etc). So-called “drug holidays” or “structured treatment
interruptions” have been shown to increase risk of AIDS-related
complications, increase CD4 declines, and increase morbidity from
non–AIDS-related complications (eg, myocardial infarctions and
liver failure) and are not recommended.
1. Nucleoside and nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
—There are currently seven nucleoside or nucleotide agents
approved for use. The choice of which agent to use depends
primarily on the patient's prior treatment experience, results of
resistance testing, drug side effects, other underlying conditions, and
convenience of formulation. However, most clinicians use fixed-
dose combinations of either tenofovir/emtricitabine (TDF/FTC) or
abacavir/lamivudine (ABC/3TC), both of which can be given once
a day. Zidovudine/lamivudine (AZT/3TC) is usually reserved for
second- or third-line regimens because of toxicity and dosing
schedule. Recent studies have raised some concerns about the
efficacy of ABC/3TC in patients with high viral loads (eg, >
100,000 copies/mL) as well as concerns about increase risks of
myocardial infarction with abacavir. Therefore, TDF/FTC is the
preferred fixed-dose combination as part of initial treatment
regimens.
Of the available agents, zidovudine is the most likely to cause
anemia. Zidovudine and didanosine are the most likely to cause
neutropenia. Stavudine is the most likely to cause lipoatrophy (loss
of fat in the face, extremities, and buttocks) followed by zidovudine.
Zalcitabine and didanosine are the most likely to cause peripheral
neuropathy. Lamivudine, emtricitabine, and tenofovir have activity
against hepatitis B. Didanosine, lamivudine, emtricitabine, and
tenofovir can be administered daily. Information specific to each
drug is given below, and recommendations on how to combine
them appear in the Constructing regimens section below.
A. ZIDOVUDINE—Zidovudine was the first approved anti-viral drug
for HIV infection and remains an important agent. It is administered
at a dose of 300 mg orally twice daily. A combination of zidovudine
300 mg and lamivudine 150 mg (Combivir) allows more convenient
dosing of medication for individuals taking both of these agents.
Side effects seen with zidovudine are listed in Table 31–6.
Approximately 40% of patients experience subjective side effects
that usually remit within 6 weeks. The common dose-limiting side
effects are anemia and neutropenia, which require ongoing
laboratory monitoring. Long-term use has been associated with
lipoatrophy.
B. DIDANOSINE—The most convenient formulation of didanosine
(ddI) is the enteric-coated capsule. For adults weighing at least 60
kg, the dose is one 400-mg enteric-coated capsule orally daily; for
those 30–59 kg, the dose is one 250-mg enteric-coated capsule
orally daily. Didanosine should be taken on an empty stomach.
Didanosine has been associated with pancreatitis. The incidence
of pancreatitis with didanosine is 5–10%—of fatal pancreatitis, <
0.4%. Patients with a history of pancreatitis, as well as those taking
other medications associated with pancreatitis (including
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and intravenous pentamidine) are at
higher risk for this complication. Other common side effects with
didanosine include a dose-related, reversible, painful peripheral
neuropathy, which occurs in about 15% of patients, and dry mouth.
Fulminant hepatic failure and electrolyte abnormalities, including
hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia, have been
reported in patients taking didanosine. Because of the side-effect
profile, didanosine is rarely used today.
C. STAVUDINE—Stavudine (d4T) has shown good activity as an
antiretroviral drug. The dose is 40 mg orally twice daily for
individuals weighing 60 kg or more. However, because of its side
effects including lipoatrophy, lipodystrophy (see below), peripheral
neuropathy and, rarely, lactic acidosis and hepatitis, this drug should
no longer be used except when there is no alternative. Patients
taking stavu-dine should be routinely changed to abacavir or
tenofovir, both of which are less likely to cause lipoatrophy.
D. LAMIVUDINE—Lamivudine (3TC) is a safe and well-tolerated
agent. The dosage is 150 mg orally twice daily or 300 mg orally
once a day. The dose should be reduced with chronic kidney
disease. There are no significant side effects with lamivudine, and it
has activity also against hepatitis B.
E. EMTRICITABINE—Emtricitabine is a nucleoside analog that is
dosed at 200 mg orally. It was developed primarily as a once a day
alternative to lamivudine. However, lamivudine can be dosed daily,
eliminating the special indication for emtricitabine. As is true of
lamivudine, emtricitabine has activity against hepatitis B and its
dosage should be reduced in patients with chronic kidney disease.
F. ABACAVIR—A daily dose of 300 mg orally twice daily results in
potent antiretroviral activity. Prior to initiation of abacavir, patients
should undergo testing for HLA typing. Those with the B*5701
allele should not be treated with abacavir because the likelihood of
a hypersensitivity reaction developing is high; the reaction is
characterized by a flu-like syndrome with rash and fever that
worsens with successive doses. Unfortunately, the absence of this
allele does not guarantee that the patient will avoid the hyper-
sensitivity reaction. Individuals in whom the hypersensitivity reaction
develops should not be rechallenged with this agent because
subsequent hypersensitivity reactions can be fatal. Abacavir has also
been shown to be associated with an increased risk of myocardial
infarction in some cohort studies. This increased risk is generally
seen in patients who have underlying risks of cardiovascular
disease. Consequently, abacavir should be avoided in such patients
if effective alternative nucleoside or nucleotide analog agents exist.
Abacavir is formulated with zidovudine and lamivudine in a single
pill (Trizivir, one tablet orally twice daily). Trizivir is not
recommended as solo treatment for HIV because it is not as
efficacious as combining two nucleoside/nucleotide analogs with a
PI/ritonavir or an NNRTI; its use as a sole regimen should be
reserved only for patients who cannot tolerate a more complicated
regimen. Abacavir is also available as a fixed dose combination pill
with lamivudine for use as a once daily pill (Epzicom).
G. ZALCITABINE—Zalcitabine (ddC) was one of the least effective
antiretroviral agents and is no longer being manufactured.
H. TENOFOVIR—Tenofovir is the only licensed nucleotide analog. It
is given as a single daily oral dose of 300 mg and is generally well
tolerated. Tenofovir is available in a fixed dose combination pill with
emtricitabine (Truvada) for daily dosing and is the only
recommended fixed-dose combination for initial regimens. A once-
a-day single fixed-dose combination pill that contains efavirenz,
emtricitabine, and tenofovir (Atripla) is also available. Tenofovir is
active against hepatitis B, including isolates that have resistance to
lamivudine.
2. Protease inhibitors—Ten PIs—indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir,
saquinavir, amprenavir, fosamprenavir, lopinavir (in combination
with ritonavir), atazanavir, darunavir, and tipranavir are available.
PIs have been shown to potently suppress HIV replication and are
administered as part of a combination regimen.
All the PIs—to differing degrees—are metabolized by the
cytochrome P450 system, and each can inhibit and induce various
P450 isoenzymes. Therefore, drug interactions are common and
difficult to predict. Clinicians should consult the product inserts
before prescribing PIs with other medications. Drugs such as
rifampin that are known to induce the P450 system should be
avoided.
The fact that the PIs are dependent on metabolism through the
cytochrome P450 system has led to the use of ritonavir to boost the
drug levels of saquinavir, lopinavir, indinavir, atazanavir, tipranavir,
darunavir and amprenavir, allowing use of lower doses and simpler
dosing schedules of these PIs. In fact, current guidelines
recommend that all PI-containing regimens use ritonavir boosting if
possible. The only PIs that can be safely used without ritonavir
boosting are nelfinavir and atazanavir.
When choosing which PI to use, prior patient experience,
resistance patterns, side effects, and ease of administration are the
major considerations. The first three PIs to be developed—
indinavir, saquinavir, and ritonavir (as single agents)—are now
rarely used because of the superiority of the second generation of
PIs. Amprenavir has been almost entirely replaced by its prodrug,
fosamprenavir. Unfortunately, all PIs, with the exception of
unboosted atazanavir have been linked to a constellation of
metabolic abnormalities, including elevated cholesterol levels,
elevated triglyceride levels, insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus, and
changes in body fat composition (eg, buffalo hump, abdominal
obesity). The lipid abnormalities and body habitus changes are
referred to as lipodystrophy. Although lipodystrophy is commonly
associated with PIs, it has been seen also in HIV-infected persons
who have never been treated with these agents. In particular, the
lipoatrophy effects seen in patients receiving ART appears to be
more related to the nucleoside toxicity and in particular to the
thymidine analogs (stavu-dine and zidovudine).
Of the different manifestations of lipodystrophy, the dyslipidemias
that occur are of particular concern because of the likelihood that
increased levels of cholesterol and triglycerides will result in
increased prevalence of heart disease. All patients taking PIs or
NRTIs should have fasting serum cholesterol, low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and triglyceride levels performed
every 3–6 months. Clinicians should calculate the Framingham 10-
year coronary heart disease risk (see Chapter 28) and consider
initiating dietary or drug therapy (or both) to achieve target LDL
levels depending on the individual's risk factors. Patients who are
unable to meet their LDL goal based solely on dietary interventions
should be given pravastatin (20 mg daily orally) or atorvastatin (10
mg daily orally). Lovastatin and simvastatin should be avoided
because of their interactions with PIs. Fish oil (3000 mg daily)
combined with exercise and dietary counseling has been found to
decrease triglycerides levels by 25%. Patients with persistently
elevated fasting serum triglyceride levels of 500 mg/dL or more who
do not respond to dietary intervention should be treated with
gemfibrozil (600 mg twice daily prior to the morning and evening
meals).
A. INDINAVIR—The standard dose of indinavir is 800 mg orally
three times a day, although it is usually dosed twice daily in
combination with ritonavir. Nausea and headache are common
complaints with this drug. Indinavir crystals are present in the urine
in approximately 40% of patients; this results in clinically apparent
nephrolithiasis in about 15% of patients receiving indinavir. Lower
urinary tract symptoms and acute kidney injury also have been
reported. Patients taking this drug should be instructed to drink at
least 48 ounces of fluid a day to ensure adequate hydration in an
attempt to limit these complications. Mild indirect hyperbilirubinemia
is also commonly observed in patients taking indinavir but is not an
indication for discontinuation of the drug.
B. SAQUINAVIR—Saquinavir is formulated only as a hard-gel
capsule (Invirase). It should only be used with ritonavir (1000 mg of
hard-gel saquinavir with 100 mg of ritonavir orally twice daily). The
soft-gel capsule (Fortovase) has been removed from the market in
the United States. The most common side effects with saquinavir
are diarrhea, nausea, dyspepsia, and abdominal pain.
C. RITONAVIR—Use of this potent PI at full dose (600 mg orally
twice daily) has been limited by its inhibition of the cytochrome
P450 pathway causing a large number of drug–drug interactions
and by its frequent side effects of fatigue, nausea, and paresthesias.
However, it is widely used in lower dose (eg, 100 mg daily to 100
mg twice daily) as a booster of other PIs.
D. NELFINAVIR—Nelfinavir is the only PI for which ritonavir
boosting is not recommended. Unboosted nelfinavir is generally not
as potent as a boosted PI regimen (eg, lopinavir plus ritonavir). The
dose of nelfinavir is 1250 mg orally twice daily. Diarrhea is a side
effect in 25% of patients taking nelfinavir, but this symptom may be
controlled with over-the-counter antidiarrheal agents in most
patients.
E. AMPRENAVIR—Amprenavir has efficacy and side effects similar
to those of other PIs. Common side effects are nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, rash, and perioral paresthesia. The dose is 1200 mg orally
twice daily. The concentration of amprenavir decreases when
coadministered with ethinyl estradiol; therefore, amprenavir should
be used with circumspection in the treatment of transgender persons
requiring high-dose estrogen.
F. FOSAMPRENAVIR—Fosamprenavir is a prodrug of amprenavir.
Its major advantage over using amprenavir is a much lower pill
burden. For PI-naïve patients, it can be dosed at 1400 mg orally
twice daily (four capsules a day) or at 1400 mg orally daily (two
capsules) with ritonavir 200 mg orally daily (two capsules) or at
700 mg orally with ritonavir 100 mg orally twice daily. Patients
previously treated with PIs should receive 700 mg orally with
ritonavir 100 mg orally twice daily. Side effects are similar to those
with amprenavir—most commonly gastrointestinal distress and
hyperlipidemia. As with amprenavir, the concentration of
fosamprenavir decreases when coadministered with ethinyl
estradiol; therefore, fosamprenavir should be used with
circumspection in the treatment of transgender persons requiring
high-dose estrogen.
G. LOPINAVIR/R—Lopinavir/r is lopinavir (200 mg) coformulated
with a low dose of ritonavir (50 mg) to maximize the bioavailability
of lopinavir. It has been shown to be more effective than nelfinavir
when used in combination with stavudine and lamivudine. The usual
dose is 400 mg lopinavir with 100 mg of ritonavir (two tablets)
orally twice daily with food. When given along with efavirenz or
nevirapine, a higher dose (600 mg/150 mg—three tablets) is usually
prescribed. The most common side effect is diarrhea, and lipid
abnormalities are frequent. Because of these side effects, lopinavir/r
has fallen off the list of drugs recommended as part of first-line
treatment regimens.
H. ATAZANAVIR—Atazanavir can be dosed as 400 mg (two 200-
mg capsules) only daily with food or it can be dosed as 300 mg in
combination with 100 mg of ritonavir once daily with food. When
used without ritonavir, it has only minimal or no impact on
cholesterol and triglyceride levels. The most common side effect is
mild hyperbilirubinemia that resolves with discontinuation of the
drug. Nephrolithiasis has also been reported with this PI. Both
tenofovir and efavirenz lower the serum concentration of atazanavir.
Therefore, when either of these two drugs is used with atazanavir, it
should be boosted by administering ritonavir. Proton pump
inhibitors are contraindicated in patients taking atazanavir because
atazanavir requires an acidic pH to remain in solution.
I. TIPRANAVIR—Tipranavir is the only nonpeptidic PI currently
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Because of its unique structure, it is active against some strains of
HIV that are resistant to other PIs. It is dosed with ritonavir (two
250 mg capsules of tipranavir with two 100 mg capsules of ritonavir
orally twice daily with food). The most common side effects are
nausea, 
vomiting, 
diarrhea, 
fatigue, 
and 
headache.
Tipranavir/ritonavir has been also associated with liver damage and
should be used very cautiously in patients with underlying liver
disease. Reports of intracranial hemorrhage in patients taking
tipranavir-containing regimens have raised additional safety
concerns about this potent PI. Because it is a sulfa-containing drug,
its use should be closely monitored in patients with sulfa allergy.
J. DARUNAVIR—Darunavir has impressive antiviral activity in the
setting of significant PI resistance and in treatment-naïve patients.
Darunavir has been added to the list of recommended PIs for initial
treatment of HIV at a daily dose of 800 mg with 100 mg of
ritonavir. For patients with prior PI treatment experience or PI
resistance, darunavir should be dosed at 600 mg orally twice daily,
with ritonavir, 100 mg orally twice daily. Once daily dosing can be
used in treatment-experienced patients who do not have darunavir-
related resistance mutations. Darunavir has a safety profile similar to
other PIs, such as lopinavir/ritonavir but is generally better tolerated.
Like tipranavir, darunavir is a sulfa-containing drug, and its use
should be closely monitored in patients with sulfa allergy.
3. Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors—NNRTIs
inhibit reverse transcriptase at a site different from that of the
nucleoside and nucleotide agents described above. All four
NNRTIs have shown antiviral activity as measured by HIV viral
load and CD4 responses. The major advantage of the NNRTIs is
that two of them (nevirapine and efavirenz) have potencies
comparable to that of PIs—with lower pill burden and fewer side
effects. In particular, they do not appear to cause lipodystrophy;
patients with cholesterol and triglyceride elevations who are
switched from a PI to an NNRTI may have improvement in their
lipids. The resistance patterns of the NNRTIs are distinct from
those of the PIs, so their use still leaves open the option for future
PI use.
The NNRTIs can be used with PIs in patients who are difficult to
suppress on simpler regimens or when it is difficult to identify at
least two nucleoside/nucleotide agents to which the patient is not
resistant. Because these agents may cause alterations in the
clearance of PIs, dose modifications may be necessary when these
two classes of medications are administered concomitantly. There is
a high degree of cross-resistance between the “first generation”
NNRTIs, such that resistance to one drug in this class uniformly
predicts resistance to other drugs. However, etravirine has been
approved as a “second-generation” NNRTI and appears to have
consistent antiviral activity in patients with prior exposure and
resistance to the “first generation” drugs of this class. In particular,
the K103N mutation, which is associated with a high level of
resistance to nevirapine, efavirenz, and delavirdine, does not appear
to have an impact on etravirine. There is no therapeutic reason for
using more than one NNRTI at the same time.
A. EFAVIRENZ—The major advantage of efavirenz is that it can be
given once daily in a single dose (600 mg orally). The side effects
are neurologic, with patients reporting symptoms ranging from lack
of concentration and strange dreams to delusions and mania.
Fortunately, the neurologic side effects of efavirenz subside over
time, usually within a month. Administration of efavirenz with food,
especially fatty food, may increase its serum levels and consequent
neurotoxicity. Due to teratogenicity, efavirenz should be avoided in
women who wish to conceive or are already pregnant. A once-daily
fixed-dose combination of efavirenz, tenofovir, and emtricitabine in
a single pill (Atripla) is available and is probably the best first choice
for treatment-naïve patients without resistance to this regimen.
B. NEVIRAPINE—The target dose of nevirapine is 200 mg orally
twice daily, but it is initiated at a dose of 200 mg once a day to
decrease the incidence of rash, which is as high as 40% when full
doses are begun immediately. If rash develops while the patient is
taking 200 mg a day, liver enzymes should be checked and the
dose should not be increased until the rash resolves. Patients with
mild rash and no evidence of hepatotoxicity can continue to be
treated with nevirapine. Nevirapine should not be used in treatment-
naïve women with high CD4 counts (> 250/mcL). Because of
potential fatal hepatotoxicity, nevirapine should only be used in
patients who cannot tolerate efavirenz. A new extended-release
formulation of nevirapine (Viramune XR) allows for once-daily
dosing (400 mg daily). In clinical trials, nevirapine XR was not
inferior when compared with standard nevirapine (both forms of
nevirapine were combined with tenofovir/emtricitabine). This XR
formulation potentially provides another once daily NNRTI regimen
for first-line ART, although there has yet to be a direct comparison
to any of the currently preferred first-line ART regimens (see
below).
C. DELAVIRDINE—Of the available “first generation” NNRTIs,
delavirdine is used the least largely because of its less convenient
dosing and pill burden compared with the other available NNRTIs.
Unlike nevirapine and efavirenz, delavirdine inhibits P450
cytochromes rather than inducing these enzymes. This means that
delavirdine can act like ritonavir and boost other antiretrovirals,
although delavir-dine is not as potent as ritonavir in this capacity.
The dosage is 400 mg orally three times a day. The major side
effect is rash.
D. ETRAVIRINE—Etravirine is an NNRTI approved for the
treatment of patients with prior NNRTI intolerance or resistance.
Etravirine has been shown to be effective even when some degree
of NNRTI-resistance is present, making it a true “second
generation” drug in this class. Etravirine dosage is two 100-mg
tablets twice daily. It should be used with a PI and a
nucleoside/nucleotide 
analog 
and 
not 
just 
with 
two
nucleoside/nucleotide analogs. The most common side effects are
nausea and rash; rarely, the rash can be severe (toxic epidermal
necrolysis). Patients with signs of severe rash or hypersensitivity
reactions should immediately discontinue the drug. Prior rash due to
treatment with one of the other NNRTIs does not make rash more
likely with etravirine. Etravirine should not be taken by people with
severe liver disease or administered with tipranavir/ritonavir,
fosamprenavir/ritonavir, atazanavir/ritonavir, full-dose ritonavir, or
PIs without low-dose ritonavir.
E. RILPIVIRINE—A fifth NNRTI is currently in late-stage clinical
development and is likely to be approved by the FDA shortly. The
dose is 25 mg daily and will be coformulated with
tenofovir/emtricitabine in a new single-tablet regimen. Two large
clinical trials compared rilpivirine plus tenofovir/emtricitabine with
efavirenz plus tenofovir/emtricitabine; results showed rilpivirine to be
noninferior to efavirenz.
4. Entry inhibitors
A. ENFUVIRTIDE—Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon) is known as a fusion
inhibitor; it blocks the entry of HIV into cells by blocking the fusion
of the HIV envelope to the cell membrane. The addition of
enfuvirtide to an optimized anti-retroviral regimen improved CD4
counts and lowered viral loads in heavily pretreated patients with
multidrug-resistant HIV. Unfortunately, resistance develops rapidly
in patients receiving nonsuppressive treatment. The dose is 90 mg
by subcutaneous injection twice daily; unfortunately, painful injection
site reactions develop in most patients, which makes long-term use
problematic.
B. MARAVIROC—Maraviroc is a CCR5 co-receptor antagonist.
Drugs in this class prevent the virus from entering uninfected cells by
blocking the CCR5 co-receptor. Unfortunately, this class of entry
inhibitors is only active against “CCR5-tropic virus.” This form of
the HIV-1 virus tends to predominate early in infection, while so-
called “dual/mixed tropic virus” (which utilizes either R5 or CXCR4
co-receptors) emerges later as infection progresses. Approximately
50–60% of previously treated HIV-infected patients have
circulating CCR5-tropic HIV. The drug has been shown to be
effective in HIV-infected persons with ongoing viral replication
despite being heavily treated and who have CCR5-tropic virus.
Tropism testing should be performed before beginning the
medication. The dose of maraviroc is 150–300 mg orally twice
daily, based on the other drugs the patient is taking at the time.
Common side effects are cough, fever, rash, musculoskeletal
problems, abdominal pain, and dizziness; however, maraviroc is
generally well tolerated with limited impact on serum lipids.
5. Integrase inhibitors
A. RALTEGRAVIR—Raltegravir is an HIV integrase inhibitor.
Integrase inhibitors slow HIV replication by blocking the HIV
integrase enzyme needed for the virus to multiply. Raltegravir was
impressively effective (when combined with other active drugs) in
the treatment of HIV-infected patients with documented resistance
to at least one drug in each of the three main classes of antiretroviral
medications (nucleoside analogs, PIs, NNRTIs). Clinical trials of
integrase inhibitors reveal a consistent pattern of more rapid decline
in viral load compared with more standard PI/r or NNRTI-based
regimens. The clinical significance of this observation is unclear.
Despite the impressive antiviral potency of this new class of
antiretroviral drugs, high-level resistance to integrase inhibitors
emerges quickly in the setting of virologic failure (much like with the
NNRTIs). Therefore, it is critical that raltegravir be used in
combination with other active antiretroviral agents.
Recent studies in treatment-naïve patients have demonstrated that
raltegravir in combination with tenofovir/emtricitabine is as effective
as the current first-line choice of efavirenz/tenofovir/emtricitabine for
daily treatment and has fewer side effects. Furthermore, the CD4
response appeared better in patients treated with the raltegravir
combination. These results led to FDA approval for raltegravir in
treatment-naïve patients. The dose of raltegravir is 400 mg orally
twice daily. Common side effects are diarrhea, nausea, and
headache.
B. ELVITEGRAVIR—Elvitegravir is another integrase inhibitor that is
in phase 3 studies. The dose is 125 mg once daily, given with
ritonavir (100 mg) for boosting. Elvitegravir showed impressive
short-term virologic responses in phase 2 studies.
6. Constructing regimens—There is now little debate about the
necessity for combining drugs to achieve long-term suppression of
HIV and its associated clinical benefit. Only combinations of three
or more drugs have been able to decrease HIV viral load by 2–3
logs and allow long-term suppression of HIV RNA to below the
threshold of detection.
Current evidence supports the use of Truvada (tenofovir and
emtricitabine) as the “nucleoside/nucleotide backbone” combined
with efavirenz as the initial regimen. This regimen has been shown to
be more effective and better tolerated than Combivir (zidovudine
and lamivudine) and Epzicom (abacavir/lamivudine). It has the
advantages of once daily dosing and is available as a single pill
(Atripla). Because 8–10% of newly infected persons in some urban
areas of the United States have NNRTI resistance, resistance
testing should be performed before initiating efavirenz in this
population. The following medications may also be combined with
daily fixed-dose tenofovir/emtricitabine as first-line regimens:
darunavir/ritonavir (800 mg/100 mg daily), atazanavir/ritonavir (300
mg/100 mg daily), or raltegravir (400 mg twice daily). Regimens
that include only nucleoside and nucleotide analogs without
nonnucleoside agents or PIs are clinically inferior and should only be
used for patients that cannot adhere to a more complicated regimen.
The most important determinant of treatment efficacy is
adherence to the regimen. Therefore, it is vitally important that the
regimen chosen be one to which the patient can easily adhere. In
general, patients are more compliant with medication regimens that
are once or twice a day only, do not require special timing with
regard to meals, can be taken at the same time as other
medications, do not require refrigeration or special preparation, and
do not have bothersome side effects. Toxicities should ideally be
nonoverlapping. An individual's relative contraindications to a given
drug or drugs should be considered. The regimen should not include
agents that are either virologically antagonistic or incompatible in
terms of drug–drug interactions. For example, etravirine should not
be used with boosted tipranavir because of drug-drug interactions.
Compatible dosing schedules—prescribing medications that can be
taken at the same time—improve adherence to treatment. Finally,
highly complex therapeutic regimens should be reserved for
individuals who are capable of adhering to the rigorous demands of
taking multiple medications and having this therapy closely
monitored. Conversely, simplified regimens that deliver the lowest
number of pills given at the longest possible dosing intervals are
desirable for patients who have difficulty taking multiple
medications.
Figure 31–2. Approach to initial and subsequent antiretroviral
therapy.
 
Possible ways of incorporating nonnucleoside agents and PIs into
combinations are displayed in Figure 31–2.
A number of points about the “nucleoside/nucleotide backbone”
of regimens have become clearer. The combination of stavudine
plus didanosine should be avoided, since there is increased risk of
toxicities, in particular in pregnant women because of the increased
risk of lactic acidosis, which can be fatal. Moreover, the nucleoside
pair of zidovudine and stavudine should be avoided because of
increased toxicity and the potential for antagonism that results from
intracellular competition for phosphorylation. Finally, the
combination of didanosine with tenofovir should be avoided due to
observed declines in CD4 counts.
In designing second-line regimens for patients with resistance to
initial therapy, the goal is to identify three drugs from at least two
different classes to which the virus is not resistant. This can be quite
complicated because of the problem of cross-resistance between
drugs within a class. For example, the resistance patterns of
lopinavir/ritonavir and indinavir are overlapping, and patients with
virus resistant to these agents are unlikely to respond to nelfinavir or
saquinavir even though they have never received treatment with
these agents. Similarly, the resistance patterns of nevirapine and
efavirenz are overlapping. With several new classes of drugs and
new generations of existing drug classes now available, the ability to
provide fully suppressive regimens even to patients with extensive
treatment experience and drug resistance has become more
realistic. The goal of therapy, therefore, should be to fully suppress
viral loads to < 50 copies/mL even for highly treatment-experienced
patients.
In addition to taking a careful history of what antiretroviral agents
a patient has taken and for how long, genotypic and phenotypic
resistance testing can provide useful information in designing
second-line regimens.
Whatever regimen is chosen, patients should be coached in ways
to improve adherence. For certain populations (eg, unstably housed
individuals), specially tailored programs that include drug dispensing
are needed.
Rarely, it is impossible to construct a tolerable regimen that fully
suppresses HIV. In such cases, clinicians and patients should
consider their goals. Patients maintained on effective antiretroviral
agents often benefit from these regimens (eg, higher CD4 counts,
fewer opportunistic infections) even if their virus is detectable. In
some cases, patients may request a drug holiday during which they
are taken off all medications. Patients often immediately feel better
because of the absence of drug side effects. Unfortunately,
structured treatment interruptions generally result in viral rebound
and rapid CD4 decline. Compared with patients who continue their
regimens without interruption, those who interrupt their treatment
fare poorly, with increased morbidity and mortality from both HIV-
related and non–HIV-related causes.
7. The challenge of drug resistance—HIV-1 drug resistance
limits the ability to fully control HIV replication and is a leading
cause for antiretroviral regimen failure. Resistance has been
documented for all currently available antiretrovirals including the
new classes of fusion inhibitor, CCR5 inhibitors, and integrase
inhibitors. The problem of drug resistance is widespread in HIV-
infected patients undergoing treatment in countries where ART is
widely available. A cohort study revealed that some degree of
resistance developed over the first 30 months of therapy in nearly
one-third of patients starting a HAART regimen. Patients who have
taken various antiretroviral regimens and who now have resistant
HIV-1 represent a major challenge for the treating clinician.
Resistance is now also documented in patients who are ART-naive,
but who have been infected with a drug resistant strain—“primary
resistance.” Cohort studies of antiretroviral treatment–naive patients
entering care in North America and Western Europe show that
roughly 10–12% (and as high as 25%) of recently infected
individuals have been infected with a drug-resistant strain of HIV-1.
Current expert guidelines recommend resistance testing as part of
standard baseline testing in all patients. Resistance testing is also
recommended for patients who are on an antiretroviral regimen and
have suboptimal viral suppression (ie, viral loads > 1000
copies/mL). Both genotypic and phenotypic tests are commercially
available and in randomized controlled studies their use has been
shown to result in improved short-term virologic outcomes
compared to making treatment choices without resistance testing.
Furthermore, multiple retrospective studies have conclusively
demonstrated that resistance tests provide prognostic information
about virologic response to newly initiated therapy that cannot be
gleaned from standard clinical information (ie, treatment history,
examination, CD4 count, and viral load tests).
Because of the complexity of resistance tests, many clinicians
require expert interpretation of results. In the case of genotypic
assays, results may show that the mutations that are selected for
during ART are drug-specific or contribute to broad cross-
resistance to multiple drugs within a therapeutic class. An example
of a drug-specific mutation for the reverse transcriptase inhibitors
would be the M184V mutation that is selected for by lamivudine or
emtricitabine therapy—this mutation causes resistance only to those
two drugs. Conversely, the thymidine analog mutations (“TAMs”)
of M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F, and T219Q/K/E are
selected for by either zidovudine or stavudine therapy, but cause
resistance to all the drugs in the class and often extend to the
nucleotide inhibitor tenofovir when three or more of these TAMs
are present. Further complicating the interpretation of genotypic
tests is the fact that some mutations that cause resistance to one
drug can actually make the virus that contains this mutation more
sensitive to another drug. The M184V mutation, for example, is
associated with increased sensitivity to zidovudine, stavudine, and
tenofovir. The most common mutations associated with drug
resistance and cross-resistance patterns for NRTIs, NNRTIs, PIs,
and integrase inhibitors can be found at http://hivdb.stanford.edu.
Phenotypic tests also require interpretation in that the distinction
between a resistant virus and sensitive one is not fully defined for all
available drugs.
Both methods of resistance testing are limited by the fact that
they may measure resistance in only some of the viral strains present
in an individual. Resistance results may also be misleading if a
patient is not taking antiretroviral medications at the time of testing.
Thus, resistance results must be viewed cumulatively—ie, if
resistance is reported to an agent on one test, it should be presumed
to be present thereafter even if subsequent tests do not give the
same result.
Despite the prevalence of resistance in patients who have not
responded to multiple prior treatment regimens and given the
availability of new class drugs and new generation drugs, virtually all
patients—no matter how much resistance is present—can be
treated with a combination of ART that should be fully suppressive.
 Course & Prognosis
With improvements in therapy, patients are living longer after the
diagnosis of AIDS. A population-based study conducted in
Denmark found that HIV-infected persons at age 25 years without
hepatitis C had a life expectancy of 39 additional years.
Unfortunately, not all HIV-infected persons have access to
treatment. Studies consistently show less access to treatment for
blacks, the homeless, and injection drug users. In addition to access
to treatment, sustaining lower mortality will require developing new
treatments for patients in whom resistance to existing agents
develops. For patients whose disease progresses even though they
are receiving appropriate treatment, meticulous palliative care must
be provided (see Chapter 5), with attention to pain control, spiritual
needs, and family (biologic and chosen) dynamics.
 When to Refer
•  Clinicians with limited experience in HIV/AIDS should
p
refer HIV-infected patients to specialists with experience,
given the increasing number and complexity of treatment
regimens available.
•  Extra efforts should be made to obtain specialty
consultation for those patients with detectable viral loads on
ART; those intolerant of standard medications; those in
need of systemic chemotherapy; and those with
complicated opportunistic infections, particularly when
invasive procedures or experimental therapies are needed.
When to Admit
Patients with opportunistic infections who are acutely ill (eg, who
are febrile, who have had rapid change of mental status, or who are
in respiratory distress) or who require intravenous medications.
Bhaskaran K et al. Changes in the risk of death after HIV
serocon-version compared with mortality in the general population.
JAMA. 2008 Jul 2;300(1):51–9. [PMID: 18594040]
 
Clotet B et al. Efficacy and safety of darunavir-ritonavir at week
48 in treatment-experienced patients with HIV-1 infection in
POWER 1 and 2: a pooled subgroup analysis of data from two
randomised trials. Lancet. 2007 Apr 7;369(9568):1169–78.
[PMID: 17416261]
 
Cooper DA et al; BENCHMRK Study Teams. Subgroup and
resistance analyses of raltegravir for resistant HIV-1 infection. N
Engl J Med. 2008 Jul 24;359(4):355–65. [PMID: 18650513]
 
Fätkenheuer G et al; MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2 Study
Teams. Subgroup analyses of maraviroc in previously treated R5
HIV-1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct 2;359(14):1442–55.
[PMID: 18832245]
 
Lennox JL et al; STARTMRK investigators. Safety and efficacy of
raltegravir-based versus efavirenz-based combination therapy in
treatment-naive patients with HIV-1 infection: a multi-centre,
double-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2009 Sep
5;374(9692):796–806. [PMID: 19647866]
 
Lohse N et al. Survival of persons with and without HIV infection
in Denmark, 1995–2005. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Jan
16;146(2):87–95. [PMID: 17227932]
 
McNicholl IR. Strategies to enhance adherence, reduce costs, and
improve patient quality of life. J Manag Care Pharm.
2008;14(5):S12-S16.
 
Palella FJ Jr et al; HOPS (HIV Outpatient Study) Investigators.
The association of HIV susceptibility testing with survival among
HIV-infected patients receiving antiretroviral therapy: a cohort
study. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Jul 21;151(2):73–84. [PMID:
19620160]
 
Sax PE et al; AIDS Clinical Trials Group Study A5202 Team.
Abacavirlamivudine versus tenofovir-emtricitabine for initial HIV-1
therapy. N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 3;361(23):2230–40. [PMID:
19952143]
 
Steigbigel RT et al; BENCHMRK Study Teams. Raltegravir with
optimized background therapy for resistant HIV-1 infection. N
Engl J Med. 2008 Jul 24;359(4):339–54. [PMID: 18650512]
 
Thompson MA et al; International AIDS Society-USA.
Antiretroviral treatment of adult HIV infection: 2010
recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel.
JAMA. 2010 Jul 21;304(3):321–33. [PMID: 20639566]
 
Zolopa A et al. Early antiretroviral therapy reduces AIDS
progression/death in individuals with acute opportunistic infections:
a multicenter randomized strategy trial. PLoS One.
2009;4(5):e5575. [PMID: 19440326]
 
 
 
Viral & Rickettsial
Infections
Shruti Patel, MD Wayne X. Shandera,
MD
VIRAL DISEASES
 
HUMAN HERPESVIRUSES
Herpesviruses cause a wide spectrum of human disease. Eight
identified human herpesviruses (HHV) include herpes simplex virus
(HSV) (type 1), HSV (type 2), varicella zoster virus (VZV) (type
3), Epstein–Barr infectious mononucleosis virus (type 4), and
cytomegalovirus (CMV) (type 5). A sixth type (HHV-6) is
identified as a causative agent of roseola (exanthema subitum), and
a seventh (HHV-7) is serologically associated with several
syndromes. Another herpesvirus (HHV-8) is linked with Kaposi
sarcoma (see Chapter 31).
Subclinical primary infection with the herpesviruses is more
common than clinically manifest illness. Each persists in a latent state
for the remainder of the person's life. With HSV and VZV, virus
remains latent in sensory ganglia. Upon reactivation, lesions appear
in the distal sensory nerve distribution. As a result of disease-, drug-
, or radiation-induced immunosuppression, virus reactivation may
lead to widespread lesions in affected organs such as the viscera or
the central nervous system (CNS). Severe or fatal illness may occur
in infants and immunodeficient persons. Herpesviruses can
transform cells in tissue culture. Associations with malignancies
include Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) with Burkitt lymphoma and
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and HHV-8 with primary effusion
lymphoma and Kaposi sarcoma.
1. Herpesviruses 1 & 2
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Spectrum of illness from stomatitis and urogenital lesions to facial
nerve paralysis (Bell palsy) and encephalitis.
 Variable intervals between exposure and clinical disease, since
HSV causes both primary (which may be subclinical) and
reactivation disease.
 Successful management with acyclovir or related acyclic
compounds (valacyclovir, famciclovir).
 
 General Considerations
Herpesviruses 1 and 2 affect primarily the oral and genital areas,
respectively. Seroprevalence of both viruses increases with age.
Seroprevalence of HSV-2 increases with sexual activity. Disease is
typically a manifestation of reactivation. Although HSV-2 is the
most common cause of genital ulcers in the developed world, HSV-
1 is increasingly recognized as causing primary urogenital infections.
Genital recurrences are much more frequent with HSV-2 and
gradually decrease over time, whereas HSV-1 recurrences are rare
after the first year. Risk factors for HSV transmission include black
race, female gender, a history of sexually transmitted infections, an
increased number of partners, contact with commercial sex
workers, lower socioeconomic status, young age at onset of sexual
activity, and total duration of sexual activity. Asymptomatic
shedding of either virus is common, especially following primary
infection or symptomatic recurrences, and may be responsible for
transmission. HSV-2 increases the risk of HIV acquisition, and
reactivates more frequently in advanced HIV infection. HIV
replication is increased by interaction with HSV proteins.
Suppression of HSV-2 can decrease HIV-1 plasma level and
genital tract shedding of HIV, which can contribute to the reduction
in sexual transmission of HIV-1.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Mucocutaneous disease—HSV-1 mucocutaneous disease
largely involves the mouth and oral cavity (“herpes labialis” or
“gingivostomatitis;” the latter largely in children). Digital lesions
(whitlows) (Figure 32–1) are an occupational hazard in medicine
and dentistry. Contact sports (eg, wrestling) are associated with
outbreaks of skin infections (“herpes gladiatorum”). Asymptomatic
shedding of HSV-1 is frequent, with most infected individuals
shedding virus at least once a month.
Vesicles form moist ulcers after several days and epithelialize
over 1–2 weeks if untreated. Primary infection is usually more
severe than recurrences but may be asymptomatic. Recurrences
often involve fewer lesions, tend to be labial, heal faster, and are
induced by stress, fever, infection, sunlight, chemotherapy (eg,
fludarabine, azathioprine) or other undetermined factors. A specific
apolipoprotein E polymorphism correlates with the presence of oral
herpetic disease but not with reactivation.
Figure 32–1. Herpetic whitlow. (Used, with permission, from
Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J.
The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
HSV-2 lesions largely involve the genital tract. Virus remains
latent in presacral ganglia. Lesions arising on the external genitalia
are multiple, painful, small, grouped, and vesicular. Occasionally,
lesions arise in the perianal region or on the buttocks and upper
thighs. Dysuria, cervicitis, and urinary retention may occur in
women. Most HSV-2 infected persons in the United States are
unaware that they are infected. Higher than expected rates of HSV-
2 lesions occur among women in the postpartum period and also
among women who have sex with women.
Proctitis and sacral lesions in HIV-infected persons with CD4
cytopenia may present with extensive, ulcerating, weeping lesions.
Large ulcerations and atypical lesions suggest drug-resistant isolates
(see below).
2. Ocular disease—HSV can cause keratitis, blepharitis, and
keratoconjunctivitis. Keratitis is usually unilateral, often with
impaired visual acuity. Lesions limited to the epithelium usually heal
without affecting vision, whereas stromal involvement can cause
uveitis, scarring, and eventually blindness. Recurrences of ocular
disease are frequent. HSV is the second most common cause, after
VZV, of acute retinal necrosis.
3. Neonatal and congenital infection—Both herpesviruses can
infect the fetus and induce congenital malformations (organomegaly,
bleeding, and CNS abnormalities). Neonatal transmission during
delivery is more common than intrauterine infection. Maternal
infection during the third trimester is associated with the highest risk
of neonatal transmission. About 70% of these infections, however,
are asymptomatic or unrecognized. Invasive fetal monitoring and
vacuum or forceps delivery can increase the risk of herpesvirus
transmission.
4. Central nervous system disease—HSV-1 predominantly
causes herpes simplex encephalitis, while HSV-1 and HSV-2 are
both associated with benign recurrent lymphocytic (Mollaret)
meningitis. HSV-1 infection may enhance the development of
Alzheimer disease by promoting tau phospholylation.
Primary HSV-2 infection in women often presents as aseptic
meningitis. Recurrent meningitis from HSV-2 occurs in both
younger and older individuals. HSV-1 and HSV-2 are increasingly
recognized as a cause of mild, non-specific neurologic symptoms.
Herpes simplex encephalitis presents with nonspecific symptoms:
a flu-like prodrome, followed by headache, fever, behavioral and
speech disturbances, and focal or generalized seizures. The
temporal lobe is often involved. Untreated disease and presentation
with coma carry a high mortality rate, with many survivors suffering
neurologic sequelae. Herpes encephalitis does not occur
disproportionately among immunosuppressed persons.
5. Disseminated infection—Disseminated HSV infection occurs
in the setting of immunosuppression, either primary or iatrogenic, or
rarely with pregnancy. In disseminated disease, skin lesions are not
always present. Disseminated skin lesions are a particular
complication in patients with atopic eczema (eczema herpeticum)
and burns. Pneumonia can occur in both immunocompetent and
immunosuppressed persons.
6. Bell palsy—An association between HSV-1 and Bell palsy is
established.
7. Esophagitis and proctitis—HSV-1 can cause esophagitis in
those with AIDS and other immunocompromised patients. CMV
esophagitis is distinguished by the size and depth of the lesion
(smaller and deeper for HSV). HSV-1 is also postulated to activate
mononuclear cells in the pathogenesis of achalasia. Proctitis often
occurs mainly in men who have sex with men.
8. Erythema multiforme—Herpes simplex viruses remain, with
drugs, the leading association with erythema multiforme and with the
more severe, mucosally involved Stevens–Johnson syndrome.
9. Other—HSV causes about 1% of acute liver failure; however,
when it occurs, the mortality of fulminant hepatitis is nearly 75%. An
HSV lower respiratory tract infection of unknown clinical
significance is common in mechanically ventilated patients. HSV-1
pneumonia is associated with high morbidity in patients with solid
tumors. HSV-1 is reported to be a cause of perinephric abscess,
febrile neutropenia, chronic urticaria, and esophagitis and enteritis in
systemic lupus erythematosus. HSV is also associated with
Helicobacter pylori–negative upper gastrointestinal tract ulcers. An
association between HSV-1 and endocardial inflammation in the
pathogenesis of atrial myxoma is postulated.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Mucocutaneous disease—Diagnosis is usually made clinically,
but viral cultures of vesicular fluid or direct fluorescent antibody
staining of scraped lesions remain the standard of diagnosis.
Intranuclear inclusion bodies and multinucleated giant cells on a
Tzanck preparation or Calcofluor stain are indicative of herpetic
infection. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a more sensitive
diagnostic assay. A DNA microarray test for simultaneous detection
of HSV-1, HSV-2, VZV, CMV, EBV, HHV-6, and adenovirus in
immunocompromised patients is found to be sensitive, specific,
cost-effective, and time saving. Type-specific serologies are useful
for counseling HIV-infected individuals; pregnant women; sexual
partners of persons infected with HSV; and those with an uncertain
clinical history, high-risk behavior, or increased number of sexual
partners.
2. Ocular disease—Herpes keratitis is diagnosed by branching
(dendritic) ulcers that stain with fluorescein. The extent of epithelial
injury in herpes keratitis correlates well with PCR positivity.
3. Encephalitis and recurrent meningitis—Cerebrospinal fluid
pleocytosis is common, with a similar increase in the number of red
cells. HSV DNA PCR of the cerebrospinal fluid is a rapid,
sensitive, and specific tool for early diagnosis. Antibodies to HSV in
cerebrospinal fluid can confirm the diagnosis but appear late in the
course of the disease. Viral culture shows a sensitivity of only 10%.
MRI scanning is often a useful adjunct showing increased signal in
the temporal and frontal lobes. Temporal lobe seizure foci may be
shown on electroencephalograms (EEGs).
4. Esophagitis and proctitis—Esophagitis is diagnosed by
endoscopic biopsy and cultures. Proctitis may be diagnosed by
rectal swab for PCR or culture, or both, although complicated
cases may require biopsy.
5. Pneumonia—Pneumonia is diagnosed by clinical, pathologic,
and radiographic findings. The CT findings include diffuse or
multifocal areas of ground-glass attenuation or consolidative
changes or both and are best confirmed using high-resolution CT
techniques.
 Treatment & Prophylaxis
Drugs that inhibit replication of HSV-1 and HSV-2 include
trifluridine and vidarabine (both for keratitis), acyclovir and related
compounds, foscarnet, and cidofovir (Table 32–1).
A. Mucocutaneous Disease
While treatment is often not necessary in immunocompetent
patients, it can ameliorate and shorten the duration of symptoms if
initiated early. For primary genital infection, oral agents are generally
used and include acyclovir, 200 mg five times a day or 400 mg
three times a day; valacyclovir, 1 g twice daily; or famciclovir, 250
mg three times daily; all given for 7–10 days. Most experience in
treating primary herpes labialis is with acyclovir (same doses and
duration as for genital infection). Intravenous acyclovir (5–10 mg/kg
every 8 hours for 7–14 days) should be considered in
immunosuppressed patients. Topical 1% hydrocortisone cream in
combination with 5% acyclovir cream is also safe and effective in
the treatment of recurrent herpes simplex labialis.
For recurrent genital disease, acyclovir, 800 mg three times daily
for 2 days; valacyclovir, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days; or
famciclovir, 1 g twice daily for 1 day all show efficacy in controlled
trials. Patient-initiated therapy with short courses of antivirals at first
symptoms of recurrence is a frequently used and favorable
approach. For the treatment of recurrences of herpes labialis,
lesions heal faster with topical penciclovir than with topical
acyclovir. Docosanol cream offers modest benefit. Oral acyclovir
(same doses as above for 5 days) is more effective than topical
agents and may be given as short-course therapy with higher doses
(eg, valacyclovir, 2 g twice daily for 1 day, or famciclovir, 1.5 g
single dose).
Atypical isolates, large ulcerations, new lesions, or poor response
to therapy suggest acyclovir resistance, which often occurs in
immunodeficient patients. Alternatives include high dose acyclovir
(4–5 g), which is effective in treating proctitis in the HIV-positive
population, or foscarnet (40–60 mg/kg intravenously every 8
hours), adjusting the dose interval in patients with kidney
dysfunction. Cidofovir is used in rare cases of infection resistant to
both acyclovir and foscarnet.
Patients with frequent recurrent genital infections may be given
secondary prophylaxis with acyclovir, 400 mg twice a day;
valacyclovir, 500–1000 mg once daily; or famciclovir, 250 mg
twice a day. For herpes labialis, valacyclovir, 500 mg daily, is the
best option. Sunscreen may be useful for recurrences associated
with sunlight exposure. Advantages of suppressive therapy include a
significant reduction in acquisition of disease among the HSV-2
discordant heterosexual partners. AIDS patients with a history of
mucocutaneous disease should continued receiving suppressive
therapy unless a sustained improvement of immune status occurs.
Among the HIV-infected, the use of highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART) is associated with a shortened duration of HSV-
1 or -2 lesions.
B. Keratitis
For the treatment of acute epithelial keratitis, topical anti-virals
(ophthalmic trifluridine, vidarabine, acyclovir, and ganciclovir are all
nearly equivalent in efficacy) are recommended. Combination of
topical antivirals with interferon or debridement (or both) hastens
healing. Intravenous acyclovir is used for acute retinal necrosis. Oral
famciclovir is a reasonable alternative, especially in patients unable
to tolerate intravenous therapy and when acyclovir resistance is
present. The usage of topical corticosteroids may exacerbate the
infection, although systemic corticosteroids may help with selected
cases of stromal infection. Long-term treatment (> 1 year) with
acyclovir at a dosage of 800 mg/d orally decreases recurrence rates
of keratitis, conjunctivitis or blepharitis due to HSV.
C. Neonatal Disease
Acyclovir intravenously is effective for disseminated lesions in
neonatal disease. The dosage is 20 mg/kg intravenously every 8
hours for 14–21 days. Counseling with serologic screening should
be offered to pregnant mothers. The use of maternal antenatal
suppressive therapy with acyclovir (typically, 400 mg three times
daily) beginning at 36 weeks gestation decreases the presence of
detectable HSV, the rates of recurrence at delivery, and the need
for cesarean section. Cesarean section is recommended for
pregnant women with active genital lesions or typical prodromal
symptoms.
 
Table 32–1. Agents for viral infections.1
 
1Agents used exclusively in the management of HIV infection and AIDS are
found in Chapter 31.
2Available through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Emergency Use Authorization.
CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HSV, herpes
simplex virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus;
CMV, cytomegalovirus; HPV, human papillomavirus; HCV, hepatitis C virus;
RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.
D. Encephalitis and CNS Meningitis
Because of the need for rapid treatment and the difficulties
associated with brain biopsy, patients with suspected HSV
encephalitis are given intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8
hours for 10 days or more, adjusting for kidney dysfunction),
starting upon suspicion of diagnosis, and stopping if another
diagnosis is established. If the PCR is negative and clinical suspicion
remains high in the absence of a biopsy, treatment should be
continued for 10 days because the false-negative rate for PCR can
be as high as 25% (especially in children) and acyclovir is relatively
nontoxic. Long-term neurologic sequelae are common and late
pediatric relapse is recognized. Acyclovir resistance in a case of
herpes simplex encephalitis has been reported. Aseptic meningitis
may also require a course of intravenous acyclovir or valacyclovir.
E. Disseminated Disease
Disseminated disease responds best to parenteral acyclovir when
treatment is initiated early.
F. Bell Palsy
Prednisolone, 25 mg orally twice daily for 10 days started within 72
h of onset, significantly increases the rate of recovery. Data on
antiherpes antivirals are equivocal; according to one study,
valacyclovir (but not acyclovir), 1 g orally daily for 5 days, plus
corticosteroid therapy may be beneficial if started within 7 days of
symptom onset. In patients with severe or complete facial paralysis,
such antiviral therapy is often administered but without a firm proof
of efficacy.
G. Esophagitis and Proctitis
Patients with esophagitis should receive either intravenous acyclovir
at a dosage of 5–10 mg/kg every 8 hours or oral acyclovir, 400 mg
five times daily. Maintenance therapy for AIDS patients is acyclovir
at a dosage of 400 mg three to five times daily. Proctitis is treated
with similar dosages and usually responds within 5 days.
H. Erythema Multiforme
Suppressive therapy with oral acyclovir (400 mg twice a day for 6
months) decreases the recurrence rate of HSV-associated erythema
multiforme. Valacyclovir (500 mg twice a day) may be effective in
cases unresponsive to acyclovir.
 Prevention
Besides antiviral suppressive therapy, prevention also requires
counseling and the use of barrier precautions during sexual activity.
Disclosure of partner status is associated with about a 50%
reduction in the HSV-2 acquisition. Arguments favoring partner
testing include confirming exposure, assistance with management,
reducing the risk of transmission, and aiding in public health
strategies. Male circumcision is associated with a lower incidence of
acquiring HSV-2 infection.
q
g
Preventing spread to hospital staff and other patients from cases
with mucocutaneous, disseminated, or genital disease requires
isolation and the usage of hand-washing and gloving–gowning
precautions. Staff with active lesions (eg, whitlows) should not have
contact with patients. Asymptomatic transmission occurs, especially
with HSV-2. An HSV-2 glycoprotein-D vaccine under
development appears to prevent infection and disease among
women who are seronegative at baseline.
Bousfiha A et al. Primary immunodeficiencies of protective
immunity to primary infections. Clin Immunol. 2010
May;135(2):204–9. [PMID: 20236864]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus type 2 among persons
aged 14–49 years–United States, 2005–2008. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Apr 23;59(15):456–9. [PMID:
20414188]
 
Hull CM et al. The role of topical 5% acyclovir and 1% hydro-
cortisone cream (XereseTM) in the treatment of recurrent herpes
simplex labialis. Postgrad Med. 2010 Sep;122(5):1–6. [PMID:
20873400]
 
Kennedy PG. Herpes simplex virus type 1 and Bell's palsy–a
current assessment of the controversy. J Neurovirol. 2010
Feb;16(1):1–5. [PMID: 20113184]
 
Munjoma MW et al. The prevalence, incidence and risk factors of
herpes simplex virus type 2 infection among pregnant Zimbabwean
women followed up nine months after childbirth. BMC Womens
Health. 2010 Jan 12;10:2. [PMID: 20064273]
 
Shiley K et al. Herpes viruses in transplant recipients: HSV, VZV,
human herpes viruses, and EBV. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2010
Jun;24(2):373–93. [PMID: 20466275]
 
2. Varicella (Chickenpox) & Herpes Zoster (Shingles)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure 14–21 days before onset.
 Fever and malaise just before or with eruption.
 Rash: pruritic, centrifugal, papular, changing to vesicular
(“dewdrops on a rose petal”), pustular, and finally crusting.
 
 General Considerations
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is HHV-3. Disease manifestations
include chickenpox (varicella) and shingles (herpes zoster).
Chickenpox is generally a disease of the childhood. It has an
incubation period of 10–20 days (average 2 weeks) and is highly
contagious, spreading by inhalation of infective droplets or contact
with lesions.
The incidence and severity of herpes zoster (“shingles”) affects
up to 25% of persons during their lifetime and increases with age
due to an age-related decline in immunity against VZV. More than
half of all patients in whom herpes zoster develops are older than 60
years, and the incidence of herpes zoster reaches 10 cases per
1000 patient-years by age 80 (by which time 50% are infected with
VZV). The annual incidence in the United States of 1 million cases
is increasing as the population ages. Populations at increased risk
for varicella-zoster–related diseases include immunosuppressed
persons and persons receiving biologic agents (tumor necrosis
factor inhibitors).
 Clinical Findings
A. Varicella
1. Symptoms and signs—Fever and malaise are mild in children
and more marked in adults. The pruritic rash begins prominently on
the face, scalp, and trunk, and later involves the extremities (Table
32–2). Maculopapules change in a few hours to vesicles that
become pustular and eventually form crusts (Figures 32–2 and 32–
3). New lesions may erupt for 1–5 days, so that different stages of
the eruption are usually present simultaneously. The crusts slough in
7–14 days. The vesicles and pustules are superficial and elliptical,
with slightly serrated borders. Pitted scars are frequent. Although
the disease is often mild, complications such as secondary bacterial
infection, pneumonitis, and encephalitis occur in about 1% of cases
and often lead to hospitalization.
After the primary infection, the virus remains dormant in cranial
nerves sensory ganglia and spinal dorsal root ganglia. Latent VZV
will reactivate as herpes zoster in about 10–30% of persons (see
below). Varicella is more severe in older patients and
immunocompromised persons. In the latter, atypical presentations,
including widespread dissemination in the absence of skin lesions,
are often described.
 
Table 32–2. Diagnostic features of some acute exanthems.
 
1http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/smallpox/response-plan/.
EBV, Epstein–Barr virus; EM, electron microscopy; HHV, human
herpesvirus.
There is a small increased risk of Guillain-Barré syndrome for at
least 2 months after an acute herpes zoster attack.
2. Laboratory findings—Diagnosis is usually made clinically, with
confirmation by direct immunofluorescent antibody staining or PCR
of scrapings from lesions. Multinucleated giant cells are usually
apparent on a Tzanck smear or Calcofluor stain of material from the
vesicle bases. Leukopenia and subclinical transaminase elevation
are often present and thrombocytopenia occasionally occurs.
 
Figure 32–2. Primary varicella (chickenpox) skin lesions. (Public
Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
A varicella skin test and interferon-gamma enzyme-linked
immunospot (ELISPOT) can screen for VZV susceptibility.
B. Herpes Zoster
Herpes zoster (“shingles”) usually occurs among adults, but cases
are reported among infants and children. Skin lesions resemble
those of chickenpox. Pain is often severe and commonly precedes
the appearance of rash. Lesions follow a dermatomal distribution,
with thoracic and lumbar roots being the most common. In most
cases, a single unilateral dermatome is involved, but occasionally,
neighboring and distant areas are involved. Lesions on the tip of the
nose, inner corner of the eye, and root and side of the nose
(Hutchinson sign) indicate involvement of the trigeminal nerve
(herpes zoster ophthalmicus). Facial palsy, lesions of the external
ear with or without tympanic membrane involvement, vertigo and
tinnitus, or deafness signify geniculate ganglion involvement (Ramsay
Hunt syndrome or herpes zoster oticus). Shingles is a particularly
common and serious complication among patients with multiple
myeloma who receive bortezomib therapy, and it also occurs
among patients with systemic lupus erythematosus receiving
corticosteroids and immunomodulators. Contact with patients who
have varicella does not appear to be a risk factor for zoster.
 
Figure 32–3. Chickenpox (varicella) with classic “dew drop on
rose petal” appearance. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD;
used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ
Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Complications
A. Varicella
Secondary bacterial skin superinfections, particularly with group A
β-hemolytic streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus, are the most
common complications in children. Cellulitis, erysipelas, and scarlet
fever are described. Bullous impetigo and necrotizing fasciitis are
less often seen. Other associations with varicella include epiglottitis,
necrotizing pneumonia, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, epidural
abscess, meningitis, endocarditis, and purpura fulminans. Toxic
shock syndrome can also develop.
Interstitial VZV pneumonia is more common in adults (especially
smokers, HIV-infected patients, and pregnant women) and may
result in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). After healing,
numerous densely calcified lesions are seen throughout the lung
fields on chest radio-graphs.
Historically, neurologic complications developed in about 1 in
2000 children. Currently, cerebellar ataxia occurs at a frequency of
1:4000 in the young. A limited course and complete recovery are
the rule. Encephalitis is similarly infrequent, occurs mostly in adults,
and is characterized by delirium, seizures, and focal neurologic
signs. Both mortality and long-term neurologic sequelae rates are
about 10%. Ischemic strokes in the wake of acute VZV infection
present a mean of 4 months after rashes and may be due to an
associated 
vasculitis. 
Multifocal 
encephalitis, 
ventriculitis,
myeloradiculitis, arterial aneurysm formation, and arteritis are also
described in immunosuppressed, especially HIV-infected, patients.
Purpura fulminans is an extremely rare complication of varicella
secondary to protein S deficiency resulting in diffuse intravascular
coagulation and severe skin defects. VZV reactivation on rare
occasions causes a hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndrome
in severely immunocom-promised patients.
Clinical hepatitis is uncommon and mostly presents in the
immunosuppressed patient but can be fulminant and fatal. Reye
syndrome (fatty liver with encephalopathy) also complicates
varicella (and other viral infections, especially influenza B), usually in
childhood, and is associated with aspirin therapy (see Influenza,
below).
When contracted during the first or second trimesters of
pregnancy, varicella carries a very small risk of congenital
malformations, including cicatricial lesions of an extremity, growth
retardation, microphthalmia, cataracts, chorioretinitis, deafness, and
cerebrocortical atrophy. If varicella develops around the time of
delivery, the newborn is at risk for disseminated disease.
B. Herpes Zoster
Postherpetic neuralgia occurs in 60–70% of patients who have
herpes zoster and are older than 60 years. The pain can be
prolonged and debilitating. Risk factors for postherpetic neuralgia
include advanced age, female sex, the presence of a prodrome, and
severity of rash or pain but not family history.
Other complications include the following: (1) bacterial skin
superinfections; (2) herpes zoster ophthalmicus, which occurs with
involvement of the trigeminal nerve and is a sight-threatening
complication (especially when it involves the cornea or the iris), and
is a marker for stroke over the ensuing year (Hutchinson sign is a
marker of ocular involvement in the HIV-positive population); (3)
rarely, unilateral ophthalmoplegia; (4) involvement of the geniculate
ganglion of cranial nerve VII as well as cranial nerves V, VIII, IX,
and X; (5) aseptic meningitis; (6) peripheral motor neuropathy; (7)
transverse myelitis; (8) encephalitis; (9) acute cerebellitis; (10)
stroke; (11) vasculopathy; (12) acute retinal necrosis; and (13)
progressive outer retinal necrosis (largely among HIV infected
persons). VZV is a major cause of Bell palsy in patients who are
HSV sero-negative. Diagnosis of neurologic complications requires
the detection of VZV DNA or anti-VZV IgG in cerebrospinal fluid
or the detection of VZV DNA in tissue. Zoster sine herpete (pain
without rash) can also be associated with most of the above
complications.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
In general, patients with varicella should be isolated until primary
crusts have disappeared and kept at bed rest until afebrile. The skin
is kept clean. Pruritus can be relieved with antihistamines, calamine
lotion, and colloidal oatmeal baths. As an antipyretic,
acetaminophen is used. Fingernails can be closely cropped to avoid
skin excoriation and infection.
B. Antiviral Therapy
Acyclovir, 20 mg/kg (up to 800 mg per dose) orally four times daily
for 5 days, should be given within the first 24 hours after the onset
of rash and should be considered for patients older than 12 years,
secondary household contacts (secondary cases tend to be more
severe 
disease), 
patients 
with 
chronic 
cutaneous 
and
cardiopulmonary diseases, and children receiving long-term therapy
with salicylates (to decrease the risk of Reye syndrome).
Experience with valacyclovir and famciclovir in these settings is
scant.
In immunocompromised patients, in pregnant women during the
third trimester, and in patients with extracutaneous disease
(encephalitis, pneumonitis), antiviral therapy with high-dose
acyclovir (30 mg/kg/d in three divided doses intravenously for at
least 7 days) should be started once the diagnosis is suspected.
Corticosteroids may be useful in the presence of pneumonia.
Prolonged prophylactic acyclovir is important for thorough
suppression of VZV reactivation in profoundly immunosuppressed
patients. For uncomplicated herpes zoster, acyclovir (800 mg orally
five times daily) or valacyclovir (1 g three times daily) for 7 days is
recommended. Therapy should start within the first 72 hours of the
onset of the lesions. Intravenous acyclovir is used for
extradermatomal complications of zoster, although acyclovir is not
fully effective in retinal disease. A topical antiviral, sorivudine,
appears to be a safe and well-tolerated adjuvant therapy to
valacyclovir for treatment of acute herpes zoster. Foscarnet may be
used 
for 
acyclovir-resistant 
VZV 
infections 
seen 
in
immunosuppressed patients. The Ramsay Hunt syndrome is more
resistant to antiviral therapy.
C. Treatment of Complications
Once established, postherpetic neuralgia may respond to
gabapentin or lidocaine patches (FDA approved drugs for
neuropathic pain). Tricyclic antidepressants, opioids, and capsaicin
cream are also widely used and effective. The epidural injection of
corticosteroids and local anesthetics appears to modestly reduce
herpetic pain at 1 month but is not effective for prevention of long-
term postherpetic neuralgia. Secondary bacterial infections are
treated with antibiotics providing coverage for staphylococci.
 Prognosis
The total duration of varicella from onset of symptoms to
disappearance of crusts rarely exceeds 2 weeks. Fatalities are rare
except in immunosuppressed patients.
Herpes zoster resolves in 2–6 weeks. Antibodies persist longer
and at higher levels than with primary varicella. Eye involvement
with herpes zoster necessitates periodic future examinations.
 Prevention
Health care workers should be screened for varicella and
vaccinated if seronegative. Patients with active varicella or herpes
zoster are promptly separated from seronegative patients. For those
with varicella, airborne and contact isolation is recommended,
whereas for those with zoster, contact precautions are sufficient.
For immunosuppressed patients with zoster, precautions should be
the same as if the patient had varicella. Exposed serosusceptible
patients should be placed in isolation and exposed serosusceptible
employees should stay away from work between days 10 and 21
after exposure. Health care workers with zoster should receive
antiviral agents during the first 72 hours of disease and withdraw
from work until lesions are crusted. Postexposure prophylaxis
should be evaluated (see below).
A. Varicella
1. Vaccination—Universal childhood vaccination against varicella
is effective. The varicella vaccine (Varilrix) is safe and over 98.1%
effective when given after 13 months of age. A single antigen live
attenuated vaccine (VARIVAX) or a quadrivalent measles, mumps,
rubella, and varicella vaccine (ProQuad) are available. The first
dose should be administered at 12–15 months of age and the
second at 4–6 years. Aspirin should be avoided for at least 6
weeks because of the risk of Reye syndrome. This vaccine is safe,
well tolerated, but the quadrivalent vaccine is associated with a
small risk of febrile seizures 5–12 days after vaccination among
infants aged 12–23 months. Rashes, when secondary to the
varicella vaccine, appear 15–42 days after vaccination. Rare cases
of zoster among children who received the varicella vaccine are
attributable to delayed vaccination (after age 5), severe asthma, and
developmental disorders. Such complications appear to occur less
often among African American children.
For serosusceptible individuals older than 13 years, two doses of
varicella vaccine (single antigen) administered 4–8 weeks apart is
recommended. For those who received a single dose in the past, a
catch-up second dose is advised, especially in the epidemic setting
(where it is effective when it can be given during the first 5 days
postexposure). Household contacts of immunocompromised
patients should adhere to these recommendations. Susceptible
pregnant women need to receive the first dose of vaccine before
discharge after delivery and the second dose 4–8 weeks later. The
quadrivalent vaccine MMRV can be used for the second doses of
MMR and varicella in patients aged 15 months to 12 years and for
the first dose in patients aged 48 months or older. (Before this age,
the MMR and varicella vaccination can safely be given separately.)
The vaccine, administered 3 months apart, should also be
considered for HIV-infected adolescents and adults with CD4 T
lymphocyte counts ≥ 200 cells/mcL. The vaccine may also be given
to patients with impaired humoral immunity, to patients receiving
corticosteroids, and to patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
who receive methotrexate. Patients receiving high doses of
corticosteroids for over 2 weeks may be vaccinated a month after
discontinuation of the therapy. Patients with leukemia, lymphoma, or
other malignancies whose disease is in remission and who have not
undergone chemotherapy for at least 3 months may be vaccinated.
Kidney and liver transplant patients should be vaccinated if they are
susceptible to varicella.
The incidence of varicella in the United States has been reduced
between 67% and 87% as a consequence of the varicella vaccine.
2. Postexposure—Postexposure vaccination is recommended for
unvaccinated persons without other evidence of immunity.
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG) (in short supply with
production stopped in 2004) or VariZIG (a lyophilized product
available under expanded access since December 2007) should be
considered for susceptible exposed patients who cannot receive the
vaccine, including immunosuppressed patients, neonates from
mothers with varicella around the time of delivery, exposed
premature infants born from serosusceptible mothers at > 28 weeks
of gestation, neonates born at < 28 weeks of gestation regardless of
maternal serostatus, and pregnant women. No controlled studies
have evaluated the use of acyclovir in this setting. VZIG is given by
intramuscular injection in a dosage of 12.5 units/kg up to a
maximum of 625 units, with a repeat identical dose in 3 weeks if a
high-risk patient remains exposed. VZIG has no place in therapy of
established disease.
Further information may be obtained by calling the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention's Immunization Information Hotline
(800-232-2522).
B. Herpes Zoster
A live attenuated VZV vaccine is available and should be offered to
persons 60 years and older. In this population, the vaccine reduces
the incidence of postherpetic neuralgia and herpes zoster by 67%
and 51%, respectively. Before administration of zoster vaccine,
patients do not need to be asked about their history of varicella
(chickenpox) or have sero-logic tests to determine varicella
immunity because the vaccine is safe, tolerated, and immunogenic in
persons with a history of herpes zoster. The attenuated VZV
vaccine is safe and modestly immunogenic among HIV-infected
persons with a CD4 count of at least 300 cells/mcL. The herpes
zoster and pneumococcal vaccines should not be administered
together. Prophylaxis with acyclovir, 800 mg twice daily, can be
considered in patients at high risk for reactivation (eg, allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplant patients).
Kang JH et al. Increased risk of Guillain-Barré syndrome following
recent herpes zoster: a population-based study across Taiwan.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Sep 1;51(5):531–3. [PMID: 20642353]
 
Klein NP et al; Vaccine Safety Datalink. Measles-mumps-
rubellavaricella combination vaccine and the risk of febrile seizures.
Pediatrics. 2010 Jul;126(1):e1–8. [PMID: 20587679]
 
Marin M et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Use of combination measles, mumps, rubella, and varicella
vaccine: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010
May 7;59(RR-3):1–12. [PMID: 20448530]
 
Oxman MN. Zoster vaccine: current status and future prospects.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jul 15;51(2):197–213. [PMID: 20550454]
 
Simberkoff MS et al; Shingles Prevention Study Group. Safety of
herpes zoster vaccine in the shingles prevention study: a
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010 May 4;152(9):545–54.
[PMID: 20439572]
 
Whitley RJ et al. Management of herpes zoster and post-herpetic
neuralgia now and in the future. J Clin Virol. 2010 May;48(Suppl
1):S20–8. [PMID: 20510264]
 
3. Epstein–Barr Virus & Infectious Mononucleosis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Malaise, fever, and sore throat, sometimes with exudates.
 Palatal petechiae, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and,
occasionally, a maculopapular rash.
 Positive heterophil agglutination test (Monospot).
 Atypical large lymphocytes in blood smear; lymphocytosis.
 Possible complications: hepatitis, myocarditis, neuropathy,
encephalitis, airway obstruction secondary to lymph node
enlargement, anti-i hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia.
 
 General Considerations
Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV, or human herpes virus -4 [HHV-4]) is
one of the most ubiquitous human viruses, infecting > 90% of the
adult population worldwide and persisting for the lifetime of the
host. Infectious mononucleosis is a common manifestation of EBV
and may occur at any age. In the United States, EBV infection
usually develops in persons between the ages of 10 and 35 years,
sporadically or epidemically. In the developing world, infectious
mononucleosis occurs at younger ages and tends to be less
symptomatic. Rare cases in the elderly occur usually without the full
symptomatology. EBV is largely transmitted by saliva but can also
be recovered from genital secretions. Saliva may remain infectious
during convalescence for 6 months or longer from symptom onset.
The incubation period lasts several weeks.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The protean manifestations of infectious mononucleosis reflect the
dissemination of the virus in the oral cavity and through peripheral
blood lymphocytes and cell-free plasma. Fever, sore throat, fatigue,
malaise, anorexia, and myalgia typically occur in the early phase of
the illness. Physical findings include lymphadenopathy (discrete,
nonsuppurative, slightly painful, especially along the posterior
cervical chain) and splenomegaly (in up to 50% of patients). A
maculopapular or occasionally petechial rash occurs in < 15% of
patients unless ampicillin has been given (when rash is seen in >
90%). Conjuctival hemorrhage (Figure 32-4), exudative pharyngitis,
tonsillitis, or gingivitis may occur and soft palatal petechiae may be
noted.
Other manifestations include hepatitis, cholestasis, nervous
system involvement (mononeuropathies and occasionally aseptic
meningitis, encephalitis, optic neuritis, transverse myelitis, or
Guillain–Barré syndrome), kidney disease (mostly interstitial
nephritis), pneumonia, pleural involvement, and myocarditis. Airway
obstruction from lymph node enlargement, pericarditis, life-
threatening thrombocytopenia, severe CNS complications, and
massive splenomegaly are all considered indications for
hospitalization or close observation. Mesenteric adenitis may mimic
an acute abdomen.
 
Figure 32–4. Conjunctival hemorrhage of the eye due to
infectious mononucleosis. (Courtesy of Dr. Thomas F. Sellers,
Emory University, Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Initially 
infectious 
mononucleosis 
is 
associated 
with
granulocytopenia followed within 1 week by a lymphocytic
leukocytosis (> 50% of all leukocytes) with atypical lymphocytes
(larger than normal mature lymphocytes, staining more darkly, and
showing vacuolated, foamy cytoplasm and dark nuclear chromatin)
comprising > 10% of the leukocyte count. Hemolytic anemia, with
anti-i antibodies, occurs occasionally as does thrombocytopenia (at
times marked). The diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis is
commonly made on the basis of characteristic manifestations and
serologic evidence of infection (the heterophil (sheep cell
agglutination (HA) antibody tests or the correlated mononucleosis
spot test (Monospot).
These tests usually become positive within 4 weeks after onset of
illness and are specific but often not sensitive in early illness.
Heterophil antibodies may be absent in young children and in as
many as 20% adults. During acute illness, there occurs a rise and
fall in immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody to EB virus capsid antigen
(VCA) and a rise in IgG antibody to VCA, which persists for life.
Antibodies (IgG) to EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) appear after 4
weeks of onset and also persist. Absence of IgG and IgM VCA or
the presence of IgG EBNA should make one reconsider the
diagnosis of acute EBV infection. PCR for EBV DNA is useful in
the evaluation of malignancies associated with EBV. For instance,
detection of EBV DNA in cerebrospinal fluid shows a sensitivity of
90% and specificity of nearly 100% for the diagnosis of primary
CNS lymphoma in patients with AIDS. Monitoring of quantitative
EBV DNA levels (a “viral load”) in blood may be useful in early
detection of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder in high-risk
patients. PCR analysis may also be helpful in detecting primary
infection and infectious mononucleosis in children, in narrowing the
differential diagnosis of CNS processes, and in monitoring disease
and treatment response in primary CNS lymphoma and
posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Detection of specific
IgA antibodies is also being studied as a marker of primary infection
in children. Antibodies against ZEBRA (a replication protein) are
produced in early infection and assays for this antibody are under
commercial development.
 Differential Diagnosis
CMV infection, toxoplasmosis, acute HIV infection, secondary
syphilis, HHV-6, rubella, and drug hypersensitivity reactions may be
indistinguishable from infectious mononucleosis due to EBV, but
exudative pharyngitis is usually absent and the heterophil antibody
tests are negative. With acute HIV infection, rash and
mucocutaneous ulceration are common but atypical lymphocytosis
is much less common. Heterophil-negative infectious mononucleosis
with nonsignificant lymphocytosis (especially if rash or
mucocutaneous ulcers are present) should prompt investigation for
acute HIV infection. Heterophil-negative infectious mononucleosis
with atypical lymphocytosis can be caused by CMV, toxoplasmosis
and, on occasion, EBV itself. Mycoplasmal infection may also
present as pharyngitis, though lower respiratory symptoms usually
predominate. 
A 
hypersensitivity 
syndrome 
induced 
by
carbamazepine or phenytoin may mimic infectious mononucleosis.
The differential diagnosis of acute exudative pharyngitis includes
diphtheria, gonococcal and streptococcal infections, and infections
with adenovirus and herpes simplex. Head and neck soft tissue
infections (pharyngeal and tonsillar abscesses) may occasionally be
mistaken as the lymphadenopathy of mononucleosis.
 Complications
Secondary bacterial pharyngitis can occur and is often
streptococcal. Splenic rupture is a rare but dramatic complication,
and a history of preceding trauma can be elicited in 50% of the
cases. Acalculous cholecystitis, fulminant hepatitis with massive
necrosis, pericarditis and myocarditis are also infrequent
complications. Neurologic involvement—including transverse
myelitis, encephalitis, and Guillain–Barré syndrome—is infrequent.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
Over 95% of patients with acute EBV-associated infectious
mononucleosis recover without specific antiviral therapy. Treatment
is symptomatic with acetaminophen or other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs and warm saline throat irrigations or gargles
three or four times daily. Acyclovir decreases viral shedding but
shows no clinical benefit. Corticosteroid therapy, although
widespread, is not recommended in uncomplicated cases; its use is
reserved for impending airway obstruction from enlarged lymph
nodes, hemolytic anemia, and severe thrombocytopenia. The value
of corticosteroid therapy in impending splenic rupture, pericarditis,
myocarditis, and nervous system involvement is less well defined. If
a throat culture grows β-hemolytic streptococci, a 10-day course of
penicillin or erythromycin is indicated. Ampicillin and amoxicillin are
avoided because of the frequent association with rash.
B. Treatment of Complications
Hepatitis, myocarditis, and encephalitis are treated symptomatically.
Rupture of the spleen requires splenectomy and is most often
caused by deep palpation of the spleen or vigorous activity. Patients
should avoid contact or collision sports for at least 4 weeks to
decrease the risk of splenic rupture (even if splenomegaly is not
detected by physical examination which can be insensitive).
 Prognosis
In cases without complications, fever disappears in 10 days and
lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly in 4 weeks. The debility
sometimes lingers for 2–3 months.
Death is uncommon and is usually due to splenic rupture,
hypersplenic 
phenomena 
(severe 
hemolytic 
anemia,
thrombocytopenic purpura), or encephalitis.
4. Other Epstein–Barr Virus Syndromes
EBV viral antigens are found in > 90% of patients with African
Burkitt lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (among whom
quantified EBV DNA can be used to follow disease). Risk factors
for Burkitt lymphoma include a history of malaria while risk factors
for nasopharyngeal carcinoma include long-term heavy cigarette
smoking and seropositive EBV serologies (VCA) and
deoxyribonuclease (DNase). VCA-IgA in peripheral blood is a
sensitive and specific predictor for nasopharyngeal carcinoma in
endemic areas.
Chronic EBV infection is associated with aberrant cellular
immunity (a low frequency of EBV-specific CD8 cells), an X-linked
lymphoproliferative syndrome (Duncan disease), lymphomatoid
granulomatosis, and a fatal T cell lymphoproliferative disorder in
children. EBV is an important cause of hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis among immunodeficient patients; B-cell
lymphomas, such as primary CNS lymphoma in HIV-infected
individuals; and posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Over
70% of posttransplant lymphoproliferative states are associated
with EBV.
EBV-naïve patients who receive a donor organ from an EBV-
infected donor are at the highest-risk for the development of
posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Rituximab (CD20
monoclonal antibody) is effective in treating some cases of
posttransplant 
lymphoproliferative 
disorder 
and 
is 
often
administered in conjunction with monitoring levels of EBV DNA
load in the blood and, if indicated, CNS. Infusion of EBV-specific
cytotoxic T cell lymphocytes (adoptive cell therapy) is also used but
with a less established role.
Age is a major determinant of the type of tumor EBV causes,
with T and NK cell tumors in childhood caused by chronic active
EBV infections and peripheral T cell lymphomas and diffuse large B
cell lymphomas in the elderly due to waning immunity. EBV is also
associated with leiomyomas in children with AIDS and with nasal T
cell lymphomas.
EBV is often implicated in the pathogenesis of a host of disorders
from Hodgkin disease and gastric carcinoma to multiple sclerosis,
histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi-Fugimoto disease),
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), rheumatic
diseases, and dental disorders (pulpitis and apical periodontitis).
EBV was previously linked with the chronic fatigue syndrome but
there is no persuasive evidence for an association, nor does there
appear to be an association between chronic fatigue syndrome and
xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus. Oral hairy
leukoplakia and its association with EBV are discussed in Chapter
8.
 When to Admit
 
•    Acute meningitis, encephalitis, or acute Guillain-Barré.
•    Severe thrombocytopenia.
•    Potential splenic rupture.
•    Airway obstruction from severe adenitis.
•    Significant hemolysis.
•    Pericarditis.
•    Abdominal findings mimicking an acute abdomen.
Bornkamm GW. Epstein-Barr virus and its role in the pathogenesis
of Burkitt's lymphoma: an unresolved issue. Semin Cancer Biol.
2009 Dec;19(6):351–65. [PMID: 19619654]
 
Parker A et al; Haemato-oncology Task Force of the British
Committee for Standards in Haematology and British
Transplantation Society. Diagnosis of post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disorder in solid organ transplant recipients–
BCSH and BTS Guidelines. Br J Haematol. 2010
Jun;149(5):675–92. [PMID: 20408847]
 
Shah K et al. Epstein-Barr virus and carcinogenesis: beyond
Burkitt's lymphoma. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2009 Nov;15(11):982–
8. [PMID: 19874382]
 
Shiley K et al. Herpes viruses in transplant recipients: HSV, VZV,
human herpes viruses, and EBV. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2010
Jun;24(2):373–93. [PMID: 20466275]
 
Switzer WM et al. Absence of evidence of xenotropic murine
leukemia virus-related virus infection in persons with chronic
fatigue syndrome and healthy controls in the United States.
Retrovirology. 2010 Jul 1;7:57. [PMID: 20594299]
 
5. Cytomegalovirus Disease
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Mononucleosis-like syndrome.
 Frequent pathogen seen in transplant populations.
 Diverse clinical syndromes in HIV (retinitis, esophagitis,
pneumonia, encephalitis).
 Major pathogen to consider in neonates in the differential of
maternally transmitted agents.
 
 General Considerations
Most CMV infections are asymptomatic. After primary infection,
the virus remains latent in most body cells. Seroprevalence in adults
of Western developed countries is about 60–80% but is higher in
developing countries. CMV seroprevalence increases with age,
number of sexual partners, history of prior sexually transmitted
infections, and low socioeconomic status. The virus can be isolated
from a variety of tissues under nonpathogenic conditions.
Transmission occurs through sexual contact, breastfeeding, blood
products, or transplantation; it may also occur person-to-person
(eg, day care centers) or be congenital. Serious disease occurs
primarily in immunocompromised persons.
There are three recognizable clinical syndromes: (1) perinatal
disease and CMV inclusion disease; (2) diseases in
immunocompetent persons; and (3) diseases in immuno-
compromised persons. Congenital CMV infection is the most
common congenital infection in developed countries (between 0.2%
and 2% of all live births, with higher rates in underdeveloped areas
and among lower socioeconomic groups). Transmission is much
higher from mothers with primary disease than those with
reactivation (40% vs 0.2–1.8%). About 10% of infected newborns
will be symptomatic with CMV inclusion disease. In
immunocompetent persons, acute CMV infection is the most
common cause of the mononucleosis-like syndrome with negative
heterophil antibodies. CMV appears to play a role in critically ill
immunocompetent adults wherein it is reactivated and associated
with prolonged hospitalization and death. Other syndromes
associated with CMV and whose role in pathogenesis requires
further 
elucidation 
include 
inflammatory 
bowel 
disease,
atherosclerosis, cognitive decline, and breast cancer. In
immunocompromised persons, tissue and bone marrow
transplant patients are mainly at risk for a year after allograft
transplantation (but especially during the first 100 days afterward)
and in particular when graft-versus-host disease or CMV
seropositivity, or both, are present in the donor and recipient.
Depending on the serostatus of the donor and recipient, disease
may present as primary infection or reactivation. The risk of CMV
disease is proportionate to the intensity of immunosuppression.
CMV itself is immunosuppressive. CMV may contribute to
transplanted organ dysfunction, which often mimics organ rejection.
CMV disease in HIV-infected patients (retinitis, serious
gastrointestinal disease) occurs most prominently when the CD4
count is < 50 cells/mcL. HAART reduces the frequency of retinitis
and may reverse active disease. CMV retinitis may also develop
after solid organ or bone marrow transplantation. CMV retinitis
associated with intravitreal delivery of corticosteroids (injections or
implants) or systemic anti-tumor necrosis factor antibodies is also
described. 
Occasionally, 
CMV 
retinitis 
presents 
in
immunocompetent persons. Serious gastrointestinal CMV disease
also occurs after organ transplantation, cancer chemotherapy, or
corticosteroid therapy. CMV may exist alongside other pathogens,
such as Cryptosporidium, in up to 15% of patients with AIDS
cholangiopathy. CMV pneumonitis occurs in transplant recipients
(mainly bone marrow and lung) with a mortality rate up to 60–80%,
and less often in AIDS patients. CMV pneumonitis in hematologic
malignancies (eg, lymphoma) is increasingly reported. Neurologic
CMV in patients with advanced AIDS is usually associated with
disseminated CMV infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Perinatal disease and CMV inclusion disease—CMV
inclusion disease in infected newborns is characterized by jaundice,
hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, purpura, microcephaly,
periventricular CNS calcifications, mental retardation, and motor
disability. Hearing loss develops in > 50% of infants who are
symptomatic at birth. Most infected neonates are asymptomatic, but
neurologic deficits may ensue later in life, including hearing loss in
15% and mental retardation in 10–20%. Perinatal infection acquired
through breastfeeding or blood products typically shows a benign
clinical course.
2. Disease in immunocompetent persons—Acute acquired
CMV infection is characterized by fever, malaise, myalgias,
arthralgias, and splenomegaly. Exudative pharyngitis or cervical
lymphadenopathies are uncommon, but cutaneous rashes (including
the typical maculopapular rash after exposure to ampicillin) are
common. The mean duration of symptoms is 7–8 weeks.
Complications 
include 
mucosal 
gastrointestinal 
damage,
encephalitis, severe hepatitis, thrombocytopenia (on occasion,
refractory), the Guillain–Barré syndrome, pericarditis, and
myocarditis. The mononucleosis-like syndrome due to CMV can
also occur postsplenectomy, often years later and associated with a
protracted fever, marked lymphocytosis, and impaired anti-CMV
IgM response.
3. Disease in immunocompromised persons—Distinguishing
between CMV infection (with evidence of CMV replication) and
CMV disease (evidence for systemic symptoms or organ invasion)
is important. In addition to patients infected with HIV, those who
have undergone transplantation (solid organ or hematopoietic stem
cell) show a wide spectrum of disease including gastrointestinal
(including acute cholecystitis), renal, and CNS disease, as outlined
above. CMV viral loads correlate with prognosis after
transplantation.
A. 
CMV RETINITIS—A funduscopic examination reveals
neovascular, proliferative lesions (“pizza-pie” retinopathy). Immune
restoration with HAART is associated with CMV vitreitis and
cystoid macular edema. Infants with CMV retinitis tend to have
more macular than peripheral disease.
B. GASTROINTESTINAL AND HEPATOBILIARY CMV—Esophagitis
presents with odynophagia. Gastritis can occasionally cause
bleeding, and small bowel disease may mimic inflammatory bowel
disease or may present as ulceration or perforation. Colonic CMV
disease causes diarrhea, hematochezia, abdominal pain, fever, and
weight loss and may mimic inflammatory bowel disease. CMV
hepatitis commonly complicates liver transplantation and appears to
be increased in those with hepatitis B or hepatitis C viral infection.
C. RESPIRATORY CMV—CMV pneumonitis is characterized by
cough, dyspnea, and relatively little sputum production.
D. NEUROLOGIC CMV—Neurologic syndromes associated with
CMV 
include 
polyradiculopathy, 
transverse 
myelitis,
ventriculoencephalitis (suspected with ependymitis), and focal
encephalitis. These manifestations are more prominent in patients
with advanced AIDS in whom the encephalitis has a subacute
onset.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Mothers and newborns—Pregnant women should be tested
for IgM CMV antibodies every 3 months if an assay during the first
trimester is seropositive. Congenital CMV disease is confirmed by
presence of the virus in amniotic fluid or an IgM assay from fetal
blood. Amniocentesis is less reliable before 21 weeks of gestation
(due to inadequate fetal urinary development and release into the
amniotic fluid), but amniocentesis is attendant with greater risk when
performed after 21 weeks of gestation. PCR assays of dried blood
samples from newborns and micro-enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) on urine, saliva or blood specimens obtained during
the first 3 weeks of life are used to diagnose congenital CMV
infection.
2. Immunocompetent persons—The acute mononucleosis-like
syndrome is characterized by initial leukopenia; within 1 week, it is
followed by absolute lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes.
Abnormal liver function tests are common in the first 2 weeks of the
disease (often 2 weeks after the fever). Detection of CMV specific
IgM or a fourfold increase of specific IgG levels support the
diagnosis of acute infection.
3. Immunocompromised persons—CMV retinitis is diagnosed
on the basis of the characteristic ophthalmoscopic findings. In HIV-
infected patients, negative CMV serologies lower the possibility of
the diagnosis but do not eliminate it. Cultures alone are of little use
in diagnosing AIDS-related CMV infections, since viral shedding of
CMV is common. PCR analysis should be used to diagnose CNS
infection since cultures are insensitive.
Detection of pp65 antigen in blood and determination of
quantitative CMV antigenemia (“viral load”) by PCR are
increasingly used in posttransplant patients for guidance on both
treatment and prevention and should be interpreted in the context of
clinical and pathologic findings. The PCR is more sensitive in
predicting clinical disease. Quantitative PCR of bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid seems to be useful for diagnosing CMV pneumonia.
Rapid shell-vial cultures for detection of early CMV antigens with
fluorescent antibodies have largely replaced the conventional tube
culture (for detection of cytopathic changes) since the time to
positivity is greatly reduced (24–48 hours compared to weeks).
Shell-vial cultures are more useful on bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
than in routine blood monitoring.
A variety of false-positive immunologic assays occur in the setting
of acute CMV infections, including positive rheumatoid factor,
direct Coombs test, cryoglobulins, and speckled antinuclear
antibody.
In gastrointestinal disease, CMV antigenemia is more specific
than sensitive.
C. Imaging
The chest radiographic findings of CMV pneumonitis are consistent
with interstitial pneumonia.
D. Biopsy
Tissue confirmation is especially useful in diagnosing CMV
pneumonitis and CMV gastrointestinal disease; the diagnosis of
colonic CMV disease is made by mucosal biopsy showing
characteristic CMV histopathologic findings of intranuclear (“owl's
eye”) and intracytoplasmic inclusions.
 Treatment
Sight-threatening CMV retinitis (lesions close to the fovea or optic
nerve head) is treated with ganciclovir induction therapy (5 mg/kg
intravenously every 12 hours for 14–21 days) followed by
maintenance therapy at lower doses (5 mg/kg intravenously daily).
Sustained-release 
ganciclovir 
intraocular 
implants 
(always
accompanied by systemic valganciclovir) are another option. In less
severe retinal disease, valganciclovir (900 mg twice daily for 14–21
days followed by 900 mg/d maintenance) is preferred. Due to
potential toxicities, foscarnet, cidofovir, and fomivirsen are usually
reserved for CMV infections that are resistant to ganciclovir.
Combinations of ganciclovir and foscarnet are shown to be safe and
effective in treating clinically resistant CMV retinitis. The role of
HAART in reducing the need for CMV antivirals is essential. Other
forms of CMV disease in AIDS are managed initially with
intravenous ganciclovir and subsequently with oral valganciclovir;
alternative agents (listed above) are used when resistance evolves.
The treatment of other systemic CMV infection (colitis,
encephalitis, pneumonia) involves the use of the main anti-viral
agents used in CMV retinitis. The length of therapy depends on the
state of immunosuppression, and secondary prophylaxis is typically
maintained until immune restoration is present for at least 6 months.
Prolonged 
prophylaxis 
may 
be 
necessary 
in 
other
immunosuppressed patients, such as those receiving tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) inhibitors.
Therapy for CMV disease resulting from a transplantation
procedure is ganciclovir (at same doses as for retinitis) for 2–3
weeks. Oral valganciclovir (900 mg twice daily for 21 days
followed by 900 mg daily for 28 days) is noninferior to intravenous
ganciclovir-based therapy in solid organ transplant patients with
CMV disease and is associated with less clinical resistance than
ganciclovir. Dosage adjustments of all medications are needed for
kidney dysfunction. Reduction of immunosuppression should be
attempted when possible (especially for muromonab, azathioprine,
or mycophenolate mofetil). Other agents that may be useful in
resistant CMV infections include leflunomide, sirolimus-based
therapy, and artesunate. Adoptive immunotherapy is also under
study.
In pregnant women with primary CMV infection, passive
immunization with hyperimmune globulin appears preliminarily to be
effective in both treatment and prevention of fetal infection, but
controlled clinical trials are lacking. While CMV immunoglobulin is
also used in the treatment of CMV pneumonia in stem cell
transplant recipients, its efficacy is not completely established.
 Prevention
No vaccine is currently available although a CMV glyco-protein B
vaccine under development shows 50% efficacy in preventing
congenital disease. HAART is effective in preventing CMV
infections in HIV-infected patients. Use of leukocyte-depleted
blood products effectively reduces the incidence of CMV disease in
patients who have undergone transplantation. Prophylactic and
preemptive strategies (eg, antivirals only when antigen detection or
PCR assays show evidence of active CMV replication) are
effective in preventing disease in the early transplantation period but
are associated with a risk of a late-onset form of the disease after
the prophylaxis is discontinued. The appropriate management of
transplant patients is based on the serostatus of the donor and the
recipient. In most pediatric transplant patients, prophylaxis is
preferred over preemptive therapy. After adult lung transplantation,
valganciclovir prophylaxis is now recommended for 12 months, and
this appears to be effective without the development of resistance to
ganciclovir or toxicity. All effective anti-CMV agents can serve as
prophylactic agents for CMV-seropositive transplants or for CMV-
seronegative recipients of CMV-positive organ transplants. CMV
immune globulin may also be useful in reducing the incidence of
bronchiolitis obliterans in the bone marrow transplant population
and is used in some centers as part of the prophylaxis in kidney,
liver, and lung transplantation patients. CMV immune globulin as
prophylaxis is not recommended in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients.
Withdrawal of infected children from day care centers, reduction
of patient contact by health care workers, screening for women of
childbearing age, or restrictions to breastfeeding are not
recommended because the virus is ubiquitous.
 When to Refer
 
•    Neonatal infections consistent with CMV inclusion
disease.
•    AIDS patients with retinitis, esophagitis, colitis,
hepatobiliary disease, or encephalitis.
•    Organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplants with
suspected reactivation CMV.
 When to Admit
 
•    Risk of colonic perforation.
•    Evaluation of unexplained, advancing encephalopathy.
•    Biopsy of tissues in the differential diagnosis of
transplant rejection vs infection.
•    Initiation of treatment with intravenous anti-CMV agents.
Cannon MJ et al. Review of cytomegalovirus seroprevalence and
demographic characteristics associated with infection. Rev Med
Virol. 2010 Jul;20(4):202–13. [PMID: 20564615]
 
de Pagter PJ et al. Human herpesvirus type 6 reactivation after
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. J Clin Virol. 2008
Dec;43(4):361–6. [PMID: 18829379]
 
Kotton CN et al; Transplantation Society International CMV
Consensus Group. International consensus guidelines on the
management of cytomegalovirus in solid organ transplantation.
Transplantation. 2010 Apr 15;89(7):779–95. [PMID: 20224515]
 
6. Human Herpesviruses 6, 7, & 8
HHV-6 is a B cell lymphotropic virus that is the principal cause of
exanthema subitum (roseola infantum, sixth disease). Primary HHV-
6 infection occurs most commonly in children under 2 years of age
and is a major cause of infantile febrile seizures. HHV-6 is also
associated with encephalitis (symptoms may include insomnia,
seizures, and hallucinations) and with acute liver failure. Primary
infection in immunocompetent adults is rare and can produce a
mononucleosis-like 
illness. 
Reactivation 
of 
HHV-6 
in
immunocompetent adults is rare and can present as encephalitis.
Imaging studies in HHV-6 encephalitis typically show lesions in the
hippocampus, amygdala, and limbic structures.
Infection during pregnancy and congenital transmission is
recognized. Most cases of reactivation, however, occur in
immunocompromised persons. Reactivation is associated with graft
rejection, graft-versus-host disease, and bone marrow suppression
in transplant patients and with encephalitis and pneumonitis in AIDS
patients and in recipients of hematopoietic cell transplants. HHV-6
is on occasion also associated with drug-induced hypersensitivity
syndromes that may evolve into diabetes mellitus. The roles of
HHV-6 in multiple sclerosis, chronic fatigue syndrome, certain
malignancies, 
myocarditis 
and 
progressive 
multifocal
leukoencephalopathy remain unproven. HHV-6 may cause
fulminant hepatic failure and acute decompensation of chronic liver
disease in children. There is a case report of purpura fulminans with
HHV-6 infection.
Two variants (A and B) of HHV-6 have been identified. HHV-
6B is the predominant strain found in both normal and
immunocompromised persons. Ganciclovir, cidofovir, and foscarnet
(but not acyclovir) appear to be clinically active against HHV-6.
HHV-7 is a T cell lymphotropic virus that is associated with
roseola (serologically), seizures and, rarely, encephalitis. Pregnant
women are often infected. Infection with HHV-7 is synergistic with
CMV in kidney transplant recipients. The membrane glycoprotein
CD4 is involved in HHV-7 recognition, but a clinical interaction
between HHV-7 and HIV is not established.
HHV-8 is associated with Kaposi sarcoma, multicentric
Castleman disease and primary effusion (body cavity) lymphoma.
See Chapter 31 for pathogenesis and management.
Ogata M. Human herpesvirus 6 in hematological malignancies. J
Clin Exp Hematop. 2009 Nov;49(2):57–67. [PMID: 19907110]
 
Provenzale JM et al. Clinical and imaging findings suggesting
human herpesvirus 6 encephalitis. Pediatr Neurol. 2010
Jan;42(1):32–9. [PMID: 20004860]
 
Schleiss MR. Cytomegalovirus vaccines: at last, a major step
forward. Herpes. 2009 Jan;15(3):44–5. [PMID: 19306601]
 
Syggelou A et al. Congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 2010 Sep;1205:144–7. [PMID: 20840266]
 
Vinnard C et al. A report of human herpesvirus 6-associated
encephalitis in a solid organ transplant recipient and a review of
previously published cases. Liver Transpl. 2009 Oct;15(10):
1242–6. [PMID: 19790143]
 
MAJOR VACCINE-PREVENTABLE VIRAL
INFECTIONS
1. Measles
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure 10–14 days before onset in an unvaccinated patient.
 Prodrome of fever, coryza, cough, conjunctivitis, malaise,
irritability, photophobia, Koplik spots.
 Rash: brick-red, irregular, maculopapular; onset 3–4 days after
onset of prodrome; begins on the face and proceeds “downward
and outward,” affecting the palms and soles last.
 Leukopenia.
 
 General Considerations
Measles is a reportable acute systemic paramyxoviral infection
transmitted by inhalation of infective droplets. It is a major
worldwide cause of pediatric morbidity and mortality, although
vaccination programs successfully reduced this number from nearly
750,000 deaths in 2000 to an estimated 197,000 in 2007 (with
particular achievement in Southeast Asia). Illness confers permanent
immunity. It is highly contagious and communicability is greatest
during the preeruptive and catarrhal stages but continues as long as
the rash remains. Despite high community vaccination coverage,
rising rates of intentional undervaccination lead to sporadic
outbreaks among clusters of intentionally undervaccinated children
and can undermine measles elimination programs. Therefore,
laboratory testing and confirmation of suspected measles infection is
especially important in countries that report the elimination of
measles. Sporadic outbreaks of the disease in adults, adolescents,
and unvaccinated preschool children in dense urban areas, and
sporting event participants emphasize the need for specific
recommendations concerning prevention (see below).
In the United States, measles was declared eliminated in 2000.
The few reported cases since then are largely imported and
geographically dispersed, and the associated isolates fail to show a
recurrent 
strain. 
Immigrants 
and 
refugees 
can 
show
serosusceptibility rates to measles in excess of 35%.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Fever is often as high as 40–40.6 °C. It persists through the
prodrome and early rash (about 5–7 days) (Table 32–2). Malaise
may be marked. Coryza (nasal obstruction, sneezing, and sore
throat) resembles that seen with upper respiratory infections. Cough
is persistent and nonproductive. Conjunctivitis manifests as redness,
swelling, photophobia, and discharge. These symptoms intensify
over 2–4 days before onset of the rash and peak on the first day of
the rash.
Koplik spots (small, irregular, and red with whitish center on the
mucous membranes) are pathognomonic of measles. They appear
about 2 days before the rash and last 1–4 days as tiny “table salt
crystals” in the buccal mucosa opposite the molars and vaginal
membranes. The rash usually appears on the face and behind the
ears 4 days after the onset of symptoms. The initial lesions are
pinhead-sized papules that coalesce to form a brick-red, irregular,
blotchy maculopapular rash. In severe cases, the rash coalesces to
form a nearly uniform erythema in some areas. The rash next
appears on the trunk, followed by the extremities, including the
palms (25–50% of those infected) and soles. The rash lasts for 3–7
days and fades in the same manner it appeared. Hyperpigmentation
remains in fair-skinned individuals and severe cases. Slight
desquamation may follow.
Other findings in measles include pharyngeal erythema, tonsillar
yellowish exudate, coating of the tongue in the center with a red tip
and margins, moderate generalized lymphadenopathy and, at times,
splenomegaly.
Atypical measles is a syndrome occurring in adults who
received inactivated measles vaccine (1963–1968) or who received
live measles vaccine before age 12 months and as a result
developed hypersensitivity rather than protective immunity. Infection
later in life with wild measles virus can lead to a potentially fatal
illness with high fever; unusual rashes (papular, hemorrhagic), most
prominent on the extremities, without Koplik spots; headache;
arthralgias; hepatitis; a high rate of pneumonitis, and sometimes
pleural effusions. Measles antibody titers tend to be very high after
the appearance of the exanthem.
Measles may be distinctive in HIV-infected individuals, with
higher rates of pneumonitis, higher mortality, prolonged viral
shedding, and higher vaccine failure rates. Measles during
pregnancy is not known to cause congenital abnormalities of the
fetus. It is, however, associated with spontaneous abortion and
premature delivery and can cause severe disease in the mother.
Although measles does not always develop in the offspring of
mothers with the disease, it can be severe when it does. It is
recommended that infants born to such mothers be passively
immunized with immunoglobulin at birth.
The virologic clearance of measles can take months.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukopenia is usually present unless secondary bacterial
complications exist. A lymphocyte count under 2000/mcL is a poor
prognostic sign. Thrombocytopenia is common. Proteinuria is often
observed. Although technically difficult, virus can be cultured from
nasopharyngeal washings and from blood. Detection of IgM
measles antibodies with ELISA or a fourfold rise in serum
hemagglutination inhibition antibody supports the diagnosis.
Fluorescent antibody staining of respiratory or urinary epithelial cells
can also confirm the diagnosis. PCR techniques are available in
research settings.
 Differential Diagnosis
Measles is usually diagnosed clinically but may be mistaken for
other exanthematous infections (see Table 32–2). Frequent difficulty
in establishing a diagnosis suggests that measles may be more
prevalent than is recognized.
 Complications
A. Central Nervous System
Postinfectious encephalomyelitis occurs in about 0.05–0.1% of
cases. Higher rates of encephalitis occur in adolescents and adults
than in school-aged children. Its onset is usually 3–7 days after the
rash. Vomiting, convulsions, coma, and diverse, severe neurologic
symptoms and signs may develop. Treatment is symptomatic and
supportive. Virus is usually not found in the CNS, though
demyelination is prominent. There is an appreciable mortality (10–
20%) and morbidity (33% of survivors are left with neurologic
deficit).
A similar form, “inclusion body encephalitis,” occurs months after
exposure. This complication is reported to occur after measles
vaccination in patients with inadequate cellular immunity but is
associated with isolation of the measles virus.
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a very late
CNS complication (5–15 years after infection; the measles virus
acts as a “slow virus” to produce degenerative CNS disease years
after the initial infection. SSPE is rare (1:100,000 cases of measles)
and occurs more often when measles develops early in life among
males who live in rural environments. SSPE very rarely develops in
adults.
Measles virus can opportunistically invade the CNS. An acute
progressive 
encephalitis 
(subacute 
measles 
encephalitis),
characterized by seizures, neurologic deficits, and often progressive
stupor and death, can occur among immunosuppressed patients.
Treatment 
is 
supportive, 
withholding 
immunosuppressive
chemotherapy when feasible. Interferon and ribavirin are variably
successful.
B. Respiratory Tract Disease
Early in the course of the disease, bronchopneumonia or
bronchiolitis due to the measles virus may occur in up to 5% of
patients and result in serious respiratory difficulties. Bronchiectases
may occur in up to a quarter of nonvaccinated children. Pneumonia
occurring with or without an evanescent rash is seen in atypical
measles.
C. Secondary Bacterial Infections
Immediately following measles, secondary bacterial infection,
particularly cervical adenitis, otitis media (the most common
complication), and pneumonia, occurs in about 15% of patients.
D. Immune Reactivity
Measles produces temporary anergy to cell-mediated skin tests.
E. Gastroenteritis
Diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy (prodromal rectal Koplik
spots may be seen) are significant complications among
malnourished children.
F. Other Complications
Other complications include conjunctivitis, keratitis, and
otosclerosis.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
The patient should be isolated for the week following onset of rash
and kept at bed rest until afebrile. Treatment is symptomatic
including antipyretics and fluids as needed. Vitamin A, 200,000
units/d orally for 2 days (the benefit being maintenance of
gastrointestinal and respiratory epithelial mucosa), reduces pediatric
morbidity rates although high-dose vitamin A exposure increases the
severity and risk of antibiotic failure in non measles pneumonia and
appears to increase mortality when diphtheria–pertussis–tetanus
(DPT) was the most recently given vaccine. Measles virus is
susceptible to ribavirin in vitro and has been used in selected severe
cases of pneumonitis (35 mg/kg/d intravenously in three divided
doses for 2 days, followed by 20 mg/kg/d intravenously in three
divided doses for 5 days).
B. Treatment of Complications
Secondary bacterial infections, including pneumonia, are treated
with appropriate antibacterial antibiotics. Postmeasles encephalitis,
including SSPE, can be managed only symptomatically.
Repeated studies fail to show an association between vaccination
and autism. The prevalence of asthma-like diseases in childhood
appears to be reduced among vaccinated children. Some data
implicate the measles virus in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid
arthritis.
 Prognosis
Between 1999 and 2005, measles mortality rate was reduced an
estimated 60%. In the last decade, the case-fatality rate in the
United States stayed around 3 per 1000 reported cases, with
deaths principally due to encephalitis (15% mortality rate) and
secondary bacterial pneumonia. Deaths in the developing world are
mainly related to diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy.
 Prevention
In the United States, children receive their first vaccine dose at 12–
15 months and a second at age 4–6 years prior to entry into school.
Combination measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccines (MMRV)
can be used in place of the traditional measles, mumps, and rubella
(MMR) vaccine.
American students beyond high school and medical staff starting
employment require documentation of the above vaccination
schedule or must show serologic evidence of immunity if they were
born after 1956. For individuals born before 1957, herd immunity is
assumed. Health care workers, immigrants, and refugees should be
screened and vaccinated if necessary regardless of date of birth.
At 6 months of age, more than 99% of infants of vaccinated
women and 95% of infants of naturally immune women lose
maternal antibodies. Therefore, in outbreaks that include infants
under 1 year of age, initial vaccination may be given at 6 months,
with repeat at 15 months. When outbreaks take place in day care
centers, K–12 institutions, or colleges and universities, revaccination
is probably indicated for all, in particular for students and their
siblings born after 1956 who do not have documentation of
immunity as defined above. Susceptible personnel who have been
exposed should be isolated from patient contact between the fifth
and the twenty-first day after exposure regardless of whether they
were vaccinated or given immune globulin. If measles develops in
these persons, they should be isolated from patient contact until 7
days after the rash develops.
When susceptible individuals are exposed to measles, live virus
vaccine can prevent disease if given within 5 days of exposure. In
addition, immune globulin (0.25 mL/kg [0.11 mL/lb] body weight)
can be injected intramuscularly for prevention or modification of
clinical illness if given within 6 days after exposure. This must be
followed by active immunization with live measles vaccine 3 months
later. Vaccination of all immunocompetent persons born after 1956
who travel to the developing world is important. In the developing
world, the use of a second vaccine dose is an important aspect of
achieving control of measles in the community.
Pregnant women and immunosuppressed persons should not
receive this vaccine. Exception to this contraindication is
asymptomatic HIV-infected patients, including children, who have
not shown adverse effects from measles vaccination. In
asymptomatic HIV-infected children, vaccination improves survival
after measles, and HAART therapy is associated with an improved
vaccine response. Repeat vaccination may be necessary in HIV-
infected children after immune restoration. Immune globulin should
be administered within 6 days of exposure for postexposure
prophylaxis in any high-risk person exposed to measles. Such high-
risk persons include children with malignancy and patients with
AIDS who are at risk for developing severe or fatal disease.
Severe allergic reactions including anaphylaxis to the MMR
vaccine are rare, though fever and rash appear to occur slightly
more often among female recipients. Quadrivalent MMRV vaccine
is associated with an increased risk of seizures that appears to be
age-related; the risk is highest when MMRV is given to infants
under 15 months of age. An aerosolized measles vaccine shows
promising results in small clinical trials with hopes for availability in
the near future. Future vaccines for a variety of infectious agents
may utilize measles vectors, thereby augmenting immunity to
measles. Rare cases of post-immunization encephalitis represent a
form of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (which can occur after
many other vaccines including rabies, DPT, smallpox, and hepatitis
B virus vaccinations).
 When to Refer
 
•    Any suspect cases should be reported to public health
authorities.
•    HIV infection.
•    Pregnancy.
 When to Admit
 
•    Meningitis, encephalitis, or myelitis.
•    Severe pneumonia.
•    Diarrhea that significantly compromises fluid or
electrolyte status.
Gerber JS et al. Vaccines and autism: a tale of shifting hypotheses.
Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Feb 15;48(4):456–61. [PMID: 19128068]
 
Leuridan E et al. Early waning of maternal measles antibodies in
era of measles elimination: longitudinal study. BMJ. 2010 May
18;340:c1626. [PMID: 20483946]
 
Omer SB et al. Vaccine refusal, mandatory immunization, and the
risks of vaccine-preventable diseases. N Engl J Med. 2009 May
7;360(19):1981–8. [PMID: 19420367]
 
Sugerman DE et al. Measles outbreak in a highly vaccinated
population, San Diego, 2008: role of the intentionally under-
vaccinated. Pediatrics. 2010 Apr;125(4):747–55. [PMID:
20308208]
 
2. Mumps
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure 14–21 days before onset.
 Painful, swollen salivary glands, usually parotid.
 Frequent involvement of testes, pancreas, and meninges in
unvaccinated individuals.
 
 General Considerations
Mumps is a paramyxoviral disease spread by respiratory droplets.
Children are the age group most affected, although in some
outbreaks, patients are in the late second or early third decades of
life. Mumps can spread rapidly in congregate settings, such as
colleges and schools. The incidence is highest in spring. The
incubation period is 14–21 days (average, 18 days). Infectivity
occurs via saliva and urine and precedes the symptoms by about 1
day and is maximal for 3 days, although it may last a week. Up to
one-third of affected individuals have subclinical infection. In 2006,
an outbreak of mumps in the United States occurred and involved
over 6000 persons; 85% of these cases were reported from eight
Midwestern states. Another mumps outbreak involving 1521 cases
was reported in 2009 at a summer camp in New York.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Mumps is more serious in adults than in children. Parotid tenderness
and overlying facial edema (Figure 32–5) are the most common
physical findings and typically develop within 48 hours of the
prodromal symptoms. Usually, one parotid gland enlarges before
the other, but unilateral parotitis alone occurs in 25% of patients.
The orifice of Stensen duct may be red and swollen. Trismus may
result from parotitis. The parotid glands return to normal within a
week. Involvement of other salivary glands (submaxillary and
sublingual) occurs in 10% of cases.
Fever and malaise are variable but often minimal in young
children. High fever accompanies meningitis or orchitis. Neck
stiffness, headache, and lethargy suggest meningitis. Testicular
swelling and tenderness (unilateral in 75% of cases) denote orchitis;
the testes are the most common extrasalivary site of disease in
adults. Orchitis develops 7–10 days after the onset of parotitis in
about 25–40% of postpubertal men, but sterility is rare. Acute
hormonal disturbances are prevalent, including decreased levels of
testosterone and inhibin B with low or normal levels of
gonadotropins in up to 35% cases with mumps orchitis. Upper
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting suggest pancreatitis. Mumps
is the leading cause of pancreatitis in children. Lower abdominal
pain and ovarian enlargement suggest oophoritis (which occurs in
5% of postpubertal women, usually unilateral); it is a difficult
diagnosis to establish.
B. Laboratory Findings
Mild leukopenia with relative lymphocytosis may be present. Serum
amylasemia usually reflects salivary gland involvement rather than
pancreatitis. Lymphocytic pleocytosis and hypoglychorrhachia of
the cerebrospinal fluid in meningitis may be asymptomatic. Mild
kidney function abnormalities are found in up to 60% of patients.
 
Figure 32–5. Mumps. (Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
Characteristic clinical picture is usually sufficient for diagnosis.
Confirmatory diagnosis of mumps is made by isolating the virus
preferably from a swab of the duct of the parotid or other affected
salivary gland. The virus can also be isolated from cerebrospinal
fluid early in the course of aseptic meningitis. Isolation from urine is
no longer advised. Nucleic acid amplification techniques are more
sensitive than viral cultures but their availability is limited. An
elevated serum IgM is also considered diagnostic and a repeat test
2–3 weeks after the onset of symptoms is recommended if the first
assay is negative due to a delay in IgM rise, especially in vaccinated
persons. A fourfold rise in complement-fixing antibodies to mumps
virus in paired serum IgG also confirms infection.
 Differential Diagnosis
Swelling of the parotid gland may be due to calculi in the parotid
ducts, tumors, or cysts, or to a reaction to iodides. Other causes
include starch ingestion, sarcoidosis, cirrhosis, diabetes, bulimia,
pilocarpine usage, and Sjögren syndrome. Parotitis may be
produced by pyogenic organisms (eg, S aureus, gram-negative
organisms), particularly in debilitated individuals with poor oral
intake, drug reaction (phenothiazines, propylthiouracil), and other
viruses (influenza A, parainfluenza, EBV infection, coxsackie-
viruses, adenoviruses, HHV-6). Swelling of the parotid gland must
be differentiated from inflammation of the lymph nodes located
more posteriorly and inferiorly than the parotid gland.
 Complications
Other manifestations of the disease are less common and usually
follow parotitis but may precede it or occur without salivary gland
involvement. Such manifestations include meningitis (30%), orchitis
(which on rare occasion leads to priapism or testicular infarction),
pancreatitis (usually mild), oophoritis, thyroiditis, neuritis, hepatitis,
myocarditis, thrombocytopenia, migratory arthralgias (noted
infrequently among adults and rarely in children), and nephritis.
Mumps has also been associated with cases of endocardial
fibroelastosis.
Rare neurologic complications include encephalitis, Guillain–
Barré syndrome, cerebellar ataxia, facial palsy, and transverse
myelitis. Encephalitis is associated with cerebral edema, serious
neurologic manifestations, and sometimes death. Deafness from
eighth nerve neuritis develops in about 0.1%; it is typically unilateral,
severe, and permanent.
 Treatment
A. General Measures
The patient should be isolated until swelling subsides (about 9 days
from onset) and kept on bed rest while febrile. Treatment is
symptomatic. Topical compresses may relieve parotid discomfort.
Some clinicians advocate intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for
complicated disease (eg, thrombocytopenia) although its definitive
role is unproven.
B. Management of Complications
1. Aseptic meningitis—The treatment is symptomatic. The
management of encephalitis requires attention to cerebral edema,
the airway, and vital functions.
2. Epididymo-orchitis—The scrotum should be supported with a
suspensor or toweling “bridge” and ice bags applied. Incision of the
tunica may be necessary in severe cases. Pain can be relieved with
opioids, or by injecting the spermatic cord at the external inguinal
ring with 10–20 mL of 1% procaine solution. The merit of hydro-
cortisone sodium succinate (100 mg intravenously, followed by 20
mg orally every 6 hours for 2 or 3 days) in reducing inflammation is
not firmly established. Interferon alfa-2b may be useful in preventing
testicular atrophy.
3. Pancreatitis—Symptomatic treatment should be provided, with
emphasis on parenteral hydration.
 Prognosis
The entire course of mumps rarely exceeds 2 weeks. Rare fatalities
are usually due to encephalitis.
 Prevention
Mumps live virus vaccine is safe and effective (there is some
variability among vaccines, the Jeryl Lynn strain being highly
effective, the Urabe intermediate, the Rubini less so) with long
lasting immunity. It is recommended for routine immunization for
children over age 1 year, either alone or in combination with other
virus vaccines (eg, in the MMR vaccine or as a quadrivalent vaccine
with varicella). A second dose is recommended for children (ages
4–6 years) before starting school. Two doses of the vaccine should
also be considered for high-risk individuals (eg, health care
workers) born before 1957 and without evidence of immunity.
There are no known cases of long-term sequelae associated with
mumps vaccination and the currently used mumps strain (Jeryl
Lynn) shows the lowest associated incidence of post vaccine
aseptic meningitis (from 1 in 150,000 to 1 in 1.8 million). This
vaccine is less effective in epidemic settings. Reactions are reviewed
in the measles section. It should not be given to pregnant women or
to immunocompromised individuals, though the vaccine has been
given to asymptomatic HIV-infected individuals without adverse
sequelae, especially when the individuals are taking HAART. In the
developed world, persons in whom mumps develops are less likely
to have received a second vaccine dose. The mumps skin tests are
less reliable than serum neutralization titers in determining immunity.
 When to Refer
Any suspect cases should be reported to public health authorities.
 When to Admit
 
•    Trismus.
•    Meningitis, encephalitis.
•    Severe abdominal pain or vomiting suggesting
pancreatitis.
•    Severe testicular pain.
•    Priapism.
•    Severe thrombocytopenia.
•    Myocarditis.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Update:
mumps outbreak–New York and New Jersey, June 2009–January
2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Feb
12;59(5):125–9. [PMID: 20150887]
 
Dayan GH et al. Recent resurgence of mumps in the United States.
N Engl J Med. 2008 Apr 10;358(15):1580–9. [PMID:
18403766]
 
Smith PJ et al. The association between intentional delay of
vaccine administration and timely childhood vaccination coverage.
Public Health Rep. 2010 Jul–Aug;125(4):534–41. [PMID:
20597453]
 
Ternavasio-de la Vega HG et al. Mumps orchitis in the post-
vaccine era (1967–2009): a single-center series of 67 patients and
review of clinical outcome and trends. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010
Mar;89(2):96–116. [PMID: 20517181]
 
3. Poliomyelitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Incubation period 9–12 days from exposure.
 Muscle weakness, headache, stiff neck, fever, nausea and
vomiting, sore throat.
 Lower motor neuron lesion (flaccid paralysis) with decreased
deep tendon reflexes and muscle wasting.
 Cerebrospinal fluid shows excess leukocytes, with lymphocytic
predominance; count is rarely > 500/mcl.
 
 General Considerations
Poliomyelitis virus, an enterovirus, is present in throat washings and
stools (excretion may last for weeks after infection). It is highly
contagious through fecal–oral route, especially during the first week
of infection. By 2005, because of global vaccination efforts,
indigenous transmission of wild poliovirus (WPV) types 1 and 3
were eliminated from all but four countries (Afghanistan, India,
Nigeria, and Pakistan) and no cases of WPV type 2 were reported
since 1999. During 2009, a total of 1606 cases of WPV infection
were reported (down from 350,000 in 1988). Globally, 12
independent outbreaks of vaccine-derived polio virus (VDPV) are
reported to date. The last major outbreak in the Western
Hemisphere occurred in Hispaniola (Haiti and the Dominican
Republic) from 2000 to 2001. An ongoing outbreak of type 2
VDPV in Nigeria is reportedly the largest to date and is unique in
occurring in the presence of extensive transmission of indigenous
type 1 and 3 WPV. An ongoing outbreak of type 1 WPV in
Congo-Brazzaville is unique in infecting mostly adult males, with
mortality as high as 40%. The last VDPV case in the United States
occurred in 2005, with the patient acquiring the infection during
travel in Central America.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
At least 95% of infections are asymptomatic, but in those who
become ill, manifestations include abortive poliomyelitis (minor
illness), nonparalytic poliomyelitis, and paralytic poliomyelitis.
1. Abortive poliomyelitis (minor illness)—Such minor illness
occurs in 4–8% of infections and the symptoms are fever,
headache, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, and sore throat lasting
2–3 days. This entity is suspected clinically only during an epidemic.
2. Nonparalytic poliomyelitis—In addition to the above
symptoms, signs of meningeal irritation and muscle spasm occur in
the absence of frank paralysis. This disease is indistinguishable from
aseptic meningitis caused by other viruses.
3. Paralytic poliomyelitis—Paralytic poliomyelitis represents
0.1% of all poliomyelitis cases (the incidence is higher when
infections are acquired later in life). Paralysis may occur at any time
during the febrile period. Tremors, muscle weakness, constipation,
and ileus may appear. Paralytic poliomyelitis is divided into two
forms, which may coexist: (1) spinal poliomyelitis, with
involvement of the muscles innervated by the spinal nerves, and (2)
bulbar poliomyelitis, with weakness of the muscles supplied by
the cranial nerves (especially nerves IX and X) and of the
respiratory and vasomotor centers.
In spinal poliomyelitis, paralysis of the shoulder girdle often
precedes intercostal and diaphragmatic paralysis, which leads to
diminished chest expansion and decreased vital capacity. The
paralysis occurs over 2–3 days, is flaccid, has an asymmetric
distribution, and affects the proximal muscles of the lower
extremities more frequently. Sensory loss is very rare.
In 
bulbar 
poliomyelitis, 
symptoms 
include 
diplopia
(uncommonly), facial weakness, dysphagia, dysphonia, nasal voice,
weakness of the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles,
difficulty in chewing, inability to swallow or expel saliva, and
regurgitation of fluids through the nose. The most life-threatening
aspect of bulbar poliomyelitis is respiratory paralysis. Lethargy or
coma may be due to hypoxia, most often from hypoventilation.
Vasomotor disturbances in blood pressure and heart rate may
occur. Convulsions are rare. Bulbar poliomyelitis is more common
in adults.
B. Laboratory Findings
The peripheral white blood cell count may be normal or mildly
elevated. Cerebrospinal fluid pressure and protein are normal or
slightly increased. Glucose is not decreased. White blood cells
usually number < 500/mcL and are principally lymphocytes after the
first 24 hours. Cerebrospinal fluid is normal in 5% of patients. The
virus may be recovered from throat washings (early) and stools
(early and late). Neutralizing and complement-fixing antibodies
appear during the first or second week of illness. Serologic testing
cannot distinguish between wild-type and vaccine-related virus
infections.
 Differential Diagnosis
Nonparalytic poliomyelitis is similar to other forms of enteroviral
meningitis; the distinction is made serologically. Acute flaccid
paralysis is the term used in the developing world for the variety of
neurologic illnesses that both include and mimic poliomyelitis. Acute
flaccid paralysis due to poliomyelitis is distinguished by the greater
frequency of fever and asymmetric neurologic signs. Acute
inflammatory polyneuritis (Guillain–Barré syndrome), Japanese B
virus encephalitis, West Nile virus infection, and tick paralysis may
resemble poliomyelitis. In Guillain–Barré syndrome (see Chapter
24), the weakness is more symmetric and ascending in most cases,
but the Miller–Fisher variant is quite similar to bulbar polio.
Paresthesias are uncommon in poliomyelitis but common in Guillain–
Barré syndrome. The cerebrospinal fluid usually has high protein
content but normal cell count in Guillain–Barré syndrome.
 Complications
Urinary tract infection, atelectasis, pneumonia, myocarditis, paralytic
ileus, gastric dilation, and pulmonary edema may occur. Respiratory
failure may be a result of paralysis of respiratory muscles, airway
obstruction from involvement of cranial nerve nuclei, or lesions of
the respiratory center.
 Treatment
In the acute phase of paralytic poliomyelitis patients should be
hospitalized. Strict bed rest in the first few days of illness reduces
the rate of paralysis. Comfortable but rotating positions should be
maintained in a “polio bed”: firm mattress, footboard, sponge
rubber pads or rolls, sandbags, and light splints. Intensive
physiotherapy may help recover some motor function with paralysis.
Fecal impaction and urinary retention (especially with paraplegia)
are managed appropriately. In cases of respiratory weakness or
paralysis, intensive care is needed. The anti-viral pleconaril shows
no clear benefit in cases of polio meningoencephalitis.
 Prognosis
During the febrile period, paralysis may develop or progress. Mild
weakness of small muscles is more likely to regress than severe
weakness of large muscles. Bulbar poliomyelitis carries a mortality
rate of up to 50%. Long-term sequelae include pain, weakness, and
fatigue. When new muscle weakness and pain develop and
progress slowly years after recovery from acute paralytic
poliomyelitis, the entity is called postpoliomyelitis syndrome. This
syndrome presents with signs of chronic and new denervation, is
associated with increasing dysfunction of surviving motor neurons,
and is not infectious in origin; patients do not shed the virus. Immune
modulators, such as prednisone, interferon, and IVIG, do not show
any clear benefits in the treatment of postpoliomyelitis syndrome.
 Prevention
Given the epidemiologic distribution of poliomyelitis and the
continued concern about vaccine-associated disease (estimated in
1:750,000 recipients) with the trivalent oral live poliovirus vaccine
(OPV), the inactive (Salk) parenteral vaccination is currently used in
the United States for all four recommended doses (at ages 2
months, 4 months, 6–18 months, and at 4–6 years). Inactivated
vaccine is also routinely used elsewhere in the developed world.
Oral vaccines are limited to usage for outbreak control, travel to
endemic areas within the ensuing month, and protection of children
whose parents do not comply with the recommended number of
immunizations. The advantages of oral vaccination are the ease of
administration, low cost, effective local gastrointestinal and
circulating immunity, and herd immunity.
Routine immunization of adults in the United States is no longer
recommended because of the low incidence of the disease.
Exceptions include adults not vaccinated within the prior decade
who are exposed to poliomyelitis or who plan to travel to endemic
areas (mentioned above). Vaccination should also be considered
for adults engaged in high-risk activities (eg, laboratory workers
handling stools). Such adults should be given inactivated
poliomyelitis vaccine (Salk) as should immunodeficient or immuno-
suppressed individuals and members of their households.
In the developing world, three doses of OPV seem sufficient for
adequate immunization and the interval between doses should
probably be > 1 month (because of interference from enteric
pathogens). Intramuscular injections should be routinely avoided
during the month following oral poliomyelitis vaccination to prevent
provocation paralysis. Ancillary useful control measures
(“supplementary immunization activities”) in polio-endemic countries
include national immunization days (mass campaigns in which all
children are vaccinated twice, 4–6 weeks apart, regardless of
vaccine history); cross-border vaccination activities; surveillance for
acute flaccid paralysis, an indicator for poliomyelitis; and aggressive
outbreak responses as well as intensified immunization activities in
countries impacted by armed conflicts.
VDPV cases with the oral Sabin vaccination are due to mutations
leading to neurovirulence. Such cases serve as a reminder of the
need to maintain high levels of immunization coverage even in the
absence of overt disease. An immunogenic monovalent type 1 oral
vaccine (several times more effective than the trivalent oral vaccine)
is successfully used in India, Egypt, and Nigeria. Cost and
administrative considerations along with a need for effective herd
immunity remain major reasons the oral Sabin is still administered.
There is no epidemiologic evidence to implicate poliomyelitis
vaccination as a cause for recurrent worsening wheezing or eczema
in childhood.
 When to Refer
 
•    Neurologic compromise.
•    Any suspicious cases should be referred to public
health authorities.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Progress
toward interruption of wild poliovirus transmission–worldwide,
2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 May
14;59(18):545–50. [PMID: 20467412]
 
Gonzalez H et al. Management of postpolio syndrome. Lancet
Neurol. 2010 Jun;9(6):634–42. [PMID: 20494327]
 
Heinsbroek E et al. The global introduction of inactivated polio
vaccine can circumvent the oral polio vaccine paradox. Vaccine.
2010 May 14;28(22):3778–83. [PMID: 20362626]
 
Jenkins HE et al. Implications of a circulating vaccine-derived
poliovirus in Nigeria. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jun 24;362(25):2360–
9. [PMID: 20573924]
 
4. Rubella
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure 14–21 days before onset.
 Arthralgia, particularly in young women.
 No prodrome in children, mild prodrome in adults; mild
symptoms (fever, malaise, coryza) coinciding with eruption.
 Posterior cervical and postauricular lymphadenopathy 5–10 days
before rash.
 Fine maculopapular rash of 3 days duration; face to trunk to
extremities.
 Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia.
 
 General Considerations
Rubella is a systemic disease caused by a togavirus transmitted by
inhalation of infective droplets. It is only moderately communicable.
One attack usually confers permanent immunity but reinfection is
possible, albeit rarely. The incubation period is 14–21 days
(average, 16 days). The disease is transmissible from 1 week
before the rash appears until 15 days afterward.
The clinical picture of rubella is difficult to distinguish from other
viral illnesses such as infectious mononucleosis, measles, echovirus
infections, and coxsackievirus infections; however, arthritis is more
prominent in rubella. Surveillance of female military recruits suggests
that sero-logic protection against rubella, measles, and mumps are
inadequate. The rubella case load decreased from 670,894 cases in
2000 to 121,344 cases in 2009 reported from 167 nations. Rubella
containing vaccine is available in 130 nations. In the United States,
endemic rubella and congenital rubella syndrome have been
eliminated. In 2008 in the Americas, 2038 cases were reported, the
majority from Brazil. In the United States, all 11 cases were
imported. In other parts of the world (eg, Eastern Europe) where
vaccination against rubella was introduced later than in the United
States, significant outbreaks still occur.
The principal importance of rubella lies in its devastating effects
on the fetus in utero, producing teratogenic effects and a continuing
congenital infection. More than 100,000 cases of congenital
rubella syndrome are reported annually in the developing world.
The Pan American Health Organization, however, reported fewer
than 975 cases for the Americas in 2007 and the goal of rubella
elimination in the Americas is underway.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
While fetal rubella can be devastating, postnatally acquired rubella is
usually innocuous with up to 50% cases asymptomatic. In the
postnatally acquired infection, fever and malaise, usually mild,
accompanied by tender suboccipital adenitis, may precede the
eruption by 1 week. Mild coryza may be present. Polyarticular
arthritis occurs in about 25% of adult cases and involves the fingers,
wrists, and knees. Rarely does chronic arthritis develop. The
polyarthritis usually subsides within 7 days but may persist for
weeks. Early posterior cervical and postauricular lymphadenopathy
is very common. Erythema of the palate and throat, sometimes
patchy, may be noted.
A fine, pink maculopapular rash appears on the face, trunk, and
extremities in rapid progression (2–3 days) and fades quickly,
usually lasting 1 day in each area (Table 32–2). Rubella without
rash may be at least as common as the exanthematous disease.
Diagnosis, when suspected because of disease in the community,
requires serologic confirmation.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukopenia may be present early and may be followed by an
increase in plasma cells. The definitive diagnosis of acute rubella
infection is based on elevated IgM antibody, fourfold or greater rise
in IgG antibody titers, or isolation of the virus. False-positive IgM
antibodies, however, are associated with Epstein-Barr virus,
cytomegalovirus, erythrovirus (parvovirus), and rheumatoid factor.
Detection of antibodies against rubella in other body fluids, such as
urine and saliva, are promising diagnostic aids. An interferon-
gamma-ELISPOT can provide valuable additional information in
seronegative individuals. PCR techniques are also available.
 Complications
A. Exposure During Pregnancy
When a pregnant woman is exposed to a possible case of rubella,
an immediate hemagglutination-inhibiting rubella antibody level
should be obtained to document immunity, since fetal infection
during the first trimester leads to congenital rubella in at least 80%
of fetuses.
Positive tests for IgG antibodies alone indicate past infection or
vaccination. High-avidity anti-rubella IgG assays may distinguish
past infection from vaccination. If no antibodies are found, clinical
observation and serologic follow-up are essential. An isolated IgM-
positive test needs to be interpreted with caution because it does
not necessarily imply acute infection. Confirmation of rubella in the
expectant mother raises the question of therapeutic abortion, an
alternative to be considered in light of personal, religious, legal, and
other factors.
The immune status of the mother needs to be evaluated because
titers fall to seronegativity in about 10% by 12 years after
vaccination.
B. Congenital Rubella
An infant acquiring the infection in utero may be normal at birth but
probably—50% in a series of nearly 70 pregnant women with
rubella in Mexico—will have a wide variety of manifestations,
including early-onset cataracts and glaucoma, microphthalmia,
hearing deficits, psychomotor retardation, congenital heart defects
(patent ductus arteriosus, branch pulmonary artery stenosis),
organomegaly, and maculopapular rash. In general, the younger the
fetus when infected, the more severe the illness. Deafness is the
primary complication in the second trimester. Viral excretion in the
throat and urine persists for many months despite high antibody
levels. A specific test for IgM rubella antibody is useful for diagnosis
in the newborn. A confirmatory diagnosis is made by isolation of the
virus or PCR detection of viral RNA in tissues. Treatment is
directed toward the many anomalies.
C. Postinfectious Encephalopathy
In 1:6000 cases, postinfectious encephalopathy develops 1–6 days
after the rash; the virus cannot always be isolated. The mortality rate
is 20%, but residual deficits are rare among the recovered. The
mechanism is unknown.
Other unusual complications of rubella include hemorrhagic
manifestations due to thrombocytopenia and vascular damage,
duodenal stenosis, and mild hepatitis.
 Treatment
Acetaminophen provides symptomatic relief for acute rubella.
Encephalitis and non–life-threatening thrombocytopenia should be
treated symptomatically.
 Prognosis
Rubella is a mild illness and rarely lasts more than 3–4 days.
Congenital rubella, on the other hand, has a high mortality rate, and
the associated congenital defects are largely permanent.
 Prevention
Live attenuated rubella virus vaccine should be given to all infants
and a second dose should be given to children of school age. It is
important that girls in particular are immune to rubella prior to the
menarche. When women are immunized, they should not be
pregnant, and the absence of antibodies should be established. (In
the United States, about 80% of 20-year-old women are immune to
rubella.) Postpartum administration to susceptible female hospital
employees is recommended. It is recommended that women not
become pregnant for at least 3 months after vaccine administration.
Nonetheless, there are no reports of congenital rubella syndrome
after rubella immunization, and inadvertent immunization of a
pregnant woman is not considered an indication for therapeutic
abortion. Arthritis is more marked after rubella vaccination than in
native disease and appears to be immunologically mediated. A flare
of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis after rubella vaccination is reported.
The association between chronic arthropathies and rubella
vaccination is controversial. Anaphylactoid reactions following
vaccination are rare.
MMR may be given in conjunction with DPT or varicella
boosters as adequate serologic responses are documented. The
administration of two or more doses appears to overcome an
immunogenetic risk for vaccine failure in some vaccinees.
Immunogenicity is similar with intramuscular and intracutaneous
infection, for MMR and varicella vaccinations. Children with biliary
atresia in particular show impaired responses to MMR and varicella
vaccinations. Preliminary data suggests that the vaccination of
transplant (solid organ, bone marrow, and stem cell) patients on
immunosuppressive therapy may be safe.
 When to Refer
 
•    Pregnancy.
•    Meningitis/encephalitis.
•    Significant vaccination reactions.
•    Any suspect cases should be reported to public health
authorities.
Allmendinger J et al. Determination of rubella virus-specific cell-
mediated immunity using IFN gamma-ELISpot. J Med Virol. 2010
Feb;82(2):335–40. [PMID: 20029797]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Progress
toward control of rubella and prevention of congenital rubella
syndrome–worldwide, 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2010 Oct 15;59(40):1307–10. [PMID: 20948509]
 
Oster ME et al. An update on cardiovascular malformations in
congenital rubella syndrome. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol
Teratol. 2010 Jan;88(1):1–8. [PMID: 19697432]
 
OTHER NEUROTROPIC VIRUSES
1. Rabies
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of animal bite.
 Paresthesia, hydrophobia, rage alternating with calm.
 Convulsions, paralysis, thick tenacious saliva.
 
 General Considerations
Rabies is a viral (rhabdovirus) encephalitis transmitted by infected
saliva that gains entry into the body by an animal bite or an open
wound. Globally, an estimated 50,000 to 100,000 deaths occur
annually from rabies, mostly in rural areas of Africa and Asia. In the
United States, domestically acquired rabies cases are rare but
probably underreported. In 2008, 6841 cases of animal rabies and
2 cases of bat-associated human rabies were reported in the United
States. During the past several years, dog rabies variant has almost
disappeared but rabies in wildlife has skyrocketed. Each wildlife
species has its own rabies variant (s). Raccoons, skunks, bats, and
foxes are common wildlife reservoirs. Unique geographic biting
species that cause rabies in the United States include raccoons in
the East, including New England; skunks in the Midwest,
Southwest, and in California; and foxes in the Southwest and in
Alaska. Hawaii is the only rabies-free state. Bats are the second
most reported rabid animal after raccoons. Rodents and
lagomorphs (eg, rabbits) are unlikely to spread rabies because they
cannot survive the disease long enough to transmit it, although
woodchucks and groundhogs can become infected and transmit the
virus. In developing countries, > 90% of human cases are due to
infected dog bites. Rabies among travelers to rabies-endemic areas
is usually associated with animal injuries (including dogs in North
Africa and India, cats in the Middle East, and non-human primates
in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia). Most travel-associated cases
occur within 10 days of arrival. Wildlife epizootics present a
constant public health threat in addition to the danger of
reintroducing rabies to domestic animals. Vaccination is the key to
rabies in small animals and rabies transmission to human beings.
The virus gains entry into the salivary glands of dogs 5–7 days
before their death from rabies, thus limiting their period of infectivity.
Less common routes of transmission include contamination of
mucous membranes with saliva or brain tissue, aerosol transmission,
and corneal transplantation. Transmission through solid organ and
vascular segment transplantation from donors with unrecognized
infection is also reported.
The incubation period may range from 10 days to many years but
is usually 3–7 weeks depending in part on the distance of the
wound from the CNS. The virus travels in the nerves to the brain,
multiplies there, and then migrates along the efferent nerves to the
salivary glands. Rabies virus infection forms cytoplasmic inclusion
bodies similar to Negri bodies. These Negri body-like structures
are thought to be the sites of viral transcription and replication.
Rabies is almost uniformly fatal, with only six documented
surviving cases to date. Five received either pre-exposure or
postexposure prophylaxis. In 2004, a teenager survived with only
naturally acquired immunity but received intense treatment, including
antiviral therapy and induction of a therapeutic coma (called the
Milwaukee protocol).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
While there is usually a history of animal bite, bat bites may not be
recognized. The prodromal syndrome consists of pain at the site of
the bite in association with fever, malaise, headache, nausea, and
vomiting. The skin is sensitive to changes of temperature, especially
air currents (aerophobia). Percussion myoedema can be present
and persist throughout the disease. The CNS stage begins about 10
days after the prodome and may be either encephalitic (“furious”) or
paralytic (“dumb”). The encephalitic form (about 80% of the cases)
produces the classic rabies manifestations of delirium alternating
with periods of calm, extremely painful laryngeal spasms on
attempting 
drinking 
(hydrophobia), 
autonomic 
stimulation
(hypersalivation), and seizures. In the less common paralytic form,
an acute ascending paralysis resembling Guillain–Barré syndrome
predominates with relative sparing of higher cortical functions
initially. Both forms progress relentlessly to coma, autonomic
nervous system dysfunction, and death.
B. Laboratory Findings
Biting animals that appear well should be quarantined and observed
for 10 days. Sick or dead animals should be tested for rabies. A
wild animal, if captured, should be sacrificed and the head shipped
on ice to the nearest laboratory qualified to examine the brain for
evidence of rabies virus. When the animal cannot be examined,
raccoons, skunks, bats, and foxes should be presumed to be rabid.
Direct fluorescent antibody testing of skin biopsy material from
the posterior neck (where hair follicles are highly innervated) has a
sensitivity of 60–80%.
Quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR), nucleic acid
sequence-based amplification, direct rapid immunohistochemical
test and viral isolation from the cerebrospinal fluid or saliva are
advocated as definitive diagnostic assays. Antibodies can be
detected in the serum and the cerebrospinal fluid. Pathologic
specimens often demonstrate round or oval eosinophilic inclusion
bodies (Negri bodies) in the cytoplasm of neuronal cells, but the
finding is neither sensitive nor specific. MRI signs are diffuse and
nonspecific.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Management requires intensive care with attention to the airway,
maintenance of oxygenation, and control of seizures. Universal
precautions are essential. The induction of coma by ketamine,
midazolam, and supplemental barbiturates along with the use of
amantadine and ribavirin (the Milwaukee protocol) was reportedly
helpful in one case but has failed to reproduce success in
subsequent cases. Corticosteroids are of no use.
If postexposure prophylaxis (discussed below) is given
expediently, before clinical signs develop, it is nearly 100%
successful in prevention of disease. Once the symptoms have
appeared, death almost inevitably occurs after 7 days, usually from
respiratory failure. Most deaths occur in persons with unrecognized
disease who do not seek medical care or in individuals who do not
receive postexposure prophylaxis. The very rare cases in which
patients recover without intensive care are referred to as “abortive
rabies.”
 Prevention
Immunization of household dogs and cats and active immunization
of persons with significant animal exposure (eg, veterinarians) are
important. The most important decisions, however, concern animal
bites. Animals that are frequent sources of infection to travelers are
dogs, cats, and non-human primates.
In the developing world, education, surveillance, and animal
(particularly dog) vaccination programs are preferred over mass
destruction of dogs, which is followed typically by invasion of
susceptible feral animals into urban areas. In some Western
European countries, campaigns of oral vaccination of wild animals
led to the elimination of rabies in wildlife.
A. Local Treatment of Animal Bites and Scratches
Thorough cleansing, debridement, and repeated flushing of wounds
with soap and water are important. Rabies immune globulin or
antiserum should be given as stated below. Wounds caused by
animal bites should not be sutured.
B. Postexposure Immunization
The decision to treat should be based on the circumstances of the
bite, including the extent and location of the wound, the biting
animal, the history of prior vaccination, and the local epidemiology
of rabies. Any contact or suspect contact with a bat is usually
deemed a sufficient indication to warrant prophylaxis. Consultation
with state and local health departments is recommended.
Postexposure treatment including both immune globulin and
vaccination should be administered as promptly as possible when
indicated.
The optimal form of passive immunization is human rabies
immune globulin (HRIG; 20 international units/kg), administered
once. As much as possible of the full dose should be infiltrated
around the wound, with any remaining injected intramuscularly at a
site distant from the wound. Finger spaces can be safely injected
without development of a compartment syndrome. If HRIG is not
available, equine rabies antiserum (20–40 international units/kg) can
be used if available (it was last produced in 2001) after appropriate
tests for horse serum sensitivity.
Two vaccines are licensed and available for use in humans in the
United States: a human diploid cell vaccine and a purified chick
embryo cell vaccine. The current vaccines may be given as four
injections of 1 mL intramuscularly in the deltoid or, in small children,
into the anterolateral thigh muscles on days 0, 3, 7, and 14 after
exposure. (The fifth dose at 28 days after exposure is no longer
recommended except among immunosuppressed patients.) The
vaccine should not be given in the gluteal area due to suboptimal
response. An alternative vaccination strategy that only takes 1
week, with injections on days 0, 3, and 7 after exposure with a
verocell vaccine is under study in Thailand.
Rabies vaccines and HRIG should never be given in the same
syringe or at the same site. Allergic reactions to the vaccine are
rare, although local reactions (pruritus, erythema, tenderness) occur
in about 25% and mild systemic reactions (headaches, myalgias,
nausea) in about 20% of recipients. Adverse reactions to HRIG
seem to be more frequent in women and rare in young children. The
vaccine is commercially available or can be obtained through health
departments.
Globally diverse anti-rabies vaccines are used. After Pasteur's
research in the 19th century with increasingly virulent strains, the
first licensed vaccine (1911) was inactivated and grown on bovine
brain tissue. Subsequent vaccines were grown using duck or chick
embryo cells but remained allergenic. Increasingly purified vaccines
are now grown on verocells, and a sixth-generation verocell rabies
vaccine is under development. In some countries, the full spectrum
of vaccines, from human diploid rabies to chromatographically
purified rabies vaccine are available, whereas in others, the gamut is
smaller and intradermal application of smaller vaccine doses at
multiple sites and at different times is commonly practiced in an
attempt to lower costs, and is deemed safe and effective by the
World Health Organization.
In patients with history of past vaccination, the need for HRIG is
eliminated (RIG is in short supply worldwide) but postexposure
vaccination is still required. The vaccine should be given 1 mL in the
deltoid twice (on days 0 and 3). Neither the passive nor the active
form of postexposure prophylaxis is associated with fetal
abnormalities and thus pregnancy is not considered a
contraindication to vaccination.
C. Preexposure Immunization
Preexposure prophylaxis with three injections of human diploid cell
vaccine intramuscularly (1 mL on days 0, 7, and 21 or 28) is
recommended for persons at high risk for exposure: veterinarians
(who should have rabies antibody titers checked every 2 years and
be boosted with 1 mL intramuscularly or 0.1 mL intradermally if
seronegative); animal handlers; laboratory workers; Peace Corps
workers; and travelers with stays over 1 month to remote areas in
endemic countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. An
intradermal route is also available. Intradermal preexposure
prophylaxis (0.1 mL on days 0, 7, and 21 over the deltoid) is not
available in the United States. Immunosuppressive illnesses and
agents including corticosteroids as well as antimalarials—in
particular chloroquine—may diminish the antibody response. A
single dose booster at 10 years after initial immunization increases
the level of antibody titers.
 When to Refer
Suspicion of rabies requires contact with public health personnel to
initiate appropriate passive and active prophylaxis and observation
of suspect cases.
 When to Admit
 
•    Respiratory, neuromuscular, or CNS dysfunction
consistent with rabies.
•    Patients with suspect rabies require initiation of therapy
until the disease is ruled out in suspect animals, and this
requires coordination of care based on likelihood of patient
compliance, availability of inpatient and outpatient facilities,
and response of local public health teams.
Chatterjee P. India's ongoing war against rabies. Bull World
Health Organ. 2009 Dec;87(12):890–1. [PMID: 20454476]
 
Gautret P et al. Rabies exposure in international travelers: do we
miss the target? Int J Infect Dis. 2010 Mar;14(3):e423–6. [PMID:
19674923]
 
Piyaphanee W et al. Rabies exposure risk among foreign
backpackers in Southeast Asia. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010
Jun;82(6):1168–71. [PMID: 20519619]
 
Rupprecht CE et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Use of a reduced (4-dose) vaccine schedule for postexposure
prophylaxis to prevent human rabies: recommendation of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR
Recomm Rep. 2010 Mar 19;59(RR-2):1–9. [PMID: 20300058]
 
Shantavasinkul P et al. Postexposure rabies prophylaxis completed
in 1 week: preliminary study. Clin infect Dis. 2010 Jan 1:50(1):56–
60. [PMID: 19995217]
 
Strady C et al. Immunogenicity and booster efficacy of pre-
exposure rabies vaccination. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2009
Nov;103(11):1159–64. [PMID: 19359026]
 
2. Arbovirus Encephalitides
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, malaise, stiff neck, sore throat, and nausea and vomiting,
progressing to stupor, coma, and convulsions.
 Signs of an upper motor neuron lesion (exaggerated deep tendon
reflexes, absent superficial reflexes, pathologic reflexes, and
spastic paralysis).
 Cerebrospinal fluid protein and opening pressure often increased,
with lymphocytic pleocytosis.
 
 General Considerations
The arboviruses are arthropod-borne pathogens that produce
clinical manifestations in humans. The mosquito-borne pathogens
that cause encephalitis include three togaviruses (causing Western,
Eastern, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis), five flaviviruses
(causing West Nile fever, St. Louis encephalitis, Japanese B
encephalitis, dengue, and Murray Valley encephalitis), and
bunyaviruses (the California serogroup of viruses, including the
Lacrosse agent of California encephalitis). The tick-borne causes
of encephalitis include the flavivirus of the Powassan encephalitis
(northeastern United States and Canada) and tick-borne
encephalitis virus of Europe; and the Colorado tick fever reovirus.
Tick-borne encephalitis virus, Colorado tick fever, and the
arboviruses associated with viral hemorrhagic fever (including
dengue) are discussed below, and only those viruses causing
primarily encephalitis in the United States will be discussed here.
The reported total number of cases in the United States for all
but the West Nile virus are low. As of October 2009, the following
number of cases were reported: 27 cases of La Crosse agent of
California encephalitis, 7 cases of St Louis encephalitis, 4 cases of
Eastern equine encephalitis, 1 case of Powassan encephalitis, and
no cases of Western equine encephalitis.
Infection with West Nile virus was first identified in the United
States in the New York City area in 1999. The virus spread
rapidly, and current cases are reported throughout the continental
United States. The homeless appear to be at particularly increased
risk for infection. In the United States during 2009, 720 cases of
West Nile virus disease were reported from 38 states and the
District of Columbia. Among these, there were 386 cases of
neuroinvasive disease (0.13 per 100,000), with an increased
incidence in the elderly.
Pathogen-specific reservoirs (typically small mammals or birds)
are responsible for maintaining the encephalitis-producing viruses in
nature. Birds are the main reservoir for West Nile virus and
substantial avian mortality accompanies West Nile fever outbreaks.
Outbreaks tend to occur in late summer and early fall and climatic
factors, including elevated mean temperatures and rainfall, are
shown to correlate with increased West Nile infection. Only dengue
and Venezuelan equine encephalitis viruses produce viremias high
enough to allow continued transmission to other mosquitoes and
ticks. Human to human transmission of the other arboviruses is
usually related to blood transfusion or organ transplantation
(although most infected donors give a history of clinically significant
disease). West Nile virus perinatal, transplacental, breast-feeding
(rarely), laboratory, and possibly aerosol transmission can also
occur. Rare case reports of West Nile virus infection follow solid
organ transplant. It is estimated that fever develops in 1 of 5
patients infected with West Nile virus, while severe neurologic
disease presents in 1 of 150. St. Louis encephalitis and Powassan
encephalitis occur among adults; Western equine encephalitis,
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, and California encephalitis occur
primarily among children, while West Nile fever and Eastern equine
encephalitis are diseases of both children and adults.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The human incubation period for arboviral encephalitides is 2–14
days. Symptoms include fever, malaise, sore throat, headache,
gastrointestinal upset, lethargy, and stupor progressing to coma. A
nonpruritic maculopapular rash is variably present. Stiff neck and
mental status changes are the most common neurologic signs. About
50% of hospitalized patients with West Nile virus infection in the
United States have significant muscle weakness that may be initially
confused with the Guillain–Barré syndrome. Acute flaccid
(poliomyelitis-like) paralysis is seen in 10% of West Nile virus
neuroinvasive disease and less commonly with the other
arboviruses. Other signs include tremors, seizures, cranial nerve
palsies, and pathologic reflexes. Myocarditis, pancreatitis, and
hearing loss are also reported. The disease manifestations
associated with West Nile virus infection are strongly age-
dependent: the acute febrile syndrome and mild neurologic
symptoms (but on occasion meningitis) are more common in the
young, aseptic meningitis and poliomyelitis-like syndromes are seen
in the middle aged, and frank encephalopathy is seen in the elderly.
All forms of disease tend to be severe in immunocompromised
persons in whom neuroinvasive manifestations and associated high
mortality are more apt to develop.
B. Laboratory Findings
The peripheral white blood cell count is variable. Cerebrospinal
fluid protein is elevated; cerebrospinal fluid glucose is normal; there
is usually a lymphocytic pleocytosis; and polymorphonuclear cells
may predominate early. The diagnosis of arboviral encephalitides
depends on sero-logic tests. Antibodies to arboviruses persist for
life and the presence of IgG in the absence of a rising titer of IgM
may indicate past exposure rather than acute infection. Individuals
with chronic symptoms after West Nile virus infection may show
persistent renal infection over several years with West Nile virus
RNA present in urine. Documentation of a fourfold increase in
acute/convalescence titers IgG or the presence of IgM antibodies is
confirmatory. For West Nile virus, an IgM capture ELISA in serum
or cerebrospinal fluid is almost always positive by the time the
disease is clinically evident, and the presence of IgM in
cerebrospinal fluid indicates neuroinvasive disease. These tests are
commercially available but also obtainable through local or state
health departments. Serologic tests specific for other arboviral
encephalitides 
can 
be 
obtained 
through 
the 
CDC
(http://www.cdc.gov/neezid/dvbd/specimensub/index.htm/specimen-
submission.htm). Cross-reactivity exists among the different
flaviviruses, so a plaque reduction assay may be needed to
definitively distinguish between West Nile fever and St. Louis
encephalitis. PCR assays (also available through the CDC) are less
sensitive than serologic tests for the diagnosis of acute infections but
are the preferred method for screening blood products and may be
particularly useful in immunocompromised patients with abnormal
antibody responses. CT scans of the brain usually show no acute
disease, but MRI may reveal leptomeningeal, basal ganglia,
thalamic, or periventricular enhancement.
 Differential Diagnosis
Mild forms of encephalitis must be differentiated from aseptic
meningitis, 
lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis, 
and 
nonparalytic
poliomyelitis.
Severe forms of arbovirus encephalitides are to be differentiated
from other causes of viral encephalitis (HSV, mumps virus,
poliovirus or other enteroviruses, HIV), encephalitis accompanying
exanthematous diseases of childhood (measles, varicella, infectious
mononucleosis, rubella), encephalitis following vaccination (a
demyelinating type following rabies, measles, pertussis), toxic
encephalitis (from drugs, poisons, or bacterial toxins such as
Shigella dysenteriae type 1), Reye syndrome, and severe forms of
stroke, brain tumors, brain abscess, autoimmune processes such as
lupus cerebritis, and intoxications. In the California Encephalitis
Project, the cause for most cases of encephalitis was not identified.
 Complications
Bronchial pneumonia, urinary retention and infection, prolonged
weakness, and decubitus ulcers may occur. St. Louis encephalitis is
reportedly associated with a postinfectious encephalomyelitis.
 Treatment
Although specific antiviral therapy is not available for most causative
entities, vigorous supportive measures can be helpful. Such
measures include reduction of intracranial pressure (mannitol) and
monitoring of intraventricular pressure. The efficacy of
corticosteroids in these infections is not established. Preliminary
evidence that ribavirin is useful in West Nile virus encephalitis is not
substantiated. Other therapeutic options such as IVIG or interferon-
α await confirmation of effectiveness. A recent case report suggests
that prophylaxis with West Nile virus hyperimmune plasma and
gamma globulin may prevent neuroinvasion.
 Prognosis
Although most infections are mild or asymptomatic, the prognosis is
always guarded, especially at the extremes of age. Homozygosity
for a 32bp deletion in the gene coding for the chemokine receptor
CCR5, associated with complete loss of function, predisposes to
symptomatic West Nile virus infection. People with this mutation are
resistant to acquiring HIV infection. The case fatality rate for West
Nile virus neuroinvasive disease in the United States was 5.8% in
2008. Age older than 50 years is the most important risk factor for
severe disease and death. Other risk factors for mortality include
black race, chronic kidney disease, hepatitis C virus infection, and
immunosuppression. Recovery of persons with severe neurologic
compromise may take months. Sequelae of West Nile virus
infection include a poliomyelitis-like syndrome, cognitive complaints,
movement disorders, epilepsy, and depression; and they may
become apparent late in the course of what appears to be a
successful recovery. The prognosis is generally better for Western
equine than for Eastern equine or St. Louis encephalitis.
 Prevention
No human vaccine is currently available for the arboviruses
prevalent in North America, although yellow fever virus-based
chimeric vaccines and recombinant vaccines are under development
for West Nile virus. Mosquito control (repellents, protective
clothing, and insecticides) is effective in prevention. Since 2003, all
blood donations in the United States are screened with nucleic acid
amplification tests for West Nile virus. Laboratory precautions are
indicated for handling all these pathogens, in particular the West
Nile virus.
A vaccine against Japanese B encephalitis is recommended for
travelers to rural areas of East Asia, though the risk of disease
acquisition among the exposed is estimated at only 1:1,000,000.
This vaccination appears to provide some protection against West
Nile virus (both agents are related flaviviruses).
Ben-Nathan D et al. Using high titer West Nile intravenous
immunoglobulin from selected Israeli donors for treatment of West
Nile virus infection. BMC Infect Dis. 2009 Feb 17;9:18. [PMID:
19222853]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). West Nile
virus activity–United States, 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2010 Jul 2;59(25):769–72. [PMID: 20592686]
 
Lindsey NP et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Surveillance for human West Nile virus disease–United
States, 1999–2008. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2010 Apr
2;59(2):1–17. [PMID: 20360671]
 
Morelli MC et al. Absence of neuroinvasive disease in a liver
transplant recipient who acquired West Nile virus (WNV) infection
from the organ donor and who received WNV antibodies
prophylactically. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Aug 15;51(4):e34–7.
[PMID: 20597692]
 
United States Geological Survey. Disease maps 2010: West Nile
virus. http://diseasemaps.usgs.gov/wnv_us_human.html
 
3. Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 “Influenza-like” prodrome of fever, chills, malaise, and cough,
followed by meningitis with associated stiff neck.
 Aseptic meningitis with positive Kernig sign, headache, nausea,
vomiting, and lethargy.
 Cerebrospinal fluid: slight increase of protein, lymphocytic
pleocytosis (500–3000/mcl); low glucose in 25% of patients.
 Complement-fixing antibodies within 2 weeks.
 
 General Considerations
The lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is an arenavirus (related to
the pathogen causing Lassa fever, discussed below) that causes
infection of the CNS. The main reservoir for lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus is the house mouse. Other rodents (such as
rats, guinea pigs, and even pet hamsters), monkeys, dogs, and
swine are also potential reservoirs. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus is shed by the infected animal via nasal secretions, urine, and
feces; transmission to humans probably occurs through aerosolized
particles, direct contact, or animal bites. Human cases of
lymphocytic choriomeningitis are underdiagnosed and occur most
often in autumn. The lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is typically
not spread person to person, although vertical transmission occurs,
and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is an underrecognized
neuroteratogen. Rare cases related to solid organ transplantation
and autopsies of infected individuals are reported. Outbreaks tend
to occur among persons with rodent exposure (eg, in the laboratory
setting). Complications of clinical disease are rare.
This disease is principally confined to the Eastern seaboard and
Northeastern states of the United States. Serologic evidence of past
infection is present in 5% of adults in some urban areas of those
regions and is higher in women, the elderly, and members of lower
socioeconomic groups.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 8–13 days to the appearance of systemic
manifestations and 15–21 days to the appearance of meningeal
symptoms. Symptoms are biphasic, with a prodromal illness
characterized by fever, chills, headache, myalgia, cough, and
vomiting, occasionally with lymphadenopathy and maculopapular
rash. After 3–5 days, the fever subsides and recurs in 2–4 days
with the meningeal phase, characterized by headache, nausea and
vomiting, lethargy, and variably present meningeal signs. Obstructive
hydrocephalus is a rare complication. Arthralgias can develop late.
Chorioretinitis also appears to be a sequela. Occasionally, a
syndrome resembling the viral hemorrhagic fevers (see below) is
described in transplant recipients of infected organs and in patients
with lymphoma.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukocytosis or leukopenia and thrombocytopenia may be present.
Cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytic pleocytosis (total count is often
500–3000/mcL) may occur, with a slight increase in protein and
)
y
,
g
p
normal to low glucose in at least 25%. The virus may be recovered
from the blood and cerebrospinal fluid by mouse inoculation.
Complement-fixing antibodies appear during or after the second
week. Detection of specific IgM by ELISA is becoming widely
used. Detection of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus by PCR is
available in research settings.
 Differential Diagnosis
The influenza-like prodrome and latent period may distinguish this
from other aseptic meningitides, and bacterial and granulomatous
meningitis. A history of exposure to mice or other potential vectors
is an important diagnostic clue.
 Treatment
Treatment is supportive. In the survivor of a transplant-associated
outbreak, ribavirin (which is effective against other arenaviruses)
was used successfully along with decreasing immunosuppression.
 Prognosis
Fatalities are rare. The illness usually lasts 1–2 weeks, though
convalescence may be prolonged. Congenital infection is more
severe with about 30% mortality rate among infected infants, and
more than 90% of survivors suffering long-term neurologic
abnormalities.
 Prevention
Pregnant women should be advised of the dangers to their unborn
children inherent in exposure to rodents.
Asnis DS et al. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus meningitis,
New York, NY, USA, 2009. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010
Feb;16(2):328–30. [PMID: 20113573]
 
Palacios G et al. A new arenavirus in a cluster of fatal transplant-
associated diseases. N Engl J Med. 2008 Mar 6;358(10):991–8.
[PMID: 18256387]
 
4. Prion Diseases
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Rare in humans.
 Cognitive decline.
 Myoclonic fasciculations, ataxia, visual disturbances, pyramidal
and extrapyramidal symptoms.
 Variant disease in younger people with prominent psychiatric or
sensory symptoms.
 Specific EEG patterns.
 
 General Considerations
Several non-treatable neurodegenerative diseases are caused by
communicable pathogens that contain protein but apparently lack
nucleic acid as they are resistant to most procedures that modify it.
They are called “prions” for proteinaceous infectious particles.
These agents show slow replicative capacity and long latent
intervals in the host. They induce the conformational change of a
normal brain protein (prion protein; PrP[C]) into an abnormal
isoform (PrP[Sc]) that accumulates and causes neuronal vacuolation
(spongiosis), reactive proliferation of astrocytes and microglia and,
in some cases, the deposition of beta-amyloid oligomeric plaques
(PrP[C]) is a receptor for such oligomers). Variations at PrP
codons sites, in particular codon 129 but also codons 114, 180,
and 232, determine host susceptibility to prion disease.
The term “transmissible spongiform encephalopathies” (TSE)
refers to the spongiform appearance of the brain tissue observed in
these conditions. It is thought that TSEs are protein-misfolding
states in which the prion proteins aggregate into beta-sheet rich
amyloid fibrils and cause disease. A variety of animal diseases
exhibit characteristics of TSE but those affecting humans include
classic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (cCJD) and its variant form
(vCJD) , kuru, Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome
(GSS), and fatal familial insomnia. Infectious transmission of
disease has only been described for vCJD, kuru and the iatrogenic
form of cCJD (see below under Treatment and Prevention),
whereas genetically determined mutations of PrP (C) are the cause
for the remainder. Kuru (characterized by cerebellar ataxia,
tremors, dysarthria and emotional liability) was once prevalent in
central New Guinea but now rare since the abandonment of
cannibalism in the late 1950s (a protective allele of the PrP gene is
now identified at codon 127). GSS (ataxia and dysarthria,
progressing to dementia and spastic paraparesis) is extremely rare.
Fatal familial insomnia occurs in kindreds (it is rarely sporadic).
Six phenotypes of the CJD pathogens exist, and variations in these
types may be responsible for specific disease manifestations (eg,
kuru, cCJD). cCJD and vCJD are discussed in more detail here.
There are three forms of cCJD: sporadic (80–85%), familial
(15%), and iatrogenic (< 1%). There are no definitive risk factors
for cCJD other than possibly age, and its annual incidence is about
1 in one million people per year. Familial cases are inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern with variable penetrance. Among 2177
cases reported through July 31, 2010 to the US National Prion
Disease Pathology Surveillance Center, about 84% (1834) were
sporadic and 14.5% (315) were familial.
vCJD probably results from ingestion of beefsteak contaminated
with neural tissue (brain, spinal cord) from livestock infected with
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) (“mad cow disease”).
A polymorphism in codon 129 of the PrP (C) is prevalent in
patients affected with vCJD. Since the first documented cases in
Great Britain in the mid 1990s, more than 200 cases of vCJD have
been reported with most cases reported from the United Kingdom.
Only three cases of vCJD to date were reported in the United
States (the last one in 2005), and all had documented former
residence in the United Kingdom or Saudi Arabia. As of October
2010, only three cases of BSE were documented in the United
States (from Washington, Texas, and Alabama), the last one in
2006. Canada in turn, has reported 15 cases to date, the last three
in 2008. The risk for vCJD associated with the ingestion of beef
products in these countries, thus, is very small. There is no animal-
to-animal spread of BSE and milk and its derived products are not
infected. Transmission through blood transfusions is documented in
the United Kingdom.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The sporadic and familial cases of cCJD usually present in the sixth
or seventh decade of life, whereas the iatrogenic form tends to
occur in much younger patients. The typical clinical picture is
dementia that progresses over several months, myoclonic
fasciculations, ataxia, visual disturbances, somnolence, pyramidal or
extrapyramidal symptoms (or both), and akinetic mutism. A
nonconvulsive, refractory status epilepticus may mimic cCJD.
vCJD, in contrast, usually affects younger people, the duration of
disease is longer, the degree of organ involvement is often extensive,
and the clinical symptoms are unique (prominent psychiatric and
sensory symptoms).
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of CJD should be considered in the proper clinical
setting and in the absence of alternative diagnoses after routine
investigations. Abnormalities in cerebrospinal fluid are subtle and
rarely helpful. The detection of 14-3-3 protein in the cerebrospinal
fluid is supportive of the diagnosis of cCJD (the assay is more
sensitive than specific in cCJD) but is not helpful in vCJD.
Cerebrospinal fluid detection of other proteins like tau and neuron-
specific enolase do not as yet show clinical utility although ubiquitin
shows promise in cCJD. EEG typically shows a pattern of
paroxysms with high voltages and slow waves in cCJD, and the
MRI is characteristic for bilateral areas of increased signal intensity,
predominantly in the caudate and putamen. vCJD, in contrast,
shows a diffusely abnormal but nondiagnostic EEG. MRI
characteristically reveals hyperintensity of the posterior thalamus
(“pulvinar sign”). Positron emission tomography can help distinguish
GSS disease. The differentiation and definitive diagnosis of these
neurodegenerative diseases are ultimately established by
neuropathologic confirmation.
 Treatment & Prevention
There is no specific treatment for CJD and once symptoms appear,
the infection invariably leads to death. Flupirtine (an analgesic drug)
may slow cognitive decline but does not affect survival.
Iatrogenic cCJD can be prevented by limiting patient exposure to
potentially infectious sources, which include human cadaveric
growth hormones, gonadotrophins, corneal grafts, and dural grafts,
and by restricting unnecessary exposure to stereotactic
electroencephalography electrodes. Disinfection of equipment
requires autoclaving at 15 psi for 1 hour, and disinfection of
contaminated surfaces requires 5% hypochlorite or 0.1 N sodium
hydroxide solution. Prevention of vCJD relies on surveillance of
potentially infected livestock. The American Red Cross does not
accept blood donations from persons with a family history of CJD
or with a history of dural grafts or pituitary-derived growth hormone
injections.
An international referral and database for CJD is available at:
http://www.cjdsurveillance.com/index.html.
Appleby BS. Psychotropic medications and the treatment of
human prion diseases. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2009
Nov;88(5):353–62. [PMID: 19702575]
 
Graziano S et al. Management and prevention of human prion
diseases. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2009 Nov;9(6):423–9.
[PMID: 19818228]
 
Holman RC et al. Human prion diseases in the United States.
PLoS One. 2010 Jan 1;5(1):e8521. [PMID: 20049325]
 
Mead S et al. A novel protective prion protein variant that
colocalizes with kuru exposure. N Engl J Med. 2009 Nov
19;361(21):2056–65. [PMID: 19923577]
 
Parchi P et al. Agent strain variation in human prion disease:
insights from a molecular and pathological review of the National
Institutes of Health series of experimentally transmitted disease.
Brain. 2010 Oct;133(10):3030–42. [PMID: 20823086]
 
5. Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a rare
demyelinating CNS disorder caused by the reactivation of the JC
virus (John Cunningham virus or JCV), a polyomavirus that typically
infects children and has a reported seropositivity in adults of > 60%.
The virus remains latent in the kidneys, lymphoid organs, brain, and
other organs (eg, bone) until reactivation. PML principally occurs in
adults with impaired cell-mediated immunity, especially AIDS
patients and patients with the idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia
syndrome. It also occurs in those with lymphoproliferative and
myeloproliferative disorders; granulomatous, inflammatory and
rheumatic diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid
arthritis in particular); and solid and hematopoietic cell
transplantation recipients. PML is occasionally diagnosed in patients
with other medical states including cirrhosis and renal failure as well
as in patients without other diagnoses.
Monoclonal antibody-associated PML is described with the use
of natalizumab, rituximab, and efalizumab. Natalizumab, a
monoclonal antibody used in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, is
associated with a 1:1000 incidence of PML after 18 months of
therapy, and although an immune reconstitution inflammatory state
may follow cessation of therapy, both the JCV and residual
neurologic deficits may not clear for years after therapy is finished.
The mean interval between the most recent use of rituximab and the
diagnosis of PML is 5.5 months. Smoking is reportedly associated
with increased risk of PML. Because of this risk, efalizumab is no
longer marketed in the United States and its suspension is
advocated by the European Medicines Agency.
JCV causes lytic infection of oligodendocytes in the white matter
and symptoms presenting subacutely reflect the diverse areas of
CNS involvement. Symptoms include altered mental status, aphasia,
ataxia, hemiparesis or hemiplegia and visual field disturbances.
Seizures occur in about 18%. Involvement of cranial nerves and
cervical spine is rare.
PCR for JCV in cerebrospinal fluid is used for diagnosis in
patients with compatible clinical and radiologic findings. A
quantitative PCR is more sensitive. Persistent JC viremia and
increasing urinary JCV DNA may be predictive of PML.
MRIs of the brain show multifocal areas of white matter
demyelination without mass effect or contrast enhancement.
The mainstay of therapy for PML is limiting immunosuppression.
HAART for HIV improves survival as well as the clinical and
radiographic features, although a small number of cases appear to
worsen with immune restoration. Immune reconstitution syndromes
do not alter mortality but are associated with a form of PML called
non-determined leukoencephalopathy associated with a distinct
chemokine polymorphism. Significant neurologic sequelae to PML
infections are the rule and the deficits associated with monoclonal
associated PML may persist for years.
Decreasing immunosuppression in non-AIDS patients with PML
(eg, transplant patients) is typically beneficial. Cidofovir may be
beneficial in non-AIDS related cases. Corticosteroids may be useful
with immune reconstitution. Combined antiretroviral therapy
reduces the incidence of PML as well as the 1-year mortality rate,
regardless of baseline CD4 count. Because the JCV infects cells
through serotonin receptors, the use of risperidone and mirtazapine
are recommended by some clinicians but the success of these
agents remains anecdotal. Future reports will assess the role of
small inhibitory RNAs.
Gheuens S et al. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in
individuals with minimal or occult immunosuppression. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010 Mar;81(3):247–54. [PMID:
19828476]
 
Major EO. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in patients
on immunomodulatory therapies. Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:35–47.
[PMID: 19719397]
 
Ryschkewitsch CF et al. JC virus persistence following progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy in multiple sclerosis patients
treated with natalizumab. Ann Neurol. 2010 Sep;68(3):384–91.
[PMID: 20818792]
 
Shah R et al. Imaging manifestations of progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy. Clin Radiol. 2010 Jun;65(6):431–9. [PMID:
20451009]
 
Tan CS et al. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and
other disorders caused by JC virus: clinical features and
pathogenesis. Lancet Neurol. 2010 Apr;9(4):425–37. [PMID:
20298966]
 
6. Human T Cell Lymphotropic Virus (HTLV)
HTLV-1 and -2 are retroviruses. HTLV-1 is endemic to many
regions in the world including southern Japan (where > 10% of the
population is infected), the Caribbean (where 1% of Afro-
Caribbeans are HTLV-1 seropositive), sub-Saharan Africa, Latin
America, Eastern Europe, Oceania, and the southeastern United
States (where sero-prevalence is most common among injection
drug users). The virus is transmitted horizontally (sex), vertically
(intrauterine, peripartum, and breast-feeding), and parenterally
(injection drug use and blood transfusion).
The association of HTLV-1 with adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia
(ATL) is well established. The lifetime risk of developing ATL
among seropositive persons is estimated to be 3% in women and
7% in men, with an incubation period of at least 15 years. The mean
age of diagnosis of ATL is 40–50 years in Central and South
America but 60 years in Japan.
ATL clinical syndromes may be classified as chronic, acute
(leukemic), smoldering, or lymphomatous. Presentation as a primary
cutaneous tumor is also described and has a prognosis worse than
the smoldering type. Clinical features of ATL include diffuse
lymphadenopathy, maculopapular skin lesions that may evolve into
erythroderma, organomegaly, lytic bone lesions, and hypercalcemia.
Opportunistic infections, such as Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
and cryptococcal meningitis, are more common. HTLV
seropositivity is associated with an increased risk of tuberculosis.
The identification of HTLV-1 antibodies supports the diagnosis.
The peripheral smear can show atypical lymphoid cells with
basophilic cytoplasm and convoluted nuclei (flower cells) but the
diagnostic standard is evidence of clonal integration of the proviral
DNA genome into tumor cell. Management of ATL is similar to that
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The use of interferon-α, zidovudine,
monoclonal antibodies or protein inhibitors is under evaluation.
HTLV-1 also causes HTLV-associated myelopathy (HAM) and
tropical spastic paraparesis (TSP). HAM develops in 0.3–4% of
seropositive individuals and is more common in women. A chronic
inflammation of the spinal cord leads to progressive motor
weakness and symmetric spastic paraparesis, nociceptive low back
pain, paraplegia with hyperreflexia. Bladder and sexual disorders
(eg, dyspareunia), sensory disturbances, erectile dysfunction, and
constipation are also common. HTLV-1 and -2 also produce motor
abnormalities, such as leg weakness, impaired tandem walk, and
vibration sense, without overt HTLV-associated myelopathy. A
progressive cognitive impairment is seen with HAM/TSP in
children.
HTLV-1 provirus load in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and
in cerebrospinal fluid cells, and HTLV-1 mRNA load have all been
proposed as markers of HAM risk and progression. HTLV
positivity is associated with erythrocytosis and lymphocytosis
(HTLV-2) and with thrombocytosis (HTLV-1 and –2).
HAM is treated with a variety of immune-modulating agents
(including corticosteroids) without consistent results. Combination
of antiretrovirals does not show benefit. Interferon-α may be of
some efficacy. Small uncontrolled studies showed that
plasmapheresis appears to result in some improvement in gait and
sensory disturbance among PML patients.
Patients infected with HTLV-1 show a risk of Strongyloides
stercoralis hyperinfection. Other associations are with tuberculosis,
crusted scabies, and infective dermatitis. Inflammatory states
associated 
with 
HTLV-1 
infection 
include 
arthropathy,
polymyositis, 
uveitis, 
Sjögren 
syndrome, 
vasculitis,
cryoglobulinemia, infiltrative pneumonitis, and ichthyosis. HTLV-1
infected patients tend to have a more severe pneumonia.
HTLV-2 is no longer considered associated with hairy cell
leukemia. HTLV-2 seropositivity is common in injection drug users.
HTLV-2 appears to cause a myelopathy that is milder and slower
to progress than HAM. All-cause and cancer mortality is higher
among HTLV-2 seropositive patients.
HTLV-1/HIV coinfection is associated both with higher CD4
counts and a higher risk of HAM.
Screening of the blood supply for HTLV-1 is required in the
United States. There is significant cross-reactivity between HTLV-1
and HTLV-2 by serologic studies, but PCR can distinguish the two.
Better assays to screen organ donors for HTLV-1 and -2 infections
are needed.
Biswas HH et al; HTLV Outcomes Study. Increased all-cause and
cancer mortality in HTLV-II infection. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr. 2010 Jul 1;54(3):290–6. [PMID: 20512047]
 
Gonçalves DU et al. Epidemiology, treatment, and prevention of
human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-associated diseases. Clin
Microbiol Rev. 2010 Jul;23(3):577–89. [PMID: 20610824]
 
Kaul DR et al; HTLV Donor Screening Advisory Group. Donor
screening for human T-cell lymphoptrophic virus 1/2: changing
paradigms for changing testing capacity. Am J Transplant. 2010
Feb;10(2):207–13. [PMID: 19839982]
 
Zorzi G et al. Childhood-onset HAM/TSP with progressive
cognitive impairment. Neurol Sci. 2010 Apr;31(2):209–12.
[PMID: 20076981]
 
OTHER SYSTEMIC VIRAL DISEASES
1. Hemorrhagic Fevers
This diverse group of illnesses results from infection with one of
several single-stranded RNA viruses (members of the families
Arenaviridae, 
Bunyaviridae, 
Filoviridae, 
and 
Flaviviridae).
Flaviviruses, such as the pathogens causing dengue and yellow fever
(both with occasional hemorrhagic complications), are discussed in
separate sections.
Lassa fever (an Old World arenavirus) is rodent associated and
transmission usually occurs through aerosolized particles (from
rodents or infected individuals). Transmission through direct contact
with infected biologic fluids or tissues is also documented. Similar
modes of transmission are assumed for Junin virus and other
members of the New World Arenaviridae (Machupo virus, Sabia
virus, Guanarito virus, Whitewater Arroyo virus). Bats (fruit bats for
Ebola) are the suspected reservoir for Ebola and Marburg viruses
(Filoviridae) but their vectors are unknown. A subtype of Ebola
(Bundibugyo) is reported in Uganda (earlier Ebola outbreaks
occurred in Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, and one case in
Côte d'Ivoire). Cases of Marburg hemorrhagic fever are reported in
travelers exploring caves and mines inhabited by bats in endemic
areas of sub-Saharan Africa. The bunyaviruses include the
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (transmitted by infected animal
exposure or tick bite), the Rift Valley fever (transmitted by
exposure to infected animal products or bite of an infected mosquito
or flea), and the hantaviruses (associated with rodent exposure and
discussed separately below). The geographic distribution of
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, like that of its tick vector, is
widespread with cases reported in Asia, the Middle East, and
Eastern Europe. In 2002, Turkey experienced the largest reported
outbreak with over 2500 cases. Hospital-associated transmission of
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever is well documented in Iran. Rift
Valley fever causes outbreaks in sub-Saharan and Northern Africa,
including a recent 2007 outbreak in Kenya. Cases are also
confirmed outside the African continent, in Saudi Arabia, and
Yemen.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period can be as short as 2 days for the Rift Valley
fever or as long as 21 days for Lassa fever. The clinical symptoms
in the early phase of a viral hemorrhagic fever are very similar,
irrespective of the causative virus, and resemble a flu-like illness or
gastroenteritis. Hepatitis is common.
The late phase is more specific and is characterized by organ
failure, persistent leukopenia, altered mental status, and
hemorrhage. Exanthemas and mucosal lesions can occur. The range
of pathology described with Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
continues to grow and include cardiac failure, bilateral alveolar
hemorrhages, and retinal hemorrhages. Rift Valley fever is
reportedly associated with encephalitis and also retinitis. Adrenal
dysfunction is a common sequela of this class of infections and a
cause for the development of the late-stage shock associated with
these infections. The case-fatality rate ranges from 5% to 30% and
may be as high as 90% in Ebola fever. The convalescence period
can be long and complicated. There is no evidence of chronic
infection among survivors. Risk factors for complications in patients
with Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever include advanced age,
thrombocytopenia, prolonged clotting factor parameters, and
hepatitis; risk factors for mortality include altered sensorium and
prolonged international normalized ratio.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory features usually include thrombocytopenia, leukopenia,
(although with Lassa fever leukocytosis is noted), anemia, increased
hematocrit, elevated liver function tests, and findings consistent with
disseminated intravascular coagulation (although less prominently in
Lassa fever). Urinalysis can reveal proteinuria and hematuria.
Special care should be taken for handling clinical specimens of
suspected cases. Laboratory personnel should be warned about the
diagnostic suspicion and the CDC must be contacted for guidance
(Special Pathogens Branch, 404-639-1115). Diagnosis may be
made by growing the virus from blood obtained early in the disease,
antigen detection (by ELISA), nucleic acid amplification (PCR
techniques), or by demonstration of a significant specific fourfold or
greater rise in antibody titer. Detection of Ebola virus antigen in oral
fluid samples by ELISA and RT-PCR may be possible; sample
collection in this manner will be useful since certain ethnic customs
prohibit blood collection. These tests are generally available only
through the CDC.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis for hemorrhagic fever includes
meningococcemia or other septicemias, Rocky Mountain spotted
fever, dengue, typhoid fever, and malaria. The likelihood of
acquiring hemorrhagic fevers among travelers is low.
 Treatment
Patients should be placed in private rooms with standard contact
and droplet precautions. Barrier precautions to prevent
contamination of skin or mucous membranes should also be
adopted by the caring personnel. Airborne precautions should be
considered in patients with significant pulmonary involvement or
undergoing procedures that stimulate cough.
Certain arenaviruses (the Lassa pathogen, Junin virus in its
viscerotropic phase, Machupo virus) and bunyaviruses (the Congo-
Crimean hemorrhagic fever and Rift Valley fever pathogens)
respond to oral ribavirin if it is started promptly: 30 mg/kg as
loading dose, followed by 16 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days and
then 8 mg/kg every 8 hours for 3 days. The efficacy for
postexposure ribavirin in the management of hospital–associated
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever remains anecdotal.
The filoviruses and the flaviviruses do not respond to ribavirin.
Live attenuated vaccines are available for Junin hemorrhagic fever
and the Rift Valley fever, and they are under study for the Crimean-
Congo hemorrhagic fever, Ebola, and Marburg viruses. In addition,
recombinant vaccines are under development for most of these
pathogens (including the Lassa fever virus but not the Junin
hemorrhagic fever virus). Therapeutic interventions that target the
hematologic system are either ineffective or only marginally
effective.
 When to Admit
 
•    Persons with symptoms compatible with those of any
hemorrhagic fever and who have traveled from a possible
endemic area should be isolated for diagnosis and
symptomatic treatment.
•    Isolation is particularly important because diseases due
to some of these agents, such as Ebola virus, are highly
transmissible and carry a mortality rate of 50–90%.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Imported
case of Marburg hemorrhagic fever–Colorado, 2008. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2009 Dec 18;58(49):1377–81. [PMID:
20019654]
 
Hensley LE et al. Demonstration of cross-protective vaccine
immunity against an emerging pathogenic Ebolavirus Species.
PLoS Pathog. 2010 May 20;6(5):e1000904. [PMID: 20502688]
 
Ikegami T et al. Rift valley fever vaccines. Vaccine. 2009 Nov
5;27 (Suppl 4):D69–72. [PMID: 19837291]
 
Soares-Weiser K et al. Ribavirin for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
fever: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis. 2010
Jul 13;10:207. [PMID: 20626907]
 
2. Dengue
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure 7–10 days before onset.
 Sudden onset of high fever, chills, severe myalgias and
arthralgias, headache, sore throat, and depression.
 Biphasic fever curve: initial phase, 3–7 days; remission, few hours
to 2 days; second phase, 1–2 days.
 Biphasic rash: evanescent, then maculopapular, scarlatiniform,
morbilliform, or petechial changes from extremities to torso.
 Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia in the hemorrhagic form.
 
 General Considerations
Dengue is due to a flavivirus transmitted by the bite of the Aedes
mosquito. It may be caused by one of four serotypes widely
distributed globally between the tropics of Capricorn and Cancer.
An estimated 50–100 million cases of dengue fever and several
hundred thousand cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever occur each
year with numbers growing in both dengue fever and dengue
hemorrhagic fever as a consequence of climatic factors, travel, and
urbanization. The incubation period is 3–15 days (usually 7–10
days). When the virus is introduced into susceptible populations,
usually by viremic travelers, epidemic attack rates range from 50%
to 70%. Dengue is endemic in the lower Rio Grande Valley and
adjacent border towns, with 40% of Brownsville, Texas residents
showing serologic evidence of past infection and the virus being
detected in mosquito larvae among 30% of households.
Severe epidemics of dengue hemorrhagic fever (sero-type 3)
occurred over the past 20 years in East Africa, Sri Lanka, and Latin
America. Dengue is the second most common cause of fever (after
malaria) in travelers returning from developing countries. In one US
series based on CDC reports, the highest proportion of laboratory-
confirmed and probable cases were among travelers returning from
the Dominican Republic (121 cases, 20% of total), Mexico (55
cases, 9% of total) and India (43 cases, 7% of total). In general, the
more advanced forms of disease (hemorrhagic fever and shock)
occur less often in the Americas than in Asia. Since the 1980s,
locally acquired cases of dengue are reported from Texas-Mexico
border, and Key West, Florida. Health care–associated
transmission (needlestick, mucocutaneous exposure or transplant
related) and vertical transmission occur rarely.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A history of travel to a dengue-endemic area within 14 days of
symptom onset is helpful in establishing a diagnosis of dengue.
Dengue infection may range from asymptomatic to severe
hemorrhagic fever to fatal shock (dengue shock syndrome).
Dengue fever is usually a nonspecific, self-limited biphasic febrile
illness. More than half of infected children are asymptomatic. The
illness is more severe and begins more suddenly in adults. After an
incubation period of 4–5 days, there is a sudden onset of high fever,
chills, and “break bone” aching of the head, back, and extremities
accompanied by sore throat, prostration, and malaise. There may
be conjunctival redness. Initially, the skin appears flushed or
blotched, but 3–4 days after the lysis of the fever, a maculopapular
rash, which spares palms and soles, appears in over 50% of cases.
As the rash fades, localized clusters of petechiae on the extensor
surface of the limbs become apparent. Up to 25% may manifest
signs of cardiac involvement. Hepatitis frequently complicates
dengue fever with acute fulminant hepatitis in up to 5%.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever usually affects children living in
endemic areas and is most likely to occur in secondary infections
and in infections with serotype 2. A few days into the illness, signs
of hemorrhage such as ecchymoses, gastrointestinal bleeding, and
epistaxis appear. Symptoms found more often among the dengue
hemorrhagic fever subset of patients include restlessness, epistaxis,
and abdominal pain. Gastroenterologic complications, including
hemorrhage, tenderness, and ascites, are more common with
dengue hemorrhagic fever and often require intensive care
observation.
A subset of patients, often with secondary infection, may
progress to dengue shock syndrome in which acute fever,
hemorrhagic manifestations, and marked capillary leak are
prominent; the latter manifests as pleural effusions and ascites, and
there is a tendency for shock to develop. In infants, even primary
infection can lead to dengue shock syndrome. While the infection is
difficult to distinguish from malaria, yellow fever, or influenza, the
rash makes dengue far more likely. Continuous abdominal pain with
vomiting, bleeding, a decrease in the level of consciousness, rash,
conjunctival congestion, and hypothermia should raise concern
about dengue shock syndrome. Acute kidney injury in dengue
largely occurs with dengue shock syndrome and shows a high
mortality.
Distinguishing between dengue and other causes of febrile illness
in endemic areas is difficult. Fevers due to dengue are more often
associated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia and with
myalgias, arthralgias/arthritis, and lethargy among adults.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukopenia is characteristic, and elevated transaminases are found
frequently in dengue fever. Thrombocytopenia, increased
fibrinolysis, and hemoconcentration occur more often in the
hemorrhagic form of the disease. Liver biochemical test
abnormalities are nearly universal. Thrombocytopenia, plasma
leakage, and acute hepatitis are identified as predictors of severe
manifestations of dengue and higher mortality. The nonspecific
nature of the illness mandates laboratory verification for diagnosis,
usually with IgM and IgG ELISAs after the febrile phase. Virus may
be recovered from the blood during the acute phase. PCR or
detection of the specific viral protein NS1 by ELISA may be
diagnostic during the first few days of infection and may be
appropriate for febrile travelers. Immunohistochemistry for antigen
detection in tissue samples can also be used. Because the
erythrocyte sedimentation rate is normal in most cases, elevation
may help with the differential. Chest radiographs in dengue
hemorrhagic fever show infiltrates and effusions, which follow the
course of laboratory abnormalities.
 Complications
Usual complications include pneumonia, bone marrow failure,
hepatitis, iritis, retinal hemorrhages and maculopathy, orchitis, and
oophoritis. Depression and chronic fatigue, occurring more often in
older women, are also reported. Neurologic complications (such as
encephalitis, Guillain–Barré syndrome, phrenic neuropathy, subdural
hematoma, and transverse myelitis) are less common, although
encephalitic complications are increasingly recognized. Aplastic
anemia and hemophagocytosis syndrome are very rare
complications. Dengue is rarely associated with stroke in patients
with focal neurologic deficit and encephalopathy. Maternal infection
poses a risk for premature birth and hemorrhage in both the mother
and the infant if infection occurs near term.
Bacterial superinfection occurs more commonly with advanced
age, higher fever, gastrointestinal bleeding, kidney disease, and
altered consciousness.
 Treatment
Treatment entails the appropriate use of volume support (with
Ringer lactate in moderately severe shock and colloids in more
severe cases), blood products, and pressor agents, and
acetaminophen rather than nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for
analgesia. Activities are gradually restored during prolonged
convalescences. Endoscopic therapy is useful in evaluating and
managing gastrointestinal hemorrhage, although injection therapy
with sclerosing agents is not beneficial in most dengue hemorrhagic
states. Platelet counts do not usefully predict clinically significant
bleeding. Platelet transfusions, however, should be considered for
severe thrombocytopenia (< 10,000/mcL) or when there is
evidence of bleeding. Monitoring vital signs and blood volume may
help in anticipating the complications of dengue hemorrhagic fever
or shock syndrome.
The efficacy of corticosteroids in the management of dengue is
not proven. There is anecdotal evidence for the efficacy of
intravenous anti-D globulin in the management of dengue
hemorrhagic fever.
 Prognosis
Fatalities are rare but do occur, especially during epidemic
outbreaks, with occasional patients dying of fulminant hepatitis.
Renal failure in dengue shock syndrome portends an especially poor
prognosis. Convalescence for most patients is slow.
 Prevention
Available prophylactic measures include control of mosquitoes by
screening and insect repellents, particularly during early morning and
late afternoon exposures. Testing of blood supplies is increasingly
necessary especially in endemic areas as dengue spreads.
Tetravalent live attenuated vaccines and genetically modified
chimeric virus vaccines are under study and entering clinical trials.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Travel-
associated dengue surveillance–United States, 2006–2008.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Jun 18;59(23):715–9.
[PMID: 20559202]
 
Mohammed HP et al. Travel-associated dengue infections in the
United States, 1996 to 2005. J Travel Med. 2010 Jan–
Feb;17(1):8–14. [PMID: 20074096]
 
Schmidt AC. Response to dengue fever–the good, the bad, and
the ugly? N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 29;363(5):484–7. [PMID:
20818870]
 
Thomas L et al. Predictors of severe manifestations in a cohort of
adult dengue patients. J Clin Virol. 2010 June;48(2):96–9. [PMID:
20362495]
 
Webster DP et al. Progress toward a dengue vaccine. Lancet
Infect Dis. 2009 Nov;9(11):678–87. [PMID: 19850226]
 
3. Hantaviruses
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Transmitted by rodents and cause two clinical syndromes.
 Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS): mild to severe
illness.
 Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS): 40% mortality rate.
 Ribavirin is used with some success in HFRS.
 
 General Considerations
Hantaviruses are rodent-borne enveloped RNA bunyaviruses with
several distinct serotypes. These differ in rodent hosts, geographic
distribution, and degree of pathogenicity for humans. They cause
two major clinical syndromes: hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome (HFRS) and the hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
(HPS). A number of currently recognized hantaviruses are
associated with HFRS (seven) and with HPS (fifteen). The Sin
Nombre (Muerto Canyon, Four Corners) virus is the most common
hantavirus infection in the United States and is the chief North
American virus responsible for HPS. It is usually seen in the
southwestern United States. Between 1993 and 2010, 545 cases
were reported in 32 states in an area roughly coterminous with the
distribution of plague. Outbreaks of HPS with other hanta-virus
types are also reported from Central and South America. Each
year, over 150,000 cases of these two syndromes occur globally,
with HPS being far less common.
The ubiquity of hantaviruses is recognized, with descriptions of
infections from North and South America (New World
hantaviruses) and additional infections from Europe, Africa, and
Asia (Old World hantaviruses). The Hantaan serotype viruses cause
severe hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome and are found
primarily in Korea, China, and eastern Russia. The Seoul viruses
produce a less severe form and are found primarily in Korea and
China. The Puumala and Dobrava viruses are found in Scandinavia
and Europe and are associated with a usually milder form of the
syndrome, nephropathia epidemica, which presents with fever,
headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, and impaired kidney function.
Aerosols of virus-contaminated rodent urine and perhaps feces
are thought to be the main vehicle for transmission to humans.
Human to human transmission is rare and confined to one
hantavirus, the Andes virus. Occupation is a dominant factor in all
hantavirus transmission, with animal trappers, forestry workers,
farmers, and military personnel at highest risk. Global warming and
climate change appear to impact the incidence of hantavirus
infection mainly through effects on reservoir ecology.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
HFRS manifests as mild, moderate, or severe illness (encephalitis
and pituitary involvement are reported with Puumala hantavirus
infection). A 2- to 3-week incubation period is followed by a
protracted, typically five-period, clinical course, which consists of a
febrile period, followed by hypotension, oliguria, diuresis, and
convalescence.
HPS is a more severe disease than HFRS, with a mortality rate
of about 40%. The clinical course of HPS is divided into a febrile
prodrome, a cardiopulmonary stage, and convalescence. A 14- to
17-day incubation period is followed by a prodromal phase,
typically lasting 3–6 days, that is associated with myalgia, malaise, a
fever of abrupt onset, gastrointestinal disturbance, headache, and
chills. Coryza and cough are usually absent. An ensuing
cardiopulmonary phase is characterized by the acute onset of
pulmonary edema. In this stage, cough is generally present,
gastrointestinal 
manifestations 
may 
dominate 
the 
clinical
presentations, and in severe cases, significant myocardial depression
occurs. Acute kidney injury and myositis may occur. Sequelae
include neuro psychological impairments in some HPS survivors.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory features include hemoconcentration, elevated lactate
dehydrogenase, serum lactate, and hepatocellular enzymes. Early
thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis are seen in both HFRS and
HPS. HPS can manifest with a leukocytosis as high as 90,000
cells/mcL, and immuno-blasts may be present. The severity of
nephropathia epidemica correlates with plasma interleukin-6 levels.
The viremia of human hantavirus infections is short-term, and viral
RNA cannot be readily detected in the blood or urine of patients.
An indirect fluorescent assay and enzyme immunoassay are
available for detection of specific IgM or low-avidity IgG virus-
specific antibodies. A plaque reduction neutralization test is
considered the gold standard serologic assay and distinguishes
between the different hantavirus species. This test is performed in a
laboratory with appropriate biosafety (level 3).
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of the acute febrile syndrome seen with
HFRS or early HPS includes scrub typhus, leptospirosis, and
dengue. HPS requires differentiation from other respiratory
infections caused by such pathogens as Legionella, Chlamydia,
a nd Mycoplasma. Coxsackievirus infections should also be
considered in the differential diagnosis.
 Treatment
Treatment is mainly supportive. Intravenous ribavirin has been used
with some success in HFRS (Hantaan virus) in decreasing the
severity of the kidney injury, but studies in HPS suggest it is not
effective. Cardiorespiratory support with vasopressors and
sometimes extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may be needed.
Corticosteroids are used anecdotally to treat severe HFRS and
HPS.
 Prognosis
The outcome is highly variable depending on severity of disease. In
Sin Nombre virus infections, the persistence of elevated IgG titers
correlates with a favorable outcome.
 Prevention
Because infection is thought to occur by inhalation of rodent wastes,
prevention is aimed at eradication of rodents in houses and
avoidance of exposure to rodent excreta in rural settings, including
forest service facilities. Vaccine development is underway.
Dearing MD et al. Ecology of hantavirus in a changing world. Ann
N Y Acad Sci. 2010 May;1195:99–112. [PMID: 20536819]
 
Hautala T et al. Central nervous system-related symptoms and
findings are common in acute Puumala hantavirus infection. Ann
Med. 2010 Jul;42(5):344–51. [PMID: 20545485]
 
Mir MA. Hantaviruses. Clin Lab Med. 2010 Mar;30(1):67–91.
[PMID: 20513542]
 
Schmaljohn C. Vaccines for hantaviruses. Vaccine. 2009 Nov
5;27(Suppl 4):D61–4. [PMID: 19837289]
 
Simpson SQ et al. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Infect Dis Clin
North Am. 2010 Mar;24(;1):159–73. [PMID: 20171551]
 
4. Yellow Fever
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Endemic area exposure (tropical South and Central America,
Africa, but not Asia).
 Sudden onset of severe headache, aching in legs, and
tachycardia.
 Brief (1 day) remission, followed by bradycardia, hypotension,
jaundice, hemorrhagic tendency.
 Proteinuria, leukopenia, bilirubinemia, bilirubinuria.
 Rare and potentially fatal reactions to vaccination.
 
 General Considerations
Yellow fever is a zoonotic flavivirus infection transmitted by Aedes
and jungle mosquitoes. It occurs in an urban and jungle cycle in
Africa and in a jungle cycle in South America (where genetic studies
suggest it arose through the slave trade 300–400 years ago).
Epidemics have extended far into the temperate zone during warm
seasons.
Infection is transmitted by an infected mosquito bite. The
incubation period in humans is 3–6 days. Adults and children are
equally susceptible, though attack rates are highest among adult
males because of their work habits. Between 5% and 50% of
infections are asymptomatic.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Mild form—Symptoms are malaise, headache, fever,
retroorbital pain, nausea, vomiting, and photophobia. Relative
bradycardia, conjunctival injection, and facial flushing may be
present.
2. Severe form—Severe illness develops in about 15%. Initial
symptoms are similar to the mild form, but a brief fever remission
lasting hours to a few days is followed by a “period of intoxication”
manifested by fever and relative bradycardia (Faget sign),
hypotension, jaundice, hemorrhage (gastrointestinal, nasal, oral),
and delirium that may progress to coma.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukopenia occurs, although it may not be present at the onset.
Kidney disease with proteinuria is present, sometimes as high as 5–
6 g/L, and usually disappears completely with recovery. Levels of
liver enzymes and bilirubin can be remarkably abnormal with the
levels of aspartate amino-transferase (AST) usually doubling those
of alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Prothrombin time may be
elevated as well. Serologic diagnosis is primarily by measurement of
IgM by capture ELISA during the acute and convalescent phases.
Viral culture is possible and has been used in epidemic settings.
Rapid test involving PCR protocols and immunoassays of
monoclonal antibodies against circulating viral antigens are
becoming more widely available.
 Differential Diagnosis
It may be difficult to distinguish yellow fever from hepatitis, malaria,
leptospirosis, louse-borne relapsing fever, dengue, and other
hemorrhagic fevers on clinical evidence alone. Albuminuria is a
constant feature in yellow fever patients and its presence helps
differentiate yellow fever from other viral hepatitides. Serologic
confirmation is often needed.
 Treatment
No specific antiviral therapy is available. Treatment is directed
toward symptomatic relief and management of complications. If not
in an endemic area, the patient should be isolated from mosquitoes
to prevent transmission, since blood in the acute phase is potentially
infectious.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate of the severe form is 20–50%, with death
occurring most commonly between the sixth and the tenth days. In
survivors, the temperature returns to normal by the seventh or eighth
day. The prognosis in any individual case is guarded at the onset,
since sudden changes for the worse are common. Intractable
hiccups, copious black vomitus, melena, anuria, jaundice, and
elevated AST are unfavorable signs. Convalescence is prolonged,
including 1–2 weeks of asthenia. Infection confers lifelong immunity
to those who recover.
 Prevention
Transmission is prevented through mosquito control. Live virus
vaccine is highly effective and should be provided for
immunocompetent persons over 9 months of age living in or
traveling to endemic areas. Revaccination is recommended every 10
years for persons with continued exposure. Vaccine-induced
reactions, including neurotropic (encephalitis-like syndrome) and
viscerotropic (resembling yellow fever and one cluster of fever with
four deaths reported from Peru in 2007) diseases, are reported
(particularly among patients aged 60 years or older and patients
with immune dysfunction, including thymic dysfunction). The aged
should probably not be vaccinated and those with immune
dysfunction should definitely not be vaccinated, although HIV-
infected persons with high CD4 counts safely receive the vaccine
with an adverse event rate of about 3%. The safety of the vaccine in
pregnant patients is not verified, and pregnant women should, if
possible, defer travel to endemic areas (see Chapter 30).
Eradication is difficult because of the sylvatic cycle (mainly
maintained by non-human primates).
The yellow fever virus vaccine shows genetic homology to a
melanoma antigen, and in one retrospective study, patients who
were given the vaccine showed a reduced risk of melanoma after
10 years.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Transfusion-
related transmission of yellow fever vaccine virus–California, 2009.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Jan 22;59(2):34–7.
[PMID: 20094025]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Transmission
of yellow fever vaccine virus through breast-feeding–Brazil, 2009.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Feb 12;59(5):130–2.
[PMID: 20150888]
 
Staples JE et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Yellow fever vaccine: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm
Rep. 2010 Jul 30;59(RR-7):1–27. [PMID: 20671663]
 
5. Tick-Borne Encephalitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Flaviviral encephalitis found in Eastern, Central, and occasionally
Northern Europe and Asia.
 Transmitted via ticks or ingestion of unpasteurized milk.
 Long-term neurologic sequelae occur in 2–25% of cases.
 Therapy is largely supportive.
 Prevention is based on avoiding tick exposure, pasteurization of
milk, and vaccination.
 
 General Considerations
Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE), flaviviral infection caused by TBE
virus is the most common arbovirus infection transmitted by ticks in
Europe. This infection is endemic in Russia and in eastern and
central Europe, but cases are also well recognized in Western
Europe and Japan. An estimated 10,000 to 12,000 cases occur
each year in parts of Europe and the Baltic, with annual increases
thought to be a function of increased recognition, climatic changes,
and personal or social habits. TBE is endemic in parts of China as
well, but information regarding its epidemiology is limited. TBE
occurs predominantly in the late spring through fall. It is usually a
consequence of exposure to infected ticks, although unpasteurized
milk from viremic livestock is also a recognized form of
transmission. Surges in cases over the last 20 years are thought to
be a consequence of agricultural policies that alter land cover, host
prevalence, climatic factors, and human behavior (including
pesticide usage). The incubation period is 7–14 days for tick-borne
exposures but only 3–4 days for milk ingestion. The principal
reservoirs for TBE virus are small rodents; humans are an accidental
host. The vectors for most cases are Ixodes ricinus (most of
Europe, including Turkey, Iran, and the Caucasus) and Ixodes
persulcatus (in the belt from Eastern Europe to China and Japan).
Related viruses found in Eastern and mid-Western North
America are the Powassan agent and the deer tick virus. Increasing
prevalence of deer ticks in North America is thought to be
responsible for the increased (but still small) number of North
American cases of these two sero-logically indistinguishable viruses.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most cases are subclinical and many resemble a flu-like syndrome.
There are two variants of clinical presentation: the Western subtype
occurs mainly in the fall and is most severe among the elderly, and
the Eastern subtype is more severe among children.
Western subtype disease is biphasic in which after 2–10 days of
fever (usually with malaise, headache, and myalgias), a 1–21 day
symptom-free interval leads to a second phase with resumed fevers
followed by neurologic symptoms. Eastern subtype disease is
progressive without an asymptomatic interval. The neurologic
manifestations range from febrile headache (accounting for up to
50% of Eastern subtype cases) to aseptic meningitis and
encephalitis with or without myelitis (preferentially of the cervical
anterior horn) and spinal paralysis (usually flaccid). A
myeloradiculitic form can also develop but is less common. Double
infection with Borrelia burgdorferi (the agent of Lyme disease;
transmitted by the same tick vector) may result in a more severe
disease. Homozygosity for a 32bp deletion in the gene coding for
the chemokine receptor CCR5, producing its complete loss of
function, predisposes to severe disease. Mortality in TBE is usually
a consequence of brain edema or bulbar involvement.
B. Diagnosis
Leukocytosis 
and 
neutrophilia 
are 
common. Abnormal
cerebrospinal fluid findings include a pleocytosis that may persist for
up to 4 months. Neuroimaging shows hyperintense lesions in the
thalamus, brainstem, and basal ganglia. TBE virus IgM and IgG are
detected by ELISA techniques when neurologic symptoms occur.
Cross-reactivity with other flaviviruses or a vaccinated state (see
below) may require confirmation by detection of TBE virus–specific
antibodies in cerebrospinal fluid. RT-PCR of blood (at earlier
stages of the disease) or cerebrospinal fluid can sometimes, if
available, assist with the diagnosis. TBE virus can be differentiated
from serologically indistinguishable viruses (Powassan agent and
deer tick virus) by plaque-reduction neutralization tests.
 Complications
The main sequela of disease is paresis, which occurs in up to 10%
of Western and up to 25% of Eastern subtype disease. Other
causes of long-term morbidity include protracted cognitive
dysfunction and persistent spinal nerve paralysis. The
postencephalitic syndrome, characterized by headache, difficulties
concentrating, balance disorders, dysphasia, hearing defects, and
chronic fatigue, occurs with both subtypes. A progressive motor
neuron disease may occur with the Eastern subtype.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes other causes of aseptic meningitis
such as enteroviral infections, herpes simplex encephalitis, and a
variety of tick-borne pathogens including tularemia, the rickettsial
diseases, babesiosis, Lyme disease, poliomyelitis (no longer
reported from Eastern Europe) and other flaviviral infections.
 Treatment
Therapy is largely supportive. Some clinicians believe
corticosteroids may be useful, although no controlled clinical trials
exist.
 Prevention
There are two inactivated TBE virus vaccines for adults and two
vaccines for children licensed in Europe. Their effectiveness is about
99% when properly administered. The initial vaccination schedule
requires 1 year with boosters every 3–5 years. There are decreased
antibody titers and booster response in recipients of TBE vaccines
who are over 50 years of age, indicating the need for a modified
immunization strategy in this age group. Neuritis and neuropathies of
peripheral nerves (plexus neuropathy—paresis of lower limb
muscles, polyradiculopathy) are recognized complications of TBE
vaccination. Rare cases of olfactory dysfunction are also reported.
Other prevention recommendations include avoidance of tick
exposure and pasteurization of milk.
Andersson CR et al. Vaccine failures after active immunisation
against tick-borne encephalitis. Vaccine. 2010 Apr
1;28(16):2827–31. [PMID: 20167301]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Tick-borne
encephalitis among U.S. travelers to Europe and Asia–2000–
2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Mar
26;59(11):335–8. [PMID: 20339345]
 
Pöllabauer EM et al. Clinical evaluation to determine the
appropriate paediatric formulation of a tick-borne encephalitis
vaccine. Vaccine. 2010 Jun 23;28(29):4558–65. [PMID:
20452432]
 
Weinberger B et al. Decreased antibody titers and booster
responses in tick-borne encephalitis vaccinees aged 50–90 years.
Vaccine. 2010 Apr 30;28(20):3511–5. [PMID: 20332047]
 
6. Colorado Tick Fever
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Onset 1–19 days (average, 4 days) following tick bite.
 Fever, chills, myalgia, headache, prostration.
 Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia.
 Second attack of fever after remission lasting 2–3 days.
 
 General Considerations
Colorado tick fever is a reportable acute reovirus infection
transmitted by Dermacentor andersoni tick bite. The disease is
limited to the western United States and Canada and is most
prevalent during the tick season (March to November). There is a
discrete history of tick bite or exposure in 90% of cases. The virus
infects the marrow erythrocyte precursors, leading to viremia lasting
the life span of the infected red cells. Blood transfusions can be a
vehicle of transmission.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The incubation period is 3–6 days. The onset is usually abrupt with
fever (to 38.9–40.6 °C), sometimes with chills. Severe myalgia,
headache, photophobia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, and
generalized weakness are prominent. Physical findings are limited to
an occasional faint rash. The acute symptoms resolve within a
week. Remission is followed in 50% of cases by recurrent fever and
a full recrudescence lasting 2–4 days. In an occasional case, there
may be three bouts of fever.
The differential diagnosis includes influenza, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, numerous other viral infections and, in the right
setting, relapsing fevers.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukopenia (2000–3000/mcL) with a shift to the left and atypical
lymphocytes occurs, reaching a nadir 5–6 days after the onset of
illness. Thrombocytopenia may occur. Viremia may be
demonstrated by inoculation of blood into mice or by fluorescent
antibody staining of the patient's red cells (with adsorbed virus). An
RT-PCR assay may be used to detect early viremia. Detection of
IgM by capture ELISA or plaque reduction neutralization is
possible after 2 weeks from symptom onset and is the most
frequently used diagnostic tool.
 Complications
Aseptic meningitis (particularly in children), encephalitis, and
hemorrhagic fever occur rarely. Malaise may last weeks to months.
Fatalities are very rare. There is one reported case of spontaneous
abortion and multiple congenital anomalies associated with
Colorado tick fever infection during pregnancy.
 Treatment
No specific treatment is available. Ribavirin has shown efficacy in an
animal model. Antipyretics are used, although salicylates should be
avoided due to potential bleeding with the thrombocytopenia seen in
patients with Colorado tick fever. Tick avoidance is the best
prevention.
 Prognosis
The disease is usually self-limited and benign.
 Prevention
The essence of prevention is vector (tick) control, particularly from
March to November.
Brackney MM et al. Epidemiology of Colorado tick fever in
Montana, Utah, and Wyoming, 1995–2003. Vector Borne
Zoonotic Dis. 2010 May;10(4):381–5. [PMID: 19725767]
 
7. Chikungunya Fever
Chikungunya (“that which bends up” in Bantu) is a flaviviral infection
transmitted to humans by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus (the
“Asian tiger mosquito”). The virus is indigenous to tropical Africa
and Asia with recent outbreaks reported from parts of Southeast
Asia and its neighboring islands (2005–2007) and from Europe
(2007). The attack rates are often as high as 50%. The endemicity
of A aegypti in the Americas and the introduction of A albopictus
into Europe and the New World raise the concerns of a global
extension of the epidemic. The Rh-negative population appears to
be immune. There are reports of cases of Chikungunya coinfection
with yellow fever, malaria, and dengue fever.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of 1–12 days (average 2–4), there is an
abrupt onset of fever; headache; intestinal complaints; myalgias; and
arthralgias/arthritis affecting small, large, and axial joints. The
simultaneous involvement of more than 10 joints and the presence
of tenosynovitis (especially in the wrist) are characteristic. The
stooped posture of patients gives the disease its name. Joint
symptoms persist for 4 months in 33% and linger for years in about
10%. A centrally distributed pruritic maculopapular rash is reported
in 50% of the patients, but it can be bullous with sloughing in
children. Mucosal disease occurs in about 15%. Facial edema and
localized petechiae are reported. Neurologic complications,
including 
encephalitis, 
myelopathy, 
peripheral 
neuropathy,
myeloneuropathy, and myopathy, are usually associated with a
good outcome. Rare cases of mother-to-child transmission at birth
were reported during a 2005–2006 outbreak from Réunion Island.
The virus has no observable effect on the outcome of pregnancy. In
infants, primary manifestations of disease include fever, lethargy,
acrocyanosis, and erythema evolving into vesiculobullous lesions.
Hemorrhagic fever–like presentations are exceptional. Coinfection
with other respiratory viruses, in particular dengue, is common.
Death is rare and usually related to underlying comorbidities.
B. Laboratory Findings
Diagnosis is made epidemiologically and clinically. Mild leukopenia
occurs as does thrombocytopenia, which is seldom severe.
Elevated inflammatory markers do not correlate with the severity of
arthritis. Radiographs of affected joints are normal.
Serologic confirmation requires elevated IgM titers or fourfold
increase in convalescent IgG levels using an ELISA. RT-PCR and
culture techniques (viral isolation in insect or mammalian cell lines or
by inoculation of mosquitoes or mice) are seldom available.
Suspected cases in the United States should be promptly reported
to public health authorities including the CDC Arboviral Diseases
Branch, 970-221-6400. The differential includes other tropical
febrile diseases, such as malaria, leishmaniasis, or dengue.
 Treatment & Prevention
Treatment is largely supportive with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Chloroquine may be useful for managing refractory arthritis.
No vaccine is available, and prevention relies on avoidance of the
mosquito vectors. Vertical transmission is documented, but
teratogenicity is not established. Prophylaxis with specific
Chikungunya immunoglobulins may be useful for exposed neonates
or immunosuppressed persons.
Fritel X et al; Chikungunya-Mere-Enfant Team. Chikungunya virus
infection during pregnancy, Reunion, France, 2006. Emerg Infect
Dis. 2010 Mar;16(3):418–25. [PMID: 20202416]
 
Powers AM. Chikungunya. Clin Lab Med. 2010 Mar;30(1): 209–
19. [PMID: 20513548]
 
COMMON VIRAL RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS
1. Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) & Other
Paramyxoviruses
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 RSV is a major cause of morbidity and mortality at the extremes
of age.
 Care for patients with RSV infections is largely supportive.
 A monoclonal antibody against RSV, palivizumab, is good but
expensive prophylaxis among patients with certain at-risk
cardiopulmonary conditions.
 No active vaccination for RSV is available to date.
 
 General Considerations
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a paramyxovirus that
causes annual outbreaks, in winter and early spring, of pneumonia,
bronchiolitis, and tracheobronchitis. Most cases occur in the very
young with annual hospitalization rates of 17 per 1000 children
under 6 months and 3 per 1000 children under 5 years of age. RSV
also causes upper and lower respiratory tract infections in adults.
Risk factors for children include prematurity, low birth weight,
younger age (especially younger than 6 months), bronchopulmonary
dysplasia, congenital heart disease, later birth order, and day care
exposure. Cardiopulmonary disease is a risk factor among adults.
Reinfections are common but usually milder. In older children and
adults, RSV infection is typically manifested as an upper respiratory
tract infection and tracheobronchitis. The virus enters through
contact with mucosal surfaces, as the eye or nose. The average
incubation period is 5 days. RSV infection in children is associated
with persistence of airway reactivity later in life in some studies.
In immunocompromised patients, such as bone marrow
transplant recipients, serious pneumonia can occur and outbreaks
with a high mortality rate (> 70%) are reported.
Other paramyxoviruses important in human disease include
human 
metapneumovirus 
and 
parainfluenza 
virus. Human
metapneumovirus is less common and less pathogenic than RSV.
It appears to cause bronchiolitis; croup; exacerbation of pneumonia;
and pneumonia during the winter and spring among slightly older
children and is responsible for lower respiratory tract infections
among immunocompromised and elderly adults. Parainfluenza
viruses, the most common cause of croup, also causes respiratory
tract infections in the very young, the elderly, the
immunocompromised, and those with chronic illnesses. Bocavirus
infections are discussed under Erythrovirus (parvovirus) infections
below.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In RSV bronchiolitis, proliferation and necrosis of bronchiolar
epithelium develop, producing obstruction from sloughed epithelium
and increased mucus secretion. Signs include low-grade fever,
tachypnea, and wheezes. Apnea is a common presenting symptom.
Hyperinflated lungs, decreased gas exchange, and increased work
of breathing are present. In children, RSV is globally the most
common cause of acute lower respiratory infection and also a
common cause of acute and recurrent otitis media. In patients with
Down syndrome, RSV develops at a later age and is associated
with more protracted hospitalizations. RSV pneumonia is a serious
condition in the elderly and debilitated patient as well as in the
immunocompromised person.
B. Laboratory Findings
A rapid diagnosis of RSV infection is made by viral antigen
identification 
of 
nasal 
washings 
using 
an 
ELISA 
or
immunofluorescent assay. Culture of nasopharyngeal or lower
respiratory tract secretions remain the standard of diagnosis,
although PCR is increasingly used. Coinfection with bacteria is
relatively uncommon in industrialized countries. Coinfection with B
pertussis and other viruses occurs in a subset of patients
hospitalized for RSV infection. Detection of parainfluenza virus
usually requires culture, but tests for rapid detection of viral antigens
with immunofluorescence or ELISA, and PCR techniques are also
available. Human metapneumovirus is best diagnosed by PCR.
 Treatment & Prevention
Treatment of RSV consists of supportive care, including hydration,
humidification of inspired air, and ventilatory support as needed.
Neither bronchodilating agents nor corticosteroids have
demonstrated efficacy in bronchiolitis although individual patients
with significant bronchospasm or history of asthma might respond to
them. The use of nebulized ribavirin might be considered in some
high risk and very sick children (eg, immunosuppressed, those with
underlying pulmonary or congenital heart conditions, and those with
severe respiratory compromise) but the evidence of its efficacy is
not well documented and this therapy is expensive and
cumbersome. There is no evidence that macrolides are beneficial to
infants or children with lower respiratory tract disease caused by
RSV.
Ribavirin can also be considered in high-risk adults, such as those
with a history of bone marrow transplantation. Pregnant women,
including hospital staff, should avoid ribavirin exposure. Therapy
with surfactant lacks evidence to make recommendations on its use.
Passive immunotherapy has no role in treating acute infections in
children. The combination of hyperimmune RSV immunoglobulin G
and ribavirin appears to be beneficial in uncontrolled studies of
infected adult bone marrow transplant patients. In the United States,
RSV immunoglobulin G is no longer available and has been
replaced with palivizumab, a monoclonal RSV antibody.
Administration of palivizumab prophylactically (parenterally at 15
mg/kg monthly during the season of high transmission) to infants
with high-risk factors, such as congenital heart disease, is well
recommended (guidelines for its administration are available in the
references below). Future studies may entail the use of small
inhibitory RNA molecules and of monoclonal antibodies under
development, such as motavizumab.
Live attenuated vaccines fail to show significant clinical protection
or immunogenicity in adults and their use in infants raises safety
concerns. Prevention in hospitals entails rapid diagnosis, hand-
washing, contact isolation, and perhaps passive immunization.
Therapeutic modalities for human metapneumovirus and
parainfluenza virus infections under investigation include ribavirin
administration. The use of conjugated pneumococcal vaccination
appears to decrease the incidence of concomitant pneumonia
associated with viral infections in children in some countries. A
randomized controlled trial shows that immunization with RSV-A
subunit vaccine in persons aged 65 years or older is safe and
immunogenic. Further efficacy testing is needed.
Adams O et al. Palivizumab-resistant human respiratory syncytial
virus infection in infancy. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jul 15;51(2):185–8.
[PMID: 20528472]
 
Carbonell-Estrany X et al; Motavizumab Study Group.
Motavizumab for prophylaxis of respiratory syncytial virus in high-
risk children: a noninferiority trial. Pediatrics. 2010
Jan;125(1):e35–51. [PMID: 20008423]
 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. From the American Academy
of Pediatrics: Policy statements–modified recommendations for use
of palivizumab for prevention of respiratory syncytial virus
infections. Pediatrics. 2009 Dec;124(6):1694–701. [PMID:
19736258]
 
Lüsebrink J et al. Novel therapies for an old virus: treatment of
RSV infections in the 21st Century. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther.
2009 Nov;7(9):1125–9. [PMID: 19883332]
 
Murata Y. Respiratory syncytial virus vaccine development. Clin
Lab Med. 2009 Dec;29(4):725–39. [PMID: 19892231]
 
Nair H et al. Global burden of acute lower respiratory infections
due to respiratory syncytial virus in young children: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2010 May 1;375(9725):1545–
55. [PMID: 20399493]
 
2. Seasonal Influenza
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cases usually in epidemic pattern.
 Abrupt onset with fever, chills, malaise, cough, coryza, and
myalgias.
 Aching, fever, and prostration out of proportion to catarrhal
symptoms.
 Leukopenia.
 
 General Considerations
Influenza (an orthomyxovirus) is a highly contagious disease
transmitted by the respiratory route. Transmission occurs primarily
by droplet nuclei rather than fomites or direct contact. There are
three types of influenza viruses. While type A can infect a variety of
mammals (humans, swine, horses, etc) and birds, types B and C
almost exclusively infect humans. Type A viruses are further divided
into subtypes based on the hemagglutinin (H) and the neuraminidase
(N) expressed in their surface. There are 16 subtypes of
hemagglutinin and 9 subtypes of neuraminidase. Annual epidemics
usually appear in the fall or winter (although sporadic cases occur as
summer outbreaks in northern areas such as Alaska). Epidemics
affect 10–20% of the global population on average each year and
are typically the result of frequent minor antigenic variations of the
virus, or antigenic drift, which are more common in influenza A
virus. On the other hand, pandemics—associated with higher
mortality—appear at longer and varying intervals (decades) as a
consequence of a major genetic reassortment of the virus (antigenic
shift) or the mutation of an animal virus that adapts to the human (as
with the pandemic virus of 1918 with H1N1 properties). Currently,
the main circulating seasonal influenza viruses are the human-origin
A (H1N1) and (H3N2) subtypes, as well as type B. A novel
swine-origin influenza A (H1N1) virus emerged in Mexico in March
of 2009 and quickly spread through North America and elsewhere.
In addition, a highly pathogenic avian (H5N1) subtype that caused
occasional human infections in Asia and Europe over the last
decade is still cause of ongoing global concern. The infections with
seasonal influenza viruses will be discussed here, whereas those due
to avian-origin and the 2009 H1N1 viruses are covered in the next
sections.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Seasonal influenza viruses of antigenic types A and B produce
clinically indistinguishable infections, whereas type C usually causes
a minor illness. The incubation period is 1–4 days. In unvaccinated
persons, uncomplicated influenza often begins abruptly. Symptoms
include fever, chills, malaise, myalgias, substernal soreness,
headache, nasal stuffiness, and occasionally nausea. Fever lasts 1–7
days (usually 3–5). Coryza, nonproductive cough, and sore throat
are present. Elderly patients may present with only lassitude and
confusion, often without fever or respiratory symptoms. Signs
include mild pharyngeal injection, flushed face, and conjunctival
redness. Moderate enlargement of the cervical lymph nodes may be
observed. The presence of fever (> to 38.2 °C) and cough during
influenza season is highly predictive of influenza infection in those
older than 4 years of age.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukopenia is common, but leukocytosis can occur. Proteinuria
may be present. The virus may be isolated from throat swabs or
nasal washings by inoculation of embryonated eggs or cell cultures.
Rapid immunofluorescence assays and enzyme immunoassays for
detection of influenza antigens from nasal or throat swabs are
becoming widely available; however, their sensitivity is suboptimal
(60–80%) and only a few can distinguish between influenza A and
B. More sensitive nucleic acid (PCR) techniques still remain less
accessible. Complement-fixing and hemagglutination-inhibiting
antibodies appear during the second week. Microarrays may be
used in the future to monitor the spread of pathogenic viral variants.
 Complications
Influenza causes necrosis of the respiratory epithelium, which
predisposes to secondary bacterial infections. In turn, bacterial
enzymes (eg, proteases, trypsin-like compounds, and streptokinase)
activate influenza viruses. Frequent complications are acute sinusitis,
otitis media, purulent bronchitis, and pneumonia. Children under 5
years of age, pregnant women, residents of nursing homes and long-
term–care facilities, the elderly (aged 65 years or older), children
and teens under 19 years of age who are receiving long-term aspirin
therapy, and persons with underlying medical conditions
(pulmonary, renal, cardiovascular, hepatic, hematologic, neurologic
and 
neurodevelopmental 
conditions 
and 
immune-deficient
conditions such as HIV) are at high risk for complications. Persons
who are morbidly obese (body mass index > 40), American
Indians, and Alaskan natives are also at high risk for complications.
Primary influenza pneumonia may occur, particularly in patients
with cardiovascular disease and pregnant women, and has a high
mortality. Secondary bacterial pneumonia due to pneumococci or,
less often, staphylococci or Haemophilus spp is common.
Pericarditis and myocarditis occur infrequently. There is an
association of acute myocardial infarction with preceding respiratory
infection, including influenza; a UK study showed that influenza
vaccination is associated with a lower rate of acute myocardial
infarction. Rhabdomyolysis is a rare late complication of influenza.
Reye syndrome (fatty liver with encephalopathy) is a rare and
severe complication of influenza (usually B type) and other viral
diseases (eg, varicella), particularly in young children. It consists of
rapidly progressive hepatic failure and encephalopathy, and there is
a 30% mortality rate. The pathogenesis is unknown, but the
syndrome is associated with aspirin use in the management of viral
infections. Hypoglycemia, elevation of serum aminotransferases and
blood ammonia, prolonged prothrombin time, and change in mental
status all occur within 2–3 weeks after onset of the viral infection.
Histologically, the periphery of liver lobules shows striking fatty
infiltration and glycogen depletion. Treatment is supportive and
directed toward the management of cerebral edema. Other
encephalopathic complications of influenza are equally rare and
include an acute necrotizing encephalopathy associated with
disseminated intravascular coagulation and cytokine storm, with
worsening when treated with certain nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (diclofenac and mefenamic acid), and an acute
encephalopathy associated with febrile seizures and the use of
theophylline. Influenza infections are an infrequent trigger of Guillain-
Barré syndrome.
 Treatment
Many patients with influenza prefer to rest in bed. Analgesics and a
cough mixture may be used. Treatment should be considered for
those with a suggestive clinical presentation or with laboratory
confirmed influenza and at high risk for developing complications
(nursing home residents; patients with chronic pulmonary,
cardiovascular, kidney, or liver disease; those with diabetes mellitus,
active malignancy, immunosuppression, or impairment for managing
respiratory secretions), or living with persons at significant risk for
them. Maximum benefit is expected with the earliest initiation of
therapy. Although the benefit of antiviral therapy after 48 hours of
illness is unproven, it should be considered if the patient is
hospitalized.
The neuraminidase inhibitors, either inhaled zanamivir, 10 mg (2
inhalations) twice daily for 5 days, or oral oseltamivir, 75 mg twice
daily for 5 days, are equally effective in the treatment of susceptible
strains of influenza. Clinical trials have shown a reduction in the
duration of symptoms as well as secondary complications, such as
otitis, sinusitis, or pneumonia, but not in the rate of hospitalizations
or mortality when using these agents. Recommended antiviral
medications (neuraminidase inhibitors) are not licensed for treatment
of children (restrictions are for under 1 year of age for oseltamivir
and under 7 years of age for zanamivir).
When administered early, these drugs are effective mainly in high-
risk patients and in those over age 12 years. Since high levels of
resistance to the adamantanes (amantadine and rimantadine) persist
among 2009 influenza A (H1N1) and A (H3N2) viruses and these
agents are not effective against influenza B viruses, adamantanes are
generally not recommended for treatment. Resistance to
neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir and zanamivir) can occur with
prolonged use in immunocompromised patients or in avian (H5N1)-
infected patients. High rates (approximately 25%) of oseltamivir
resistance in influenza A viruses were reported in surveillance data
from several areas in Europe and Africa during 2007–2008 and
2008–2009. A genetic mutation (H275Y) in the neuraminidase
protein of the virus confers oseltamivir resistance. As of December
2010, the CDC was not reporting significant neuraminidase
resistance in America among current influenza A (H1N1), influenza
A (H3N2), and influenza B isolates.
Zanamivir is relatively contraindicated among persons with
asthma because of the risk of bronchospasm and is not formulated
for 
use 
in 
mechanically 
ventilated 
patients. 
Transient
neuropsychiatric events, occasionally resulting in self-injury and
death, have been reported postmarketing for both neuraminidase
inhibitors. Patients receiving these drugs should be closely
monitored for any unusual behavior, and healthcare professionals
should be notified immediately if such signs occur. Laninamivir is a
long-acting neuraminidase inhibitor that is under study for the
treatment of seasonal influenza, including infection caused by
oseltamivir-resistant virus, in adults. Ribavirin (unlabeled usage, 1.1
g/d, diluted to 20 mg/mL, delivered as particulate aerosol with
oxygen over 12–18 hours a day for 3–7 days [see Table 32–1])
may be effective in severely ill patients with influenza A or B. In vivo
studies often do not mimic efficacy in vitro.
The neuraminidase inhibitor, peramivir, is indicated for
intravenous use in patients with 2009 H1N1 (available through the
CDC's Emergency Use Authorization), but its use is not indicated in
seasonal influenza.
Antibacterial antibiotics should be reserved for treatment of
bacterial complications. Acetaminophen rather than aspirin should
be used for fever in children.
 Prognosis
The duration of the uncomplicated illness is 1–7 days, and the
prognosis is excellent in healthy, nonelderly adults. Purulent
bronchitis and bronchiectasis may result in chronic pulmonary
disease and fibrosis that persist throughout life. Most fatalities are
due to bacterial pneumonia although exacerbations of other diseases
processes, in particular cardiac diseases, occur which contributed
to the overall increase in fatalities. Influenza pneumonia has a high
mortality rate among pregnant women and persons with a history of
rheumatic heart disease. Current mortality is low except in
debilitated individuals.
If the fever recurs or persists for more than 4 days with
productive cough and white cell count over 10,000/mcL, secondary
bacterial infection should be suspected. Pneumococcal pneumonia
is the most common secondary infection, and staphylococcal
pneumonia is the most serious.
 Prevention
Annual administration of influenza vaccine is the most effective
measure for preventing influenza and its complications. Vaccines
available for use in the United States are the trivalent inactivated
influenza vaccine (TIV) and the trivalent live-inactivated influenza
vaccine (LAIV). They both contain antigens from 1 strain each of
pandemic influenza A (H1N1), influenza A (H3N2), and influenza
B. TIV is FDA approved for use in persons as young as 6 months
of age. One brand of TIV (Afluria) is not be administered to
children aged 6 months to 8 years based on reports of an increased
risk of fever and febrile seizures among young children in Australia
and New Zealand given this vaccine.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee
recommend influenza vaccination for all women who will be
pregnant through the influenza season (October through May in the
United States) and vaccination early in the season regardless of
gestational age. No study to date has shown any adverse
consequence of inactivated influenza vaccine in pregnant women or
their off-spring. Children between the ages of 6 months and 8 years
who have no prior seasonal influenza vaccination history should
receive two doses of the vaccine at least 4 weeks apart. The FDA
has approved Fluzone High-Dose, a TIV containing four-times
more hemagglutinin than standard TIV, for persons age 65 or older.
The LAIV is available for use in healthy individuals between 2
and 49 years of age; it should not be given to adult women who are
pregnant.
All of these vaccines are contraindicated in persons with well-
substantiated hypersensitivity to chicken eggs or other components
of the vaccine (skin testing can be performed by an allergist), in
persons with a history of Guillain–Barré syndrome, or in persons
with an acute febrile illness until symptomatic improvement.
Concomitant warfarin or corticosteroid therapy is not a
contraindication to influenza vaccination. Side effects are infrequent
and include tenderness, redness, or induration at the intramuscular
site of the TIV; and respiratory symptoms for the LAIV.
Chemoprophylaxis is considered for individuals when vaccination
is contraindicated and in those exposed to an infected patient within
2 weeks after vaccination with TIV. It is not necessary with the
LAIV, since this vaccine confers more rapid protection. Other
circumstances that warrant consideration of chemoprophylaxis
include outbreaks in long-term–care facilities, persons living with or
in close contact with high-risk individuals, persons with immune
deficiencies who might not respond to vaccination, unvaccinated
staff during response to an outbreak in a closed institutional setting
with residents at high risk, and first responders to epidemic
situations. Chemoprophylaxis against influenza A and B is
traditionally accomplished with the neuraminidase inhibitors
oseltamivir (75 mg/d, oral) and zanamivir (10 mg/d, inhaled). These
agents reduce the attack rate among unvaccinated individuals if
begun within 48 hours after exposure. The CDC recommends
chemoprophylaxis for 7 days after exposure. For outbreak control
in long-term–care facilities and hospitals, a minimum of 2 weeks is
recommended, including in vaccinated person, and until 1 week
after identification of the last known case. Zanamivir should not be
given as chemoprophylaxis to asthmatic persons, nursing home
residents, or children under 5 years of age. Hand hygiene and
surgical facemasks appear to prevent household transmission of
influenza virus isolates when implemented within 36 hours of
recognition of symptoms in an index patient. Nonpharmaceutical
interventions remain mainstay in mitigating the spread of pandemic
and interpandemic influenza.
 When to Admit
 
•    Limited availability of supporting services.
•    Pneumonia.
•    Changes in mental status.
•    Consider with pregnancy.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Committee
on Obstetric Practice. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 468:
Influenza vaccination during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2010
Oct;116(4):1006–7. [PMID: 20859176]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). FluView: a
weekly influenza surveillance report.
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Licensure of
a high-dose inactivated influenza vaccine for persons aged ≥ 65
years (Fluzone High-Dose) and guidance for use-United States,
2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Apr
30;59(16):485–6. [PMID: 20431524]
 
Fiore AE et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Prevention and control of influenza with vaccines:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP), 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Aug
6;59(RR-8):1–62. [PMID: 20689501]
 
Jefferson T et al. Neuraminidase inhibitors for preventing and
treating influenza in healthy adults: systematic review and meta-
analysis. BMJ. 2009 Dec 8;339:b5106. [PMID: 19995812]
 
Watanabe A et al; MARVEL Study Group. Long-acting
neuraminidase inhibitor laninamivir octanoate versus oseltamivir for
treatment of influenza: a double-blind, randomized, noninferiority
clinical trial. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Nov 15;51(10):1167–75.
[PMID: 20936975]
 
3. Avian Influenza (H5N1)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Cases to date in humans, mostly from Southeast Asia.
 Clinically indistinguishable from influenza.
 Epidemiologic factors assist in diagnosis.
 Rapid antigen assays are the means of confirming diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
The normal hosts for avian influenza viruses are aquatic waterfowl.
Although avian influenza was first recognized in Italy in 1878, the
current outbreak of highly pathogenic influenza A subtype (H5N1)
in poultry was recognized in 1997 in Hong Kong and was followed
by the first documented human cases. A massive slaughter of
poultry was attempted to contain the disease. Outbreaks of H5N1
influenza in poultry emerged in 2003 and now involve more than 65
countries of East and Southeast Asia, Eurasia, Western and Eastern
Europe, and Northern Africa. The 510 confirmed human cases as
of December 2010 included 303 deaths. Recently, cases are
reported in Haiti, Egypt, and Indonesia (details maintained and
updated by Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, World
Health Organization).
Although highly contagious among birds, the transmission of this
H5N1 strain from human to human is inefficient and not sustained.
The result is only rare cases of person-to-person infection.
Occasional transmission to other mammals, including domestic cats
and dogs, is also documented.
Most human cases occur after exposure to infected poultry or
surfaces contaminated with poultry droppings. Because infection in
humans is associated with a mortality rate > 50% (over 80% [91 of
113] for Indonesian cases) and the avian H5N1 subtype continues
to spread among birds (with many parts of Southeast Asia now
considered endemic for the virus), there is worldwide concern that
the virus may undergo genetic reassortment or mutation (as with the
1918 strain) and develop greater human-human transmissibility with
the potential to produce a global pandemic.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Distinguishing avian influenza from regular influenza is difficult.
History of exposure to dead or ill poultry in the prior 10 days,
recent travel to Southeast Asia, or contact with known cases should
be investigated. The symptoms and signs include predominantly
respiratory symptoms (cough and dyspnea), but a variety of other
systems may be involved, producing headaches and gastrointestinal
complaints in particular. Subclinical disease is relatively rare. With
cytokines responsible for much of the pathology, prolonged febrile
states and generalized malaise are common. Children are
preferentially impacted. Respiratory failure is the usual cause of
death.
B. Laboratory Findings
Current commercial rapid antigen tests are not optimally sensitive or
specific for detection of H5N1 influenza but are still first-line
diagnostic tests because of their widespread availability. Diagnostic
yield can be improved by earlier collection of samples. More
sensitive RT-PCR assays are usually available through state health
departments. An initial negative result in the right clinical setting
warrants retesting. Throat or lower respiratory swabs may provide
higher yield of detection than nasal swabs. When highly pathogenic
strains (eg, H5N1) are suspected, extreme care in the handling of
these samples must be observed during preliminary testing. Positive
samples must then be forwarded to the appropriate public health
authorities for further investigations (eg, culture) in laboratories with
the adequate level of biosafety (level 3).
 Treatment
Resistance of avian H5N1 influenza strains to amantadine and
rimantadine is present in most geographic areas where the virus is
found. Reacquisition of sensitivity to these drugs through genetic
reassortment is possible. The current first-line recommendation is to
use the neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir, 75 mg twice daily for 5
days administered within 48 hours from onset of illness. A higher
dose (150 mg twice daily), longer duration, and possible
combination therapy with amantadine or rimantadine (in countries
where A (H5N1) viruses are likely to be susceptible to
adamantanes) may be considered in patients with pneumonia or
progressive disease. Evidence of resistance to oseltamivir is
reported. Although inhaled zanamivir has proven effective in treating
seasonal influenza, no data of its efficacy against H5N1 strains are
available. Therapy should still be considered for patients with severe
avian influenza disease even after several days of onset. Parenteral
treatment with unapproved peramivir or zanamivir preparations may
be considered. Postexposure prophylaxis with 75 mg of oseltamivir
once daily for 7–10 days should be given to household contacts of
documented cases. Personnel exposed to those patients should be
monitored for symptoms. Careful surveillance for human cases and
prudent stockpiling of medications with establishment of an
infrastructure for dissemination are essential modalities of control.
Non pharmacologic means of control include masks; social
distancing; quarantine; travel limitations; and infrastructure
development, particularly for emergency departments.
 Prevention
One human vaccine against H5N1 influenza is licensed (but not
marketed) in the United States with the government stockpiling
supplies in the event of need. This vaccine does not contain
adjuvant and as a result, its immunogenicity is only modest. A
vaccine with oil-in-water emulsion-based adjuvant is available in
Europe. Several other vaccine candidates are undergoing clinical
trials.
Prevention of exposure to avian influenza strains also includes
hygienic practices during handling of poultry products, including
hand-washing and prevention of cross-contamination, as well as
thorough cooking of poultry products (to 70 °C). There is no risk of
acquiring avian influenza through the consumption of poultry
products, although there is a risk associated with handling feathers
or birds from endemic areas, and the US government bans the
importation of poultry from infected areas.
Adisasmito W et al. Effectiveness of antiviral treatment in human
influenza A (H5N1) infections: analysis of a Global Patient
Registry. J Infect Dis. 2010 Oct 15;202(8):1154–60. [PMID:
20831384]
 
Keitel WA et al. Preparing for a possible pandemic: influenza
A/H5N1 vaccine development. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2007
Oct;7(5):484–90. [PMID: 17644429]
 
Uyeki TM. Human infection with highly pathogenic avian influenza
A (H5N1) virus: review of clinical issues. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Jul
15;49(2):279–90. [PMID: 19522652]
 
4. 2009 H1N1 Influenza
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Influenza-like illness with consistent epidemiologic background.
 Respiratory swab allows local screen and more specific analysis
by state public health laboratories.
 
 General Considerations
An outbreak of swine-origin (H1N1) influenza virus (Swine-Origin
Influenza Virus [S-OIV] or H1N1/A/California/04/2009) emerged
in Mexico City in March 2009. After initially spreading in the United
States and Canada, the virus spread globally with cases reported
from over 40 nations by mid-2009. The World Health Organization
declared a pandemic on June 11, 2009 which lasted until August
10, 2010. This was the first pandemic since 1968 with circulation
outside the usual influenza season in the Northern Hemisphere. The
2009 H1N1 influenza virus will presumably continue to spread for
years to come, akin to the seasonal influenza virus. This virus
originates from triple-reassortment North American swine virus
lineages and Eurasian swine virus lineages.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
This pandemic strain of H1N1 causes a broad range of clinical
symptoms ranging from typical symptoms (fever, malaise, myalgias,
cough, sore throat, rhinorrhea, shortness of breath) commonly
accompanied by gastrointestinal manifestations (especially diarrhea)
to fulminant viral pneumonia. The principal clinical syndrome leading
to hospitalization and ICU admission is diffuse viral pneumonitis
with severe hypoxemia and sometimes shock and renal failure.
Neurologic complications, including seizures and encephalopathy,
and cardiac dysfunction, including myocarditis and pulmonary
thromboemboli, have occurred. Cases with pandemic H1N1
associated hemophagocytic syndrome are reported. Most patients
with mild disease make full recovery, but 9–31% of hospitalized
cases require ICU admission, where the mortality ranges between
14% and 46%. The disease has an incubation period of 1.5 to 7
days.
Attack rates are highest in children and young adults with relative
sparing of adults older than 60 years of age presumably due to
previous exposure with related strains (conferring some degree of
cross-protection). High-risk groups include patients with severe
obesity, immunosuppression, or neurologic disorders, and pregnant
and postpartum women. Infection during pregnancy may be
associated with severe illness, spontaneous abortion, preterm labor,
and fetal distress. Overall case fatality rate is < 0.5% with 90% of
deaths in those under 65 years of age.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings may include normal to low leukocyte counts
with lymphocytopenia and elevated aminotransferases. Elevated
alkaline phosphatase, creatine kinase, creatinine, thrombocytopenia
and metabolic acidosis suggest poor prognosis. A nasopharyngeal
swab, nasal aspirate, combined nasopharyngeal swab with
oropharyngeal swab, or material from a bronchoalveolar lavage can
be tested for 2009 H1N1. Test material can be kept at 4 °C up to
4 days (not frozen) and shipped with an ice pack. The CDC or
many state public health laboratories can then perform a real-time
PCR or viral culture. Local laboratories can perform rapid influenza
antigen enzyme or direct immuno-fluorescent assays to distinguish
influenza viruses types A and B, but the results of these assays
should be interpreted with caution due to a limited sensitivity (11–
70%) and inability to differentiate between seasonal and the 2009
H1N1 influenza viruses.
Pathologic findings in pandemic H1N1 influenza show a
particular propensity toward diffuse alveolar damage, akin to the
damage seen in patients with avian influenza. This in turn explains
the propensity toward development of ARDS with pandemic
H1N1.
 Treatment
The virus is usually resistant to the adamantanes (amantadine or
rimantadine). See the seasonal influenza section for side effects and
concerns with these medications.
Treatment entails using neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir or
zanamivir; dosages are available in Table 32–1) as early as
possible. Early therapy with oseltamivir may reduce duration of
hospitalization and progression to severe disease requiring ICU
admission or resulting in death. Intravenous formulations of
zanamivir and peramivir are available for emergency use in severely
ill patients. Oseltamivir-resistant virus remains sensitive to zanamivir.
The efficacy of intravenous peramivir is similar to that of oseltamivir
but is reduced by a factor of 80 in oseltamivir-resistant 2009 H1N1
viral infection. In such patients, intravenous zanamivir is preferred.
One case of multidrug-resistant pandemic H1N1 virus with
resistance to oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir is also reported.
The use of high frequency oscillatory ventilation and extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation can improve oxygenation but the impact on
mortality in unknown.
Updated 
advice 
is 
available 
at
http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/recommendations.htm.
 Prevention
The 2010–2011 seasonal influenza vaccines (discussed above)
include the A/California/7/2009 (H1N1)–like viral strain and confer
protection against 2009 H1N1 influenza.
Persons who should receive vaccination against the 2009 H1N1
influenza virus include pregnant women, household and caregiver
contacts of children under 6 months of age, health care and
emergency service personnel, healthy persons between 6 months
and 24 years of age, adults 24–64 with underlying medical
complications that predispose to influenza (as listed above).
In general, persons with 2009 H1N1 influenza infection should
be considered potentially infectious from 1 day before to about 7
days following illness onset. Children and immunosuppressed
persons exhibit prolonged viral shedding and may be infectious
longer. Any hospital patient in whom the infection is suspected
should be isolated in individual rooms with standard and contact
precautions plus eye protection.
The World Health Organization guidelines recommend surgical
masks for all patient care with the exception of N95 masks for
aerosol generating procedures (eg, bronchoscopy, elective
intubation, suctioning, administering nebulized medications). For
such procedures, an airborne infection isolation room can be used,
with air exhausted directly outside or recirculated after filtration by a
high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter. Strict adherence to hand
hygiene with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer and
immediate removal of gloves and other equipment after contact with
respiratory secretions is essential. Precautions should be maintained
until 7 days from symptom onset or until the resolution of
symptoms, whichever is longer. Postexposure prophylaxis should
be considered for close contacts of patients (confirmed, probable,
or suspected) who are at high risk for complications of influenza
(see section on seasonal influenza) as well as for healthcare
personnel, public health workers, or first responders who have had
a recognized, unprotected close contact exposure to a person with
novel (H1N1) influenza virus infection (confirmed, probable, or
suspected) during that person's infectious period. Despite
incomplete data about the safety of neuraminidase inhibitors, the
CDC recommends considering postexposure prophylaxis as well in
this population.
Concerned professionals should refer to MMWR and World
Health 
Organization 
websites
(http://www.who.int/csr/disease/swineflu/en/) for evolving updates
about this pandemic.
Gralton J et al. Protecting healthcare workers from pandemic
influenza: N95 or surgical masks? Crit Care Med. 2010
Feb;38(2):657–67. [PMID: 20095070]
 
Lee N et al. Co-infection with pandemic H1N1 and seasonal
H3N2 influenza viruses. Ann Intern Med. 2010 May 4;152(9):
618–9. [PMID: 20439587]
 
Miller AC et al. Novel influenza A (H1N1) virus among gravid
admissions. Arch Intern Med. 2010 May 24;170(10):868–73.
[PMID: 20498414]
 
Norfolk SG et al. Rescue therapy in adult and pediatric patients
with pH1N1 influenza infection: a tertiary center intensive care unit
experience from April to October 2009. Crit Care Med. 2010
Nov;38(11):2103–7. [PMID: 20711068]
 
Writing Committee of the WHO Consultation on Clinical Aspects
of Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 Influenza; Bautista E et al. Clinical
aspects of pandemic 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus infection. N
Engl J Med. 2010 May 6;362(18):1708–19. [PMID: 20445182]
 
Wu J et al. Safety and effectiveness of a 2009 H1N1 vaccine in
Beijing. N Engl J Med. 2010 Dec 16;363(25):2416–23. [PMID:
21158658]
 
5. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Mild, moderate, or severe respiratory illness.
 Travel to endemic area within 10 days before symptom onset,
including mainland China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan,
Vietnam, and Toronto.
 Persistent fever; dry cough, dyspnea in most.
 Diagnosis confirmed by antibody testing or isolation of virus.
 No specific treatment; mortality as high as 10% in clinically
diagnosed cases.
 
 General Considerations
SARS is a respiratory syndrome of varying severity but capable of
causing death in as many as 10% of clinically established cases. It is
caused by an apparently unique coronavirus. The earliest cases
were traced to a health care worker in Guangdong Province in
China in late 2002, with rapid spread thereafter to Hong Kong,
Singapore, Vietnam, Taiwan, and Toronto. The primary mode of
transmission appears to be through direct or indirect contact of
mucous membranes (eyes, nose, or mouth) with infectious
respiratory droplets or fomites. Epidemiologic data also suggest
airborne spread. The use of aerosol-generating procedures
(endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, nebulization treatments) in
hospitals may amplify the transmission of the SARS coronavirus.
The virus is shed in stools but the role of fecal–oral transmission is
unknown. The natural reservoir appears to be the horseshoe bat
(which eats and drops fruits ingested by civets, the earlier presumed
reservoir and a likely amplifying host).
The variable distribution of cases throughout Asia and Canada is
considered a consequence of spread through travel. The virus is
sufficiently virulent that it may be transmitted and acquired by
patients during brief stops in airports. As a result, sporadic
confirmed and suspected cases have appeared throughout the
United States. The 2003 outbreak involved 8096 probable cases in
about 28 countries, with 774 fatalities. In 2004, nine cases
associated with laboratory and subsequent secondary exposure
were reported from Beijing, China. No cases have been reported
since then.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
SARS is considered an atypical pneumonia that affects persons in
all age groups. The CDC recognizes asymptomatic or mild cases,
moderate disease, and severe respiratory illness. The incubation
period is 2–7 days, and it can be spread to contacts of affected
patients for 10 days. The mean time from onset of clinical symptoms
to hospital admission is 3–5 days. In all clinical cases, persistent
fever is present; chills or rigor (or both), cough, shortness of breath,
rales, and rhonchi are the rule. Many patients report headache,
myalgias, and sore throat as well. A watery diarrhea occurs in some
patients during the course of the illness. Elderly patients may report
malaise and delirium, without the typical febrile response. No single
symptom or sign is diagnostic or highly suggestive, and the history
and physical examination of a patient in whom SARS in suspected
are to be interpreted in this context.
B. Laboratory Findings and Imaging
Leukopenia and especially lymphopenia are observed commonly. A
low-grade 
disseminated 
intravascular 
coagulation
(thrombocytopenia, prolonged activated thromboplastin time, and
elevated D-dimer level) is present in many patients. Other
abnormalities include modest elevations of ALT and creatine kinase.
Arterial oxygen saturation is < 95% in 80% of affected individuals,
and pulmonary infiltrates are noted in all. The roentgenographic
pattern is not specific, and severe cases may progress to ARDS,
with extensive bilateral consolidation. A high-resolution CT scan is
abnormal (ground-glass opacifications or focal consolidation) in
67% of patients with initially normal chest radiographs. Serum
serologies, including enzyme immunoassays and fluorescent
antibody assays, are available through public health departments at
the state level, although seroconversion may not occur until 3 weeks
after the onset of symptoms.
The detection rates for the virus using conventional RT-PCR are
generally low in the first week of illness. Urine, nasopharyngeal
aspirate, and stool specimens are positive in 42%, 68%, and 97%,
respectively, on day 14 of illness. Although viral isolation is
possible, it is a technically laborious and time-consuming procedure.
 Complications
As with any viral pneumonia, pulmonary decompensation is the
most feared problem. ARDS occurs in about 16% patients, and
about 20–30% of patients require intubation and mechanical
ventilation. Sequelae of intensive care include infection with
nosocomial pathogens, tension pneumothorax from ventilation at
high peak pressures, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
 Treatment
Severe cases require intensive support. Although a number of
different agents including ribavirin (400–600 mg/d and 4 g/d),
lopinavir/ritonavir (400 mg/100 mg), interferon type I, IVIG, and
systemic corticosteroids (linked to case reports of post-SARS
osteonecrosis) were used to treat SARS patients during the 2003
epidemic, the treatment efficacy of these therapeutic agents remains
inconclusive and further research is needed. Subsequent studies
with ribavirin show no activity against the virus in vitro, and a
retrospective analysis of the epidemic in Toronto suggests worse
outcomes in patients who receive the drug. Agents under evaluation
include monoclonal antibodies, protease inhibitors, and interferon-
based therapies.
 Prognosis
The overall mortality rate of identified cases is about 14%. Mortality
is age-related, ranging from < 1% in persons under 24 years of age
to > 50% in persons over 65 years of age. Poor prognostic factors
include advanced age, chronic hepatitis B infection treated with
lamivudine, high initial or high peak lactate dehydrogenase
concentration, high neutrophil count on presentation, diabetes
mellitus, acute kidney disease, and low counts of CD4 and CD8 on
presentation. Many subclinical cases probably go undiagnosed.
Seasonality, as with influenza, is not established.
 Prevention
Health care workers engaged in procedures that involve activities
such as intubation, suctioning, and nebulization are at high risk for
acquiring the virus. Transmission may occur shortly after the
development of symptoms and perhaps before the appearance of
fever, cough, and dyspnea. Thus, an increased level of suspicion is
critical, and isolation of high-risk patients is essential. Simple
hygienic measures (such as hand-washing after touching patients,
use of appropriate and well-fitted face masks, and early
introduction of infection control measures, including quarantine) may
help reduce transmission.
There is limited efficacy in using infrared thermometers in
screening travelers because symptoms and fevers can be masked
by medications and early cases may not be detected. Other controls
measures include quarantining in the home for high-risk exposed
persons and the use of facemasks for preventing hospital-acquired
infections, although the validity of using such masks in the
community remains unsubstantiated. Continual reporting of
suspected cases is crucial, as is awareness of restrictions on
international travel. The most cautious modalities include monitoring
for 10 days after the last potential exposure and confinement of
recovering patients for a similar interval.
Golda A et al. Recent antiviral strategies against human
coronavirus-related respiratory illnesses. Curr Opin Pulm Med.
2008 May;14(3):248–53. [PMID: 18427249]
 
Hui DS et al. Clinical features, pathogenesis and immunobiology of
severe acute respiratory syndrome. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2008
May;14(3):2417. [PMID: 18427248]
 
Nishiyama A et al. Risk factors for SARS infection within hospitals
in Hanoi, Vietnam. Jpn J Infect Dis. 2008;61(5):388–90. [PMID:
18806349]
 
Raboud J et al. Risk factors for SARS transmission from patients
requiring intubation: a multicentre investigation in Toronto, Canada.
PLoS One. 2010 May 19;5(5):e10717. [PMID: 20502660]
 
ADENOVIRUS INFECTIONS
Adenoviruses (there are over at least 52 serotypes) produce a
variety of clinical syndromes. These infections are usually self-
limited or clinically inapparent and most common among infants,
young children, and military recruits. Adenoviruses, however, may
cause significant morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised
persons, such as HIV-infected persons and liver, kidney, and lung
and hematopoietic stem cell transplant, cancer chemotherapy, and
COPD patients. The incubation period is 4–9 days. Adenoviruses,
although a common cause of human disease, also receive particular
recognition through their role as vectors in gene therapy.
Clinical syndromes of adenovirus infection, often overlapping,
include the following. The common cold (see Chapter 8) is
characterized by rhinitis, pharyngitis, and mild malaise without fever.
Nonstreptococcal exudative pharyngitis is characterized by fever
lasting 2–12 days and accompanied by malaise and myalgia.
Conjunctivitis is often present. Lower respiratory tract infection may
occur, including bronchiolitis, suggested by cough and rales, or
pneumonia (types 3, 4, and 7 commonly cause acute respiratory
disease and atypical pneumonia). Adenovirus type 14 is increasingly
reported as a cause of severe and sometimes fatal pneumonia in
those with chronic lung disease, but it is also seen in healthy young
adults. Pharyngoconjunctival fever is manifested by fever and
malaise, conjunctivitis (often unilateral), mild pharyngitis, and
cervical adenitis. Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (transmissible
person to person) occurs in adults and is manifested by bilateral
conjunctival redness, pain, tearing, and an enlarged preauricular
lymph node (multiple types may be involved in a single outbreak).
Keratitis may lead to subepithelial opacities (especially with types 8,
19, or 37). Acute hemorrhagic cystitis is a disorder of children often
associated with adenovirus type 11 and 21. Sexually transmitted
genitourinary ulcers and urethritis may be caused by types 2, 8, and
37 in particular. Adenoviruses also cause acute gastroenteritis
(types 40 and 41), mesenteric adenitis, acute appendicitis, and
intussusception. Rarely, they are associated with encephalitis, acute
flaccid paralysis, and pericarditis. Adenovirus is commonly
identified in endomyocardial tissue of patients with myocarditis and
dilated cardiomyopathy. Risk factors associated with severity of
infection include youth, chronic underlying infections, recent
transplantation, and serotypes 5 or 21.
Hepatitis (type 5 adenovirus), pneumonia, and hemorrhagic
cystitis (types 11 and 34) tend to develop in infected liver, lung, or
kidney transplant recipients, respectively. Syndromes that may
develop in hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients include
hepatitis, pneumonia, hemorrhagic cystitis, tubulointerstitial nephritis,
colitis, and encephalitis.
Antigen detection assays including direct fluorescence assay or
enzyme immunoassay are rapid and show sensitivity of 40–60%
compared with viral culture (considered the standard). Samples
with negative rapid assays require PCR assays or viral cultures for
diagnosis. Quantitative real-time rapid-cycle PCR is useful in
distinguishing disease from colonization, especially in hematologic
cell transplant patients.
Treatment is symptomatic. Ribavirin and cidofovir are used in
immunocompromised individuals with occasional success, although
cidofovir is attendant with significant renal toxicity and reduced
immunosuppression is often required. Adoptive immunotherapy with
transfusion of adenovirus-specific T cells is currently being
investigated. Typing of isolates is useful epidemiologically and in
distinguishing 
transmission 
from 
endogenous 
reactivation.
Complications of adenovirus pneumonia in children include
bronchiolitis obliterans.
Vaccines are not available for general use. Live oral vaccines
containing attenuated type 4 and type 7 were used in military
personnel, but they have been discontinued.
Hoffman JA. Adenovirus infections in solid organ transplant
recipients. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2009 Dec;14(;6): 625–
33. [PMID: 19741532]
 
Russell WC. Adenoviruses: update on structure and function. J
Gen Virol. 2009 Jan;90(Pt 1):1–20. [PMID: 19088268]
 
OTHER EXANTHEMATOUS VIRAL INFECTIONS
1. Erythrovirus (Parvovirus) Infections
Parvovirus B19, now termed “erythrovirus,” infects human erythroid
precursor cells. It is quite widespread (by age 15 years about 50%
of children have detectable IgG) and its transmission occurs through
respiratory secretions and saliva, through the placenta (vertical
transmission), and through administration of blood products. The
incubation period is 4–14 days. Chronic forms of the infection can
occur. Bocavirus, another erythrovirus (parvovirus), is a cause of
winter acute respiratory disease in children and adults.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Erythrovirus (parvovirus B19) causes several syndromes and
manifests differently in various populations.
1. Children—In children, an exanthematous illness (“fifth disease,”
erythema infectiosum) is characterized by a fiery red “slapped
cheek” appearance, circumoral pallor, and a subsequent lacy,
maculopapular, evanescent rash on the trunk and limbs. Malaise,
headache, and pruritus (especially on the palms and soles) occur.
Systemic symptoms and fever are mostly abated by the time of rash
appearance.
2. Immunocompromised patients—In 
immunosuppressed
patients, including those with HIV infection or transplanted organs,
or with hematologic conditions such as sickle cell disease, transient
aplastic crisis and pure red blood cell aplasia may occur. Bone
marrow aspirates reveal absence of mature erythroid precursors
and characteristic giant pronormoblasts.
3. Adults—A limited nonerosive symmetric polyarthritis that mimics
lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, preferentially involving
the metacarpophalangeal joints of the hands and the wrists and
knees, can develop in middle-aged persons (especially women) but
can also occur in children. Rashes, especially facial, are less
common in adults.
Chloroquine and its derivatives exacerbate erythrovirus
(parvovirus)-associated anemia and are linked with significantly
lower hematocrit in hospital admissions in malaria endemic areas.
Rare reported presentations include myocarditis with infarction,
constrictive pericarditis, chronic dilated cardiomyopathy, hepatitis,
pneumonitis, 
neutropenia, 
thrombocytopenia, 
a 
lupus-like
syndrome, glomerulopathy, CNS vasculitis, and a chronic fatigue
syndrome. A subclinical infection is documented among patients
with sickle cell disease. Other CNS manifestations of erythrovirus
(parvovirus) include encephalitis, meningitis, stroke (usually in sickle
cell anemia patients with aplastic crises), and peripheral neuropathy
(brachial plexitis and carpal tunnel syndrome) with occasional
chronic residua.
The symptoms of erythrovirus (parvovirus) infection can mimic
those of autoimmune states such as lupus, systemic sclerosis,
antiphospholipid syndrome, or vasculitis. The molecular mimicry of
erythrovirus (parvovirus) to human cytokeratin and transcription
factors engaged in hematopoiesis is the basis for theories that
implicate erythrovirus (parvovirus) in the pathogenesis of these
autoimmune states.
In pregnancy, premature labor, hydrops fetalis, and even fetal
loss are reported sequelae. Pregnant women with a recent exposure
or with suggestive symptoms should be tested for the disease and
carefully monitored if results are positive.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis is clinical (Table 32–2) but may be confirmed by an
elevated titer of IgM anti-erythrovirus (parvovirus) antibodies in
serum or with PCR in serum or bone marrow. Autoimmune
antibodies (antiphospholipid and antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies) can be present and are thought to be a consequence of
molecular mimicry.
 Complications
Uncommon complications include the CNS diseases listed above,
chronic hemolytic anemia, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpuric
syndrome, acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis, and hepatitis.
 Treatment
Treatment in healthy persons is symptomatic (nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs are used to treat arthralgias, and transfusions are
used to treat transient aplastic crises). In immunosuppressed
patients, IVIG can aid in the reduction of anemia. IVIG does not
reduce the complications associated with encephalitis related to
erythrovirus (parvovirus). Intrauterine blood transfusion can be
considered in severe fetal anemia.
 Prevention & Prognosis
Screening of donated blood could potentially prevent transfusion-
related infection. Several nosocomial outbreaks have been
documented. In these cases, standard containment guidelines,
including hand-washing after patient exposure and avoiding contact
with pregnant women are paramount.
The prognosis is generally excellent in immunocompetent
individuals. In immunosuppressed patients, persistent anemia may
require prolonged transfusion dependence. Remission of
erythrovirus (parvovirus) infection in AIDS patients may occur with
HAART, though the immune restoration syndrome is also reported.
Bock CT et al. Human parvovirus B19-associated myocarditis. N
Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 1;362(13):1248–9. [PMID: 20357294]
 
Bönsch C et al. Chloroquine and its derivatives exacerbate B19V-
associated anemia by promoting viral replication. PLoS Negl Trop
Dis. 2010 Apr 27;4(4):e669. [PMID: 20436917]
 
Brown KE. The expanding range of parvoviruses which infect
humans. Rev Med Virol. 2010 Jul;20(4):231–44. [PMID:
20586082]
 
Duran R et al. Transient leukoerythroblastosis in a very low birth
weight infant with parvovirus B19 infection. Int J Infect Dis. 2009
Nov;13(6):e473–5. [PMID: 19307144]
 
2. Poxvirus Infections
Among the nine poxviruses causing disease in humans, the following
are the most clinically important: variola/vaccinia, molluscum
contagiosum, orf and paravaccinia, and monkeypox.
1. Variola/vaccinia—Smallpox (variola) was a highly contagious
disease associated with high mortality and disabling sequelae. Its
manifestations include severe headache, acute onset of fever,
prostration and a rash characterized by the uniform progression
from macules to papules to firm, deep-seated vesicles or pustules.
The synchronous progression in smallpox readily differentiates
lesions from those of varicella (see also Chapter 6).
Complications of smallpox include bacterial superinfections
(cellulitis and pneumonia), encephalitis, and keratitis with corneal
ulcerations (risk factor for blindness). Effective vaccination led to its
global elimination by 1979 and routine vaccination stopped in 1985.
Despite the recommendation of destroying remaining samples of this
virus, significant concern exists for the potential misuse of these
repositories in military or terrorist activities.
Smallpox should be considered, in concordance with the CDC's
Smallpox 
Response 
Plan
(www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/smallpox/response-plan/index.asp), in any
patient with fever and a characteristic rash (see above) for which
other etiologies—such as herpes infections, erythema multiforme,
drug reactions (eczema herpeticum may be differentiated from
suspect smallpox by appropriate sero-logic stains), or other
infections—are unlikely. Rare cases of vaccine-related disease from
contact with a smallpox vaccinee, (including sexually transmission)
are reported. Two cases of vaccinia infection after contact with oral
rabies animal baits (which uses the vaccinia vector) are reported.
Patients with suspected infection should be placed in airborne and
contact isolation and the official agency contacted (CDC
Emergency Preparedness and Response Branch; 770-488-7100).
Original smallpox vaccine was crudely manufactured with a
significant side-effect profile, including eczema vaccinatum and
acute vaccinia syndrome (fatigue, headaches, myalgias, and fever).
Second generation smallpox vaccines had similar side-effect profiles
(including myocarditis and pericarditis), which led to a safer third-
generation vaccine candidate that is currently undergoing phase II
trials. Contraindications to vaccination include immunosuppression,
eczema or other dermatitis in the vaccinee or household contacts,
allergy to any component of the vaccine, infants younger than 1 year
and pregnant or breast-feeding women. According to current
recommendation, it is unnecessary for anyone not handling the
smallpox vaccine to be vaccinated.
Inoculation of the vaccine in inappropriate sites (eg, eyes) is
unfortunately common. Asymptomatic vaccinia viremia can be
detected up to 21 days post vaccination and no blood donation
should occur during this interval. Cidofovir may be considered for
treatment of poxviral conditions and intravenous human vaccinia
immunoglobulin may be useful for vaccinia.
2. Molluscum contagiosum—Molluscum contagiosum may be
transmitted sexually or by other close contact. It is manifested by
pearly, raised, umbilicated skin nodules sparing the palms and soles.
Keratoconjunctivitis can occur. There may be an association with
atopic dermatitis or eczema. Marked and persistent lesions in AIDS
patients respond readily to combination antiretroviral therapy.
Treatment options include destructive therapies (curettage,
cryotherapy, cantharidin, and keratolytics, among others),
immunomodulators (imiquimod, cimetidine, and Candida antigen),
and antivirals (cidofovir). No treatment is uniformly effective and
multiple courses of therapy are often needed.
Cryptococcal skin lesions can mimic molluscum contagiosum.
3. Orf and paravaccinia—Orf (contagious pustular dermatitis, or
ecthyma contagiosa) and paravaccinia (milker's nodules) are
occupational diseases acquired by contact with sheep and cattle,
respectively. Orf also occurs among children with ruminant
exposures. Orf anecdotally responds to imiquimod.
4. Monkeypox—First identified in 1970, monkeypox is enzootic in
the rain forests of equatorial Africa and presents in humans as a
syndrome similar to smallpox. The incubation period is about 12
days, and limited person-to-person spread occurs. African mortality
rates vary from 3% to 11% depending on the immune status of the
patient. Secondary attack rates appear to be about 10%. The first
community-acquired outbreak in the United States of monkeypox
occurred in 2003 in Wisconsin and other states of the upper
Midwest. The source appeared to be imported Gambian giant rats
via consequent exposure of prairie dogs. Other susceptible animals
include nonhuman primates, rabbits, and rodents. Confusion with
smallpox and varicella occurs; however, both lymphadenopathy
(seen in up to 90% of unvaccinated persons) and a febrile
prodrome are prominent features in monkeypox infection.
Distinguishing characteristics of the monkeypox rash are its deep
seated and well-circumscribed nature, it appears at the same stage
of development (unlike varicella but like smallpox), and is centrifugal
(including the palms and soles). Suspected cases should be placed
on standard, contact and droplet precautions; and local and state
public health officials, and the CDC should be notified for assistance
with confirmation of the diagnosis (electron microscopy, viral
culture, ELISA, PCR). Cidofovir is effective against monkeypox,
and IVIG can be used in selected cases.
Other general precautions that should be taken are avoidance of
contact with prairie dogs and Gambian giant rats (whose illness is
manifested by alopecia, rash, and ocular or nasal discharge),
appropriate care and isolation of those exposed within 3 prior
weeks to such animals, and veterinary examination and investigation
of suspect animals through health departments. Vaccinia
immunization is effective against monkeypox and is recommended, if
no contraindication exists (outlined above), for those involved in the
investigation of the outbreak and for healthcare workers caring for
those infected with monkey-pox. Postexposure vaccination is also
advised for documented contacts of infected persons or animals.
US federal agencies currently prohibit the importation of African
rodents.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Updated
interim CDC guidance for use of smallpox vaccine, cidofovir, and
vaccinia immune globulin (VIG) for prevention and treatment in the
setting of an outbreak of monkey-pox infections.
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/monkeypox/ treatmentguidelines.htm.
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Vaccinia virus
infection after sexual contact with a military smallpox vaccinee–
Washington, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Jul
2;59(25):773–5. [PMID: 20592687]
 
Essbauer S et al. Zoonotic poxviruses. Vet Microbiol. 2010 Jan
27;140(3–4):229–36. [PMID: 19828265]
 
MacNeil A et al. Monkeypox or varicella? Lessons from an
outbreak rash investigation in the Republic of the Congo. Am J
Trop Med Hyg. 2009 Apr;80(4):503–7. [PMID: 19346366]
 
von Krempelhuber A et al. A randomized, double-blind, dose-
finding Phase II study to evaluate immunogenicity and safety of the
third generation smallpox vaccine candidate IMVAMUNE.
Vaccine. 2010 Feb 3;28(5):1209–16. [PMID: 19944151]
 
VIRUSES & GASTROENTERITIS
Viruses are responsible for at least 30–40% of cases of infectious
diarrhea in the United States. These agents include rotaviruses;
caliciviruses, including noroviruses such as Norwalk virus;
astroviruses; enteric adenoviruses; and, less often, toroviruses,
coronaviruses, picornaviruses (including the Aichi virus), and
pestiviruses. Rotaviruses and noroviruses are responsible for most
of nonbacterial cases of gastroenteritis.
Rotaviruses are the leading worldwide cause of dehydrating
gastroenteritis in young children and are associated with significant
morbidity and mortality (at least 500,000 children under 5 years of
age annually from rota-virus infection). Children aged 6 months to 2
years are the most affected. By age 5, virtually every child has been
infected with this pathogen. The diverse set of rotaviruses (classified
by glycoproteins and protease-sensitive proteins [G-type and P-
type antigens] which segregate independently) results in a
constellation of phenotypes although only about four of these are
responsible for over 90% of disease. Rotavirus infections follow an
endemic pattern, especially in the tropics, although they peak during
the winter in temperate regions. The virus is transmitted by fecal-
oral route and can be shed in feces for up to 3 weeks in severe
infections. In outbreak settings (eg, daycare centers), the virus is
ubiquitously found in the environment, and secondary attack rates
are between 16% and 30% (including household contacts). The
disease is usually mild and self-limiting. A 2- to 3-day prodrome of
fever and vomiting is followed by nonbloody diarrhea (up to 10–20
bowel movements per day) lasting for 1–4 days. The method of
choice for diagnosis is PCR of the stool. It is thought that rarely
systemic disease occurs. Treatment is symptomatic, with fluid and
electrolyte replacement. Local intestinal immunity gives protection
against successive infection. Two oral rotavirus vaccines are
available in the United States: pentavalent human-bovine
reassortment rotavirus vaccine (PRV, RotaTeq; to be given at 2, 4,
and 6 months of age) and attenuated human rotavirus vaccine
(HRV, Rotarix; to be given at 2 and 4 months of age).
Contraindications include allergy to any of the vaccine ingredients,
previous allergic reaction to the vaccine, and immunodeficiency.
Noroviruses, such as Norwalk virus (one of a variety of small
round viruses divided into 3 genogroups and at least 25 genotypes),
are the major cause of epidemic gastroenteritis. They are
responsible for a significant percentage of childhood hospitalizations
for gastroenteritis in the developing world (15% in surveys from
India, 31% from Peru). They appear to evolve by antigenic drift
(similar to influenza). While 90% of young adults show serologic
evidence of past infection, no long-lasting protective immunity
develops and reinfections are common. In the United States,
noroviruses are responsible for over 90% of reported nonbacterial
gastroenteritis outbreaks during cold weather intervals (hence the
colloquial name “gastric flu”). Outbreak environments include
restaurants, long-term care facilities, hospitals, schools, daycare
centers, vacation destinations (including cruise ships), and Middle
Eastern military bases deployed abroad. Persons at particular risk
are the young, the elderly, the institutionalized, and the immuno-
suppressed. Although transmission is usually fecal–oral, airborne
and waterborne transmission are also documented. A short
incubation period (24–48 hours), a short symptomatic illness (12–
60 hours, but up to 5 days in hospital-associated cases and in
children under 11 years of age), a high frequency (> 50%) of
vomiting, and absence of bacterial pathogens in stool samples are
highly predictive of norovirus gastroenteritis. RT-PCR of stool
samples is used for epidemiologic purposes. Treatment is largely
symptomatic.
Outbreak control for both rotavirus and norovirus infections
include strict adherence to general hygienic measures. Despite the
promise of alcohol-based sanitizers for the control of pathogen
transmission, such cleansers may be relatively ineffective against the
noroviruses compared with antibacterial soap and water, reinforcing
the need for new hygienic agents against this prevalent group of
viruses. Cohorting of sick patients, contact precautions for
symptomatic hospitalized patients, exclusion from work of
symptomatic staff until symptom resolution (or 48–72 h after this for
norovirus disease), and proper decontamination procedures are
crucial.
The presence of antibodies is not associated with protection
against reinfection. Vaccine developments are attendant with the
complications associated with the rapid evolution (“antigenic drift”)
of noroviruses and the probable need for annual strain selection to
match circulating variants.
Glass RI et al. Norovirus gastroenteritis. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct
29;361(18):1776–85. [PMID: 19864676]
 
Greenberg HB et al. Rotaviruses: from pathogenesis to
vaccinavaccination. Gastroenterology. 2009 May;136(6):1939–
51. [PMID: 19457420]
 
Le Guyader FS et al. Aichi virus, norovirus, astrovirus, enterovirus,
and rotavirus involved in clinical cases from a French oyster-
related gastroenteritis outbreak. J Clin Microbiol. 2008
Dec;46(12):4011–7. [PMID: 18842942]
 
Liu P et al. Effectiveness of liquid soap and hand sanitizer against
Norwalk virus on contaminated hands. Appl Environ Microbiol.
2010 Jan;76(2):394–9. [PMID: 19933337]
 
Ward RL. Rotarix: a rotavirus vaccine for the world. Clin Infect
Dis. 2009 Jan 15;48(2):222–8. [PMID: 19072246]
 
ENTEROVIRUSES THAT PRODUCE SEVERAL
SYNDROMES
The most famous enterovirus, the poliomyelitis virus, is discussed
above under Vaccine Preventable Diseases. Other clinically relevant
enteroviral infections are discussed in this section.
1. Coxsackievirus Infections
Coxsackievirus infections cause several clinical syndromes. As with
other enteroviruses, infections are most common during the summer.
Two groups, A and B, are defined either serologically or by mouse
bioassay. There are more than 50 serotypes.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical syndromes associated with coxsackievirus infection are
summer grippe; herpangina; epidemic pleurodynia; aseptic
meningitis and other neurologic syndromes; acute nonspecific
pericarditis; myocarditis; hand, foot, and mouth disease; epidemic
conjunctivitis; and other syndromes.
1. Summer grippe (A and B)—A febrile illness, principally of
children, summer grippe usually lasts 1–4 days. Minor symptoms of
upper respiratory tract infection are often present.
2. Herpangina (A2–6, 10: B3)—There is sudden onset of fever,
which may be as high as 40.6 °C, sometimes with febrile
convulsions. Other symptoms are headache, myalgia, and vomiting.
The sore throat is characterized early by petechiae or papules on
the soft palate that ulcerate in about 3 days and then heal. An
outbreak in Taiwan with A2 was associated with herpangina and
coincided with an enterovirus 71 (below) outbreak, characterized
by hand, foot, and mouth disease. Treatment is symptomatic.
3. Epidemic pleurodynia (Bornholm disease) (B1–5)—Pleuritic
pain is prominent. Tenderness, hyperesthesia, and muscle swelling
are present over the area of diaphragmatic attachment. Other
findings include headache, sore throat, malaise, nausea, and fever.
Orchitis and aseptic meningitis occur in < 10% of patients. Most
patients are ill for 4–6 days.
4. Aseptic meningitis (A and B) and other neurologic
syndromes—Fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, stiff neck,
drowsiness, and cerebrospinal fluid lymphocytosis without chemical
abnormalities may occur, and pediatric clusters of group B
(especially B5) meningitis are reported. Focal encephalitis and
transverse myelitis are reported with coxsackievirus group A.
Disseminated encephalitis occurs after group B infection, and acute
flaccid paralysis is reported with both coxsackievirus group A and
B. An outbreak of aseptic meningitis occurred in central China
(Gansu Province) in 2008, with 85 cases reported of coxsackie A9
disease. Severe neonatal illnesses are reported with B1 infections,
including encephalomyocarditis and six neonatal deaths between
2007 and 2008.
5. Acute nonspecific pericarditis (B types)—Sudden onset of
anterior chest pain, often worse with inspiration and in the supine
position, is typical. Fever, myalgia, headache, and pericardial
friction rub appear early and these symptoms are often transient.
Evidence for pericardial effusion on imaging studies is often present,
and the occasional patient has a paradoxical pulse.
Electrocardiographic evidence of pericarditis is often present.
Relapses may occur.
6. Myocarditis (B1–5)—Heart failure in the neonatal period
secondary to in utero myocarditis and over 20% of adult cases of
myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy are associated with group
B (especially B3) infections.
7. Hand, foot, and mouth disease (A5, 10, 16)—This disease is
sometimes epidemic and is characterized by stomatitis and a
vesicular rash on hands and feet. Enterovirus 71 is also a causative
agent (see below).
8. Epidemic conjunctivitis—As with enterovirus 70 (see below),
the A24 variant of coxsackievirus is associated with acute epidemic
hemorrhagic conjunctivitis in tropical areas with outbreaks reported
in the last few years in southern China, Pakistan, southern Sudan,
and Uganda.
9. Other syndromes associated with coxsackievirus infections
—These include rhabdomyolysis, fulminant neonatal hepatitis
(occurs rarely), glomerulopathy (group B infections), type 1
diabetes mellitus (mainly group B infections), and thyroid disease
(group B4), although definitive causality is not established. A
pathogenic role in primary Sjögren syndrome and acute myocardial
infarction has also been proposed for group B coxsackievirus
infections.
B. Laboratory Findings
Routine laboratory studies show no characteristic abnormalities.
Neutralizing antibodies appear during convalescence. The virus may
be isolated from throat washings or stools inoculated into suckling
mice. Viral culture is expensive, labor demanding, and requires
several days for results. A PCR test for enterovirus RNA is
available and, although it cannot identify the serotype, it appears to
be useful, particularly in cases of meningitis.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Treatment is symptomatic. With the exception of meningitis,
myocarditis, pericarditis, perhaps diabetes, and rare illnesses such
as pancreatitis or polio-like syndrome, the syndromes caused by
coxsackieviruses are benign and self-limited. Two controlled trials
showed a potential clinical benefit with pleconaril for patients with
enteroviral meningitis although the compassionate use of this drug
has stopped. There are anecdotal reports of success with IVIG in
severe disease.
Chen SP et al. Comparison of clinical features between
coxsackievirus A2 and enterovirus 71 during the enterovirus
outbreak in Taiwan, 2008: a children's hospital experience. J
Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2010 Apr;43(2):99–104. [PMID:
20457425]
 
Cui A et al. An outbreak of aseptic meningitis caused by
coxsackievirus A9 in Gansu, the People's Republic of China. Virol
J. 2010 Apr 6;7:72. [PMID: 20367886]
 
2. Echovirus Infections
Echoviruses are enteroviruses that produce several clinical
syndromes, particularly in children. Infection is most common during
summer. Among reported specimens, death ensues in about 3%.
Males younger than 20 years are more commonly infected than
other persons.
Over 30 serotypes of echoviruses are recognized and the most
common serotypes for disease are types 6, 9, 11, and 30. Most
can cause aseptic meningitis, which may be associated with a
rubelliform rash. Types 30 and 13 (the latter also associated with
meningitis) outbreaks are increasingly reported globally, including a
Korean outbreak of the former in 2008 and five epidemics of the
latter in the United States. An echovirus 4 outbreak of aseptic
meningitis occurred in Australia in 2007. A type 18 outbreak in
Missouri was associated with childcare. Transmission is primarily
fecal–oral. Hand-washing is an effective control measure in
outbreaks of aseptic meningitis. Outbreaks related to fecal
contamination of water sources, including drinking water and
swimming and bathing pools, were reported in the past.
Besides meningitis, other conditions associated with echoviruses
range from common respiratory diseases (bronchiolitis occurs often
in children) and epidemic diarrhea to myocarditis, a hemorrhagic
obstetric 
syndrome, 
keratoconjunctivitis, 
hepatitis 
with
coagulopathy, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and neonatal as well as
adult cases of encephalitis and sepsis, interstitial pneumonitis,
hemophagocytic syndromes (in children with cancer), sudden
deafness, encephalitis, optic neuritis, uveitis, and septic shock.
Echoviruses, and enteroviruses in general, are also a common cause
of nonspecific exanthems.
Echovirus 1 (EV1) is an oncolytic virus that selectively targets
and destroys malignant prostate and ovarian cancer cells in vivo and
is being studied as a potential adjunctive therapy for the control of
the peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer.
As with other enterovirus infections, diagnosis is best established
by correlation of clinical, epidemiologic, and laboratory evidence.
Cytopathic effects are produced in tissue culture after recovery of
virus from throat washings, blood, or cerebrospinal fluid. An
enterovirus PCR of the cerebrospinal fluid can assist in the diagnosis
and is associated with a shorter duration of hospitalization in febrile
neonates. Fourfold or greater rises in antibody titer signify systemic
infection.
Treatment is usually symptomatic, and the prognosis is excellent,
though there are reports of mild paralysis after CNS infection.
Pleconaril, investigational, appears to be of some use among
meningitis patients with more severe disease in shortening the course
of illness.
From a public health standpoint, clustered illnesses such as
swimming in sewage-infested sea water in travelers suggest point-
source exposure. Prevention of fecal–oral contamination and
maintenance of pool hygiene through chlorination and pH control
are important public health control measures.
Begier EM et al. An outbreak of concurrent echovirus 30 and
coxsackievirus A1 infections associated with sea swimming among
a group of travelers to Mexico. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Sep
1;47(5):616–23. [PMID: 18637756]
 
Haley ES et al. Regional administration of oncolytic Echovirus 1 as
a novel therapy for the peritoneal dissemination of gastric cancer. J
Mol Med. 2009 Apr;87(4):385–99. [PMID: 19139835]
 
Markey PG et al. Meningitis and a febrile vomiting illness caused
by echovirus type 4, Northern Territory, Australia. Emerg Infect
Dis. 2010 Jan;16(1):63–8. [PMID: 20031044]
 
3. Enteroviruses 70, 71, & Related Agents
Several distinct clinical syndromes are being described in
association with enteroviruses. Enterovirus 70, a ubiquitous agent
first identified in 1969 and responsible for abrupt bilateral eye
discharge and subconjunctival hemorrhage with occasional systemic
symptoms, is most commonly associated with acute hemorrhagic
conjunctivitis. Enterovirus infection of the pancreas can trigger
cell-mediated autoimmune destruction of beta-cells resulting in
diabetes. Enterovirus myocarditis can be a serious infection in
neonates, complicated by cardiac dysfunction and arrhythmias.
Enterovirus 71 (HEV-71) almost always occurs in the Asia-
Pacific region and is associated with hand, foot, and mouth
disease (HFMD), herpangina as well as a form of epidemic
encephalitis associated on occasion with pulmonary edema, and
acute flaccid paralysis. An enteroviral outbreak in Fuyang China
in 2008 with over 6000 cases of largely HFMD and 22 deaths was
caused by a recombinant virus between HEV-71 and
coxsackievirus A16.
Human enteroviruses are neurotropic and a potential role for
these viruses in amyotropic lateral sclerosis is the subject of some
investigation.
Mortality is especially high in enterovirus 71-associated
brainstem encephalitis, which is often complicated by pulmonary
edema, particularly when it occurs in children younger than 5 years.
A complication is autonomic nervous system dysregulation, which
may develop prior to the pulmonary edema. Because of lower herd
immunity, HFMD tends to infect the very young (under age 5) in
nonendemic areas. Disease is usually more severe and sequelae
more common than with other enteroviruses. Some children with
enterovirus-associated cardiopulmonary failure require the usage of
extracorporeal life support which can improve the outcome.
Recognized sequelae include central hypoventilation, dysphagia, and
limb weakness.
Diagnosis of both entities is facilitated by the clinical and
epidemiologic findings with the isolation of the suspect agent from
conjunctival scraping for enterovirus 70 or vesicle swabs, body
secretions, or cerebrospinal fluid for enterovirus 71. Serologic
methods, including enzyme immunoassays and complement fixation
tests, are developed. These assays show good specificity but poor
sensitivity (< 80%). RT-PCR may increase the detection rate in
enterovirus infections and is useful in the analysis of cerebrospinal
fluid samples among patients with meningitis and of blood samples
among infants with a sepsis-like illness.
Treatment of both entities remains largely symptomatic, though
pleconaril (see above) may be of some use. The role of
immunoglobulins is under investigation. Treatment of enterovirus 71
infections with corticosteroids or pyrazolones was associated with a
worse prognosis in one study. The major complication associated
with enterovirus 70 is the rare development of an acute neurologic
illness with motor paralysis akin to poliomyelitis. Attention-deficit
with hyper-activity occurs in about 20% with confirmed infection.
Household contacts, especially children under 6 months of age,
are at particular risk for enterovirus 71 acquisition. A commercial
disinfectant, Virkon S, at 1–2% application, appears to reduce
infectivity titers. A stage-based supportive treatment for enterovirus
71 infections, recognizing the potential for late onset CNS disease
and cardiopulmonary failure is important. A human vaccine is
needed for enterovirus 71.
Enterovirus 72 is another term for hepatitis A virus (see
Chapter 16). Enterovirus EV-104A is related to rhino-viruses and
associated with respiratory illness in reports from Italy and
Switzerland.
Ma H et al. Glucocorticoid and pyrazolone treatment of acute
fever is a risk factor for critical and life-threatening human
enterovirus 71 infection during an outbreak in China, 2008. Pediatr
Infect Dis J. 2010 Jun;29(6):524–9. [PMID: 20104199]
 
Piralla A et al. Enterovirus genotype EV-104 in humans, Italy,
2008–2009. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010 Jun;16(6):1018–21. [PMID:
20507762]
 
Wong SS et al. Human enterovirus 71 and hand, foot, and mouth
disease. Epidemiol Infect. 2010 Aug;138(8):1071–89. [PMID:
20056019]
 
Zhang Y et al. An emerging recombinant human enterovirus 71
responsible for the 2008 outbreak of hand foot and mouth disease
in Fuyang city of China. Virol J. 2010 May 12;7:94. [PMID:
20459851]
 
4. Human Parechovirus Infection
At least six types of parechovirus (a picornavirus first recognized in
2000) were recognized by 2010. They are responsible for otitis,
respiratory, and gastrointestinal illness in young children; neonatal
sepsis; flaccid paralysis; and cerebral infections, including aseptic
meningitis and encephalitis (with white matter changes noted in
neonatal disease). Severe disease is most often found with the type
3 parechovirus. Cases are reported from Europe and North
America. Disease can also occur in older adults.
The added screening with a human parechovirus-specific PCR
provides a significant increase in determining the viral cause of
neonatal sepsis or CNS symptoms in children younger than 5 years.
Human parechoviruses are one of the leading causes of viral sepsis
and meningitis in young children. Respiratory and gastrointestinal
illnesses are seen with types 4–6. Neonatal deaths are reported
with type 3 and 6 parechovirus infections. Treatment is largely
supportive, and rapid identification of the viral antigen by PCR may
decrease use of unnecessary antibiotics and shorten hospital stay,
although current PCR assays are not always sufficiently sensitive to
exclude pachecoviruses. Reported complications of neonatal
cerebral infections include learning disabilities, epilepsy, and
cerebral palsy.
Harvala H et al. Parechoviruses in children: understanding a new
infection. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2010 Jun;23(3):224–30. [PMID:
20414971]
 
Pajkrt D et al. Clinical characteristics of human parechoviruses 4-6
infections in young children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009
Nov;28(11):1008–10. [PMID: 19536040]
 
Sedmak G et al. Infant deaths associated with human parechovirus
infection in Wisconsin. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Feb 1;50(3):357–61.
[PMID: 20047496]
 
RICKETTSIAL DISEASES
 
TYPHUS GROUP
1. Epidemic Louse-Borne Typhus
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Prodrome of headache, then chills and fever.
 Severe, intractable headaches, prostration, persisting high fever.
 Macular rash appearing on the fourth to seventh days on the
trunk and in the axillae, spreading to the rest of the body but
sparing the face, palms, and soles.
 Diagnosis confirmed by specific antibodies using complement
fixation, microagglutination, or immunofluorescence.
 
 General Considerations
Epidemic louse-borne typhus is caused by Rickettsia prowazekii,
a parasite of the body louse (Table 32–3). Transmission is favored
by crowded, unsanitary living conditions, famine, war, or any
circumstances that predispose to heavy infestation with lice. When
the louse sucks the blood of a person infected with R prowazekii,
the organism becomes established in the gut of the louse. When the
louse is transmitted to another person (through contact or clothing)
and has a blood meal, it defecates simultaneously, and the infected
feces are rubbed into the itching bite wound or mucous membranes.
Dry, infectious louse feces may also enter via the respiratory tract.
Cases can be acquired by travel to pockets of infection (eg, central
and northeastern Africa, Central and South America). In the last
few years, outbreaks have been reported from Peru, Burundi, and
Russia. Because of aerosol transmissibility, R prowazekii is
considered a possible bioterrorism agent.
R prowazekii can survive in lymphoid tissues after primary
infection, and years later, produce recrudescence of disease (Brill-
Zinsser disease) without exposure to infected lice. This phenomenon
can serve as a point source for future outbreaks.
An extrahuman reservoir of R prowazekii in the United States is
flying squirrels. Transmission to humans can occur through their
ectoparasites, usually causing atypical mild disease. A case of
recrudescent (Brill-Zinsser) disease 11 years after the initial flying
squirrel-associated disease has been reported.
 
Table 32–3. Rickettsial diseases.
 
1Also serve as arthropod reservoirs by maintaining rickettsiae through
transovarian transmission.
2Human infection results from inhalation of dust.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
(Table 32–2). Prodromal malaise, cough, headache, backache,
arthralgia, and chest pain begin after an incubation period of 10–14
days, followed by an abrupt onset of chills, high fever, and
prostration, with flu-like symptoms progressing to delirium and
stupor. The headache is severe and the fever is prolonged.
Other findings consist of conjunctivitis, hearing loss from
neuropathy of the eighth cranial nerve, flushed facies, rales at the
lung bases, and often splenomegaly. A macular rash (that may
become confluent) appears first in the axillae and then over the
trunk, spreading to the extremities but rarely involving the face,
palms, or soles. In severely ill patients, the rash becomes
hemorrhagic, and hypotension becomes marked. There may be
acute kidney injury, stupor, and delirium. Improvement begins 13–
16 days after onset with a rapid drop of fever and typically a
spontaneous recovery.
B. Laboratory Findings
The white blood cell count is variable. Thrombocytopenia, elevated
liver enzymes, proteinuria and hematuria commonly occur. Serum
obtained 5–12 days after onset of symptoms usually shows specific
antibodies 
for R prowazekii antigens as demonstrated by
complement fixation, microagglutination, or immunofluorescence. In
primary rickettsial infection, early antibodies are IgM; in
recrudescence (Brill disease), early antibodies are predominantly
IgG. A PCR test is developed, but its availability is limited. R
prowazekii is differentiated into 7 genotypes.
C. Imaging
Radiographs of the chest may show patchy consolidation.
 Differential Diagnosis
The prodromal symptoms and the early febrile stage are not specific
enough to permit diagnosis in nonepidemic situations. The rash is
usually sufficiently distinctive for diagnosis, but it may be absent in
up to 50% of cases or may be difficult to observe in dark-skinned
persons. A variety of other acute febrile diseases should be
considered, including typhoid fever, meningococcemia, and
measles.
 Complications
Pneumonia, thromboses, vasculitis with major vessel obstruction
and gangrene, circulatory collapse, myocarditis, and uremia may
occur.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of either doxycycline (100 mg orally twice daily
for adults and children weighing > 45 kg, and 2.2 mg/kg twice daily
for children weighing < 45 kg) or chloramphenicol (50–100
mg/kg/d in four divided doses, orally or intravenously; it is the drug
of choice in pregnant women) for 4–10 days. In epidemic
conditions, a single dose of doxycycline can be effective and is less
costly.
 Prognosis
The prognosis depends greatly on the patient's age and immune
status. In children under age 10 years, the disease is usually mild.
The mortality rate is 10% in the second and third decades but in the
past reached 60% in the sixth decade. Brill-Zinsser disease
(recrudescent epidemic typhus) has a more gradual onset than
primary R prowazekii infection, fever and rash are of shorter
duration, and the disease is milder and rarely fatal.
 Prevention
Prevention consists of louse control with insecticides, particularly by
applying chemicals to clothing or treating it with heat, and frequent
bathing. The control of typhus in Finland during World War II is
attributed to sauna use.
A deloused and bathed typhus patient is not infectious. The
disease is not transmitted from person to person. Patients are
infectious for the lice during the febrile period and perhaps 2–3 days
after the fever returns to normal. Infected lice pass rickettsiae in
their feces within 2–6 days after the blood meal and can be
infectious earlier if crushed. Rickettsiae remain viable in a dead
louse for weeks.
No vaccine is currently available for the prevention of R
prowazekii infection. Past vaccines with crude antigen or
inactivated Rickettsia provided partial protection but were
associated with undesirable toxic reactions and difficulties in
standardization. Efforts to identify candidate antigens through DNA
technology are underway.
Gross D et al. 100th anniversary of the death of Ricketts: Howard
Taylor Ricketts (1871–1910). The namesake of the Rickettsiaceae
family. Microbes Infect. 2011 Jan;13(1):10–3. [PMID:
20888424]
 
Laurent H. Control of typhus fever in Finland during World War
II. Vesalius. 2009 Dec;15(2):71–9. [PMID: 20527325]
 
McQuiston JH et al. Brill-Zinsser disease in a patient following
infection with sylvatic epidemic typhus associated with flying
squirrels. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Sep 15;51(6):712–5. [PMID:
20687836]
 
2. Endemic Flea-Borne Typhus (Murine Typhus)
Rickettsia typhi, a ubiquitous pathogen recognized on all
continents, is transmitted from rat to rat through the rat flea (Table
32–3). Serosurveys of animals show high prevalence of antibodies
to R typhi in opossums, followed by dogs and cats. Humans usually
acquire the infection in an urban or suburban setting when bitten by
an infected flea, which releases infected feces while sucking blood.
Rare human cases in the developed world follow travel, usually to
Southeast Asia. Seroprevalence to R typhi among children in South
Texas is reported as high as 14% and among the homeless in
Houston about 10%.
Endemic typhus resembles recrudescent epidemic typhus in that it
has a gradual onset, less severe symptoms, and a shorter duration
of illness than epidemic typhus (7–10 days versus 14–21 days). The
presentation is nonspecific, including fever, headache, and chills.
Maculopapular rash occurs in around 50% of cases; it is
concentrated on the trunk and fades fairly rapidly. Peripheral facial
paralysis and splenic infarction are reported to occur. Severe
disease with mental confusion and signs of hepatic, cardiac, renal,
and pulmonary involvement may develop. Fatalities are uncommon
but occur especially in the elderly. Jaundice, bradycardia, and the
absence of a headache are correlated with a delayed defervescence
(in both epidemic and endemic typhus).
The most common entity in the differential diagnosis is Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, usually occurring after a rural exposure and
with a different rash (centripetal versus centrifugal for epidemic or
endemic typhus). Serologic confirmation may be necessary for
differentiation, with complement-fixing or immunofluorescent
antibodies detectable within 15 days after onset, with specific R
typhi antigens. A fourfold rise in serum antibody titers between the
acute and the convalescence phase is diagnostic.
Antibiotic treatment is the same as for epidemic typhus (see
above). Ciprofloxacin (500–750 mg orally twice a day) and
ampicillin (500 mg orally three times a day) are reportedly
successful in pregnant women. Preventive measures are directed at
control of rats and ectoparasites (rat fleas) with insecticides, rat
poisons, and rat-proofing of buildings.
Adjemian J et al. Murine typhus in Austin Texas, USA, 2008.
Emerg Infect Dis. 2010 Mar;16(3):412–7. [PMID: 20202415]
 
Gutierrez L et al. Murine typhus in pregnancy. Am J Med Sci.
2010 Apr;339(4):378–9. [PMID: 20186042]
 
3. Scrub Typhus (Tsutsugamushi Fever)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure to mites in endemic area of Southeast Asia, the western
Pacific (including Korea), and Australia.
 Black eschar at site of the bite, with regional and generalized
lymphadenopathy.
 High fever, headache, myalgia, and a short-lived macular rash.
 Frequent pneumonitis, encephalitis, and cardiac failure.
 
 General Considerations
Scrub typhus is caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi, which is
principally a parasite of rodents and is transmitted by larval
trombiculid mites (chiggers). The disease is endemic in Korea;
China; Taiwan; Japan; Pakistan; India; Thailand; Malaysia; and
Queensland, Australia (Table 32–3). The mites live on vegetation
but complete their maturation cycle by biting humans who come in
contact with infested vegetation. Vertical transmission occurs, and
blood transfusions may transmit the pathogen as well. Rare
occupational transmission via inhalation is documented among
laboratory workers.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
After a 1- to 3-week incubation period, malaise, chills, severe
headache, and backache develop. At the site of the bite, a papule
evolves into a flat black eschar. The regional lymph nodes are
enlarged and tender, and there may be generalized adenopathy.
Fever rises gradually, and a macular rash appears primarily on the
trunk after a week of fever and may be fleeting or may last a week.
The patient may become obtunded. During the second or third
week, pneumonitis, myocarditis and cardiac failure, encephalitis or
meningitis, acute abdominal pain, granulomatous hepatitis,
disseminated intravascular coagulation, ARDS, or acute kidney
disease may develop, although not often. Gastrointestinal symptoms
including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea occur in nearly two-thirds
of patients and correspond to the presence of superficial mucosal
hemorrhage, multiple erosions, or ulcers in the gastrointestinal tract.
An attack confers prolonged immunity against homologous strains
and transient immunity against heterologous strains. Heterologous
strains produce mild disease if infection occurs within a year after
the first episode.
B. Laboratory Findings
Thrombocytopenia and elevation of liver enzymes, bilirubin, and
creatinine are common. Serologic testing with immunofluorescence
and immunoperoxidase assays or commercial dot-blot ELISA
dipstick assays are convenient diagnostic aids, but a conclusive
diagnosis requires documentation of a fourfold increase between
acute and convalescence titers of antibodies. An indirect immuno-
fluorescent assay is the mainstay of serologic diagnosis. PCR
(from the eschar or blood) may be the most sensitive diagnostic test
but remains positive even after the initiation of treatment. Culture of
the organism (by mouse inoculation) from blood obtained in the first
few days of illness is another diagnostic modality but requires a
specialized BioSafety Level 3 laboratory. Filter paper
immunofluorescent assays are under development, are as sensitive
and specific as paired sera, and may be especially useful in field
settings.
 Differential Diagnosis
Leptospirosis, typhoid, dengue, malaria, Q fever, hemorrhagic
fevers, and other rickettsial infections should be considered. The
headache may mimic trigeminal neuralgia. Scrub typhus is a
recognized cause of obscure tropical fevers, especially in children.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Without treatment, fever subsides spontaneously after 2 weeks, but
the mortality rate may be 10–30%. Empiric treatment for 3 days
with doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily, or for 7 days with
chloramphenicol, 25 mg/kg/d orally or intravenously in four divided
doses, eliminates most deaths and relapses. Chloramphenicol- and
tetracycline-resistant strains have been reported from Southeast
Asia, where azithromycin or roxythromycin may become the drug of
choice for children, pregnant women, and patients with refractory
disease. Rifampin reduces the duration of fever by 1 day when used
with doxycycline
Poor prognostic factors include requiring care in an ICU, high
APACHE-II scores, age over 60 years, absence of an eschar
(making the diagnosis difficult) and laboratory findings such as
leukocytosis or hypoalbuminemia. HIV infection does not appear to
influence the severity of scrub typhus.
 Prevention
Repeated application of long-acting miticides can make endemic
areas safe. Insect repellents on clothing and skin as well as
protective clothing are effective preventive measures. For short
exposure, chemoprophylaxis with doxycycline (200 mg weekly) can
prevent the disease but permits infection. No effective vaccines are
available.
Kim DM et al. Clinical and laboratory findings associated with
severe scrub typhus. BMC Infect Dis. 2010 Apr 30;10:108.
[PMID: 20433689]
 
Koh GC et al. Diagnosis of scrub typhus. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2010 Mar;82(3):368–70. [PMID: 20207857]
 
SPOTTED FEVERS
1. Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure to tick bite in an endemic area.
 An influenza-like prodrome followed by chills, fever, severe
headache, myalgias, restlessness, and prostration; occasionally,
delirium and coma.
 Red macular rash appears between the second and sixth days of
fever, first on the wrists and ankles and then spreading centrally;
it may become petechial.
 Serial serologic examinations by indirect fluorescent antibody
confirm the diagnosis retrospectively.
 
 General Considerations
Despite its name, most cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever
(RMSF) occur outside the Rocky Mountain area. Passive
surveillance data from 1997 to 2002 reported cases of RMSF from
each of the contiguous states except Vermont and Maine. More
than half (56%) of these cases were from only five states: North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Oklahoma, and Arkansas.
RMSF is endemic in Central and Southern America, with well-
documented cases in Mexico, Costa Rica, Panama, Colombia,
Brazil, and Argentina. There are 25 total genotypes of R rickettsii
in four different groups, and potential correlations of these
differences to various clinical manifestations of RMSF are under
evaluation. The causative agent, R rick-ettsii, is transmitted to
humans by the bite of ticks, including the Rocky Mountain wood
tick, D andersoni, in the western United States, and the American
dog tick, Dermacentor variabilis, in the eastern United States.
The brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, is a vector in
eastern Arizona.
In the United States, the estimated annual incidence of RMSF is
increasing to as high as seven cases per million persons (primarily
occurring from April through September), with a higher incidence
among children and men. Better diagnostic capacity and improved
surveillance are thought responsible for the changing epidemiology.
Other hard ticks transmit the organism in the southern United
States and in Central and South America and are responsible for
transmitting it among rodents, dogs, porcupines, and other animals.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
RMSF is the most serious rickettsial disease, at times causing
severe multiorgan dysfunction and fatality rates, which may reach
73% in untreated cases. Two to 14 days (mean, 7 days) after the
bite of an infectious tick, symptoms begin with fever, chills,
headache, nausea and vomiting, myalgias, restlessness, insomnia,
and irritability. Cough and pneumonitis may develop. Delirium,
lethargy, seizures, stupor, and coma may appear. The characteristic
rash (faint macules that progress to maculopapules and then
petechiae) appears between days 2 and 6 of fever, first on the
wrists and ankles, spreading centrally to the arms, legs, and trunk
for 2–3 days. Involvement of the palms and soles is characteristic.
Facial flushing, conjunctival injection, and hard palatal lesions
(Figure 32–6) may occur. About 10% of cases, however, occur
without rash or with minimal rash. In some cases there is
splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, jaundice, myocarditis (which may
mimic an acute coronary syndrome), adrenal hemorrhage, or
uremia. ARDS and necrotizing vasculitis are of greatest concern.
Figure 32–6. Hard palate lesion caused by Rocky Mountain
spotted fever. (Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
B. Laboratory Findings
Thrombocytopenia, hyponatremia, elevated aminotransferases, and
hyperbilirubinemia are common. Cerebrospinal fluid may show
hypoglycorrhachia and mild pleocytosis. Disseminated intravascular
coagulation is observed in severe cases. Diagnosis during the acute
phase of the illness can be made by immunohistologic (including
PCR) demonstration of R rickettsiae in skin biopsy specimens, but
this must be performed as soon as skin lesions become apparent
and before antibiotics are started to achieve maximum sensitivity.
Isolation of the organism using the shell-vial technique is available in
some laboratories but is hazardous.
Serologic studies confirm the diagnosis, but most patients do not
mount an antibody response until the second week of illness. The
indirect fluorescent antibody test is most commonly used. No
commercial PCR technique is validated for serologic use.
 Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis is challenging. Up to 40% of patients do not recall a
tick bite, and initial diagnosis is made clinically. Early symptoms may
resemble those of many other infections. The rash may be confused
with that of measles, typhoid, and ehrlichiosis, or—most importantly
—meningococcemia. Blood cultures and examination of cerebro-
spinal fluid establish the latter.
Some spotted fever rickettsioses may also mimic RMSF.
 Treatment & Prognosis
Treatment 
with 
doxycycline 
or, 
in 
pregnant 
women,
chloramphenicol at similar doses and duration as for epidemic
typhus (see above) is recommended. Patients usually defervesce
within 48–72 hours. Therapy should be maintained for at least 3
days after defervescence. Mild cases in low-risk individuals may be
observed without treatment.
Although the reported mortality rate in the United States is about
3–5%, it can be as high as 70% in the untreated elderly.
Myocarditis is the leading cause of death. Other risk factors for a
fatal outcome include very young age, atypical clinical features
(absence of headache, no history of tick attachment, gastrointestinal
symptoms), underlying chronic diseases, and a delay in initiation of
appropriate antibiotic therapy. The usual cause of death is
pneumonitis with respiratory or cardiac failure. Sequelae, more
common than formerly recognized, may include seizures,
encephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy, paraparesis, bowel and
bladder incontinence, cerebellar and vestibular dysfunction, hearing
loss, and motor deficits.
 Prevention
Protective clothing, tick-repellent chemicals, and the removal of
ticks at frequent intervals are helpful measures. Prophylactic therapy
after a tick bite is not currently recommended.
Minniear TD et al. Managing Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2009 Nov;7(9):1131–7. [PMID:
19883333]
 
Moncayo AC et al. Absence of Rickettsia rickettsii and
occurrence of other spotted fever group rickettsiae in ticks from
Tennessee. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Sep;83(3):653–7.
[PMID: 20810834]
 
Oppensaw JJ et al. Rocky Mountain spotted fever in the United
States, 2000–2007: interpreting contemporary increase in
incidence. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Jul;83(1):174–82. [PMID:
20595498]
 
2. Rickettsialpox
Rickettsialpox is an acute, self-limiting, febrile illness caused by
Rickettsia akari, a parasite of mice, transmitted by the mite
Liponyssoides sanguineus (Table 32–3). Crowded conditions and
mouse-infested housing allow transmission of the pathogen to
humans. The incubation period is 7–12 days. Onset is sudden, with
chills, fever, headache, photo-phobia, and disseminated aches and
pains. The primary lesion is a painless red papule that vesiculates
and forms a black eschar. Two to 4 days after onset of symptoms,
a widespread papular eruption appears that becomes vesicular and
forms crusts that are shed in about 10 days. Early lesions may
resemble those of chickenpox (typically vesicular versus
papulovesicular in rickettsialpox). Pathologic findings include dermal
edema, subepidermal vesicles, and at times a lymphocytic vasculitis.
Transient leukopenia and thrombocytopenia and acute hepatitis
can occur. A fourfold rise in serum antibody titers to rickettsial
antigen, detected by complement fixation or indirect fluorescent
assays, is diagnostic. Conjugated antirickettsial globulin can identify
antigen in punch biopsies of skin lesions. PCR detection of
rickettsial DNA in fresh tissue also appears of value. R akari can
reportedly also be isolated from eschar biopsy specimens.
Treatment includes doxycycline (200 mg/d) for 7 days. The
disease is usually mild and self-limited without treatment, but
occasionally severe symptoms may require hospitalization. Control
requires the elimination of mice from human habitations and
insecticide applications to suppress the mite vectors.
Bennett SG et al. Serologic evidence of a Rickettsia akari-like
infection among wild-caught rodents in Orange County and
humans in Los Angeles County, California. J Vector Ecol. 2007
Dec;32(2):198–201. [PMID: 18260508]
 
Madison G et al. Hepatitis in association with rickettsialpox.
Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2008 Spring;8(1):111–5. [PMID:
18171106]
 
3. Tick Typhus (Rickettsial Fever)
The term “tick typhus” denotes a variety of spotted rickettsial
fevers. They are often named by geography, eg, Mediterranean
spotted fever, Queensland tick typhus, Oriental spotted fever,
African tick bite fever, Siberian tick typhus, North Asian tick
typhus, or by morphology, eg, boutonneuse fever. These illnesses
are transmitted by tick vectors of the rickettsial organisms R
africae, R australis, R conorii, R japonica, R massiliae, R
parkeri, and R sibirica (Table 32–3). Dogs and wild animals,
usually rodents and even reptiles, may serve as reservoirs. Travel is
a risk factor for disease, particularly among elderly ecotourists. The
pathogens usually produce an eschar or black spot (tâche noire) at
the site of the tick bite that may be useful in diagnosis, though
spotless boutonneuse fever occurs. Symptoms include fever,
headache, myalgias, and rash. Rarely, papulovesicular lesions may
resemble rickettsialpox. Endothelial injury produces perivascular
edema and dermal necrosis. Regional adenopathy, disseminated
lesions, kidney disease, splenic rupture, and focal hepatic necrosis
may occur. Diabetes, dehydration, and uremia were risk factors for
mortality in one series. The disease occurs among travelers and in a
series of 280 international travelers with rickettsial disease, the most
common cause was spotted fever rick-ettsiosis (231 cases, 82.5%
of the total) followed by scrub typhus (16, 5.7%).
The diagnosis is clinical, with serologic or PCR confirmation.
Prevention entails protective clothing, repellents, and inspection for
and removal of ticks. Treatment is with the following drugs given for
7–10 days: doxycycline (200 mg/d), chloramphenicol (50–75
mg/kg/d in four divided doses), or ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice
daily). The combination of erythromycin and rifampin is effective
and safe in pregnancy. Delayed therapy is the usual cause of
morbidity. In one reported case, R africae infection was
successfully treated with pristinamycin, a streptogramin marketed in
Europe.
Another rickettsial infection, formerly classified as an endemic or
murine typhus, is more properly classified as a spotted fever. The
causative agent, R felis, is an organism that has been linked to the
cat flea and opossum exposure. Most cases in the United States
occur in the spring and summer, are reported from southern Texas
and California; it also appears to be present in Hawaii. Cases are
treated as above.
A rickesttsial infection recognized as a cause of eschar-
associated illness was recognized in northern California and is
referred to as the spotted fever group rickettsia 364D.
Demeester R et al. Diversity of life-threatening complications due
to Mediterranean spotted fever in returning travelers. J Travel
Med. 2010 Mar–Apr;17(2):100–4. [PMID: 20412176]
 
García-García JC et al. A patient from Argentina infected with
Rickettsia massiliae. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Apr;82(4):
691–2. [PMID: 20348520]
 
Goddard J. Historical and recent evidence for close relationships
among Rickettsia parkeri, R. conorii, R. africae, and R. sibirica:
implications for rickettsial taxonomy. J Vector Ecol. 2009
Dec;34(2):238–42. [PMID: 20836828]
 
Jensenius M et al; GeoSentinel Surveillance Network. Multicenter
GeoSentinel analysis of rickettsial disease in international travelers,
1996–2008. Emerg Infect Dis. 2009 Nov;15(11): 1791–8.
[PMID: 19891867]
 
Shapiro MR et al. Rickettsia 364D: a newly recognized cause of
eschar-associated illness in California. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Feb
15;50(4):541–8. [PMID: 20073993]
 
OTHER RICKETTSIAL & RICKETTSIAL-LIKE
DISEASES
1. Ehrlichiosis & Anaplasmosis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Infection of monocyte or granulocyte by tick-borne gram-
negative bacteria.
 Nine-day incubation period, with variable clinical illness, ranging
from asymptomatic to persistent or life-threatening.
 Common symptoms are malaise, nausea, fever, and headaches.
 Excellent response to therapy with tetracyclines.
 
 General Considerations
Ehrlichiae and anaplasmae are small tick-borne gram-negative
obligate intracellular bacteria that infect monocytes or granulocytes.
Human monocytic ehrlichiosis is caused by Ehrlichia chaffeensis
(Table 32–3). Human granulocytic anaplasmosis is caused by
Anasplasma phagocytophilium. Ehrlichia ewingii (infecting
primarily dogs) can rarely cause human granulocytic ehrlichiosis
similar to human granulocytic anaplasmosis. Another ehrlichia-like
organism, Neorickettsia sennetsu, is the etiologic agent of sennetsu
fever, which is confined to western Japan.
Human monocytic ehrlichiosis is seen primarily in the Southeast,
mid-Atlantic, and South Central states of the United States, though
cases are also recognized in Israel, Japan, Mexico, South America,
and Europe. Human granulocytic anaplasmosis is more frequent in
Northeastern and Midwestern United States; but infections in
Europe and China are also well documented. Human infection with
E ewingii is limited to Missouri, Oklahoma, and Tennessee and
occurs mainly among the immunocompromised. In North America,
the major vectors for these pathogens are the Lone Star tick
(Amblyomma americanus for E chaffeensis and E ewingii), the
western black-legged tick (Ixodes pacificus, for E chaffeensis),
and Ixodes scapularis (the same vector for Lyme disease) and
babesiosis for A phagocytophilium). Reported incidences of both
human monocytic and granulocytic ehrlichiosis are about 0.6 and
1.4 per million, respectively, with higher rates in the summer. The
highest attack rate is in men over 60 years of age.
The principal reservoirs for human monocytic ehrlichiosis and
human granulocytic anaplasmosis are the white tail deer and the
white footed mouse, respectively. Other mammals are implicated as
well. A nosocomial outbreak was reported from China. Perinatal
transmission of human granulocytic anaplasmosis is also
documented.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Clinical disease of human monocytic ehrlichiosis ranges from mild to
life threatening. Typically, after about a 9-day incubation period and
a prodrome consisting of malaise, rigors, and nausea, worsening
fever and headache develop. A pleomorphic rash may occur.
Presentation in immuno-suppressed patients (including transplant
patients) and the elderly tends to be more severe. Serious sequelae
include acute respiratory failure and ARDS, encephalopathy, and
acute 
kidney 
disease, 
which 
may 
mimic 
thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura.
The symptoms of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis and E ewingii
infection are similar to those seen with human monocytic
ehrlichiosis. Rash, however, is infrequent in human granulocytic
ehrlichiosis and should prompt the consideration of other infections
(eg, Lyme disease). Persistent fever and malaise are reported to
occur for 2 or more years. Coinfection with Lyme disease or
babesiosis may occur.
B. Laboratory Findings
Diagnosis can be made by the history of tick exposure followed by
a characteristic clinical presentation. Leukopenia, absolute
lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, and transaminitis occur often.
Thrombocytopenia occurs more often than leukopenia in human
granulocytic ehrlichiosis. Examination of peripheral blood with
Giemsa stain may reveal characteristic intraleukocytic vacuoles
(morulae). An indirect fluorescent antibody assay is available
through the CDC and requires acute and convalescent sera. A PCR
assay, if available, is a rapid diagnostic tool, especially for early
disease.
 Treatment & Prevention
Treatment for both forms of ehrlichiosis is with doxycycline, 100 mg
twice daily (orally or intravenously) for at least 10 days or until 3
days of defervescence. Rifampin is an alternative in pregnant
women and children. Treatment should not be withheld while
awaiting confirmatory serology when suspicion is high. Lack of
clinical improvement and defervescence 48 hours after doxycycline
initiation suggests an alternate diagnosis. Tick control is the essence
of prevention.
Ismail N et al. Human ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. Clin Lab
Med. 2010 Mar;30(1):261–92. [PMID: 20513551]
 
Woldehiwet Z. The natural history of Anaplasma
phagocytophilum. Vet Parasitol. 2010 Feb 10;167(2–4):108–22.
[PMID: 19811878]
 
2. Q Fever
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure to sheep, goats, cattle, or their products is common;
some infections are laboratory acquired.
 An acute or chronic febrile illness with severe headache, cough,
prostration, and abdominal pain.
 Extensive pneumonitis, hepatitis, or encephalopathy; less often,
endocarditis, vascular infections, or chronic fatigue syndrome.
 A common cause of culture-negative endocarditis.
 
 General Considerations
Q fever (for “query” in view of its formerly unknown cause), a
reportable disease in the United States, is caused by Coxiella
burnetii, an organism previously classified as a rickettsia but now
considered a proteobacteria. Unlike rickettsiae, C burnetii is
usually transmitted to humans not by arthropods but by inhalation or
ingestion. Coxiella infections occur mostly in cattle, sheep, and
goats, in which they cause mild or subclinical disease (Table 32–3).
In these animals, reactivation of the infection occurs during
pregnancy and causes abortions or low birth weight offspring.
Coxiella is resistant to heat and drying and remains infective in the
environment for months. Humans become infected by inhalation of
aerosolized bacteria (in dust or droplets) from feces, urine, milk, or
products of conception of infected animals. Ingestion and skin
penetration are other recognized routes of transmission. Outbreaks
associated with other mammals such as cats and dogs are also
described. There is an occupational risk for animal handlers,
slaughterhouse workers, veterinarians, laboratory workers, and
other workers exposed to animal products. Outbreaks in military
personnel returning from Iraq and Afghanistan were described.
Endocarditis, an uncommon but serious form of Coxiella infection,
has 
been 
linked 
to 
preexisting 
valvular 
conditions,
immunocompromise, urban residence, and raw milk ingestion.
Horizontal spread from one human to another does not seem to
occur even in the presence of florid pneumonitis, but maternal–fetal
infection can occur.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Asymptomatic infection is common. For the remaining cases, a
febrile illness develops after an incubation period of 1–3 weeks,
usually accompanied by headache, relative bradycardia, prostration,
and muscle pains. The clinical course may be acute, chronic
(duration ≥ 6 months), or relapsing. Pneumonia and granulomatous
hepatitis are the predominant manifestation in the acute form,
whereas other less common manifestations include skin rashes
(maculopapular or purpuric), fever of unknown origin, myocarditis,
pericarditis, aseptic meningitis, encephalitis, hemolytic anemia,
orchitis, acute kidney disease, spondylodiscitis, tenosynovitis, and
regional (mediastinal) or diffuse lymphadenopathies. Cases of Q
fever mimicking autoimmune and systemic inflammatory disease are
reported. The most common presentation of chronic Q fever is
culture-negative endocarditis, which occurs in < 1% of infected
individuals. It is found mainly in the setting of preexisting valve
disease. Vascular infections, particularly of the aorta (causing
mycotic aneurysms), are the second most common form of Q fever
and are associated with a high mortality (25%). Q fever chronic
fatigue syndrome is thought by some experts to involve bacteremic
shedding from bone marrow reservoirs and to be immunogenetically
determined.
Reactivation of Q fever in pregnant women may cause
spontaneous abortions, intrauterine growth retardation, intrauterine
fetal death, premature delivery, and oligamnios.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory examination during the acute phase may show elevated
liver function tests and occasional leukocytosis. Patients with acute
Q fever usually produce antibodies to C burnetii phase II antigen.
A fourfold rise between acute and convalescent sera by indirect
immunofluorescence is diagnostic. Realtime PCR for C burnetii
DNA is helpful in early diagnosis of Q fever. C burnetii DNA
becomes undetectable in serum as serologic responses develop.
Chronic Q fever is diagnosed on the basis of serologic tests done
at 3- and 6-month intervals. The IgG titer against phase I antigen is
usually 1:200 or greater. In some cases, the diagnosis is not made
until the time of valve replacement, with PCR of tissue samples.
Isolation of C burnetii from affected valves is also possible using
the shell-vial technique, but the organism is highly transmissible to
laboratory workers and culture techniques should be carried out in
biosafety level 3 settings.
C. Imaging
Radiographs of the chest show patchy pulmonary infiltrates, often
more prominent than the physical signs suggest.
 Differential Diagnosis
Viral, mycoplasmal, and bacterial pneumonias, viral hepatitis,
brucellosis, Legionnaire disease, Kawasaki disease, tuberculosis,
psittacosis, and other animal-borne diseases must be considered. Q
fever should be considered in cases of unexplained fevers with
negative blood cultures in association with embolic or cardiac
disease.
 Treatment & Prognosis
For acute infection, treatment with doxycycline (100 mg orally twice
daily) for 14 days or at least 3 full days after defervescence is
recommended. Even in untreated patients, the mortality rate is
usually low, except when endocarditis develops.
For chronic infection, there is no agreement on the type and
duration of antimicrobial therapy. Most experts recommend a
combination therapy with oral doxycycline (200 mg/d) plus
ciprofloxacin or rifampin or hydroxychloroquine for approximately 2
years or more for the treatment of endocarditis. A recent cohort
study shows good outcomes with doxycycline plus oral
hydroxychloroquine (600 mg/d) for 18 months for native valves and
24 months for prosthetic valves. Serologic responses should be
monitored during and after completion of therapy. Duration of
therapy should be further extended in the absence of favorable
serologic response. Patients should be monitored serologically for at
least 5 years due to risk of relapse. Heart valve replacement may be
necessary in refractory disease. Given the difficulty in treating
endocarditis, transthoracic echocardiography is recommended for
all patients with acute Q fever, and the same aforementioned
therapy for 1 year should be offered if valvulopathy is observed.
Because of the many and serious obstetric complications that
occur among pregnant women in whom Q fever develops (listed
above), a regimen of long-term trimethoprim-sulfamethoxasole
(320/1600 mg for at least 5 weeks) should be given to all infected,
pregnant women.
 Prevention
Prevention is based on detection of the infection in livestock,
reduction of contact with infected animals or contaminated dust,
special care when working with animal tissues, and effective
pasteurization of milk. No vaccine is approved for use in the United
States, although a whole-cell Q fever vaccine, with a 5-year
efficacy of > 95%, is available in Australia for persons with high-
risk exposures.
C burnetii is category B bioterrorism agent. In the setting of a
bioterrorist attack, postexposure prophylaxis with doxycycline (100
mg orally twice daily) for 5 days should be started 8–12 days after
exposure. 
Pregnant 
women 
should 
take 
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (160 mg/800 mg twice daily) for the duration of
the pregnancy.
Lefebvre M et al. Systemic immune presentations of Coxiella
burnetii infection (Q Fever). Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2010
Apr;39(5):405–9. [PMID: 19110298]
 
Million M et al. Long-term outcome of Q fever endocarditis: a 26-
year personal survey. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010 Aug;10(8):527–35.
[PMID: 20637694]
 
Schneeberger PM et al. Real-time PCR with serum samples is
indispensable for early diagnosis of acute Q fever. Clin Vaccine
Immunol. 2010 Feb;17(2):286–90. [PMID: 20032219]
 
KAWASAKI DISEASE
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, bilateral conjunctivitis, oral mucosal changes, rash,
cervical lymphadenopathy, peripheral extremity changes.
 Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein
levels.
 
 General Considerations
Kawasaki disease is a worldwide multisystemic disease initially
described by Tomisaku Kawasaki in 1967. It is also known as the
“mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome.” It occurs mainly in
children between the ages of 3 months and 5 years but can occur
occasionally in adults as well. Kawasaki disease occurs more
frequently in Asians or native Pacific Islanders than in whites. It is an
acute, self-limiting, mucocutaneous vasculitis characterized by the
infiltration of vessel walls with mononuclear cells and later by IgA
secreting plasma cells that can result in the destruction of the tunica
media and aneurysm formation. Several infectious agents (New
Haven coronavirus, parvovirus, bocavirus, CMV, Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis, meningococcus), bacterial superantigens, and
genetic polymorphisms in components of the immune system
(interleukin 10 and 18) are currently implicated in its pathogenesis.
 Clinical Findings
A clinical diagnosis of “complete” Kawasaki disease requires, in the
absence of other processes, explaining the current illness of fever
and four of the following criteria for at least 5 days: bilateral
nonexudative conjunctivitis, mucous membrane changes of at least
one type (injected pharynx, erythema, swelling and fissuring of the
lips, strawberry tongue), peripheral extremity changes of at least
one type (edema, desquamation, erythema of the palms and soles,
induration of the hands and feet, Beau lines [transverse grooves of
the nails]), a polymorphous rash, and cervical lymphadenopathy >
1.5 cm. An “incomplete” form is diagnosed when only two criteria
are met. The classic syndrome is often preceded by nonspecific
symptoms including irritability, vomiting, anorexia, cough, and
diarrhea for up to 10 days.
Major complications include arteritis and aneurysms of the
coronary vessels, occurring in about 25% of untreated patients, on
occasion causing myocardial infarction. The pathogenesis is often
thrombus formation, vasospasm, stenosis, or aneurysm rupture.
Coronary complications are more common among patients older
than 6 years or younger than 1 year of age. Noninvasive diagnosis
of this complication can be made with magnetic resonance
angiography or transthoracic echocardiography. Other factors
associated with the development of coronary artery aneurysms are
male sex, relentless fever (even after the administration of IVIG),
high C-reactive protein, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, hyponatremia,
and thrombocytopenia. Pericardial effusions, myocarditis, and mitral
regurgitation (usually mild) are also common. Coronary artery
fistulas occur in up to 5% of patients. Arteritis of extremity vessels,
peripheral gangrene, syndrome of inappropriate secretion of
antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), and the hemophagocytic syndrome
are also reported. Cases of pancreatitis and bile duct stenosis due
to underlying vasculitis have been reported. Cerebrospinal fluid
pleocytosis is found in one-third of cases. Rare case reports of
atypical presentations (eg, retropharyngeal abscess) are described.
Differentiation from disseminated adenovirus infection is
important and can be performed with rapid adenovirus assays.
 Treatment & Prevention
Every patient with a clinical diagnosis of Kawasaki disease
(complete or incomplete) should be treated. IVIG (2 g/kg over 10–
12 hours) is given within the first 10 days of illness. For those
presenting later, but with persistent fever, ongoing systemic
inflammation, or aneurysm formation, IVIG should be offered as
well. Concomitant aspirin should be started at 80–100 mg/kg/d
(divided into four doses and not exceeding 4 g/d) until the patient is
afebrile for 48 hours and then reduced to 3–5 mg/kg/d until markers
of acute inflammation normalize. Aspirin therapy is continued if
coronary aneurysm develops. If fevers persist beyond 36 hours
after the initial IVIG infusion, a second dose of IVIG at 2 g/kg
should be given if no other source of fever is found.
Methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg/d for a maximum of 3 days) should
follow if the disease persists after the second IVIG administration.
Further options for refractory cases include TNF blockers (eg,
infliximab), cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and plasmapheresis.
Abciximab therapy may be associated with coronary vessel
remodeling in large coronary artery aneurysms. An echocardiogram
is essential in the acute phase of illness and 6–8 weeks after onset.
Anticoagulation with warfarin or low-molecular-weight heparin is
indicated along with low-dose aspirin in patients with aneurysms
larger than 8 mm in diameter. If myocardial infarction occurs,
therapy with thrombolytics, percutaneous coronary intervention,
coronary artery bypass grafts, and even cardiac transplantation
should be considered. Manifestation of coronary artery aneurysms
can occur as late as in the third or fourth decade of life and regular
follow-up with a cardiologist is recommended for those with
coronary complications. Data are equivocal on the development of
accelerated atherosclerosis among those with a history of Kawasaki
disease.
While secondary prevention of complications entails the
modalities described above, primary prevention is difficult in the
absence of a clear explanation for the disease.
 When to Refer
All cases of Kawasaki disease merit referral to specialists.
Gomard-Mennesson E et al. Kawasaki disease in adults: report of
10 cases. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010 May;89(3):149–58.
[PMID: 20453601]
 
McCandless RT et al. Does abciximab promote coronary artery
remodeling in patients with Kawasaki disease? Am J Cardiol.
2010 Jun 1;105(11):1625–8. [PMID: 20494673]
 
Rowley AH et al. Pathogenesis and management of Kawasaki
disease. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2010 Feb;8(2):197–203.
[PMID: 20109049]
 
Song D et al. Risk factors for Kawasaki disease-associated
coronary abnormalities differ depending on age. Eur J Pediatr.
2009 Nov;168(11):1315–21. [PMID: 19159953]
 
Yeung RS. Kawasaki disease: update on pathogenesis. Curr Opin
Rheumatol. 2010 Sep;22(5):551–60. [PMID: 20616737]
 
 
 
Bacterial & Chlamydial
Infections
Brian S. Schwartz, MD
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY
GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIA
 
STREPTOCOCCAL INFECTIONS
1. pharyngitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Abrupt onset of sore throat, fever, malaise, nausea, and
headache.
 Throat red and edematous, with or without exudate; cervical
nodes tender.
 Diagnosis confirmed by culture of throat.
 
 General Considerations
Group A β-hemolytic streptococci (Streptococcus pyogenes) are
the most common bacterial cause of pharyngitis. Transmission
occurs by droplets of infected secretions. Group A streptococci
producing erythrogenic toxin may cause scarlet fever in susceptible
persons.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
“Strep throat” is characterized by a sudden onset of fever, sore
throat, pain on swallowing, tender cervical adenopathy, malaise,
and nausea. The pharynx, soft palate, and tonsils are red and
edematous. There may be a purulent exudate. The Centor clinical
criteria for the diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis are
temperature >38°C, tender anterior cervical adenopathy, lack of a
cough, and pharyngotonsillar exudate.
The rash of scarlet fever is diffusely erythematous, resembling a
sunburn, with superimposed fine red papules, and is most intense in
the groin and axillas. It blanches on pressure, may become
petechial, and fades in 2–5 days, leaving a fine desquamation. The
face is flushed, with circumoral pallor, and the tongue is coated with
enlarged red papillae (strawberry tongue).
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance is common. Throat
culture onto a single blood agar plate has a sensitivity of 80–90%.
Rapid diagnostic tests based on detection of streptococcal antigen
are slightly less sensitive than culture. Clinical criteria, such as the
Centor criteria, are useful for identifying patients in whom a rapid
antigen test or throat culture is indicated. Patients who meet two or
more of these criteria merit further testing. When three of the four
are present, laboratory sensitivity of rapid antigen testing exceeds
90%. When only one criterion is present, streptococcal pharyngitis
is unlikely. In high-prevalence settings or if clinical suspicion for
streptococcal pharyngitis is high, a negative antigen test or culture
should be confirmed by a follow-up culture.
 Complications
Suppurative complications include sinusitis, otitis media, mastoiditis,
peritonsillar abscess, and suppuration of cervical lymph nodes.
Nonsuppurative complications are rheumatic fever and
glomerulonephritis. Rheumatic fever may follow recurrent episodes
of pharyngitis beginning 1–4 weeks after the onset of symptoms.
Glomerulonephritis follows a single infection with a nephritogenic
strain of streptococcus group A (eg, types 4, 12, 2, 49, and 60),
more commonly on the skin than in the throat, and begins 1–3
weeks after the onset of the infection.
 Differential Diagnosis
Streptococcal sore throat resembles (and cannot be reliably
distinguished clinically from) pharyngitis caused by Fusobacterium
necrophorum, adenoviruses, Epstein-Barr virus, primary HIV,
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum (which also may cause a rash),
and other agents. Pharyngitis and lymphadenopathy are common
findings in primary HIV infection. Generalized lymphadenopathy,
splenomegaly, atypical lymphocytosis, and a positive serologic test
distinguish mononucleosis from streptococcal pharyngitis. Diphtheria
is characterized by a pseudomembrane; candidiasis shows white
patches of exudate and less erythema; and necrotizing ulcerative
gingivostomatitis (Vincent fusospirochetal gingivitis or stomatitis)
presents with shallow ulcers in the mouth. Retropharyngeal abscess
or bacterial epiglottitis should be considered when odynophagia and
difficulty in handling secretions are present and when the severity of
symptoms is disproportionate to findings on examination of the
pharynx. F necrophorum causes pharyngitis at a similar rate as
group A β-hemolytic streptococci in adolescents and young adults.
F necrophorum pharyngitis is associated with Lemierre syndrome,
suppurative thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein, bacteremia,
and metastatic infections. Early recognition and treatment of this
disease is important.
 Treatment
Antimicrobial therapy has a modest effect on resolution of
symptoms and primarily is administered for prevention of
complications. Antibiotic therapy can be safely delayed until the
diagnosis is established on the basis of a positive antigen test or
culture. Empiric therapy usually is not a cost-effective approach to
the management of most adults with pharyngitis because the
prevalence of streptococcal pharyngitis is likely to be no more than
10–20% in typical clinical settings. The positive predictive value of
clinical criteria is low. Since macrolides are not reliable against F
necrophorum infection, adolescents or young adults with
pharyngitis, which is not confirmed to be due to group A β-
hemolytic streptococci, should be given penicillin or amoxicillin
preferentially at the doses listed below. If the pharyngitis does not
resolve quickly, symptoms worsen, or unilateral neck swelling
develops, clinicians should consider suppurative complications such
as peritonsillar abscess and the Lemierre syndrome.
A. Benzathine Penicillin G
Benzathine penicillin G, 1.2 million units intramuscularly as a single
dose, is optimal therapy.
B. Penicillin VK
Penicillin VK, 500 mg orally four times a day (or amoxicillin, 750
mg orally twice daily) for 10 days, is effective, but compliance may
be poor after the patient becomes asymptomatic in 2–4 days.
C. Cephalosporins
Cefdinir, 300 mg orally twice daily for 5–10 days or 600 mg orally
once daily for 10 days, and cefpodoxime, 100 mg orally twice daily
for 5–10 days, are both approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for the treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis
but should be reserved for penicillin-allergic patients able to tolerate
cephalosporins.
D. Macrolides
Erythromycin, 500 mg orally four times a day, or azithromycin, 500
mg orally once daily for 3 days, is an alternative for the penicillin-
allergic patient. Macrolides are less effective than penicillins and are
considered second-line agents. Macrolide-resistant strains almost
always are susceptible to clindamycin, a suitable alternative to
penicillins; a 10-day course of 300 mg orally twice daily is effective.
 Prevention of Recurrent Rheumatic
Fever
Effectively controlling rheumatic fever depends on identification and
treatment of primary streptococcal infection and secondary
prevention of recurrences. Patients who have had rheumatic fever
should be treated with a continuous course of antimicrobial
prophylaxis for at least 5 years. Effective regimens are
erythromycin, 250 mg orally twice daily, or penicillin G, 500 mg
orally daily.
Casey JR et al. The evidence base for cephalosporin superiority
over penicillin in streptococcal pharyngitis. Diagn Microbiol Infect
Dis. 2007 Mar;57(3 Suppl):39S–45S. [PMID: 17292576]
 
Centor RM. Expand the pharyngitis paradigm for adolescents and
young adults. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Dec 1;151(11):812–5.
[PMID: 19949147]
 
Falagas ME et al. Effectiveness and safety of short-course vs long-
course antibiotic therapy for group A beta hemolytic streptococcal
tonsillopharyngitis: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2008 Aug;83(8):880–9. [PMID: 18674472]
 
2. Streptococcal Skin Infections
Group A β-hemolytic streptococci are not normal skin flora.
Streptococcal skin infections result from colonization of normal skin
by contact with other infected individuals or by preceding
streptococcal respiratory infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Impetigo is a focal, vesicular, pustular lesion with a thick, amber-
colored crust with a “stuck-on” appearance (see Chapter 6).
Erysipelas is a painful superficial cellulitis that frequently involves
the face. It is well demarcated from the surrounding normal skin. It
affects skin with impaired lymphatic drainage, such as edematous
lower extremities or wounds.
B. Laboratory Findings
Cultures obtained from a wound or pustule are likely to grow group
A streptococci. Blood cultures are occasionally positive.
 Treatment
Parenteral antibiotics are indicated for patients with facial erysipelas
or evidence of systemic infection. Penicillin, 2 million units
intravenously every 4 hours, is the drug of choice. However,
staphylococci infections may at times be difficult to differentiate
from streptococcal infections. In practice, initial therapy for patients
with risk factors for Staphylococcus aureus (eg, injection drug use,
diabetes, wound infection) should cover this organism. Nafcillin, 1–
2 g every 4–6 hours intravenously, and cefazolin, 1 g intravenously
or intramuscularly every 8 hours, are reasonable choices. In the
patient at risk for methicillin-resistant S aureus infection or with a
serious penicillin allergy (ie, anaphylaxis), vancomycin, 1 g
intravenously every 12 hours, or daptomycin 4 mg/kg intravenously
daily, should be used (Table 33–1).
 
Table 33–1. Empiric treatment of common skin and soft tissue
infections (SSTI).
 
1Antibiotic therapy should be given in addition to incision and drainage for
purulent SSTI if the patient has any of the following: severe or extensive
disease, signs and symptoms of systemic illness, purulent
cellulitis/wound infection, comorbidities and extremes of age, abscess in
area difficult to drain or face/hand, associated septic phlebitis, or lack of
response to incision and drainage alone.
2Regimens with activity against methicillin-resistant S aureus.
3Other regimens approved by the FDA for treatment of complicated skin
and soft tissue infections include llinezolid, 600 mg twice daily (can also
be given by mouth); tigecycline, 50 mg twice daily; telavancin, at 10 mg/kg
once daily; and ceftaroline, 600 mg twice daily.
Patients who do not require parenteral therapy may be treated
with amoxicillin, 875 mg twice daily for 7–10 days. A first-
generation oral cephalosporin, eg, cephalexin, 500 mg four times
daily, or clindamycin, 300 mg orally three times daily, is an
alternative to amoxicillin.
3. Other Group A Streptococcal Infections
Arthritis, pneumonia, empyema, endocarditis, and necrotizing
fasciitis are relatively uncommon infections that may be caused by
group A streptococci. Toxic shock-like syndrome also occurs.
Arthritis generally occurs in association with cellulitis. In addition
to intravenous therapy with penicillin G, 2 million units every 4 hours
(or cefazolin or vancomycin in doses recommended above for
penicillin-allergic patients), frequent percutaneous needle aspiration
should be performed to remove joint effusions. Open surgical
drainage may be necessary when the hip or shoulder is infected.
Pneumonia and empyema often are characterized by extensive
tissue destruction and an aggressive, rapidly progressive clinical
course associated with significant morbidity and mortality. High-
dose penicillin and chest tube drainage are indicated for treatment of
empyema. Vancomycin is an acceptable substitute in penicillin-
allergic patients.
Group A streptococci can cause endocarditis. Endocarditis
should be treated with 4 million units of penicillin G intravenously
every 4 hours for 4–6 weeks. Vancomycin, 1 g intravenously every
12 hours, is recommended for persons allergic to penicillin.
Necrotizing fasciitis is a rapidly spreading infection involving
the fascia of deep muscle. The clinical findings at presentation may
be those of severe cellulitis, but the presence of systemic toxicity
and severe pain, which may be followed by anesthesia of the
involved area due to destruction of nerves as infection advances
through the fascial planes, is a clue to the diagnosis. Surgical
exploration is mandatory when the diagnosis is suspected. Early and
extensive debridement is essential for survival.
Any streptococcal infection—and necrotizing fasciitis in particular
—can be associated with streptococcal toxic shock syndrome,
typified by invasion of skin or soft tissues, acute respiratory distress
syndrome, and kidney failure. The very young, the elderly, and
those with underlying medical conditions are at particularly high risk
for invasive disease. Bacteremia occurs in most cases. Skin rash
and desquamation may not be present. Mortality rates can be up to
80%. The syndrome is due to elaboration of pyrogenic erythrotoxin
(which also causes scarlet fever), a superantigen that stimulates
massive release of inflammatory cytokines believed to mediate the
shock. A β-lactam, such as penicillin, remains the drug of choice for
treatment of serious streptococcal infections, but clindamycin, which
is a potent inhibitor of toxin production, should also be administered
at a dose of 600 mg every 8 hours intravenously for invasive
disease, especially in the presence of shock. Intravenous immune
globulin has also been recommended for streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome for presumed, although unproven, therapeutic benefit
from specific antibody to streptococcal exotoxins in immune
globulin preparations. Two dosage regimens have been used: 450
mg/kg once daily for 5 days or a single dose of 2 g/kg with a repeat
dose at 48 hours if the patient remains unstable.
Outbreaks of invasive disease have been associated with
colonization by invasive clones that can be transmitted to close
contacts who, though asymptomatic, may be a reservoir for disease.
Tracing contacts of patients with invasive disease is controversial.
Eisenstein BI. Treatment challenges in the management of
complicated skin and soft-tissue infections. Clin Microbiol Infect.
2008 Mar;14(Suppl 2):17–25. [PMID: 18226086]
 
Phan HH et al. Necrotizing soft tissue infections in the intensive
care unit. Crit Care Med. 2010 Sep;38(9 Suppl):S460–8. [PMID:
20724879]
 
4. Non-Group A Streptococcal Infections
Non-group A hemolytic streptococci (eg, groups B, C, and G)
produce a spectrum of disease similar to that of group A
streptococci. The treatment of infections caused by these strains is
the same as for group A streptococci.
Group B streptococci are an important cause of sepsis,
bacteremia, and meningitis in the neonate. Antepartum screening to
identify carriers and peripartum antimicrobial prophylaxis are
recommended in pregnancy. This organism, part of the normal
vaginal flora, may cause septic abortion, endometritis, or peripartum
infections and, less commonly, cellulitis, bacteremia, and
endocarditis in adults. Treatment of infections caused by group B
streptococci is with either penicillin or vancomycin in doses
recommended for group A streptococci. Because of in vitro
synergism, some experts recommend the addition of low-dose
gentamicin, 1 mg/kg every 8 hours.
Viridans streptococci, which are nonhemolytic or α-hemolytic (ie,
producing a green zone of hemolysis on blood agar), are part of the
normal oral flora. Although these strains may produce focal
pyogenic infection, they are most notable as the leading cause of
native valve endocarditis (see below).
Group D streptococci include Streptococcus bovis and the
enterococci. S bovis is a cause of endocarditis in association with
bowel neoplasia or cirrhosis and is treated like viridans
streptococci.
Jeng A et al. The role of beta-hemolytic streptococci in causing
diffuse, nonculturable cellulitis: a prospective investigation.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2010 Jul;89(4):217–26. [PMID:
20616661]
 
Larsen JW et al. Group B Streptococcus and pregnancy: a review.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Apr;198(4):440–8. [PMID:
18201679]
 
ENTEROCOCCAL INFECTIONS
Two species, Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium,
are responsible for most human enterococcal infections.
Enterococci cause wound infections, urinary tract infections,
bacteremia, and endocarditis. Infections caused by penicillin-
susceptible strains should be treated with penicillin 3–4 million units
every 4 hours; ampicillin 3 g every 6 hours; or if the patient is
penicillin-allergic, vancomycin 15 mg/kg every 12 hours
intravenously. If the patient has endocarditis or meningitis,
gentamicin 1 mg/kg every 8 hours intravenously should be added to
the regimen in order to achieve the bactericidal activity that is
required to cure these infections.
Resistance to vancomycin, penicillin, and gentamicin is common
among enterococcal isolates, especially E faecium; it is essential to
determine antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates. Infection control
measures that may be indicated to limit their spread include
isolation, barrier precautions, and avoidance of overuse of
vancomycin and gentamicin. Consultation with an infectious diseases
specialist is strongly advised when treating infections caused by
resistant strains of enterococci. Quinupristin/dalfopristin and
linezolid are approved by the FDA for treatment of infections
caused by vancomycin-resistant strains of enterococci.
Quinupristin/dalfopristin is not active against strains of E faecalis
and should be used only for infections caused by E faecium. The
dose is 7.5 mg/kg intravenously every 8–12 hours. Phlebitis and
irritation at the infusion site (often requiring a central line) and an
arthralgia-myalgia syndrome are relatively common side effects.
Linezolid, an oxazolidi-none, is active against both E faecalis and E
faecium. The dose is 600 mg twice daily, and both intravenous and
oral preparations are available. Its two principal side effects are
thrombocytopenia and bone marrow suppression; however,
peripheral neuropathy, optic neuritis, and lactic acidosis have been
observed with prolonged use due to mitochondrial toxicity.
Emergence of resistance has occurred during therapy with either
quinupristin/dalfopristin or linezolid.
Arias CA et al. Management of multidrug-resistant enterococcal
infections. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2010 Jun;16(6):555–62. [PMID:
20569266]
 
PNEUMOCOCCAL INFECTIONS
1. Pneumococcal Pneumonia
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Productive cough, fever, rigors, dyspnea, early pleuritic chest
pain.
 Consolidating lobar pneumonia on chest radiograph.
 Gram-positive diplococci on gram stain of sputum.
 
 General Considerations
The pneumococcus is the most common cause of community-
acquired pyogenic bacterial pneumonia. Alcoholism, asthma, HIV
infection, sickle cell disease, splenectomy, and hematologic
disorders are predisposing factors. The mortality rate remains high
in the setting of advanced age, multilobar disease, severe
hypoxemia, extrapulmonary complications, and bacteremia.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Presenting symptoms and signs include high fever, productive
cough, occasionally hemoptysis, and pleuritic chest pain. Rigors
occur within the first few hours of infection but are uncommon
thereafter. Bronchial breath sounds are an early sign.
B. Laboratory Findings
Pneumococcal pneumonia classically is a lobar pneumonia with
radiographic findings of consolidation and occasionally effusion.
However, differentiating it from other pneumonias is not possible
radiographically or clinically because of significant overlap in
presentations. Diagnosis requires isolation of the organism in culture,
although the Gram stain appearance of sputum can be suggestive.
Sputum and blood cultures, positive in 60% and 25% of cases of
pneumococcal pneumonia, respectively, should be obtained prior to
initiation of antimicrobial therapy in patients who are admitted to the
hospital. A good-quality sputum sample (< 10 epithelial cells and >
25 polymorphonuclear leukocytes per high-power field) shows
gram-positive diplococci in 80–90% of cases. A rapid urinary
antigen test for S pneumoniae, with sensitivity of 70–80% and
specificity > 95%, can assist with early diagnosis.
 Complications
Parapneumonic (sympathetic) effusion is common and may cause
recurrence or persistence of fever. These sterile fluid accumulations
need no specific therapy. Empyema occurs in 5% or less of cases
and is differentiated from sympathetic effusion by the presence of
organisms on Gram-stained fluid or positive pleural fluid cultures.
Pneumococcal pericarditis is a rare complication that can cause
tamponade. 
Pneumococcal 
arthritis 
also 
is 
uncommon.
Pneumococcal endocarditis usually involves the aortic valve and
often occurs in association with meningitis and pneumonia
(sometimes referred to as Austrian or Osler triad). Early heart
failure and multiple embolic events are typical.
 Treatment
A. Specific Measures
Initial antimicrobial therapy for pneumonia is empiric (see Chapter 9
for specific recommendations) pending isolation and identification of
the causative agent. Once the pneumonia is determined to be
caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, any of several antimicrobial
agents may be used depending on the clinical setting, community
patterns of penicillin resistance, and susceptibility of the particular
isolate. Uncomplicated pneumococcal pneumonia (ie, arterial Po2 >
60 mm Hg, no coexisting medical problems, and single-lobe disease
without signs of extrapulmonary infection) caused by penicillin-
susceptible strains of pneumococcus may be treated on an
outpatient basis with amoxicillin, 750 mg orally twice daily for 7–10
days. For penicillin-allergic patients, alternatives are azithromycin,
one 500-mg dose orally on the first day and 250 mg for the next 4
days; clarithromycin, 500 mg orally twice daily for 10 days;
doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 10 days; levofloxacin,
750 mg orally for 5 days; or moxifloxacin, 400 mg orally for 7–14
days. Patients should be monitored for clinical response (eg, less
cough, defervescence within 2–3 days) because pneumococci have
become increasingly resistant to penicillin and the second-line
agents.
Parenteral therapy is generally recommended for the hospitalized
patient at least until there has been clinical improvement. Aqueous
penicillin G, 2 million units intravenously every 4 hours, or
ceftriaxone, 1 g intravenously every 24 hours, is effective for strains
that are not highly penicillin-resistant (ie, strains for which the
minimum inhibitory concentration [MIC] of penicillin is ≤ 1
mcg/mL). For serious penicillin allergy or infection caused by a
highly penicillin-resistant strain, vancomycin, 1 g intravenously every
12 hours, is effective. Alternatively, a fluoroquinolone (eg,
levofloxacin, 500 mg, or a comparable dose of any one of several
newer fluoroquinolones now on the market, orally or intravenously)
can be used. The total duration of therapy is not well defined but
10–14 days is standard.
B. Treatment of Complications
Pleural effusions developing after initiation of antimicrobial therapy
usually are sterile, and thoracentesis need not be performed if the
patient is otherwise improving. Thoracentesis is indicated for an
effusion present prior to initiation of therapy and in the patient who
has not responded to antibiotics after 3–4 days. Chest tube
drainage may be required if pneumococci are identified by culture
or Gram stain, especially if aspiration of the fluid is difficult.
Echocardiography should be done if pericardial effusion is
suspected. Patients with pericardial effusion who are responding to
therapy and have no signs of tamponade may be monitored and
treated with indomethacin, 50 mg orally three times daily, for pain.
In patients with increasing effusion, unsatisfactory clinical response,
or evidence of tamponade, pericardiocentesis will determine
whether the pericardial space is infected. Infected fluid must be
drained either percutaneously (by tube placement or needle
aspiration), by placement of a pericardial window, or by
pericardiectomy. Pericardiectomy eventually may be required to
prevent or treat constrictive pericarditis, a common sequela of
bacterial pericarditis.
Endocarditis should be treated for 4 weeks with 3–4 million units
of penicillin G every 4 hours intravenously; ceftriaxone, 2 g once
daily intravenously; or vancomycin, 15 mg/kg every 12 hours
intravenously. Mild heart failure from endocarditis may respond to
medical therapy, but moderate to severe heart failure is an indication
for prosthetic valve implantation, as are systemic emboli or large
friable vegetations as determined by echocardiography.
C. Penicillin-Resistant Pneumococci
Susceptibility breakpoints defining penicillin-resistant pneumococci
for isolates causing pneumonia were revised in 2008. Resistance
breakpoints for parenterally administered penicillin and high-dose
oral amoxicillin (2 g twice daily) are as follows: susceptible,
penicillin MIC ≤ 2 mcg/mL; intermediate, MIC = 4 mcg/mL;
resistant, MIC ≥ 8 mcg/mL. This change reflected results from
studies demonstrating equivalent cure rates when high doses of
parenteral penicillin were used for treatment of pneumococcal
pneumonia due to isolates with penicillin MIC ≤ 2 mcg/mL. Note,
however, that these new breakpoints do not apply to orally
administered penicillin, which are the same as for use of penicillin in
treatment of meningitis (see below). In cases of pneumococcal
pneumonia where the isolate has a penicillin MIC > 2 mcg/mL,
cephalosporin cross-resistance is common, and a non–β-lactam
antimicrobial, such as vancomycin, 1 g intravenously every 12 hours
or a fluoroquinolone with enhanced gram-positive activity (eg,
levofloxacin, 750 mg intravenously or orally once daily or
moxifloxacin, 400 mg intravenously or orally once daily), is
recommended. Penicillin-resistant strains of pneumococci may be
resistant to macrolides, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and
chloramphenicol, and susceptibility must be documented prior to
their use. All blood and cerebro-spinal fluid isolates should still be
tested for resistance to penicillin. There has been no change to the
penicillin susceptibility breakpoint for pneumococcal isolates causing
meningitis, nor any change in treatment recommendations (see
below).
Li JZ. Efficacy of short-course antibiotic regimens for community-
acquired pneumonia: a meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2007 Sep;
120(9):783–90. [PMID: 17765048]
 
Mandell LA et al. Infectious Diseases Society of
America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the
management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin
Infect Dis. 2007 Mar 1;44 (Suppl 2):S27–72. [PMID: 17278083]
 
van der Poll T et al. Pathogenesis, treatment, and prevention of
pneumococcal pneumonia. Lancet. 2009 Oct
31;374(9700):1543–56. [PMID: 19880020]
 
2. Pneumococcal Meningitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, headache, altered mental status.
 Meningismus.
 Gram-positive diplococci on gram stain of cere-brospinal fluid.
 
 General Considerations
S pneumoniae is the most common cause of meningitis in adults.
Head trauma, with cerebrospinal fluid leaks, sinusitis, and
pneumonia may precede it.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is rapid, with fever, headache, meningismus, and altered
mentation. Pneumonia may be present. Compared with meningitis
caused by the meningococcus, pneumococcal meningitis lacks a
rash, and focal neurologic deficits, cranial nerve palsies, and
obtundation are more prominent features.
B. Laboratory Findings
The cerebrospinal fluid typically has > 1000 white blood cells per
microliter, over 60% of which are polymorphonu-clear leukocytes;
the glucose concentration is < 40 mg/dL, or < 50% of the
simultaneous serum concentration; and the protein usually exceeds
150 mg/dL. Not all cases of meningitis will have these typical
findings, and alterations in cerebro-spinal fluid cell counts and
chemistries may be surprisingly minimal, overlapping with those of
aseptic meningitis.
Gram stain of cerebrospinal fluid shows gram-positive cocci in
80–90% of cases, and in untreated cases, blood or cerebrospinal
fluid cultures are almost always positive.
 Treatment
Antibiotics should be given as soon as the diagnosis is suspected. If
lumbar puncture must be delayed (eg, while awaiting results of an
imaging study to exclude a mass lesion), the patient should be
treated empirically for presumed meningitis with intravenous
ceftriaxone, 2 g, plus vancomycin, 15 mg/kg, plus dexamethasone,
0.15 mg/kg administered concomitantly after blood cultures
(positive in 50% of cases) have been obtained. Once susceptibility
to penicillin has been confirmed, penicillin, 24 million units
intravenously daily in six divided doses, or ceftriaxone, 2 g every 12
hours intravenously, is continued for 10–14 days in documented
cases.
The best therapy for penicillin-resistant strains is not known.
Penicillin-resistant strains (MIC > 0.06 mcg/mL) are often cross-
resistant to the third-generation cephalosporins as well as other
antibiotics. Susceptibility testing is essential to proper management
of this infection. If the MIC of ceftriaxone or cefotaxime is ≤ 0.5
mcg/mL, single-drug therapy with either of these cephalosporins is
likely to be effective; when the MIC is ≥ 1 mcg/mL, treatment with
a combination of ceftriaxone, 2 g intravenously every 12 hours, plus
vancomycin, 30 mg/kg/d intravenously in two or three divided
doses, is recommended. If a patient with a penicillin-resistant
organism is slow to respond clinically, repeat lumbar puncture may
be indicated to assess bacteriologic response.
Dexamethasone administered with antibiotic to adults has been
associated with a 60% reduction in mortality and a 50% reduction
in unfavorable outcomes. It is recommended that dexamethasone,
10 mg intravenously, be given immediately prior to or concomitantly
with the first dose of appropriate antibiotic and continued in those
with pneumococcal disease every 6 hours thereafter for a total of 4
days. Patients with pneumococcal meningitis and AIDS who do not
have access to resources may not benefit from dexamethasone. The
effect of dexamethasone on outcome of meningitis caused by
penicillin-resistant organisms is not known.
Hsu HE et al. Effect of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine on
pneumococcal meningitis. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jan
15;360(3):244–56. [PMID: 19144940]
 
Scarborough M et al. Corticosteroids for bacterial meningitis in
adults in sub-Saharan Africa. N Engl J Med. 2007 Dec
13;357(24):2441–50. [PMID: 18077809]
 
Van de Beek D et al. Corticosteroids for acute bacterial
meningitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jan 24;
(1):CD004405. [PMID: 17253505]
 
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS INFECTIONS
1. Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Localized erythema with induration and purulent drainage.
 Abscess formation.
 Folliculitis commonly observed.
 Gram stain of pus with gram-positive cocci in clusters; cultures
usually positive.
 
 General Considerations
Approximately one-quarter of people are asymptomatic nasal
carriers of S aureus, which is spread by direct contact. Carriage
often precedes infection, which occurs as a consequence of
disruption of the cutaneous barrier or impairment of host defenses.
S aureus tends to cause more localized skin infections than
streptococci, and abscess formation is common. The prevalence of
methicillin-resistant strains in community settings is increasing, and
these strains have been associated with recurrent and severe skin
and soft tissue infections, including necrotizing fasciitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
S aureus skin infections may begin around one or more hair
follicles, causing folliculitis; may become localized to form boils (or
furuncles); or may spread to adjacent skin and deeper
subcutaneous tissue (ie, a carbuncle) (Figure 33–1). Deep
abscesses involving muscle or fascia may occur, often in association
with a deep wound or other inoculation or injection. Necrotizing
fasciitis, a rare form of S aureus skin and soft tissues infection, has
been reported with community strains of methicillin-resistant S
aureus.
B. Laboratory Findings
Cultures of the wound or abscess material will almost always yield
the organism. In patients with systemic signs of infection, blood
cultures should be obtained because of potential endocarditis,
osteomyelitis, or metastatic seeding of other sites. Patients who are
bacteremic should have blood cultures taken early during therapy to
exclude persistent bacteremia, an indicator of severe or complicated
infection.
 Treatment
Proper drainage of abscess fluid or other focal infections is the
mainstay of therapy. Incision and drainage alone may be sufficient
for cutaneous abscess. For uncomplicated skin infections, oral
antimicrobial therapy is satisfactory. Before the emergence of
community methicillin-resistant strains of S aureus, an oral
penicillinase-resistant penicillin or cephalosporin, such as
dicloxacillin or cephalexin, 500 mg four times a day for 7–10 days,
was the drug of choice for empiric therapy. However, increasing
prevalence of methicillin-resistant strains of S aureus among
community isolates may necessitate use of other oral agents to
which the isolate is susceptible in vitro, such as clindamycin, 300 mg
three times daily; doxycycline or minocycline, 100 mg twice daily;
or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, given in two divided doses based
on 5–10 mg/kg/d of the trimethoprim component. Unfortunately, the
efficacy of these agents is not well defined and not evidence based.
Because of the high prevalence of macrolide resistance among S
aureus strains, these agents should not be used unless susceptibility
is documented (see Table 33–1).
Figure 33–1. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) abscess of the neck. (Courtesy of Edward Wright, MD;
used, with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ
Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
For more complicated infections with extensive cutaneous or
deep tissue involvement or fever, parenteral therapy is indicated
initially. A penicillinase-resistant penicillin such as nafcillin or
oxacillin in a dosage of 1.5 g every 6 hours intravenously or
cefazolin 1 g intravenously or intramuscularly is preferred for
infections caused by methicillin-susceptible isolates. In patients with
a serious allergy to β-lactam antibiotics or if the strain is methicillin-
resistant, vancomycin, 1 g intravenously every 12 hours, is a drug of
choice. If the local prevalence of methicillin-resistance is high (eg,
10% or more), and particularly if the patient is seriously ill,
vancomycin is indicated empirically pending strain isolation and
determination of susceptibility.
Linezolid is FDA-approved for treatment of skin and skin-
structure infections as well as hospital-acquired pneumonia caused
by methicillin-resistant strains of S aureus and clinically is as
effective as vancomycin. The dose is 600 mg orally (bioavailability
of 100%) or intravenously twice a day for 10–14 days. Its
considerable cost makes it an unattractive choice for most routine
outpatient infections, and its safety in treatment courses lasting
longer than 2–3 weeks is not well characterized; nevertheless, it is
the only proven effective oral alternative to parenteral vancomycin.
Daptomycin, 4 mg/kg once daily (or every other day in the patient
with creatinine clearance ≥ 30 mL/min) intravenously for 7–14
days, is also an option for treatment of complicated skin and skin
structure infections. Tigecycline (a glycylcycline class antimicrobial),
telavancin (a lipoglycopeptide), and ceftaroline (a novel
cephalosporin with activity against methicillin-resistant S aureus) are
all approved by the FDA for treatment of complicated skin and skin
structure infections due to methicillin-resistant strains of S aureus.
The dosage of tigecycline is 100 mg intravenously once followed by
50 mg intravenously twice a day. The dose of telavancin is 10
mg/kg intravenously once daily for 7–14 days. The dosage of
ceftaroline is 600 mg twice a day for 7–14 days.
Biek D et al. Ceftaroline fosamil: a novel broad-spectrum
cephalosporin with expanded anti-Gram-positive activity. J
Antimicrob Chemother. 2010 Nov;65 (Suppl 4):iv9–16. [PMID:
21115457]
 
Hersh AL et al. National trends in ambulatory visits and antibiotic
prescribing for skin and soft-tissue infections. Arch Intern Med.
2008 Jul 28;168(14):1585–91. [PMID: 18663172]
 
Stryjewski ME et al. Skin and soft-tissue infections caused by
community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Jun 1;46(Suppl 5):S368–77. [PMID:
18462092]
 
Stryjewski ME et al. Telavancin versus vancomycin for the
treatment of complicated skin and skin-structure infections caused
by gram-positive organisms. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Jun
1;46(11):1683–93. [PMID: 18444791]
 
2. Osteomyelitis
S aureus causes approximately 60% of all cases of osteomyelitis.
Osteomyelitis may be caused by direct inoculation, eg, from an
open fracture or as a result of surgery; by extension from a
contiguous focus of infection or open wound; or by hematogenous
spread. Long bones and vertebrae are the usual sites. Epidural
abscess is a common complication of vertebral osteomyelitis and
should be suspected if fever and severe back or neck pain are
accompanied by radicular pain or symptoms or signs indicative of
spinal cord compression (eg, incontinence, extremity weakness,
pathologic reflexes).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The infection may be acute, with abrupt development of local
symptoms and systemic toxicity, or indolent, with insidious onset of
vague pain over the site of infection, progressing to local tenderness
and constitutional symptoms (fever, malaise, anorexia, night
sweats). Fever is absent in one-third or more of cases. Back pain is
often the only symptom in vertebral osteomyelitis and may be
associated with an epidural abscess and spinal cord compression.
Draining sinus tracts occur in chronic infections or infections of
foreign body implants.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis is established by isolation of S aureus from the
blood, bone, or a contiguous focus of a patient with signs and
symptoms of focal bone infection. Blood culture will be positive in
approximately 60% of untreated cases. Bone biopsy and culture are
indicated if blood cultures are sterile.
C. Imaging
Bone scan and gallium scan, each with a sensitivity of approximately
95% and a specificity of 60–70%, are useful in identifying or
confirming the site of bone infection. Plain bone films early in the
course of infection are often normal but will become abnormal in
most cases even with effective therapy. Spinal infection (unlike
malignancy) traverses the disk space to involve the contiguous
vertebral body. CT is more sensitive than plain films and helps
localize associated abscesses. MRI is slightly less sensitive than
bone scan but has a specificity of 90%. It is indicated when epidural
abscess is suspected in association with vertebral osteomyelitis.
 Treatment
Prolonged therapy is required to cure staphylococcal osteomyelitis.
Durations of 4–6 weeks or longer are recommended. In cases of
staphylococcal osteomyelitis with associated epidural abscess and
spinal cord compression, other abscesses (psoas, paraspinal) or
extensive disease, surgical treatment is often indicated. Although
oral regimens can be effective, intravenous therapy is preferred,
particularly during the acute phase of the infection for patients with
systemic toxicity. Nafcillin or oxacillin, 9–12 g/d in six divided
doses, is the drug of choice for infection with methicillin-sensitive
isolates. Cefazolin, 2 g every 8 hours, also is effective. Patients with
infections due to methicillin-resistant strains of S aureus or who
have severe penicillin allergies should be treated with vancomycin,
30 mg/kg/d intravenously divided in two or three doses. Doses
should be adjusted to achieve a vancomycin trough of 15–20
mcg/mL. Oral step-down therapy to a rifampin combination
regimen may be effective and in certain cases primary oral therapy
may be effective, but consultation with an infectious diseases
specialists is recommended. The role of newer agents, such as
daptomycin or linezolid, remains to be defined.
Daver NG et al. Oral step-down therapy is comparable to
intravenous therapy for Staphylococcus aureus osteomyelitis. J
Infect. 2007 Jun;54(60):539–44. [PMID: 17198732]
 
Euba G et al. Long-term follow-up trial of oral rifampin-
cotrimoxazole combination versus intravenous cloxacillin in
treatment of chronic staphylococcal osteomyelitis. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. 2009 Jun;53(6):2672–6. [PMID: 19307354]
 
Lamp KC et al. Clinical experience with daptomycin for the
treatment of patients with osteomyelitis. Am J Med. 2007
Oct;120(10 Suppl 1):S13–20. [PMID: 17904946]
 
3. Staphylococcal Bacteremia
S aureus readily invades the bloodstream and infects sites distant
from the primary site of infection, which may be relatively minor or
even inapparent. Whenever S aureus is recovered from blood
cultures, the possibility of endocarditis, osteomyelitis, or other
metastatic deep infection must be considered. Bacteremia that
persists for more than 48 to 96 hours after initiation of therapy is
strongly predictive of worse outcome and complicated infection.
The appropriate duration of therapy for uncomplicated bacteremia
arising from a removable source (eg, intravenous device) or
drainable focus (eg, skin abscess) has not been well defined, but a
10- to 14-day course of therapy appears to be the minimum.
However, 5% or more of patients may relapse, usually with
endocarditis or osteomyelitis, even if treated for 2 weeks.
Nafcillin or oxacillin, 2 g intravenously every 4 hours or cefazolin,
2 g every 8 hours is recommended for uncomplicated methicillin-
susceptible S aureus bacteremia. Vancomycin, 30 mg/kg/d
intravenously in two or three divided doses, as definitive therapy
should be reserved for patients with serious penicillin allergy or with
infections caused by methicillin-resistant strains because it is less
active than β-lactam antibiotics and treatment failures are more
common than with β-lactams. Maintaining a vancomycin trough
concentration of 15–20 mcg/mL may improve outcomes and is
recommended. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is a
sensitive and cost-effective method for excluding underlying
endocarditis. It is considered for patients for whom the pretest
probability of endocarditis is 5% or higher—and for all patients with
unexplained S aureus bacteremia.
Vancomycin treatment failures are relatively common, particularly
for complicated bacteremia, in foreign body infection, or when the
MIC of the isolate is ≥ 2 mcg/mL. Consultation should be sought
with an infectious diseases specialist when vancomycin treatment
failure is encountered. Daptomycin, 6 mg/kg intravenously once
daily, is approved by the FDA for treatment of S aureus
bacteremia and is an alternative to vancomycin, especially if a β-
lactam cannot be used or if the patient is not responding to
vancomycin. Cases of vancomycin treatment failures in which the
staphylococcal isolate exhibits a vancomycin MIC ≥ 4 mcg/mL
should be reported to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) to help track this potentially serious and
emerging problem of vancomycin resistance.
Empiric therapy of suspected staphylococcal infection, whether
of community or hospital onset, depends on the severity of the
infection and the likelihood that it is caused by methicillin-resistant
strains. If the prevalence exceeds 5–10% for more seriously ill
patients, initial therapy should include vancomycin, 30 mg/kg/d
intravenously divided in two or three doses, until results of
susceptibility tests are known. Resistance to vancomycin fortunately
remains rare and should not affect the choice of empiric therapy.
Cosgrove SE et al. Management of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Jun
1;46 Suppl 5:S386–93. [PMID: 18462094]
 
Hawkins C et al. Persistent Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia:
an analysis of risk factors and outcomes. Arch Intern Med. 2007
Sep 24;167(17):1861–7. [PMID: 17893307]
 
Stryjewski ME et al. Use of vancomycin or first-generation
cephalosporins for the treatment of hemodialysis-dependent
patients with methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus
bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Jan 15;44(2):190–6. [PMID:
17173215]
 
4. Toxic Shock Syndrome
S aureus produces toxins that cause three important entities:
“scalded skin syndrome” in children, toxic shock syndrome in
adults, and enterotoxin food poisoning. Toxic shock syndrome is
characterized by abrupt onset of high fever, vomiting, and watery
diarrhea. Sore throat, myalgias, and headache are common.
Hypotension with kidney and heart failure is associated with a poor
outcome. A diffuse macular erythematous rash (Figure 33–2) and
non purulent conjunctivitis are common, and desquamation,
especially of palms and soles, is typical during recovery. Fatality
rates may be as high as 15%. Although originally associated with
tampon use, any focus (eg, nasopharynx, bone, vagina, rectum,
abscess, or wound) harboring a toxin-producing S aureus strain
can cause toxic shock syndrome and nonmenstrual cases of toxic
shock syndrome are common. Classically, blood cultures are
negative because symptoms are due to the effects of the toxin and
not systemic infection.
Important aspects of treatment include rapid rehydration,
antistaphylococcal drugs, management of kidney or heart failure,
and addressing sources of toxin, eg, removal of tampon or drainage
of abscess.
5. Infections Caused by Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci
Coagulase-negative staphylococci are an important cause of
infections of intravascular and prosthetic devices and of wound
infection following cardiothoracic surgery. These organisms
infrequently cause infections such as osteomyelitis and endocarditis
in the absence of a pros-thesis, but rates may be increasing. Most
human infections are caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis, S
haemolyticus, S hominis, S warnerii, S saprophyticus, S
saccharolyticus, and S cohnii. These common hospital-acquired
pathogens are less virulent than S aureus, and infections caused by
them tend to be more indolent.
Figure 33–2. Morbilliform rash in toxic shock syndrome caused
by Staphylococcus aureus. (Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
Because coagulase-negative staphylococci are normal inhabitants
of human skin, it is difficult to distinguish infection from
contamination, the latter perhaps accounting for three-fourths of
blood culture isolates. Infection is more likely if the patient has a
foreign body (eg, sternal wires, prosthetic joint, prosthetic cardiac
valve, pacemaker, intracranial pressure monitor, cerebro-spinal fluid
shunt, peritoneal dialysis catheter) or an intravascular device in
place. Purulent or serosanguineous drainage, erythema, pain, or
tenderness at the site of the foreign body or device suggests
infection. Instability and pain are signs of prosthetic joint infection.
Fever, a new murmur, instability of the prosthesis, or signs of
systemic embolization are evidence of prosthetic valve endocarditis.
Immunosuppression and recent antimicrobial therapy are risk
factors.
Infection is also more likely if the same strain is consistently
isolated from two or more blood cultures (particularly if samples
were obtained at different times) and from the foreign body site.
Contamination is more likely when a single blood culture is positive
or if more than one strain is isolated from blood cultures. The
antimicrobial susceptibility pattern and speciation are used to
determine whether one or more strains have been isolated. More
sophisticated typing methods, eg, pulse-field gel electrophoresis of
restriction enzyme digested chromosomal DNA, may be required to
identify distinct strains.
Whenever possible, the intravascular device or foreign body
suspected of being infected by coagulase-negative staphylococci
should be removed. However, removal and replacement of some
devices (eg, prosthetic joint, prosthetic valve, cerebrospinal fluid
shunt) can be a difficult or risky procedure, and it may sometimes
be preferable to treat with antibiotics alone with the understanding
that the probability of cure is reduced and that surgical management
may eventually be necessary.
Coagulase-negative staphylococci are commonly resistant to β-
lactams and multiple other antibiotics. For patients with normal
kidney function, vancomycin, 1 g intravenously every 12 hours, is
the treatment of choice for suspected or confirmed infection caused
by these organisms until susceptibility to penicillinase-resistant
penicillins or other agents has been confirmed. Duration of therapy
has not been established for relatively uncomplicated infections,
such as those secondary to intravenous devices, which may be
eliminated by simply removing the infected device. Infection
involving bone or a prosthetic valve should be treated for 6 weeks.
A combination regimen of vancomycin plus rifampin, 300 mg orally
twice daily, plus gentamicin, 1 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours, is
recommended for treatment of prosthetic valve endocarditis caused
by methicillin-resistant strains.
Chu VH et al. Emergence of coagulase-negative staphylococci as
a cause of native valve endocarditis. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Jan
15;46(2):232–42. [PMID: 18171255]
 
CLOSTRIDIAL DISEASES
1. Clostridial Myonecrosis (Gas Gangrene)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset of pain and edema in an area of wound
contamination.
 Prostration and systemic toxicity.
 Brown to blood-tinged watery exudate, with skin discoloration of
surrounding area.
 Gas in the tissue by palpation or radiograph.
 Gram-positive rods in culture or smear of exudate.
 
 General Considerations
Gas gangrene or clostridial myonecrosis is produced by any one of
several clostridia (Clostridium perfringens, C ramosum, C
bifermentans, C histolyticum, C novyi, etc). Trauma and injection
drug use are common predisposing conditions. Toxins produced in
devitalized tissues under anaerobic conditions result in shock,
hemolysis, and myonecrosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is usually sudden, with rapidly increasing pain in the
affected area, hypotension, and tachycardia. Fever is present but is
not proportionate to the severity of the infection. In the last stages of
the disease, severe prostration, stupor, delirium, and coma occur.
The wound becomes swollen, and the surrounding skin is pale.
There is a foul-smelling brown, blood-tinged serous discharge. As
the disease advances, the surrounding tissue changes from pale to
dusky and finally becomes deeply discolored, with coalescent, red,
fluid-filled vesicles. Gas may be palpable in the tissues.
B. Laboratory Findings
Gas gangrene is a clinical diagnosis, and empiric therapy is indicated
if the diagnosis is suspected. Radiographic studies may show gas
within the soft tissues, but this finding is not specific. The smear
shows absence of neutrophils and the presence of gram-positive
rods. Anaerobic culture confirms the diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Other bacteria can produce gas in infected tissue, eg, enteric gram-
negative organisms, or anaerobes.
 Treatment
Penicillin, 2 million units every 3 hours intravenously, is effective.
Clindamycin may decrease the production of bacterial toxin, and
some experts recommend the addition of clindamycin, 600–900 mg
every 8 hours intravenously, to penicillin. Adequate surgical
debridement and exposure of infected areas are essential, with
radical surgical excision often necessary. Hyperbaric oxygen
therapy has been used empirically but must be used in conjunction
with administration of an appropriate antibiotic and surgical
debridement.
2. Clostridium Sordellii Toxic Shock Syndrome
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sudden onset after medical abortion.
 Abdominal pain.
 Absence of fever.
 Tachycardia, severe hypotension, capillary leak syndrome with
edema.
 Profound leukocytosis, hemoconcentration.
 
 General Considerations & Clinical
Findings
C sordellii is a rare cause of endometritis and toxic shock
syndrome following childbirth. Fatal cases of uterine infection
following medically induced abortion with mifepristone have been
reported. Onset of illness was within 4–5 days of ingestion of
mifepristone and the clinical course fulminant. Infection appeared to
be limited to the uterus, which showed necrosis, edema,
hemorrhage, and acute inflammatory changes.
 Treatment
Early recognition, aggressive resuscitation from shock, immediate
surgical debridement with hysterectomy, and administration of an
antimicrobial that is active against C sordellii are essential to
survival. Based on in vitro susceptibility data, any of several agents
should be active, including penicillin, ampicillin, a macrolide,
clindamycin, a tetracycline, or metronidazole. Whether a protein
synthesis inhibitor to block further toxin production offers any
advantage over a β-lactam is unknown.
Ho CS. Undiagnosed cases of fatal Clostridium-associated toxic
shock in Californian women of childbearing age. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 2009 Nov;201(5):459.e1–7. [PMID: 19628200]
 
3. Tetanus
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of wound and possible contamination.
 Jaw stiffness followed by spasms of jaw muscles (trismus).
 Stiffness of the neck and other muscles, dysphagia, irritability,
hyperreflexia.
 Finally, painful convulsions precipitated by minimal stimuli.
 
 General Considerations
Tetanus is caused by the neurotoxin tetanospasmin, elaborated by
C tetani. Spores of this organism are ubiquitous in soil and may
germinate when introduced into a wound. The vegetative bacteria
produce tetanospasmin, a zinc metalloprotease that cleaves
synaptobrevin, a protein essential for neurotransmitter release.
Tetanospasmin interferes with neurotransmission at spinal synapses
of inhibitory neurons. As a result, minor stimuli result in uncontrolled
spasms, and reflexes are exaggerated. The incubation period is 5
days to 15 weeks, with the average being 8–12 days.
Most cases occur in unvaccinated individuals. Persons at risk are
the elderly, migrant workers, newborns, and injection drug users.
While puncture wounds are particularly prone to causing tetanus,
any wound, including bites or decubiti, may become colonized and
infected by C tetani.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The first symptom may be pain and tingling at the site of inoculation,
followed by spasticity of the muscles nearby. Stiffness of the jaw,
neck stiffness, dysphagia, and irritability are other early signs.
Hyperreflexia develops later, with spasms of the jaw muscles
(trismus) or facial muscles and rigidity and spasm of the muscles of
the abdomen, neck, and back. Painful tonic convulsions precipitated
by minor stimuli are common. Spasms of the glottis and respiratory
muscles may cause acute asphyxia. The patient is awake and alert
throughout the illness. The sensory examination is normal. The
temperature is normal or only slightly elevated.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of tetanus is made clinically.
 Differential Diagnosis
Tetanus must be differentiated from various acute central nervous
system infections such as meningitis. Trismus may occasionally
develop with the use of phenothiazines. Strychnine poisoning should
also be considered.
 Complications
Airway obstruction is common. Urinary retention and constipation
may result from spasm of the sphincters. Respiratory arrest and
cardiac failure are late, life-threatening events.
 Prevention
Tetanus is preventable by active immunization (see Table 30–7).
For primary immunization of adults, Td (tetanus and diphtheria
toxoids vaccine) is administered as two doses 4–6 weeks apart,
with a third dose 6–12 months later. For one of the doses, Tdap
(tetanus toxoid, reduced dose diphtheria toxoid, acellular pertussis
vaccine) should be substituted for Td. Booster doses are given
every 10 years or at the time of major injury if it occurs more than 5
y
y
j
j y
years after a dose. A single dose of Tdap is preferred to Td for
wound prophylaxis if the patient has not been previously vaccinated
with Tdap.
 
Table 33–2. Guide to tetanus prophylaxis in wound management.
 
1Such as, but not limited to, wounds contaminated with dirt, feces, soil,
saliva, etc; puncture wounds; avulsions; and wounds resulting from
missiles, crushing, burns, and frostbite.
2Td indicates tetanus toxoid and diphtheria toxoid, adult form. Tdap
indicates tetanous toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular
pertussis vaccine, which may be substituted as a single dose for Td.
Unvaccinated individuals should receive a complete series of three doses,
one of which is Tdap.
3Human tetanus immune globulin, 250 units intramuscularly.
4Yes if more than 10 years have elapsed since last dose.
5Yes if more than 5 years have elapsed since last dose. (More frequent
boosters are not needed and can enhance side effects.) Tdap has been
safely administered within 2 years of Td vaccination, although local
reactions to the vaccine may be increased.
Passive immunization should be used in nonimmunized individuals
and those whose immunization status is uncertain whenever a
wound is contaminated or likely to have devitalized tissue. Tetanus
immune globulin, 250 units, is given intramuscularly. Active
immunization with tetanus toxoid is started concurrently. Table 33–2
provides a guide to prophylactic management.
 Treatment
A. Specific Measures
Human tetanus immune globulin, 500 units, should be administered
intramuscularly within the first 24 hours of presentation. Whether
intrathecal administration has any additional benefit is controversial.
An unblinded, randomized trial comparing intramuscular tetanus
immune globulin to intramuscular plus intrathecal tetanus immune
globulin found more rapid resolution of spasms, fewer days of
ventilatory support, and a shorter hospital stay in the intrathecal
group. However, the exact immunoglobulin preparation that was
used was not specified and the total dose was 4000 units. Tetanus
does not produce natural immunity, and a full course of
immunization with tetanus toxoid should be administered once the
patient has recovered.
B. General Measures
Minimal stimuli can provoke spasms, so the patient should be
placed at bed rest and monitored under the quietest conditions
possible. Sedation, paralysis with curare-like agents, and
mechanical ventilation are often necessary to control tetanic spasms.
Penicillin, 20 million units intravenously daily in divided doses, is
given to all patients—even those with mild illness—to eradicate
toxin-producing organisms.
 Prognosis
High mortality rates are associated with a short incubation period,
early onset of convulsions, and delay in treatment. Contaminated
lesions about the head and face are more dangerous than wounds
on other parts of the body.
Murphy TV et al. Prevention of pertussis, tetanus, and diphtheria
among pregnant and postpartum women and their infants:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2008 May 30;57(RR-
4):1–51. [PMID: 18509304]
 
Roper MH et al. Maternal and neonatal tetanus. Lancet. 2007 Dec
8;370(9603):1947–59. [PMID: 17854885]
 
4. Botulism
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of recent ingestion of home-canned or smoked foods or
of injection drug use and demonstration of toxin in serum or food.
 Sudden onset of diplopia, dry mouth, dysphagia, dysphonia, and
muscle weakness progressing to respiratory paralysis.
 Pupils are fixed and dilated in most cases.
 
 General Considerations
Botulism is a paralytic disease caused by botulinum toxin, which is
produced by C botulinum, a ubiquitous, strictly anaerobic, spore-
forming bacillus found in soil. Four toxin types—A, B, E, and F—
cause human disease. Botulinum toxin is a zinc metalloprotease that
cleaves a specific component of the synaptic vesicle membrane
docking and fusion complex at the neuromuscular junction blocking
release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Botulinum toxin is
extremely potent and is classified by the CDC as a high-priority
agent because of its potential for use as an agent of bioterrorism.
Naturally occurring botulism occurs in one of three forms: food-
borne botulism, infant botulism, or wound botulism. Food-borne
botulism is caused by ingestion of preformed toxin present in
canned, smoked, or vacuum-packed foods such as home-canned
vegetables, smoked meats, and vacuum-packed fish. Commercial
foods have also been associated with outbreaks of botulism. Infant
botulism (associated with ingestion of honey) and wound botulism
(which typically occurs in association with injection drug use) result
from organisms present in the gut or wound that elaborate toxin in
vivo.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Twelve to 36 hours after ingestion of the toxin, visual disturbances
appear, particularly diplopia and loss of accommodation. Ptosis,
cranial nerve palsies with impairment of extraocular muscles, and
fixed dilated pupils are characteristic signs. The sensory examination
is normal. Other symptoms are dry mouth, dysphagia, and
dysphonia. Nausea and vomiting may be present, particularly with
type E toxin. The sensorium remains clear and the temperature
normal. Paralysis progressing to respiratory failure and death may
occur unless mechanical assistance is provided.
B. Laboratory Findings
Toxin in patients’ serum and in suspected foods can be
demonstrated by mouse inoculation and identified with specific
antiserum.
 Differential Diagnosis
Because the clinical presentation of botulism is so distinctive and the
differential diagnosis limited, botulism once considered is not easily
confused with other diseases. Cranial nerve involvement may be
seen with vertebrobasilar insufficiency, the C. Miller Fisher variant
of Guillain-Barré syndrome, myasthenia gravis, or any basilar
meningitis (infectious or carcinomatous). Intestinal obstruction or
other types of food poisoning are considered when nausea and
vomiting are present.
 Treatment
If botulism is suspected, the practitioner should contact the state
health authorities or the CDC for advice and help with procurement
of botulinus antitoxin and for assistance in obtaining assays for toxin
in serum, stool, or food. Skin testing is recommended to exclude
hypersensitivity to the antitoxin preparation. Antitoxin should be
administered as early as possible, ideally within 24 hours of the
onset of symptoms or signs, to arrest progression of disease; its
administration should not be delayed for laboratory confirmation of
the diagnosis. Respiratory failure is managed with intubation and
mechanical ventilation. Parenteral fluids or alimentation should be
given while swallowing difficulty persists. The removal of
unabsorbed toxin from the gut may be attempted. Any remnants of
suspected foods should be assayed for toxin. Persons who might
have eaten the suspected food must be located and observed.
Koussoulakos S. Botulinum neurotoxin: the ugly duckling. Eur
Neurol. 2009;61(6):331–42. [PMID: 19365125]
 
Wongtanate M et al. Signs and symptoms predictive of respiratory
failure in patients with foodborne botulism in Thailand. Am J Trop
Med Hyg. 2007 Aug;77(2):386–9. [PMID: 17690419]
 
ANTHRAX
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Appropriate epidemiologic setting, eg, exposure to animals or
animal hides, or potential exposure from an act of bioterrorism.
 A painless cutaneous black eschar on exposed areas of the skin,
with marked surrounding edema and vesicles.
 Nonspecific flu-like symptoms that rapidly progress to extreme
dyspnea and shock; mediastinal widening and pleural effusions on
chest radiograph.
 
 General Considerations
The death of a Florida photo editor from inhalational anthrax
acquired from a letter deliberately contaminated with spores of
Bacillus anthracis thrust this extremely rare infection into the public
awareness. Between September 18 and November 21 of 2001,
there were 13 cases of cutaneous anthrax and 11 cases of
inhalational anthrax associated with exposure to anthrax spores in
contaminated mail.
Naturally occurring anthrax is a disease of sheep, cattle, horses,
goats, and swine. B anthracis is a gram-positive spore-forming
aerobic rod. Spores—not vegetative bacteria—are the infectious
form of the organism. These are transmitted to humans from contact
with contaminated animals, animal products, or animal hides, or
from soil by inoculation of broken skin or mucous membranes; by
inhalation of aerosolized spores; or, rarely, by ingestion resulting in
cutaneous, inhalational, or gastrointestinal forms of anthrax,
respectively. Spores germinate into vegetative bacteria that multiply
locally in cutaneous and gastrointestinal anthrax but may also
disseminate to cause systemic infection. Inhaled spores are ingested
by pulmonary macrophages and carried via lymphatics to regional
lymph nodes, where they germinate. The bacteria rapidly multiply
within the lymphatics, causing a hemorrhagic lymph-adenitis.
Invasion of the bloodstream leads to overwhelming sepsis, killing
the host.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Cutaneous anthrax—This occurs within 2 weeks after
exposure to spores; there is no latency period for cutaneous disease
as there is with inhalational anthrax. The initial lesion is an
erythematous papule, often on an exposed area of skin that
vesiculates and then ulcerates and undergoes necrosis, ultimately
progressing to a purple to black eschar. The eschar typically is
painless; pain indicates secondary staphylococcal or streptococcal
infection. The surrounding area is edematous and vesicular but not
purulent. Regional adenopathy, fever, malaise, headache, and
nausea and vomiting may be present. The infection is self-limited in
most cases, but hematogenous spread with sepsis or meningitis may
occur.
2. Inhalational anthrax—Illness occurs in two stages, beginning
on average 10 days after exposure, but may have a latent onset 6
weeks after exposure. Nonspecific viral-like symptoms such as
fever, malaise, headache, dyspnea, cough, and congestion of the
nose, throat, and larynx are characteristic of the initial stage.
Anterior chest pain is an early symptom of mediastinitis. Within
hours to a few days, progression to the fulminant stage of infection
occurs in which symptoms or signs of overwhelming sepsis
predominate. Delirium, obtundation, or findings of meningeal
irritation suggest an accompanying hemorrhagic meningitis.
3. Gastrointestinal anthrax—This form was recently reported in
the United States. Fever, diffuse abdominal pain, rebound
abdominal tenderness, vomiting, constipation, and diarrhea occur
2–5 days after ingestion of meat contaminated with anthrax spores.
The primary lesion is ulcerative, producing emesis that may be
blood-tinged or coffee-grounds and stool that may be blood-tinged
or melenic. Bowel perforation can occur. The oropharyngeal form
of the disease is characterized by local lymphadenopathy, cervical
edema, dysphagia, and upper respiratory tract obstruction.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings are nonspecific. The white blood cell count
initially 
may 
be 
normal 
or 
modestly 
elevated, 
with
polymorphonuclear predominance and an increase in early forms.
Pleural fluid from patients with inhalational anthrax is typically
hemorrhagic with few white cells. Cerebrospinal fluid from
meningitis cases is also hemorrhagic. Gram stain of pleural fluid,
cerebrospinal fluid, unspun blood, blood culture, or fluid from a
cutaneous lesion may show the characteristic boxcar-shaped
encapsulated rods in chains.
The diagnosis is established by isolation of the organism from
culture of the skin lesion (or fluid expressed from it), blood, or
pleural fluid—or cerebrospinal fluid in cases of meningitis. In the
absence of prior antimicrobial therapy, cultures are invariably
positive. Cultures obtained after initiation of antimicrobial therapy
may be negative. If anthrax is suspected on clinical or epidemiologic
grounds, immunohistochemical tests (eg, to detect capsular antigen),
polymerase chain reaction assays, and serologic tests (useful for
documenting past cutaneous infection) are available through the
CDC and should be used to establish the diagnosis. Any suspected
case of anthrax should be immediately reported to the CDC so that
a complete investigation can be conducted.
C. Imaging
The chest radiograph is the most sensitive test for inhalational
disease, being abnormal (though the findings can be subtle) initially
in every case of bioterrorism-associated disease. Mediastinal
widening due to hemorrhagic lymph-adenitis, a hallmark feature of
the disease, has been present in 70% of the bioterrorism-related
cases. Pleural effusions were present initially or occurred over the
course of illness in all cases, and approximately three-fourths had
pulmonary infiltrates or signs of consolidation.
 Differential Diagnosis
Cutaneous anthrax, despite its characteristic appearance, can be
confused with a variety of other also uncommon or rare conditions
such as ecthyma gangrenosum, rat-bite fever, ulceroglandular
tularemia, plague, glanders, rickettsialpox, orf (parapoxvirus
infection), or cutaneous myco-bacterial infection. Inhalational
anthrax must be differentiated from mediastinitis due to other
bacterial causes, fibrous mediastinitis due to histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis, atypical or viral pneumonia, silicosis,
sarcoidosis, and other causes of mediastinal widening (eg, superior
vena cava syndrome or aortic aneurysm or dissection).
Gastrointestinal anthrax shares clinical features with a variety of
common intra-abdominal disorders, including bowel obstruction,
perforated viscus, peritonitis, gastroenteritis, and peptic ulcer
disease.
 Treatment
Strains of B anthracis (including the strain isolated in the
bioterrorism cases) are susceptible in vitro to penicillin, amoxicillin,
chloramphenicol, clindamycin, imipenem, doxycycline, ciprofloxacin
(as well as other fluoroquinolones), macrolides, rifampin, and
vancomycin. B anthracis may express β-lactamases that confer
resistance to cephalosporins and penicillins. For this reason,
penicillin or amoxicillin is no longer recommended for use as a single
agent in treatment of disseminated disease. Based on results of
animal experiments and because of concern for engineered drug
resistance in strains of B anthracis used in bioterrorism,
ciprofloxacin is considered the drug of choice (Table 33–3) for
treatment and for prophylaxis following exposure to anthrax spores.
Other fluoroquinolones with activity against gram-positive bacteria
(eg, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin) are likely to be just as effective as
ciprofloxacin. Doxycycline is an alternative first-line agent.
Combination therapy with at least one additional agent is
recommended for inhalational or disseminated disease and in
cutaneous infection involving the face, head, and neck or associated
with extensive local edema or systemic signs of infection, eg, fever,
tachycardia and elevated white blood cell count. Single-drug
therapy is recommended for prophylaxis following exposure to
spores.
 
Table 33–3. Antimicrobial agents for treatment of anthrax or for
prophylaxis against anthrax.
 
First-line agents and recommended doses
      Ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily orally or 400 mg
every 12 hours intravenously
      Doxycycline, 100 mg every 12 hours orally or
intravenously
Second-line agents and recommended doses
      Amoxicillin, 500 mg three times daily orally
      Penicillin G, 2–4 million units every 4 hours
intravenously
Alternative agents with in vitro activity and suggested doses
      Rifampin, 10 mg/kg/d orally or intravenously
      Clindamycin, 450–600 mg every 8 hours orally or
intravenously
      Clarithromycin, 500 mg orally twice daily
      Erythromycin, 500 mg every 6 hours intravenously
      Vancomycin, 1 g every 12 hours intravenously
      Imipenem, 500 mg every 6 hours intravenously
The required duration of therapy is poorly defined. In naturally
occurring disease, treatment for 7–10 days for cutaneous disease
and for at least 2 weeks following clinical response for
disseminated, inhalational, or gastrointestinal infection have been
standard recommendations. Because of concern about relapse from
latent spores acquired by inhalation of aerosol in bioterrorism-
associated cases, the initial recommendation was treatment for 60
days.
 Prevention
In 2001, the CDC offered one of two options for postal workers
receiving prophylaxis for exposure to contaminated mail: (1)
antibiotics for 100 days (fearing that even with 60 days of treatment
late relapses might occur) or (2) vaccination with an investigative
agent (three doses administered over a 1-month period) in
conjunction with 40 days of antibiotic administration to cover the
time required for a protective antibody response to develop.
Insufficient information exists to favor one recommendation over the
other.
There is also an FDA-approved vaccine for persons at high risk
for exposure to anthrax spores. The vaccine is cell-free antigen
prepared from an attenuated strain of B anthracis. Multiple
injections over 18 months and an annual booster dose are required
to achieve and maintain protection. Existing supplies have been
reserved for vaccination of military personnel.
 Prognosis
The prognosis in cutaneous infection is excellent. Death is unlikely if
the infection has remained localized, and lesions heal without
complications in most cases. The reported mortality rate for
gastrointestinal and inhalational infections is up to 85%. The
experience with bioterrorism-associated inhalational cases in which
six of eleven victims survived suggests a somewhat better outcome
with modern supportive care and antibiotics provided that treatment
is initiated before the patient has progressed to the fulminant stage
of disease. No cases of anthrax have occurred among the several
thousand individuals receiving antimicrobial prophylaxis following
exposure to spores.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Gastrointestinal anthrax after an animal-hide drumming event—
New Hampshire and Massachusetts, 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2010 Jul 23;59(28):872–7. [PMID: 20651643]
 
DIPHTHERIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Tenacious gray membrane at portal of entry in pharynx.
 Sore throat, nasal discharge, hoarseness, malaise, fever.
 Myocarditis, neuropathy.
 Culture confirms the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Diphtheria is an acute infection caused by Corynebacterium
diphtheriae that usually attacks the respiratory tract but may
involve any mucous membrane or skin wound. The organism is
spread chiefly by respiratory secretions. Exotoxin produced by the
organism is responsible for myocarditis and neuropathy. This
exotoxin inhibits elongation factor, which is required for protein
synthesis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Nasal, laryngeal, pharyngeal, and cutaneous forms of diphtheria
occur. Nasal infection produces few symptoms other than a nasal
discharge. Laryngeal infection may lead to upper airway and
bronchial obstruction. In pharyngeal diphtheria, the most common
form, a tenacious gray membrane covers the tonsils and pharynx.
Mild sore throat, fever, and malaise are followed by toxemia and
prostration.
Myocarditis and neuropathy are the most common and most
serious complications. Myocarditis causes cardiac arrhythmias,
heart block, and heart failure. The neuropathy usually involves the
cranial nerves first, producing diplopia, slurred speech, and difficulty
in swallowing.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis is made clinically but can be confirmed by culture of
the organism.
 Differential Diagnosis
Diphtheria must be differentiated from streptococcal pharyngitis,
infectious mononucleosis, adenovirus or herpes simplex infection,
Vincent 
angina, 
pharyngitis 
due 
to Arcanobacterium
haemolyticum, and candidiasis. A presumptive diagnosis of
diphtheria should be made on clinical grounds without waiting for
laboratory verification, since emergency treatment is needed.
 Prevention
Active immunization with diphtheria toxoid is part of routine
childhood immunization with appropriate booster injections. The
immunization schedule for adults is the same as for tetanus.
Susceptible persons exposed to diphtheria should receive a
booster dose of diphtheria toxoid (or a complete series if previously
unimmunized), as well as a course of penicillin or erythromycin.
 Treatment
Antitoxin, which is prepared from horse serum, must be given in all
cases when diphtheria is suspected. For mild early pharyngeal or
laryngeal disease, the dose is 20,000–40,000 units; for moderate
nasopharyngeal disease, 40,000–60,000 units; for severe,
extensive, or late (3 days or more) disease, 80,000–100,000 units.
Diphtheria equine antitoxin can be obtained from the CDC.
Removal of membrane by direct laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy
may be necessary to prevent or alleviate airway obstruction.
Either penicillin, 250 mg orally four times daily, or erythromycin,
500 mg orally four times daily, for 14 days is effective therapy,
although erythromycin is slightly more effective in eliminating the
carrier state. Azithromycin or clarithromycin is probably as effective
as erythromycin. The patient should be isolated until three
consecutive cultures at the completion of therapy have documented
elimination of the organism from the oropharynx. Contacts to a case
should receive erythromycin, 500 mg orally four times daily for 7
days, to eradicate carriage.
Murphy TV et al. Prevention of pertussis, tetanus, and diphtheria
among pregnant and postpartum women and their infants:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2008 May 30;57(RR-
4):1–51. [PMID: 18509304]
 
LISTERIOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Ingestion of contaminated food product leads to primary
infection.
 Undifferentiated fever in a pregnant woman in her third trimester.
 Altered mental status and fever in an elderly or
immunocompromised patient.
 Obtain blood and cerebral spinal fluid cultures.
 Culture confirms the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative, motile, gram-positive rod
that is capable of invading several cell types and causes intracellular
infection. Most cases of infection caused by L monocytogenes are
sporadic, but outbreaks have been traced to eating contaminated
food, including unpasteurized dairy products, hot dogs, and
delicatessen meats.
 Clinical Findings
Five types of infection are recognized:
(1) Infection during pregnancy, usually in the last trimester, is a
mild febrile illness without an apparent primary focus. This relatively
benign disease for the mother may resolve without specific therapy.
However, approximately one in five pregnancies complicated by
listeriosis result in spontaneous abortion or stillbirth and surviving
infants are at high risk for clinical neonatal listeriosis.
(2) Granulomatosis infantisepticum is a neonatal infection
acquired in utero, characterized by disseminated abscesses,
granulomas, and a high mortality rate.
(3) Bacteremia with or without sepsis syndrome is an infection
of neonates or immunocompromised adults. The presentation is of a
febrile illness without a recognized source.
(4) Meningitis caused by L monocytogenes affects infants
under 2 months of age as well as older adults, ranking third after
meningococcus and pneumococcus as common causes of bacterial
meningitis. Cerebrospinal fluid shows a neutrophilic pleocytosis.
Adults with meningitis are often immunocompromised, and cases
have been associated with HIV infection and therapy with tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors such as infliximab.
(5) Finally, focal infections, including adenitis, brain abscess,
endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and arthritis, occur rarely.
 Treatment
Ampicillin, 8–12 g/d intravenously in four to six divided doses (the
higher dose for meningitis) is considered the treatment of choice.
Gentamicin, 5 mg/kg/d intravenously once or in divided doses is
synergistic with ampicillin against Listeria in vitro and in animal
models, and the use of combination therapy may be considered
during the first few days of treatment to enhance eradication of
organisms. In patients with penicillin allergies, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole has excellent intracellular and cerebrospinal fluid
penetration and is considered an appropriate alternative. The dose
is 10–20 mg/kg/d intravenously of the trimethoprim component.
Mortality and morbidity rates still are high. Therapy should be
administered for at least 2–3 weeks. Longer durations—between 3
and 6 weeks—have been recommended for treatment of meningitis,
especially in immunocompromised persons.
Bennion JR et al. Decreasing listeriosis mortality in the United
States, 1990–2005. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Oct 1;47(7):867–74.
[PMID: 18752441]
 
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever.
 Preexisting organic heart lesion.
 Positive blood cultures.
 Evidence of vegetation on echocardiography.
 New or changing heart murmur.
 Evidence of systemic emboli.
 
 General Considerations
Endocarditis is a bacterial or fungal infection of the valvular or
endocardial surface of the heart. The clinical presentation depends
on the infecting organism and the valve or valves that are infected.
More virulent organisms—S aureus in particular—tend to produce
a more rapidly progressive and destructive infection. Endocarditis
caused by more virulent organisms often presents as an acute febrile
illnesses and is complicated by early embolization, acute valvular
regurgitation, and myocardial abscess formation. Viridans strains of
streptococci, enterococci, other bacteria, yeasts, and fungi tend to
cause a more subacute picture.
Underlying valvular disease, less common than in the past, is
present in about 50% of cases. Valvular disease alters blood flow
and produces jet effects that disrupt the endothelial surface,
providing a nidus for attachment and infection of microorganisms
that enter the bloodstream. Predisposing valvular abnormalities
include rheumatic involvement of any valve, bicuspid aortic valves,
calcific or sclerotic aortic valves, hypertrophic subaortic stenosis,
mitral valve prolapse, and a variety of congenital disorders such as
ventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, coarctation of the aorta,
or patent ductus arteriosus. Rheumatic disease is no longer the
major predisposing factor in developed countries. Regurgitation
lesions are more susceptible than stenotic ones.
The initiating event in native valve endocarditis is colonization of
the valve by bacteria or yeast that gain access to the bloodstream.
Transient bacteremia is common during dental, upper respiratory,
urologic, and lower gastrointestinal diagnostic and surgical
procedures. It is less common during upper gastrointestinal and
gynecologic procedures. Intravascular devices are increasingly
implicated as a portal of access of microorganisms into the
bloodstream. A large proportion of cases of S aureus endocarditis
are attributable to healthcare-associated bacteremia.
Native valve endocarditis is usually caused by viridans
streptococci, group D streptococci, S aureus, enterococci, or
HACEK organisms (an acronym for Haemophilus aphrophilus [
n o w Aggregatibacter 
aphrophilus], 
Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans 
[ 
now Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans], Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella
corrodens, and Kingella species). Streptococcal species formerly
accounted for the majority of native valve endocarditis cases, but
the proportion of cases caused by S aureus has been increasing,
and this organism is now the leading cause. Gram-negative
organisms and fungi account for a small percentage.
In injection drug users, S aureus accounts for over 60% of all
endocarditis cases and for 80–90% of cases in which the tricuspid
valve is infected. Enterococci and streptococci comprise the
balance in about equal proportions. Gram-negative aerobic bacilli,
fungi, and unusual organisms may cause endocarditis in injection
drug users.
The microbiology of prosthetic valve endocarditis also is
distinctive. Early infections (ie, those occurring within 2 months after
valve implantation) are commonly caused by staphylococci—both
coagulase-positive 
and 
coagulasenegative—gram-negative
organisms, and fungi. In late prosthetic valve endocarditis,
streptococci are commonly identified, although coagulase-negative
and coagulase-positive staphylococci still cause many cases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Virtually all patients have fever at some point in the illness, although
it may be very low grade (≥ 38°C) in elderly individuals and in
patients with heart failure or kidney failure. Rarely, there may be no
fever at all.
Figure 33–3. Splinter hemorrhages appearing as red lineal
streaks under the nail plate and within the nail bed, in endocarditis,
psoriasis, and trauma. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used,
with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr,
Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
The duration of illness typically is a few days to a few weeks.
Nonspecific symptoms are common. The initial symptoms and signs
of endocarditis may be caused by direct arterial, valvular, or cardiac
damage. Although a changing regurgitant murmur is significant
diagnostically, it is the exception rather than the rule. Symptoms also
may occur as a result of embolization, metastatic infection or
immunologically mediated phenomena. These include cough;
dyspnea; arthralgias or arthritis; diarrhea; and abdominal, back, or
flank pain.
The characteristic peripheral lesions—petechiae (on the palate or
conjunctiva or beneath the fingernails), subungual (“splinter”)
hemorrhages (Figure 33–3), Osler nodes (painful, violaceous raised
lesions of the fingers, toes, or feet) (Figure 33–4), Janeway lesions
(painless erythematous lesions of the palms or soles), and Roth
spots (exudative lesions in the retina)—occur in about 25% of
patients. Strokes and major systemic embolic events are present in
about 25% of patients, and tend to occur before or within the first
week of antimicrobial therapy. Hematuria and proteinuria may result
from emboli or immunologically mediated glomerulonephritis, which
can cause kidney dysfunction.
B. Imaging
Chest radiograph may show evidence for the underlying cardiac
abnormality and, in right-sided endocarditis, pulmonary infiltrates.
The electrocardiogram is nondiagnostic, but new conduction
abnormalities 
suggest 
myocardial 
abscess 
formation.
Echocardiography is useful in identifying vegetations and other
characteristic features suspicious for endocarditis and may provide
adjunctive information about the specific valve or valves that are
infected. The sensitivity of transthoracic echocardiography is
between 55% and 65%; it cannot reliably rule out endocarditis but
may confirm a clinical suspicion. TEE is 90% sensitive in detecting
vegetations and is particularly useful for identifying valve ring
abscesses as well as prosthetic valve endocarditis.
Figure 33–4. osler node causing pain within the pulp of the big
toe and multiple painless flat Janeway lesions over the sole of the
foot. (Courtesy of David A. Kasper, DO, MBA; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
C. Diagnostic Studies
1. Blood cultures—Blood cultures establish the diagnosis. Three
sets of blood cultures at least 1 hour apart before starting antibiotics
p
g
are recommended to maximize the opportunity for a microbiologic
diagnosis. Approximately 5% of cases will be culture-negative,
usually attributable to administration of antimicrobials prior to
obtaining cultures. If antimicrobial therapy has been administered
prior to obtaining cultures and the patient is clinically stable, it is
reasonable to withhold further antimicrobial therapy for 2–3 days so
that appropriate cultures can be obtained. Culture-negative
endocarditis may also be due to a fungus, organisms that require
special media for growth (eg, Legionella, Bartonella, Abiotrophia
species, formerly referred to as nutritionally deficient streptococci),
organisms that do not grow on artificial media (Tropheryma
whippelii, or pathogens of Q fever or psittacosis), or those that are
slow-growing and may require prolonged incubation (eg, Brucella,
anaerobes, 
HACEK 
organisms). Bartonella quintana has
emerged as an important cause of culture-negative endocarditis.
2. Modified Duke Criteria—Clinical criteria, referred to as the
Modified Duke criteria, for the diagnosis of endocarditis have been
proposed. Major criteria include: (1) two positive blood cultures for
a microorganism that typically causes infective endocarditis or
persistent bacteremia; (2) evidence of endocardial involvement
documented by echocardiography (eg, definite vegetation,
myocardial abscess, or new partial dehiscence of a prosthetic
valve); or (3) development of a new regurgitant murmur. Minor
criteria include the presence of a predisposing condition; fever ≥
38°C; vascular phenomena, such as cutaneous hemorrhages,
aneurysm, systemic emboli, pulmonary infarction; immunologic
phenomena, such as glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth spots,
rheumatoid factor; and positive blood cultures not meeting the
major criteria or serologic evidence of an active infection. A definite
diagnosis can be made with 80% accuracy if two major criteria, one
major criterion and three minor criteria, or five minor criteria are
fulfilled. A possible diagnosis of endocarditis is made if one major
and one minor criterion or three minor criteria are met. If fewer
criteria are found, or a sound alternative explanation for illness is
identified, or the endocarditis syndrome has resolved and the patient
has defervesced within 4 days, endocarditis is unlikely.
 Complications
The course of infective endocarditis is determined by the degree of
damage to the heart, by the site of infection (right-sided versus left-
sided, aortic versus mitral valve), by the presence of metastatic foci
of infection, by the occurrence of embolization, and by
immunologically mediated processes. Destruction of infected heart
valves is especially common and precipitous with S aureus but can
occur with any organism and can progress even after bacteriologic
cure. The infection can also extend into the myocardium, resulting in
abscesses leading to conduction disturbances, and involving the wall
of the aorta, creating sinus of Valsalva aneurysms.
Peripheral embolization to the brain and myocardium may result
in infarctions. Embolization to the spleen and kidneys is also
common. Peripheral emboli may initiate metastatic infections or may
become established in vessel walls, leading to mycotic aneurysms.
Right-sided endocarditis, which usually involves the tricuspid valve,
causes septic pulmonary emboli, occasionally with infarction and
lung abscesses.
 Prevention
In 2007, the American Heart Association made major revisions to
their recommendation on antibiotic prophylaxis for infective
endocarditis. The committee determined that only a few cases of
infective endocarditis would be prevented by antibiotic prophylaxis
for dental procedures even if the prophylactic therapy were 100%
effective. Therefore, they limited their recommendations for
prophylaxis to a small group of patients with predisposing congenital
or valvular anomalies (Table 33–4) undergoing select dental
procedures, operations involving the respiratory tract, or operations
of infected skin, skin structure, or musculoskeletal tissue (Table 33–
5). Current antimicrobial recommendations are given in Table 33–6.
 
Table 33–4. Cardiac conditions with high risk of adverse outcomes
from endocarditis for which prophylaxis with dental procedures is
recommended.1,2
 
Prosthetic cardiac valve
Previous infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease (CHD)3
      Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts
and conduits
      Completely repaired congenital heart defect with
p
y
p
g
prosthetic
          material or device, whether placed by surgery or by
catheter
           intervention, during the first 6 months after the
procedure4
      Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or
adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic
device
Cardiac transplantation recipients in whom cardiac
valvulopathy develops
1Reproduced with permission from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2007 Oct 9;116(15):1736–54.
2See Table 33–6 for prophylactic regimens.
3Except for the conditions listed above, antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer
recommended for other forms of CHD.
4Prophylaxis is recommended because endothelialization of prosthetic
material occurs within 6 months after procedure.
 
Table 33–5. Recommendations for administration of bacterial
endocarditis prophylaxis for patients according to type of
procedure.1
 
Prophylaxis
Recommended
Prophylaxis Not Recommended
Dental
procedures
All dental
procedures that
involve
manipulation of
gingival tissue or
the periapical
region of the
teeth or
perforation of the
oral mucosa
 
Respiratory tract
procedures
 
Dental procedures
Routine anesthetic injections through
noninfected tissue, taking dental
radiographs, placement of removable
prosthodontic or orthodontic
appliances, adjustment of orthodontic
appliances, placement of orthodontic
brackets, shedding of deciduous teeth,
and bleeding from trauma to the lips or
Only respiratory
tract procedures
that involve
incision of the
respiratory
mucosa
 
Procedures on
infected skin,
skin structure, or
musculoskeletal
tissue
 
oral mucosa
 
Gastrointestinal tract procedures
Genitourinary tract procedures
 
1Reproduced with permission from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2007 Oct 9;116(15):1736–54.
 Treatment
Empiric regimens for endocarditis while culture results are pending
should include agents active against staphylococci, streptococci,
and enterococci. Vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours intravenously plus
ceftriaxone 2 g every 24 hours provides appropriate coverage
pending definitive diagnosis.
A. Viridans Streptococci
For penicillin-susceptible viridans streptococcal endocarditis (ie,
MIC ≤ 0.1 mcg/mL), penicillin G, 2–3 million units intravenously
every 4 hours for 4 weeks, is recommended. The duration of
therapy can be shortened to 2 weeks if gentamicin, 1 mg/kg
intravenously every 8 hours, is used with penicillin. Ceftriaxone, 2 g
once daily intravenously or intramuscularly for 4 weeks, is also
effective therapy for penicillin-susceptible strains and is a convenient
regimen for home therapy. For the penicillin-allergic patient,
vancomycin, 15 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for 4 weeks, is
given. The 2-week regimen is not recommended for patients with
symptoms of more than 3 months’ duration or with complications
such as myocardial abscess or extracardiac infection. Prosthetic
valve endocarditis is treated with a 6-week course of penicillin with
at least 2 weeks of gentamicin.
 
Table 33–6. American Heart Association recommendations for
endocarditis prophylaxis for dental procedures for patients with
cardiac conditions.1–3
 
1Data from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2007 Oct
9;116(15):1736-54.
2For patients undergoing respiratory tract procedures involving incision of
respiratory tract mucosa to treat an established infection or a procedure on
infected skin, skin structure, or musculoskeletal tissue known or
suspected to be caused by S aureus, the regimen should contain an anti-
staphylococcal penicillin or cephalosporin. Vancomycin can be used to
treat patients unable to tolerate a β-lactam or if the infection is known or
suspected to be caused by a methicillin-resistant strain of S aureus.
3See Table 33-4 for list of cardiac conditions.
 
Viridans streptococci relatively resistant to penicillin (ie, MIC >
0.1 mcg/mL but ≤ 0.5 mcg/mL) should be treated for 4 weeks.
Penicillin G, 3 million units intravenously every 4 hours, is combined
with gentamicin, 1 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours for the first 2
weeks. In the patient with IgE-mediated allergy to penicillin,
vancomycin alone, 15 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for 4
weeks, should be administered.
Endocarditis caused by viridans streptococci with an MIC > 0.5
mcg/mL or by nutritionally deficient streptococci should be treated
the same as enterococcal endocarditis (see below).
B. Other Streptococci
Endocarditis caused by S pneumoniae, S pyogenes (group A
streptococcus), or groups B, C, and G streptococci is unusual. S
pneumoniae sensitive to penicillin (MIC ≥ 0.1 mcg/mL) can be
treated with penicillin alone, 2–3 million units intravenously every 4
hours for 4–6 weeks. Vancomycin should be effective for
endocarditis caused by strains resistant to penicillin. Group A
streptococcal infection can be treated with penicillin, ceftriaxone, or
vancomycin for 4–6 weeks. Groups B, C, and G streptococci tend
to be more resistant to penicillin than group A streptococci, and
some experts have recommended adding gentamicin, 1 mg/kg
intravenously every 8 hours, to penicillin for the first 2 weeks of a 4-
to 6-week course. Endocarditis caused by S bovis is associated
with liver disease and gastrointestinal abnormalities, especially colon
cancer. Colonoscopy should be performed to exclude the latter.
C. Enterococci
For enterococcal endocarditis, penicillin alone is inadequate; either
streptomycin or gentamicin must be included in the regimen.
Because aminoglycoside resistance occurs in enterococci,
susceptibility should be documented. Gentamicin is the
aminoglycoside of choice, because streptomycin resistance is more
common and the nephrotoxicity of gentamicin is generally more
easily managed than the vestibular toxicity of streptomycin.
Ampicillin, 2 g intravenously every 4 hours, or penicillin G, 3–4
million units intravenously every 4 hours (or, in the penicillin-allergic
patient, vancomycin, 15 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours), plus
gentamicin, 1 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours, are
recommended. The recommended duration of combination therapy
is 4–6 weeks (the longer duration for patients with symptoms for
more than 3 months, relapse, or prosthetic valve endocarditis),
although a study from Sweden found that discontinuing the
aminoglycoside before 4 weeks did not reduce efficacy. Experience
is more extensive with penicillin and ampicillin than with vancomycin
for treatment of enterococcal endocarditis, and penicillin and
ampicillin are superior to vancomycin in vitro. Thus, whenever
possible, either ampicillin or penicillin should be used.
Endocarditis caused by strains resistant to penicillin, vancomycin,
or aminoglycosides is particularly difficult to treat. Such cases
should be treated according to recent American Heart Association
guidelines and managed in consultation with an infectious diseases
specialist.
D. Staphylococci
For methicillin-susceptible S aureus, nafcillin or oxacillin, 1.5–2 g
intravenously every 4 hours for 6 weeks, is the preferred therapy.
Uncomplicated tricuspid valve endocarditis probably can be treated
for 2 weeks with nafcillin or oxacillin alone. For penicillin-allergic
patients, cefazolin, 2 g intravenously every 8 hours, or vancomycin,
30 mg/kg/d intravenously divided in two or three doses, may be
used. For methicillin-resistant strains, vancomycin remains the
preferred agent. Aminoglycoside combination regimens are
probably of no benefit and in general should be avoided. The effect
of rifampin with antistaphylococcal drugs is variable, and its routine
use is not recommended.
Because coagulase-negative staphylococci—a common cause of
prosthetic valve endocarditis—are routinely resistant to methicillin,
β-lactam antibiotics should not be used for this infection unless the
isolate is demonstrated to be susceptible. A combination of
vancomycin, 30 mg/kg/d intravenously divided in two or three
doses for 6 weeks; rifampin, 300 mg every 8 hours for 6 weeks;
and gentamicin, 1 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours for the first 2
weeks is recommended for prosthetic valve infection. If the
organism is sensitive to methicillin, either nafcillin or oxacillin or
cefazolin can be used in combination with rifampin and gentamicin.
Combination therapy with nafcillin or oxacillin (vancomycin for
methicillin-resistant strains or patients allergic to β-lactams),
rifampin, and gentamicin is also recommended for treatment of S
aureus prosthetic valve infection.
E. HACEK Organisms
HACEK organisms are slow-growing, fastidious gram-negative
coccobacilli or bacilli (H aphrophilus [now A aphrophilus] , A
actinomycetemcomitans [now A actinomycetemcomitans] , C
hominis, E corrodens, and Kingella species) that are normal oral
flora and cause < 5% of all cases of endocarditis. They may
produce β-lactamase, and thus the treatment of choice is
ceftriaxone (or some other third-generation cephalosporin), 2 g
intravenously once daily for 4 weeks. Prosthetic valve endocarditis
should be treated for 6 weeks. In the penicillin-allergic patient,
experience 
is 
limited, 
but 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
quinolones, and aztreonam have in vitro activity and should be
considered; desensitization may be preferable.
F. Role of Surgery
While many cases can be successfully treated medically, operative
management is frequently required. Acute heart failure unresponsive
to medical therapy is an indication for valve replacement even if
active infection is present, especially for aortic valve infection.
Infections unresponsive to appropriate antimicrobial therapy after
7–10 days (ie, persistent fevers, positive blood cultures despite
therapy) are more likely to be eradicated if the valve is replaced.
Surgery is nearly always required for cure of fungal endocarditis and
is more often necessary with gram-negative bacilli. It is also
indicated when the infection involves the sinus of Valsalva or
produces septal abscesses. Recurrent infection with the same
organism prompts an operative approach, especially with infected
prosthetic valves. Continuing embolization presents a difficult
problem when the infection is otherwise responding; surgery may be
the proper approach. Particularly challenging is a large and fragile
vegetation demonstrated by echo in the absence of embolization.
Most clinicians favor an operative approach, vegetectomy with
valve repair if the patient is a good candidate. Embolization after
bacteriologic cure does not necessarily imply recurrence of
endocarditis.
G. Role of Anticoagulation
Anticoagulation is contraindicated in native valve endocarditis
because of an increased risk of intracerebral hemorrhage. The role
of anticoagulant therapy during active prosthetic valve endocarditis
is more controversial. Reversal of anticoagulation may result in
thrombosis of the mechanical prosthesis, particularly in the mitral
position. On the other hand, anticoagulation during active prosthetic
valve endocarditis caused by S aureus has been associated with
fatal intracerebral hemorrhage. One approach is to discontinue
anticoagulation during the septic phase of S aureus prosthetic valve
endocarditis. In patients with S aureus prosthetic valve endocarditis
complicated by a central nervous system embolic event,
anticoagulation should be discontinued for the first 2 weeks of
therapy. Indications for anticoagulation following prosthetic valve
implantation for endocarditis are the same as for patients with
prosthetic valves without endocarditis (eg, nonporcine mechanical
valves and valves in the mitral position).
 Response to Therapy
If infection is caused by viridans streptococci, enterococci, or
coagulase-negative staphylococci, defervescence occurs in 3–4
days on average; with S aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
fever commonly persists for 9–12 days. Blood cultures should be
obtained to document sterilization of the blood. Other causes of
persistent fever are myocardial or metastatic abscess, sterile
embolization, superimposed hospital-acquired infection, and drug
reaction. Most relapses occur within 1–2 months after completion
of therapy. Obtaining one or two blood cultures during this period is
prudent.
Baddour LM et al. Infective endocarditis: diagnosis, antimicrobial
therapy, and management of complications: a statement for
healthcare professionals from the Committee on Rheumatic Fever,
Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease, Council on Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young, and the Councils on Clinical Cardiology,
Stroke, and Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, American
Heart Association: endorsed by the Infectious Diseases Society of
America. Circulation. 2005 Jun 14;111(23):e394–434. [PMID:
15956145]
 
Durante-Mangoni E et al. Current features of infective endocarditis
in elderly patients: results of the International Collaboration on
Endocarditis Prospective Cohort Study. Arch Intern Med. 2008
Oct 27;168(19):2095–103. [PMID: 18955638]
 
Hill EE et al. Management of prosthetic valve infective
endocarditis. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Apr 15;101(8):1174–8. [PMID:
18394454]
 
Wilson W et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines
from the American Heart Association: a guideline from the
American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and
Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease
in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care
and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group.
Circulation. 2007 Oct 9;116(15):1736–54. [PMID: 17446442]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY
GRAM-NEGATIVE BACTERIA
 
BORDETELLA PERTUSSIS INFECTION (Whooping
Cough)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Predominantly in infants under age 2 years. Adolescents and
adults are an important reservoir of infection.
 Two-week prodromal catarrhal stage of malaise, cough, coryza,
and anorexia.
 Paroxysmal cough ending in a high-pitched inspiratory “whoop.”
 Absolute lymphocytosis, often striking; culture confirms
diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Pertussis is an acute infection of the respiratory tract caused by B
pertussis that is transmitted by respiratory droplets. The incubation
period is 7–17 days. Half of all cases occur before age 2 years.
Neither immunization nor disease confers lasting immunity to
pertussis. Consequently, adults are an important reservoir of the
disease. In the spring of 2010, a large pertussis outbreak that
resulted in many infant deaths was identified in California. Following
the identification of this epidemic, the California Department of
Public Health made changes to their strategy for pertussis
prevention and the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
has made preliminary changes to their recommendations as detailed
below.
 Clinical Findings
The symptoms of classic pertussis last about 6 weeks and are
divided into three consecutive stages. The catarrhal stage is
characterized by its insidious onset, with lacrimation, sneezing, and
coryza, anorexia and malaise, and a hacking night cough that
becomes diurnal. The paroxysmal stage is characterized by bursts
of rapid, consecutive coughs followed by a deep, high-pitched
inspiration (whoop). The convalescent stage begins 4 weeks after
onset of the illness with a decrease in the frequency and severity of
paroxysms of cough. The diagnosis often is not considered in adults,
who may not have a typical presentation. Cough persisting more
than 2 weeks is suggestive. Infection may also be asymptomatic.
The white blood cell count is usually 15,000–20,000/mcL
(rarely, as high as 50,000/mcL or more), 60–80% of which are
lymphocytes. The diagnosis is established by isolating the organism
from nasopharyngeal culture. A special medium (eg, Bordet-
Gengou agar) must be requested. Polymerase chain reaction assays
for diagnosis of pertussis may be available in some clinical or health
department laboratories.
 Prevention
Acellular pertussis vaccine is recommended for all infants, combined
with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids (DTaP). Infants and susceptible
adults with significant exposure should receive prophylaxis with an
oral macrolide (see below). In recognition of their importance as a
reservoir of disease, vaccination of adolescents and adults against
pertussis is recommended (see Table 30–7). The FDA licensed two
tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis
vaccine (Tdap) products (BOOSTRIX, GlaxoSmithKline and
ADACEL, Sanofi Pasteur) in 2005. Adolescents aged 11–18 years
who have completed the DTP or DTaP vaccination series should
receive a single dose of either Tdap product instead of Td (tetanus
and diphtheria toxoids vaccine) for booster immunization against
tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis. Either vaccine may be used in
place of Td for prophylaxis of tetanus in wound management. The
ADACEL vaccine is indicated as a one-time dose for booster
immunization for pertussis in persons ages 11 through 64 years.
Following the 2010 pertussis outbreak and review of additional
data, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices changed
their recommendations, stating that adults > 64 years who have or
who anticipate having close contact with an infant > 12 months (eg,
grandparents, child-care providers, and healthcare providers) and
who have not previously received Tdap should receive a single dose
of Tdap. For adults > 64 years not in close contact with infants, a
single dose of Tdap vaccine may be given in place of a tetanus and
diphtheria toxoids (Td) vaccine, in persons who have not previously
received Tdap. Postpartum women and adults who have not been
previously vaccinated with Tdap and who have close contact to an
infant younger than 12 months should receive a single dose of Tdap.
In addition, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
eliminated the recommendation that a 2-year period window is
needed between receiving the Td and Tdap vaccines based on data
showing that there is not an increased risk of adverse events.
 Treatment
Antibiotic treatment should be initiated in all suspected cases.
Treatment options include erythromycin, 500 mg four times a day
orally for 7 days; azithromycin, 500 mg orally on day 1 and 250 mg
for 4 more days; or clarithromycin, 500 mg orally twice daily for 7
days. Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole, 160 mg–800 mg orally twice
a day for 7 days, also is effective. Treatment shortens the duration
of carriage and may diminish the severity of coughing paroxysms.
These same regimens are indicated for prophylaxis of contacts to an
active case of pertussis that are exposed within 3 weeks of the
onset of cough in the index case.
Cornia PB et al. Does this coughing adolescent or adult patient
have pertussis? JAMA. 2010 Aug 25;304(8):890–6. [PMID:
20736473]
 
Roehr B. Whooping cough outbreak hits several US states. BMJ.
2010 Aug 24;341:c4627. [PMID: 20736256]
 
OTHER BORDETELLA INFECTIONS
Bordetella bronchiseptica is a pleomorphic gram-negative
coccobacillus causing kennel cough in dogs. On occasion it causes
upper and lower respiratory infection in humans, principally HIV-
infected patients. Infection has been associated with contact with
dogs and cats, suggesting animal-to-human transmission. Treatment
o f B bronchiseptica infection is guided by results of in vitro
susceptibility tests.
MENINGOCOCCAL MENINGITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, headache, vomiting, confusion, delirium, convulsions.
 Petechial rash of skin and mucous membranes in many.
 Neck and back stiffness with positive Kernig and Brudzinski
signs is characteristic.
 Purulent spinal fluid with gram-negative intracellular and
extracellular diplococci.
 Culture of cerebrospinal fluid, blood, or petechial aspiration
confirms the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Meningococcal meningitis is caused by Neisseria meningitidis of
groups A, B, C, Y, and W-135, among others. Meningitis due to
serogroup A is uncommon in the United States. Serogroup B
generally causes sporadic cases. The frequency of outbreaks of
meningitis caused by group C meningococcus has increased, and
this serotype is the most common cause of epidemic disease in the
United States. Up to 40% of persons are nasopharyngeal carriers
of meningococci, but disease develops in relatively few of these
persons. Infection is transmitted by droplets. The clinical illness may
take the form of meningococcemia (a fulminant form of septicemia
without meningitis), meningococcemia with meningitis, or meningitis.
Recurrent meningococcemia with fever, rash, and arthritis is seen
rarely in patients with certain terminal complement deficiencies.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
High fever, chills, and headache; back, abdominal, and extremity
pains; and nausea and vomiting are typical. Rapidly developing
confusion, delirium, seizures, and coma occur in some. On
examination, nuchal and back rigidity are typical. Positive Kernig
and Brudzinski signs (Kernig sign is pain in the hamstrings upon
extension of the knee with the hip at 90-degree flexion; Brudzinski
sign is flexion of the knee in response to flexion of the neck) are
specific but not sensitive findings. A petechial rash appearing in the
lower extremities and at pressure points is found in most cases.
Petechiae may vary in size from pinpoint lesions to large
ecchymoses or even skin gangrene that may later slough if the
patient survives.
B. Laboratory Findings
Lumbar puncture typically reveals a cloudy or purulent
cerebrospinal fluid, with elevated pressure, increased protein, and
decreased glucose content. The fluid usually contains > 1000
cells/mcL, with polymorphonuclear cells predominating and
containing gram-negative intracellular diplococci. The absence of
organisms in a Gram-stained smear of the cerebrospinal fluid
sediment does not rule out the diagnosis. The capsular
polysaccharide can be demonstrated in cerebrospinal fluid or urine
by latex agglutination; this is useful in partially treated patients,
though sensitivity is 60–80%. The organism is usually demonstrated
by smear and culture of the cerebrospinal fluid, oropharynx, blood,
or aspirated petechiae.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation is an important
complication of meningococcal infection and is typically present in
toxic patients with ecchymotic skin lesions.
 Differential Diagnosis
Meningococcal meningitis must be differentiated from other
meningitides. In small infants and in the elderly, fever or stiff neck is
often missing, and altered mental status may dominate the picture.
Rickettsial, echovirus and, rarely, other bacterial infections (eg,
staphylococcal infections, scarlet fever) also cause petechial rash.
 Prevention
Two vaccines, meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine (MPSV4,
indicated for vaccination of persons over age 55) and a conjugate
vaccine (MCV4, indicated for persons aged 2–55 years) are
effective for meningococcal groups A, C, Y, and W-135. The
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends
immunization with a single dose of MCV4 for preadolescents ages
11–12, and for those not previously vaccinated, upon entry into
high school. MCV4 is also recommended for college freshmen—
particularly those living in dormitories (see Table 30–7). Vaccine is
also recommended for military recruits, asplenic individuals, those
with deficiencies in terminal component of complement, and
exposed persons during outbreaks. The Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices updated their recommendations so that
following immunization with a dose of MCV4 for preadolescents at
ages 11–12, a booster dose should be given at age 16 years. In
addition, they now recommend a two-dose primary series
administered 2 months apart for persons aged 2 through 54 years
with persistent complement deficiency, persons with functional or
anatomic asplenia, and for adolescents with HIV infection. All other
persons at increased risk for meningococcal disease (eg,
microbiologists or travelers to an epidemic or highly endemic
country) should receive a single dose.
Eliminating nasopharyngeal carriage of meningococci is an
effective prevention strategy in closed populations and to prevent
secondary cases in household or otherwise close contacts.
Rifampin, 600 mg orally twice a day for 2 days, ciprofloxacin, 500
mg orally once, or one intramuscular 250-mg dose of ceftriaxone is
effective. A cluster of cases of fluoroquinolone-resistant
meningococcal infections was recently identified in the United
States. However, ciprofloxacin remains a recommended empiric
agent for eradication of nasopharyngeal carriage. School and work
contacts ordinarily need not be treated. Hospital contacts receive
therapy only if intense exposure has occurred (eg, mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation). Accidentally discovered carriers without known close
contact with meningococcal disease do not require prophylactic
antimicrobials.
 Treatment
Blood cultures must be obtained and intravenous antimicrobial
therapy started immediately. This may be done prior to lumbar
puncture in patients in whom the diagnosis is not straightforward
and for those in whom MR or CT imaging is indicated to exclude
mass lesions. Aqueous penicillin G is the antibiotic of choice (24
million units/24 h intravenously in divided doses every 4 hours). The
prevalence of strains of N meningitidis with intermediate resistance
to penicillin in vitro (MICs 0.1 to 1 mcg/mL) is increasing,
particularly in Europe. At what level of resistance penicillin
treatment failure can occur is not known. Penicillin-intermediate
strains thus far remain fully susceptible to ceftriaxone and other
third-generation cephalosporins used to treat meningitis, and these
should be effective alternatives to penicillin. In penicillin-allergic
patients or those in whom Haemophilus influenzae or gram-
negative meningitis is a consideration, ceftriaxone, 2 g intravenously
every 12 hours, should be used. Treatment should be continued in
full doses by the intravenous route until the patient is afebrile for 5
days. Shorter courses—as few as 4 days if ceftriaxone is used—are
also effective.
Cohn AC et al. Changes in Neisseria meningitidis disease
epidemiology in the United States, 1998–2007: implications for
prevention of meningococcal disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jan
15;50(2):184–91. [PMID: 20001736]
 
Wu HM et al. Emergence of ciprofloxacin-resistant Neisseria
meningitidis in North America. N Engl J Med. 2009 Feb
26;360(9):886-92. [PMID: 19246360]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY HAEMOPHILUS SPECIES
H influenzae and other Haemophilus species may cause sinusitis,
otitis, bronchitis, epiglottitis, pneumonia, cellulitis, arthritis,
meningitis, and endocarditis. Nontypeable strains are responsible
for most disease in adults. Alcoholism, smoking, chronic lung
disease, advanced age, and HIV infection are risk factors.
Haemophilus species colonize the upper respiratory tract in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and frequently
cause purulent bronchitis.
β-Lactamase-producing strains are less common in adults than in
children. For adults with sinusitis, otitis, or respiratory tract
infection, oral amoxicillin, 750 mg twice daily for 10–14 days, is
adequate. For β-lactamase-producing strains, use of the oral fixed
drug combination of amoxicillin, 875 mg, with clavulanate, 125 mg,
is indicated. For the penicillin-allergic patient, oral cefuroxime axetil,
250 mg twice daily; trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 160/800 mg
orally twice daily; or a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin, 500 mg orally
twice daily; levofloxacin, 500 mg orally once daily; or moxifloxacin,
400 mg orally once daily) for 10 days is effective. Azithromycin and
clarithromycin are less effective.
In the more seriously ill patient (eg, the toxic patient with
multilobar pneumonia), ceftriaxone, 1 g/d intravenously is
recommended pending determination of whether the infecting strain
is a β-lactamase producer. Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole
administered intravenously based on a dose of 10 mg/kg/d of
trimethoprim or a fluoroquinolone (see above for dosages) can be
used for the penicillin-allergic patient. A 10- to 14-day course of
therapy is adequate for most cases.
Epiglottitis is characterized by an abrupt onset of high fever,
drooling, and inability to handle secretions. An important clue to the
diagnosis is complaint of a severe sore throat despite an
unimpressive examination of the pharynx. Stridor and respiratory
distress result from laryngeal obstruction. The diagnosis is best
made by direct visualization of the cherry-red, swollen epiglottis at
laryngoscopy. Because laryngoscopy may provoke laryngospasm
and obstruction, especially in children, it should be performed in an
intensive care unit or similar setting, and only at a time when
intubation can be performed promptly. Ceftriaxone, 1 g
intravenously every 24 hours for 7–10 days, is the drug of choice.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or a fluoroquinolone (see above for
dosage) may be used in the patient with serious penicillin allergy.
Meningitis, rare in adults, is a consideration in the patient who
has meningitis associated with sinusitis or otitis. Initial therapy for
suspected H influenzae meningitis should be with ceftriaxone, 4 g/d
in two divided doses, until the strain is proved not to produce β-
lactamase. Meningitis is treated for 10–14 days. Dexamethasone,
0.15 mg/kg intravenously every 6 hours may reduce the incidence
of long-term sequelae, principally hearing loss.
Watt JP et al. Burden of disease caused by Haemophilus
influenzae type b in children younger than 5 years: global
estimates. Lancet. 2009 Sep 12;374(9693):903–11. [PMID:
19748399]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY MORAXELLA
CATARRHALIS
M catarrhalis is a gram-negative aerobic coccus morphologically
and biochemically similar to Neisseria. It causes sinusitis, bronchitis,
and pneumonia. Bacteremia and meningitis have also been reported
in immunocompromised patients. The organism frequently colonizes
the respiratory tract, making differentiation of colonization from
infection difficult. If M catarrhalis is the predominant isolate,
therapy is directed against it. M catarrhalis typically produces β-
lactamase and therefore is usually resistant to ampicillin and
amoxicillin. 
It 
is 
susceptible 
to 
amoxicillin-clavulanate,
ampicillinsulbactam, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin,
and second- and third-generation cephalosporins.
Broides A et al. Acute otitis media caused by Moraxella
catarrhalis: epidemiologic and clinical characteristics. Clin Infect
Dis. 2009 Dec 1;49(11):1641–7. [PMID: 19886799]
 
LEGIONNAIRES DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Patients are often immunocompromised, smokers, or have
chronic lung disease.
 Scant sputum production, pleuritic chest pain, toxic appearance.
 Chest radiograph: focal patchy infiltrates or consolidation.
 Gram stain of sputum: polymorphonuclear leukocytes and no
organisms.
 
 General Considerations
Legionella infection ranks among the three or four most common
causes of community-acquired pneumonia and is considered
whenever the etiology of a pneumonia is in question. Legionnaire
disease is more common in immunocompromised persons, in
smokers, and in those with chronic lung disease. Outbreaks have
been associated with contaminated water sources, such as
showerheads and faucets in patient rooms and air conditioning
cooling towers.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Legionnaire disease is one of the atypical pneumonias, so called
because a Gram-stained smear of sputum does not show
organisms. However, many features of Legionnaire disease are
more like typical pneumonia, with high fevers, a toxic patient,
pleurisy, and grossly purulent sputum. Classically, this pneumonia is
caused by Legionella pneumophila, though other species can
cause identical disease.
B. Laboratory Findings
Several laboratory abnormalities can be associated with
Legionnaires disease, which include hyponatremia, elevated liver
enzymes, and elevated creatine kinase. Culture of Legionella
species onto charcoal-yeast extract agar or similar enriched medium
is the most sensitive method (80–90% sensitivity) for diagnosis and
permits identification of infections caused by species and serotypes
other than L pneumophila serotype 1. Dieterle silver staining of
tissue, pleural fluid, or other infected material is also a reliable
method for detecting Legionella species. Direct fluorescent
antibody stains and serologic testing are less sensitive because these
will detect only L pneumophila sero-type 1. In addition, making a
serologic diagnosis requires that the host respond with sufficient
specific antibody production. Urinary antigen tests, which are
targeted for detection of L pneumophila serotype 1, are also less
sensitive than culture.
 Treatment
Azithromycin (500 mg orally once daily), clarithromycin (500 mg
orally twice daily), or a fluoroquinolone (eg, levofloxacin 500 mg
orally once daily), and not erythromycin, are the drugs of choice for
treatment of legionellosis because of their excellent intracellular
penetration and in vitro activity, as well as desirable
pharmacokinetic properties that permit oral administration and once
or twice daily dosing. Duration of therapy is 10–14 days, although a
21-day 
course 
of 
therapy 
is 
recommended 
for
immunocompromised patients.
Bartlett JG. Is activity against “atypical” pathogens necessary in the
treatment protocols for community-acquired pneumonia? Issues
with combination therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Dec 1;47(Suppl
3):S232–6. [PMID: 18986295]
 
Jacobson KL et al. Legionella pneumonia in cancer patients.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2008 May;87(3):152–9. [PMID:
18520324]
 
GRAM-NEGATIVE BACTEREMIA & SEPSIS
Gram-negative bacteremia can originate in a number of sites, the
most common being the genitourinary system, hepatobiliary tract,
gastrointestinal tract, and lungs. Less common sources include
intravenous lines, infusion fluids, surgical wounds, drains, and
decubitus ulcers.
Patients with potentially fatal underlying conditions in the short
term such as neutropenia or immunoparesis have a mortality rate of
40–60%; those with serious underlying diseases likely to be fatal in
5 years, such as solid tumors, cirrhosis, and aplastic anemia, die in
15–20% of cases; and individuals with no underlying diseases have
a mortality rate of 5% or less.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients have fevers and chills, often with abrupt onset.
However, 15% of patients are hypothermic (temperature ≤ 36.4
°C) at presentation, and 5% never develop a temperature above
37.5 °C. Hyperventilation with respiratory alkalosis and changes in
mental status are important early manifestations. Hypotension and
shock, which occur in 20–50% of patients, are unfavorable
prognostic signs.
B. Laboratory Findings
Neutropenia or neutrophilia, often with increased numbers of
immature forms of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, is the most
common 
laboratory 
abnormality 
in 
septic 
patients.
Thrombocytopenia occurs in 50% of patients, laboratory evidence
of coagulation abnormalities in 10%, and overt disseminated
intravascular coagulation in 2–3%. Both clinical manifestations and
the laboratory abnormalities are nonspecific and insensitive, which
accounts for the relatively low rate of blood culture positivity
(approximately 20–40%). If possible, three blood cultures from
separate sites should be obtained in rapid succession before starting
antimicrobial therapy. The chance of recovering the organism in at
least one of the three blood cultures is > 95%. The false-negative
rate for a single culture of 5–10 mL of blood is 30%. This may be
reduced to 5–10% (albeit with a slight false-positive rate due to
isolation of contaminants) if a single volume of 30 mL is inoculated
into several blood culture bottles. Because blood cultures may be
falsely negative, when a patient with presumed septic shock,
negative blood cultures, and inadequate explanation for the clinical
course responds to antimicrobials, therapy should be continued for
10–14 days.
 Treatment
Several factors are important in the management of patients with
sepsis.
A. Removal of Predisposing Factors
This usually means decreasing or stopping immunosuppressive
medications and in certain circumstances (eg, positive blood
cultures) giving granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (filgrastim; G-
CSF) to the neutropenic patient.
B. Identifying the Source of Bacteremia
By simply finding the source of bacteremia and removing it
(intravenous line) or draining it (abscess), a fatal disease becomes
easily treatable.
C. Supportive Measures
The use of fluids and vasopressors for maintaining blood pressure is
discussed in Chapter 12; management of disseminated intravascular
coagulation is discussed in Chapter 13.
D. Antibiotics
Antibiotics should be given as soon as the diagnosis is suspected,
since delays in therapy have been associated with increased
mortality rates, particularly once hypotension develops. In general,
bactericidal antibiotics should be used and given intravenously to
ensure therapeutic serum levels. Penetration of antibiotics into the
site of primary infection is critical for successful therapy—ie, if the
infection originates in the central nervous system, antibiotics that
penetrate the blood-brain barrier should be used—eg, penicillin,
ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and third-generation cephalosporins—
but not first-generation cephalosporins or aminoglycosides, which
penetrate poorly. Sepsis caused by gram-positive organisms cannot
be differentiated on clinical grounds from that due to gram-negative
bacteria. Therefore, initial therapy should include antibiotics active
against both types of organisms.
The number of antibiotics necessary remains controversial and
depends on the cause. Table 30–5 provides a guide for empiric
therapy. Although a combination of antibiotics is often
recommended for “synergism,” combination therapy has not been
shown to be superior to a single-drug regimen with any of several
broad-spectrum antibiotics (eg, a third-generation cephalosporin,
piperacillin-tazobactam, carbapenem). If multiple drugs are used
initially, the regimen should be modified and coverage narrowed
based on the results of culture and sensitivity testing.
E. Corticosteroids
The role of corticosteroids in treatment of septic shock is still quite
controversial. Clinical data have suggested an association between
mortality in patients with septic shock and poor adrenal reserve to
cosyntropin (Cortrosyn) stimulation testing. Administration of
“stress doses” of hydrocortisone to patients with relative adrenal
insufficiency and pressor-dependent septic shock was shown to
reduce mortality in earlier studies. However, the CORTICUS trial,
the largest randomized control trial to evaluate the effect of stress-
dose hydrocortisone on mortality in septic shock, refuted these
earlier findings. This study failed to demonstrate a survival benefit
from the addition of stress-dose hydrocortisone, 50 mg
intravenously four times a day for 5 days followed by a 6-day
tapering dose regimen, in subjects with or without a normal
cosyntropin stimulation test. The usefulness of cosyntropin
stimulation testing and use of stress-dose hydrocortisone in patients
with septic shock are therefore not considered to be standard care.
F. Adjunctive Therapy
Expanded knowledge of the pathophysiology of sepsis and septic
shock and recognition that cytokines play a critical role suggest
novel approaches to therapy. Strategies include blocking the effects
of endotoxin with anti-endotoxin monoclonal antibodies; blockade
of TNF, a potent cytokine mediator of septic shock, with anti-TNF
monoclonal antibody or soluble TNF receptor; use of IL-1 receptor
antagonists to inhibit the proinflammatory effects of IL-1 binding to
its receptor; use of corticosteroids; and blocking platelet or
thrombin activation. None of these strategies have been met with
improved survival. However, a single randomized placebo-
controlled trial showed that recombinant human activated protein C
(drotrecogin alfa) reduced mortality of septic patients with
APACHE II scores ≥ 25, but the benefits of this agent remain
controversial. This drug should be used cautiously because of the
risk of bleeding. Drotrecogin alfa is not beneficial for patients with
severe sepsis and low risk of death (eg, APACHE II score ≥ 25 or
single organ failure), and since it is associated with serious bleeding
complications, it should not be used in these patients. Patients
considered to have an infectious cause of severe sepsis (defined as
three or more signs of systemic inflammation—eg, fever or
hypothermia, 
tachycardia, 
tachypnea—plus 
sepsis-induced
dysfunction of at least one organ system) of ≥ 24 hours’ duration
are the best candidates. Platelet counts ≥ 30,000/mcL, conditions
associated with an increased risk of bleeding (eg, recent trauma,
surgery, or bleeding episode; anticoagulation), or hypercoagulable
states have not been investigated. These criteria should be followed
when selecting candidates for treatment with drotrecogin alfa
(activated). The agent is administered intravenously by constant
infusion at a dosage of 24 mcg/kg/h for 96 hours.
Dellinger RP et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international
guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock:
2008. Crit Care Med. 2008 Jan;36(1):296–327. [PMID:
18158437]
 
Sprung CL et al. Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic
shock. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 10;358(2):111–24. [PMID:
18184957]
 
SALMONELLOSIS
Salmonellosis includes infection by any of approximately 2000
serotypes of salmonellae. The taxonomy of Salmonella species has
been confusing. All Salmonella serotypes are members of a single
species, Salmonella enterica. Human infections are caused almost
exclusively by S enterica subsp enterica, of which three serotypes
—typhi, typhimurium, 
and choleraesuis—are predominantly
isolated. Three clinical patterns of infection are recognized: (1)
enteric fever, the best example of which is typhoid fever, due to
serotype typhi; (2) acute enterocolitis, caused by serotype
typhimurium, among others; and (3) the “septicemic” type,
characterized by bacteremia and focal lesions, exemplified by
infection with sero-type choleraesuis. All types are transmitted by
ingestion of the organism, usually from contaminated food or drink.
1. Enteric Fever (Typhoid Fever)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Gradual onset of malaise, headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain.
 Rose spots, relative bradycardia, splenomegaly, and abdominal
distention and tenderness.
 Slow (stepladder) rise of fever to maximum and then slow return
to normal.
 Leukopenia; blood, stool, and urine culture positive for
salmonella.
 
 General Considerations
Enteric fever is a clinical syndrome characterized by constitutional
and gastrointestinal symptoms and by headache. It can be caused
by any Salmonella species. The term “typhoid fever” applies when
serotype typhi is the cause. Infection is transmitted by consumption
of contaminated food or drink. The incubation period is 5–14 days.
Salmonella is an intracellular pathogen. Infection begins when
organisms breach the mucosal epithelium of the intestines by
transcytosis, an organism-mediated transport process through the
cell via an endocytic vesicle. Having crossed the epithelial barrier,
organisms invade and replicate in macrophages in Peyer patches,
mesenteric lymph nodes, and the spleen. Serotypes other than typhi
usually do not cause invasive disease, presumably because they lack
the necessary human-specific virulence factors. Bacteremia occurs,
and the infection then localizes principally in the lymphoid tissue of
the small intestine (particularly within 60 cm of the ileocecal valve).
Peyer patches become inflamed and may ulcerate, with involvement
greatest during the third week of disease. The organism may
disseminate to the lungs, gallbladder, kidneys, or central nervous
system.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
During the prodromal stage, there is increasing malaise, headache,
cough, and sore throat, often with abdominal pain and constipation,
while the fever ascends in a stepwise fashion. After about 7–10
days, it reaches a plateau and the patient is much more ill, appearing
exhausted and often prostrated. There may be marked constipation,
especially early, or “pea soup” diarrhea; marked abdominal
distention occurs as well. If there are no complications, the patient's
condition will gradually improve over 7–10 days. However, relapse
may occur for up to 2 weeks after defervescence.
During the early prodrome, physical findings are few. Later,
splenomegaly, abdominal distention and tenderness, relative
bradycardia, and occasionally meningismus appear. The rash (rose
spots) commonly appears during the second week of disease. The
individual spot, found principally on the trunk, is a pink papule 2–3
mm in diameter that fades on pressure. It disappears in 3–4 days.
B. Laboratory Findings
Typhoid fever is best diagnosed by blood culture, which is positive
in the first week of illness in 80% of patients who have not taken
antimicrobials. The rate of positivity declines thereafter, but one-
fourth or more of patients still have positive blood cultures in the
third week. Cultures of bone marrow occasionally are positive
when blood cultures are not. Stool culture is unreliable because it
may be positive in gastroenteritis without typhoid fever. Relative
bradycardia and leukopenia are typical.
 Differential Diagnosis
Enteric fever must be distinguished from other gastrointestinal
illnesses and from other infections that have few localizing findings.
Examples include tuberculosis, infective endocarditis, brucellosis,
lymphoma, and Q fever. Often there is a history of recent travel to
endemic areas, and viral hepatitis, malaria, or amebiasis may be in
the differential as well.
 Complications
Complications occur in about 30% of untreated cases and account
for 75% of deaths. Intestinal hemorrhage, manifested by a sudden
drop in temperature and signs of shock followed by dark or fresh
blood in the stool, or intestinal perforation, accompanied by
abdominal pain and tenderness, is most likely to occur during the
third week. Appearance of leukocytosis and tachycardia should
suggest these complications. Urinary retention, pneumonia,
thrombophlebitis, myocarditis, psychosis, cholecystitis, nephritis,
osteomyelitis, and meningitis are less often observed.
 Prevention
Immunization is not always effective but should be considered for
household contacts of a typhoid carrier, for travelers to endemic
areas, and during epidemic outbreaks. A multiple-dose oral vaccine
and a single-dose parenteral vaccine are available. Their efficacies
are similar, but oral vaccine causes fewer side effects. Boosters,
when indicated, should be given every 5 years and 2 years for oral
and parenteral preparations, respectively.
Adequate waste disposal and protection of food and water
supplies from contamination are important public health measures to
prevent salmonellosis. Carriers cannot work as food handlers.
 Treatment
A. Specific Measures
Several 
antibiotics, 
including 
ampicillin, 
azithromycin,
chloramphenicol, 
third-generation 
cephalosporins, 
and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole all are effective for treatment of
enteric fever caused by drug-susceptible strains. These drugs can
be given orally or intravenously depending on the patient's
condition. Because many salmonella strains are resistant to
ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, a
fluoroquinolone—such as ciprofloxacin 750 mg orally twice daily or
levofloxacin 500 mg orally once daily, 5–7 days for uncomplicated
enteric fever and 10–14 days for severe infection—is the agent of
choice for treatment of salmonella infections. Ceftriaxone, 2 g
intravenously for 7 days, is also effective. Although resistance to
fluoroquinolones or cephalosporins occurs uncommonly, the
prevalence appears to be increasing. When an infection is caused
by a multidrug-resistant strain, select an antibiotic to which the
isolate is susceptible in vitro. Alternatively, increasing the dose of
ceftriaxone to 4 g/d and treating for 10–14 days or using
azithromycin 500 mg orally for 7 days in uncomplicated cases may
be effective.
B. Treatment of Carriers
Chemotherapy often is unsuccessful in eradicating the carrier state.
While treatment of carriage with ampicillin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, or chloramphenicol may be successful,
ciprofloxacin, 750 mg orally twice a day for 4 weeks, has proved to
be highly effective. Cholecystectomy may also achieve this goal.
 Prognosis
The mortality rate of typhoid fever is about 2% in treated cases.
Elderly or debilitated persons are likely to do poorly. With
complications, the prognosis is poor. Relapses occur in up to 15%
of cases. A residual carrier state frequently persists in spite of
chemotherapy.
Lynch MF et al. Typhoid fever in the United States, 1999–2006.
JAMA. 2009 Aug 26;302(8):859–65. [PMID: 19706859]
 
Thaver D et al. A comparison of fluoroquinolones versus other
antibiotics for treating enteric fever: meta-analysis. BMJ. 2009 Jun
3;338:b1865. [PMID: 19493939]
 
2. Salmonella Gastroenteritis
By far the most common form of salmonellosis is acute enterocolitis
caused by numerous Salmonella serotypes. The incubation period
is 8–48 hours after ingestion of contaminated food or liquid.
Symptoms and signs consist of fever (often with chills), nausea
and vomiting, cramping abdominal pain, and diarrhea, which may be
grossly bloody, lasting 3–5 days. Differentiation must be made from
viral gastroenteritis, food poisoning, shigellosis, amebic dysentery,
and acute ulcerative colitis. The diagnosis is made by culturing the
organism from the stool.
The disease is usually self-limited, but bacteremia with
localization in joints or bones may occur, especially in patients with
sickle cell disease.
Treatment of uncomplicated enterocolitis is symptomatic only.
Malnourished or severely ill patients, those with sickle cell disease,
and HIV-positive patients should be treated for 3–5 days with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet twice a
day), ampicillin (100 mg/kg intravenously or orally), or ciprofloxacin
(750 mg orally twice a day).
Maki DG. Coming to grips with foodborne infection—peanut
butter, peppers, and nationwide salmonella outbreaks. N Engl J
Med. 2009 Mar 5;360(10):949–53. [PMID: 19213675]
 
3. Salmonella Bacteremia
Salmonella infection may be manifested by prolonged or recurrent
fevers accompanied by bacteremia and local infection in bone,
joints, pleura, pericardium, lungs, or other sites. Mycotic abdominal
aortic aneurysms may also occur. Serotypes other than typhi
usually are isolated. This complication tends to occur in
immunocompromised persons and is seen in HIV-infected
individuals, who typically have bacteremia without an obvious
source. Treatment is the same as for typhoid fever, plus drainage of
any abscesses. In HIV-infected patients, relapse is common, and
lifelong suppressive therapy may be needed. Ciprofloxacin, 750 mg
orally twice a day, is effective both for therapy of acute infection
and for suppression of recurrence. Incidence of infections caused
by drug-resistant strains may be on the rise.
SHIGELLOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Diarrhea, often with blood and mucus.
 Crampy abdominal pain and systemic toxicity.
 White blood cells in stools; organism isolated on stool culture.
 
 General Considerations
Shigella dysentery is a common disease, often self-limited and mild
but occasionally serious. S sonnei is the leading cause in the United
States, followed by S flexneri. S dysenteriae causes the most
serious form of the illness. Shigellae are invasive organisms. The
infective dose is 102–103 organisms. There has been a rise in strains
resistant to multiple antibiotics.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The illness usually starts abruptly, with diarrhea, lower abdominal
cramps, and tenesmus. The diarrheal stool often is mixed with blood
and mucus. Systemic symptoms are fever, chills, anorexia and
malaise, and headache. The abdomen is tender. Sigmoidoscopic
examination reveals an inflamed, engorged mucosa with punctate
and sometimes large areas of ulceration.
B. Laboratory Findings
The stool shows many leukocytes and red cells. Stool culture is
positive for shigellae in most cases, but blood cultures grow the
organism in ≥ 5% of cases.
 Differential Diagnosis
Bacillary dysentery must be distinguished from salmonella
enterocolitis and from disease due to enterotoxigenic Escherichia
coli, Campylobacter, 
and Yersinia enterocolitica. Amebic
dysentery may be similar clinically and is diagnosed by finding
amebas in the fresh stool specimen. Ulcerative colitis is also an
important cause of bloody diarrhea.
 Complications
Temporary disaccharidase deficiency may follow the diarrhea.
Reactive arthritis is an uncommon complication, usually occurring in
HLA-B27 individuals infected by Shigella. Hemolytic-uremic
syndrome occurs rarely.
 Treatment
Treatment of dehydration and hypotension is lifesaving in severe
cases. The antimicrobial treatments of choice are trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, one double-strength tablet twice a day for 7–10
days, or a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin 750 mg orally twice daily
for 7–10 days, or levofloxacin, 500 mg orally once daily) for 3
days. Fluoroquinolones are contraindicated in pregnancy. Shigellae
resistant to ampicillin are common, but if the isolate is susceptible, a
dose of 500 mg orally four times a day is also effective. Amoxicillin,
which is less effective, should not be used.
Aragón TJ et al. Case-control study of shigellosis in San Francisco:
the role of sexual transmission and HIV infection. Clin Infect Dis.
2007 Feb 1;44(3):327–34. [PMID: 17205436]
 
GASTROENTERITIS CAUSED BY ESCHERICHIA COLI
E coli causes gastroenteritis by a variety of mechanisms.
Enterotoxigenic E coli (ETEC) elaborates either a heat-stable or
heat-labile toxin that mediates the disease. ETEC is an important
cause of traveler's diarrhea. Enteroinvasive E coli (EIEC) differs
from other E coli bowel pathogens in that these strains invade cells,
causing bloody diarrhea and dysentery similar to infection with
Shigella species. EIEC is uncommon in the United States. Neither
ETEC nor EIEC strains are routinely isolated and identified from
stool cultures because there is no selective medium. Antimicrobial
therapy against Salmonella and Shigella, such as ciprofloxacin 500
mg orally twice daily, shortens the clinical course, but the disease is
self-limited.
Shiga-toxin-producing E coli (STEC) infection can result in
asymptomatic carrier stage, nonbloody diarrhea, hemorrhagic
colitis, 
hemolytic-uremic 
syndrome, 
or 
thrombotic
thrombocytopenic 
purpura. 
Although E coli O157:H7 is
responsible for most cases of STEC infection in the United States,
other STEC strains (such as E coli O145) have been reported to
cause severe disease. E coli O157:H7 has caused several
outbreaks of diarrhea and hemolytic-uremic syndrome related to
consumption of undercooked hamburger, unpasteurized apple juice,
and spinach, while E coli O145 was recently linked to the
consumption of contaminated lettuce. Older individuals and young
children are most affected, with hemolytic-uremic syndrome being
more common in the latter group. STEC identification can be
difficult and the CDC now recommends that all stools submitted for
routine testing from patients with acute community-acquired
diarrhea be simultaneously cultured for E coli O157:H7 and tested
with an assay that detects Shiga toxins to detect non O157 STEC,
such as E coli O145. Antimicrobial therapy does not alter the
course of the disease and may increase the risk of hemolytic-uremic
syndrome. Treatment is primarily supportive. Hemolyticuremic
syndrome or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura occurring in
association with a diarrheal illness suggests the diagnosis and should
prompt evaluation for STEC. Confirmed infections should be
reported to public health officials.
Gould LH et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Recommendations for diagnosis of shiga toxin-producing
Escherichia coli infections by clinical laboratories. MMWR
Recomm Rep. 2009 Oct 16;58(RR-12):1–14. [PMID:
19834454]
 
Riddle MS. Effect of adjunctive loperamide in combination with
antibiotics on treatment outcomes in traveler's diarrhea: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Oct
15;47(8):1007–14. [PMID: 18781873]
 
Serna A 4th et al. Pathogenesis and treatment of Shiga toxin-
producing Escherichia coli infections. Curr Opin Gastroenterol.
2008 Jan;24(1):38–47. [PMID: 18043231]
 
CHOLERA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of travel in endemic area or contact with infected person.
 Voluminous diarrhea.
 Stool is liquid, gray, turbid, and without fecal odor, blood, or pus
(“rice water stool”).
 Rapid development of marked dehydration.
 Positive stool cultures and agglutination of vibrios with specific
sera.
 
 General Considerations
Cholera is an acute diarrheal illness caused by certain serotypes of
Vibrio cholerae. The disease is toxin-mediated, and fever is
unusual. The toxin activates adenylyl cyclase in intestinal epithelial
cells of the small intestines, producing hypersecretion of water and
chloride ion and a massive diarrhea of up to 15 L/d. Death results
from profound hypovolemia. Cholera occurs in epidemics under
conditions of crowding, war, and famine (eg, in refugee camps) and
where sanitation is inadequate. Infection is acquired by ingestion of
contaminated food or water. For over a century, cholera was rarely
seen in the Western Hemisphere until an outbreak occurred in Peru,
starting in the early 1990s and ending by 2001; the outbreak
resulted in almost 400,000 cholera cases and more than 4000
deaths. Cholera again became a rare disease in the Western
Hemisphere until late 2010. A massive earthquake in Haiti in
January 2010 crumbled the country's already fragile infrastructure.
Later that fall, a cholera outbreak erupted, resulting in
approximately 100,000 cases and over a 1000 deaths as of
December 2010.
 Clinical Findings
Cholera is characterized by a sudden onset of severe, frequent
watery diarrhea (up to 1 L/h). The liquid stool is gray; turbid; and
without fecal odor, blood, or pus (“rice water stool”). Dehydration
and hypotension develop rapidly. Stool cultures are positive, and
agglutination of vibrios with specific sera can be demonstrated.
 Prevention
A vaccine is available that confers short-lived, limited protection
and may be required for entry into or reentry after travel to some
countries. It is administered in two doses 1–4 weeks apart. A
booster dose every 6 months is recommended for persons
remaining in areas where cholera is a hazard.
Vaccination programs are expensive and not particularly effective
in managing outbreaks of cholera. When outbreaks occur, efforts
should be directed toward establishing clean water and food
sources and proper waste disposal.
 Treatment
Treatment is by replacement of fluids. In mild or moderate illness,
oral rehydration usually is adequate. A simple oral replacement fluid
can be made from 1 teaspoon of table salt and 4 heaping teaspoons
of sugar added to 1 L of water. Intravenous fluids are indicated for
persons with signs of severe hypovolemia and those who cannot
take adequate fluids orally. Lactated Ringer infusion is satisfactory.
Antimicrobial therapy will shorten the course of illness. Several
antimicrobials are active against V cholerae, including tetracycline,
ampicillin, 
chloramphenicol, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
fluoroquinolones, and azithromycin. Multiple drug-resistant strains
are increasingly encountered, so susceptibility testing, if available, is
advisable. A single 1 g oral dose of azithromycin is effective for
severe cholera caused by strains with reduced susceptibility to
fluoroquinolones, but resistance is emerging to this drug as well.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Update:
outbreak of cholera—Haiti, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2010 Dec 10;59(48):1586–90. [PMID: 21150867]
 
Harris JB et al. Cholera's western front. Lancet. 2010 Dec
11;376(9757):1961–5. [PMID: 21112083]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY OTHER VIBRIO SPECIES
Vibrios other than V cholerae that cause human disease are Vibrio
parahaemolyticus, V vulnificus, and V alginolyticus. All are
halophilic marine organisms. Infection is acquired by exposure to
organisms in contaminated, undercooked, or raw crustaceans or
shellfish and warm (>20 °C) ocean waters and estuaries. Infections
are more common during the summer months from regions along the
Atlantic coast and the Gulf of Mexico in the United States and from
tropical waters around the world. Oysters are implicated in up to
90% of food-related cases. V parahaemolyticus causes an acute
watery diarrhea with crampy abdominal pain and fever, typically
occurring within 24 hours after ingestion of contaminated shellfish.
The disease is self-limited, and antimicrobial therapy is usually not
necessary. V parahaemolyticus may also cause cellulitis and
sepsis, though these findings are more characteristic of V vulnificus
infection.
V vulnificus and V alginolyticus—neither of which is associated
with diarrheal illness—are important causes of cellulitis and primary
bacteremia following ingestion of contaminated shellfish or exposure
to sea water. Cellulitis with or without sepsis may be accompanied
by bulla formation and necrosis with extensive soft tissue
destruction, at times requiring debridement and amputation. The
infection can be rapidly progressive and is particularly severe in
immunocompromised individuals—especially those with cirrhosis—
with death rates as high as 50%. Patients with chronic liver disease
and those who are immunocompromised should be cautioned to
avoid eating raw oysters.
Tetracycline at a dose of 500 mg orally four times a day for 7–10
days is the drug of choice for treatment of suspected or
documented primary bacteremia or cellulitis caused by Vibrio
species. V vulnificus is susceptible in vitro to penicillin, ampicillin,
cephalosporins, 
chloramphenicol, 
aminoglycosides, 
and
fluoroquinolones, and these agents may also be effective. V
parahaemolyticus and V alginolyticus produce β-lactamase and
therefore are resistant to penicillin and ampicillin, but susceptibilities
otherwise are similar to those listed for V vulnificus.
Bross MH et al. Vibrio vulnificus infection: diagnosis and
treatment. Am Fam Physician. 2007 Aug 15;76(4):539–44.
[PMID: 17853628]
 
Dechet AM. Nonfoodborne Vibrio infections: an important cause
of morbidity and mortality in the United States, 1997–2006. Clin
Infect Dis. 2008 Apr 1;46(7):970–6. [PMID: 18444811]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY CAMPYLOBACTER SPECIES
Campylobacter organisms are microaerophilic, motile, gram-
negative rods. Two species infect humans: Campylobacter jejuni,
an important cause of diarrheal disease, and C fetus subsp fetus,
which typically causes systemic infection and not diarrhea. Dairy
cattle and poultry are an important reservoir for campylobacters.
Outbreaks of enteritis have been associated with consumption of
raw milk. C gastroenteritis is associated with fever, abdominal pain,
and diarrhea characterized by loose, watery, or bloody stools. The
differential diagnosis includes shigellosis, Salmonella gastroenteritis,
and enteritis caused by Y enterocolitica or invasive E coli. The
disease is self-limited, but its duration can be shortened with
antimicrobial therapy. Either azithromycin, 1 g orally as a single
dose, or ciprofloxacin, 500 mg orally twice daily for 3 days, is
effective therapy. However, fluoroquinolone resistance among C
jejuni isolates has been increasing and susceptibility testing should
be routinely performed.
C fetus causes systemic infections that can be fatal, including
primary bacteremia, endocarditis, meningitis, and focal abscesses. It
infrequently causes gastroenteritis. Patients infected with C fetus are
often older, debilitated, or immuno-compromised. Closely related
species, collectively termed “campylobacter-like organisms,” cause
bacteremia in HIV-infected individuals. Systemic infections respond
to therapy with gentamicin, chloramphenicol, ceftriaxone, or
ciprofloxacin. Ceftriaxone or chloramphenicol should be used to
treat infections of the central nervous system because of their ability
to penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
Fernández-Cruz A et al. Campylobacter bacteremia: clinical
characteristics, incidence, and outcome over 23 years. Medicine
(Baltimore). 2010 Sep;89(5):319–30. [PMID: 20827109]
 
Shah N et al. Global etiology of travelers’ diarrhea: systematic
review from 1973 to the present. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2009
Apr;80(4):609–14. [PMID: 19346386]
 
BRUCELLOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of animal exposure, ingestion of unpasteurized milk or
cheese.
 Insidious onset: easy fatigability, headache, arth-ralgia, anorexia,
sweating, irritability.
 Intermittent and persistent fever.
 Cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy; hepatos-plenomegaly.
 Lymphocytosis, positive blood culture, positive serologic test.
 
 General Considerations
The infection is transmitted from animals to humans. Brucella
abortus (cattle), B suis (hogs), and B melitensis (goats) are the
main agents. Transmission to humans occurs by contact with
infected meat (slaughterhouse workers), placentae of infected
animals (farmers, veterinarians), or ingestion of infected
unpasteurized milk or cheese. The incubation period varies from a
few days to several weeks. Brucellosis is a systemic infection that
may become chronic. In the United States, brucellosis is very rare.
Almost all US cases are imported from countries where brucellosis
is endemic (eg, Mexico, Mediterranean Europe, Spain, South
American countries).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset may be acute, with fever, chills, and sweats, but more
often is insidious with symptoms of weakness, weight loss, low-
grade fevers, sweats, and exhaustion upon minimal activity.
Headache, abdominal or back pain with anorexia and constipation,
and arthralgias are also common. The chronic form may assume an
undulant nature, with periods of normal temperature between acute
attacks; symptoms may persist for years, either continuously or
intermittently.
Fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy are the most
common physical findings. Infection may present with or be
complicated by specific organ involvement with signs of
endocarditis, meningitis, epididymitis, orchitis, arthritis (especially
sacroilitis), spondylitis, or osteomyelitis.
B. Laboratory Findings
The organism can be recovered from cultures of blood,
cerebrospinal fluid, urine, bone marrow, or other sites. Modern
automated systems have shortened the time to detection of the
organism in blood culture. Cultures are more likely to be negative in
chronic cases. The diagnosis often is made by serologic testing.
Rising serologic titers or an absolute agglutination titer of > 1:160
supports the diagnosis.
 Differential Diagnosis
Brucellosis must be differentiated from any other acute febrile
disease, especially influenza, tularemia, Q fever, mononucleosis, and
enteric fever. In its chronic form it resembles Hodgkin disease,
tuberculosis, HIV infection, malaria, and disseminated fungal
infections such as histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis.
 Complications
The most frequent complications are bone and joint lesions such as
spondylitis and suppurative arthritis (usually of a single joint),
endocarditis, and meningoencephalitis. Less common complications
are pneumonitis with pleural effusion, hepatitis, and cholecystitis.
 Treatment
Single-drug regimens are not recommended because the relapse
rate may be as high as 50%. Combination regimens of two or three
drugs are most effective. Regimens of doxycycline (200 mg/d orally
for 6 weeks) plus rifampin (600 mg/d orally for 6 weeks) or
streptomycin (1 g/d intramuscularly for 2 weeks) or gentamicin (240
mg intramuscularly once daily for 7 days) have the lowest
recurrence rates. Longer courses of therapy may be required to
prevent relapse of meningitis, osteomyelitis, or endocarditis.
Franco MP et al. Human brucellosis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2007
Dec;7(12):775–86. [PMID: 18045560]
 
Skalsky K et al. Treatment of human brucellosis: systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2008 Mar
29;336(7646):701–4. [PMID: 18321957]
 
TULAREMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of contact with rabbits, other rodents, and biting
arthropods (eg, ticks in summer) in endemic area.
 Fever, headache, nausea, and prostration.
 Papule progressing to ulcer at site of inoculation.
 Enlarged regional lymph nodes.
 Serologic tests or culture of ulcer, lymph node aspirate, or blood
confirm the diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Tularemia is a zoonotic infection of wild rodents and rabbits caused
by Francisella tularensis. Humans usually acquire the infection by
contact with animal tissues (eg, trapping muskrats, skinning rabbits)
or from a tick or insect bite. Hamsters and prairie dogs also may
carry the organism. An investigation of an outbreak of pneumonic
tularemia on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts implicated lawn-
mowing and brush-cutting as risk factors for infection, underscoring
the potential for probable aerosol transmission of the organism. F
tularensis has been classified as a high-priority agent for potential
bioterrorism use because of its virulence and relative ease of
dissemination. Infection in humans often produces a local lesion and
widespread organ involvement but may be entirely asymptomatic.
The incubation period is 2–10 days.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Fever, headache, and nausea begin suddenly, and a local lesion—a
papule at the site of inoculation—develops and soon ulcerates.
Regional lymph nodes may become enlarged and tender and may
suppurate. The local lesion may be on the skin of an extremity or in
the eye. Pneumonia may develop from hematogenous spread of the
organism or may be primary after inhalation of infected aerosols,
which are responsible for human-to-human transmission. Following
ingestion of infected meat or water, an enteric form may be
manifested by gastrointestinal symptoms, stupor, and delirium. In
any type of involvement, the spleen may be enlarged and tender and
there may be non-specific rashes, myalgias, and prostration.
B. Laboratory Findings
Culturing the organism from blood or infected tissue requires special
media. For this reason and because cultures of F tularensis may be
hazardous to laboratory personnel, the diagnosis is usually made
serologically. A positive agglutination test (> 1:80) develops in the
second week after infection and may persist for several years.
 Differential Diagnosis
Tularemia must be differentiated from rickettsial and meningococcal
infections, cat-scratch disease, infectious mononucleosis, and
various bacterial and fungal diseases.
 Complications
Hematogenous spread may produce meningitis, perisplenitis,
pericarditis, pneumonia, and osteomyelitis.
 Treatment
Streptomycin is drug of choice for treatment of tularemia. The
recommended dose is 7.5 mg/kg intramuscularly every 12 hours for
7–14 days. Gentamicin, which has good in vitro activity against F
tularensis, is generally less toxic than streptomycin and probably
just as effective. Doxycycline (200 mg/d orally) is also effective but
has a higher relapse rate. A variety of other agents (eg,
fluoroquinolones) are active in vitro but their clinical effectiveness is
less well established.
Hepburn MJ et al. Tularemia: current diagnosis and treatment
options. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2008 Apr;6(2):231–40.
[PMID: 18380605]
 
Nigrovic LE et al. Tularemia. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2008
Sep;22(3):489–504. [PMID: 18755386]
 
PLAGUE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of exposure to rodents in endemic area.
 Sudden onset of high fever, malaise, muscular pains, and
prostration.
 Axillary or inguinal lymphadenitis (bubo).
 Bacteremia, pneumonitis, and meningitis may occur.
 Positive smear and culture from bubo and positive blood culture.
 
 General Considerations
Plague is an infection of wild rodents with Yersinia pestis, a small
bipolar-staining gram-negative rod. It is endemic in California,
Arizona, Nevada, and New Mexico. It is transmitted among
rodents and to humans by the bites of fleas or from contact with
infected animals. Following a fleabite, the organisms spread through
the lymphatics to the lymph nodes, which become greatly enlarged
(bubo). They may then reach the bloodstream to involve all organs.
When pneumonia or meningitis develops, the outcome is often fatal.
The patient with pneumonia can transmit the infection to other
individuals by droplets. The incubation period is 2–10 days.
Because of its extreme virulence, its potential for dissemination and
person-to-person transmission, and efforts to develop the organism
as an agent of biowarfare, plague bacillus is considered a high-
priority agent for bioterrorism.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is sudden, with high fever, malaise, tachycardia, intense
headache, delirium, and severe myalgias. The patient appears
profoundly ill. If pneumonia develops, tachypnea, productive cough,
blood-tinged sputum, and cyanosis also occur. There may be signs
of meningitis. A pustule or ulcer at the site of inoculation and
lymphangitis may be observed. Axillary, inguinal, or cervical lymph
nodes become enlarged and tender and may suppurate and drain.
With hematogenous spread, the patient may rapidly become toxic
and comatose, with purpuric spots (black plague) appearing on the
skin.
Primary plague pneumonia is a fulminant pneumonitis with
bloody, frothy sputum and sepsis. It is usually fatal unless treatment
is started within a few hours after onset.
B. Laboratory Findings
The plague bacillus may be found in smears from aspirates of
buboes examined with Gram stain. Cultures from bubo aspirate or
pus and blood are positive but may grow slowly. In convalescing
patients, an antibody titer rise may be demonstrated by agglutination
tests.
 Differential Diagnosis
The lymphadenitis of plague is most commonly mistaken for the
lymphadenitis accompanying staphylococcal or streptococcal
infections of an extremity, sexually transmitted diseases such as
lymphogranuloma venereum or syphilis, and tularemia. The systemic
manifestations resemble those of enteric or rickettsial fevers,
malaria, or influenza. The pneumonia resembles other bacterial
pneumonias, and the meningitis is similar to those caused by other
bacteria.
 Prevention
Drug prophylaxis may provide temporary protection for persons
exposed to the risk of plague infection, particularly by the
respiratory route. Tetracycline hydrochloride, 500 mg orally once
or twice daily for 5 days, is effective.
Plague vaccines—both live and killed—have been used for many
years, but their efficacy is not clearly established.
 Treatment
Therapy should be started immediately once plague is suspected.
Either streptomycin (the agent with which there is greatest
experience), 1 g every 12 hours intravenously, or gentamicin,
administered as a 2-mg/kg loading dose, then 1.7 mg/kg every 8
hours intravenously, is effective. Alternatively, doxycycline, 100 mg
orally or intravenously, may be used. The duration of therapy is 10
days. Patients with plague pneumonia are placed in strict respiratory
isolation, and prophylactic therapy is given to any person who came
in contact with the patient.
Prentice MB et al. Plague. Lancet. 2007 Apr 7;369(9568):1196–
207. [PMID: 17416264]
 
Stenseth NC et al. Plague: past, present, and future. PLoS Med.
2008 Jan 15;5(1):e3. [PMID: 18198939]
 
GONOCOCCAL INFECTIONS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Purulent and profuse urethral discharge, especially in men, with
dysuria, yielding positive smear.
 Men: epididymitis, prostatitis, periurethral inflammation, proctitis.
 Women: cervicitis with purulent discharge, or asymptomatic,
yielding positive culture; vaginitis, salpingitis, proctitis also occur.
 Fever, rash, tenosynovitis, and arthritis with disseminated disease.
 Gram-negative intracellular diplococci seen in a smear or cultured
from any site, particularly the urethra, cervix, pharynx, and
rectum.
 
 General Considerations
Gonorrhea is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae, a gram-negative
diplococcus typically found inside polymorpho-nuclear cells. It is
transmitted during sexual activity and has its greatest incidence in the
15- to 29-year-old age group. The incubation period is usually 2–8
days.
 Classification
A. Urethritis and Cervicitis
In men, there is initially burning on urination and a serous or milky
discharge. One to 3 days later, the urethral pain is more
pronounced and the discharge becomes yellow, creamy, and
profuse, sometimes blood-tinged. The disorder may regress and
become chronic or progress to involve the prostate, epididymis, and
periurethral glands with painful inflammation. Chronic infection leads
to prostatitis and urethral strictures. Rectal infection is common in
homosexual men. Atypical sites of primary infection (eg, the
pharynx) must always be considered. Asymptomatic infection is
common and occurs in both sexes.
Gonococcal infection in women often becomes symptomatic
during menses. Women may have dysuria, urinary frequency, and
urgency, with a purulent urethral discharge. Vaginitis and cervicitis
with inflammation of Bartholin glands are common. Infection may be
asymptomatic, with only slightly increased vaginal discharge and
moderate cervicitis on examination. Infection may remain as a
chronic cervicitis—an important reservoir of gonococci. It can
progress to involve the uterus and tubes with acute and chronic
salpingitis, with scarring of tubes and sterility. In pelvic inflammatory
disease, anaerobes and chlamydiae often accompany gonococci.
Rectal infection may result from spread of the organism from the
genital tract or from anal coitus.
Gram stain of urethral discharge in men, especially during the first
week 
after 
onset, 
shows 
gram-negative 
diplococci 
in
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Gram stain is less often positive in
women. Culture has been the gold standard for diagnosis,
particularly when the Gram stain is negative. Nucleic acid
amplification tests for N gonorrhoeae are FDA approved for the
testing of endocervical swabs, vaginal swabs, urethral swabs (men),
and urine (from both men and women), and have excellent
sensitivity and specificity, and have largely replaced culture.
Identification of N gonorrhoeae from rectal or pharyngeal sites,
blood, and in joint fluid still requires culture.
B. Disseminated Disease
Systemic complications follow the dissemination of gonococci from
the primary site via the bloodstream. Two distinct clinical
syndromes—either purulent arthritis or the triad of rash,
tenosynovitis, and arthralgias—are commonly observed in patients
with disseminated gonococcal infection, although overlap can be
seen. The skin lesions can range from maculopapular to pustular or
hemorrhagic, which tend to be few in number and peripherally
located. The tenosynovitis is often found in the hands and wrists and
feet and ankles. These unique findings can help distinguish among
other infectious syndromes. The arthritis can occur in one or more
joints. Gonococci are isolated by culture from less than half of
patients with gonococcal arthritis. Rarely, gonococcal endocarditis
or meningitis develops.
C. Conjunctivitis
The most common form of eye involvement is direct inoculation of
gonococci into the conjunctival sac. In adults, this occurs by
autoinoculation of a person with genital infection. The purulent
conjunctivitis may rapidly progress to panophthalmitis and loss of
the eye unless treated promptly. A single 1-g dose of ceftriaxone is
effective.
 Differential Diagnosis
Gonococcal urethritis or cervicitis must be differentiated from
nongonococcal urethritis; cervicitis or vaginitis due to Chlamydia
trachomatis, Gardnerella vaginalis, Trichomonas, Candida,
and many other pathogens associated with sexually transmitted
diseases; and pelvic inflammatory disease, arthritis, proctitis, and
skin lesions. Often, several such pathogens coexist in a patient.
Reactive arthritis (urethritis, conjunctivitis, arthritis) may mimic
gonorrhea or coexist with it.
 Prevention
Prevention is based on education and mechanical or chemical
prophylaxis. The condom, if properly used, can reduce the risk of
infection. Effective drugs taken in therapeutic doses within 24 hours
of exposure can abort an infection. Partner notification and referral
of contacts for treatment has been the standard method used to
control sexually transmitted diseases. Expedited treatment of sex
partners by patient-delivered partner therapy is more effective than
partner notification in reducing persistence and recurrence rates of
gonorrhea and chlamydia. This strategy is being increasingly
adopted as a means of disease control.
 Treatment
Therapy typically is administered before antimicrobial susceptibilities
are known. The choice of which regimen to use should be based on
the national prevalences of antibiotic-resistant organisms.
Nationwide, strains of gonococci that are resistant to penicillin,
tetracycline, or ciprofloxacin have been increasingly observed.
Consequently, these drugs can no longer be considered first-line
therapy. All sexual partners should be treated and tested for HIV
infection and syphilis, as should the patient.
A. Uncomplicated Gonorrhea
For uncomplicated gonococcal infections of the cervix, urethra, and
rectum, either ceftriaxone (125 mg intramuscularly) or cefixime (400
mg orally as a single dose) is the treatment of choice.
Fluoroquinolones are no longer recommended because of high rates
of resistance. Spectinomycin, 1 g intramuscularly once, may be used
for the penicillin-allergic patient but is not currently available in the
United States. Other single-dose cephalosporin therapies that are
considered alternative treatment regimens for uncomplicated
urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections include ceftizoxime,
500 mg intramuscularly once; or cefoxitin, 2 g intramuscularly once,
administered with probenecid, 1 g orally; or cefotaxime, 500 mg
intramuscularly once. Some evidence indicates that single-dose
cefpodoxime, 400 mg and cefuroxime axetil, 1 g might be oral
alternatives.
Pharyngeal gonorrhea is treated by ceftriaxone, 125 mg
intramuscularly. Since coexistent chlamydial infection is common,
doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days, or azithromycin,
given as a single 1-g oral dose, concurrently, should be
administered unless chlamydial infection has been ruled out with a
negative nucleic acid amplification test for C trachomatis; women
should have a pregnancy test before a tetracycline (such as
doxycycline) is prescribed.
B. Treatment of Other Infections
Disseminated gonococcal infection should be treated with
ceftriaxone, 1 g intravenously daily, until 48 hours after
improvement begins, at which time therapy may be switched to
cefixime, 400 mg orally daily to complete at least 1 week of
antimicrobial therapy. An oral fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin, 500
mg twice daily, or levofloxacin, 500 mg once daily) for 7 days also
is effective, provided the isolate is susceptible. Endocarditis should
be treated with ceftriaxone, 2 g every 24 hours intravenously, for at
least 3 weeks. Postgonococcal urethritis and cervicitis, which are
usually caused by chlamydia, are treated with a regimen of
erythromycin, doxycycline, or azithromycin as described above.
Pelvic inflammatory disease requires cefoxitin, 2 g parenterally
every 6 hours, or cefotetan, 2 g intravenously every 12 hours plus
doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours. Clindamycin, 900 mg
intravenously every 8 hours, plus gentamicin, administered
intravenously as a 2-mg/kg loading dose followed by 1.5 mg/kg
every 8 hours, is also effective. Ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly
as a single dose (or cefoxitin, 2 g intramuscularly, plus probenecid,
1 g orally as a single dose) plus doxycycline, 100 mg twice a day
for 14 days, with or without metronidazole, 500 mg twice daily for
14 days, is an effective outpatient regimen.
Brill JR. Diagnosis and treatment of urethritis in men. Am Fam
Physician. 2010 Apr 1;81(7):873–8. [PMID: 20353145]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum
in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in
article text. [PMID: 21160459]
 
CHANCROID
Chancroid is a sexually transmitted disease caused by the short
gram-negative 
bacillus Haemophilus ducreyi. The incubation
period is 3–5 days. At the site of inoculation, a vesicopustule
develops that breaks down to form a painful, soft ulcer with a
necrotic base, surrounding erythema, and undermined edges. There
may be multiple lesions due to autoinoculation. The adenitis is
usually unilateral and consists of tender, matted nodes of moderate
size with overlying erythema. These may become fluctuant and
rupture spontaneously. With lymph node involvement, fever, chills,
and malaise may develop. Balanitis and phimosis are frequent
complications in men. Women may have no external signs of
infection. The diagnosis is established by culturing a swab of the
lesion onto a special medium.
Chancroid must be differentiated from other genital ulcers. The
chancre of syphilis is clean and painless, with a hard base. Mixed
sexually transmitted disease is very common (including syphilis,
herpes simplex, and HIV infection), as is infection of the ulcer with
fusiforms, spirochetes, and other organisms.
A single dose of either azithromycin, 1 g orally, or ceftriaxone,
250 mg intramuscularly, is effective treatment. Effective multiple-
dose regimens are erythromycin, 500 mg orally four times a day for
7 days, or ciprofloxacin, 500 mg orally twice a day for 3 days.
Mohammed TT et al. Chancroid and human immunodeficiency
virus infection–a review. Int J Dermatol. 2008 Jan;47(1):1–8.
[PMID: 18173591]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum
in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in
article text. [PMID: 21160459]
 
GRANULOMA INGUINALE
Granuloma inguinale is a chronic, relapsing granulomatous
anogenital infection due to Calymmatobacterium (Donovania)
granulomatis. The pathognomonic cell, found in tissue scrapings or
secretions, is large (25–90 mcm) and contains intracytoplasmic
cysts filled with bodies (Donovan bodies) that stain deeply with
Wright stain.
The incubation period is 8 days to 12 weeks. The onset is
insidious. The lesions occur on the skin or mucous membranes of
the genitalia or perineal area. They are relatively painless infiltrated
nodules that soon slough. A shallow, sharply demarcated ulcer
forms, with a beefy-red friable base of granulation tissue. The lesion
spreads by contiguity. The advancing border has a characteristic
rolled edge of granulation tissue. Large ulcerations may advance
onto the lower abdomen and thighs. Scar formation and healing
occur along one border while the opposite border advances.
Superinfection with spirochete-fusiform organisms is common.
The ulcer then becomes purulent, painful, foul-smelling, and
extremely difficult to treat.
Several therapies are available. Because of the indolent nature of
the disease, duration of therapy is relatively long. The following
recommended regimens should be given for 3 weeks or until all
lesions have healed: doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily; or
azithromycin, 1 g orally once weekly; or ciprofloxacin, 750 mg
orally twice daily; or erythro mycin, 500 mg orally four times a day.
BARTONELLA SPECIES
Bartonella species are responsible for a wide variety of clinical
syndromes. Bacillary angiomatosis, an important manifestation of
bartonellosis, is discussed in Chapter 31. A variety of atypical
infections, including retinitis, encephalitis, osteomyelitis, and
persistent bacteremia and endocarditis have been described.
Trench fever is a self-limited, louse-borne relapsing febrile
disease caused by B quintana. The disease has occurred
epidemically in louse-infested troops and civilians during wars and
endemically in residents of scattered geographic areas (eg, Central
America). An urban equivalent of trench fever has been described
among the homeless. Humans acquire infection when infected lice
feces enter sites of skin breakdown. Onset of symptoms is abrupt
and fever lasts 3–5 days, with relapses. The patient complains of
weakness and severe pain behind the eyes and typically in the back
and legs. Lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and a transient
maculopapular rash may appear. Subclinical infection is frequent,
and a carrier state is recognized. The differential diagnosis includes
other febrile, self-limited states such as dengue, leptospirosis,
malaria, relapsing fever, and typhus. Recovery occurs regularly even
in the absence of treatment.
Cat-scratch disease is an acute infection of children and young
adults caused by Bartonella henselae. It is transmitted from cats to
humans as the result of a scratch or bite. Within a few days, a
papule or ulcer will develop at the inoculation site in one-third of
patients. One to 3 weeks later, fever, headache, and malaise occur.
Regional lymph nodes become enlarged, often tender, and may
suppurate. Lymphadenopathy from cat scratches resembles that
due to neoplasm, tuberculosis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and
bacterial lymphadenitis. The diagnosis is usually made clinically.
Special cultures for bartonellae, serology, or excisional biopsy,
though rarely necessary, confirm the diagnosis. The biopsy reveals
necrotizing lymphadenitis and is itself not specific for cat-scratch
disease. Cat-scratch disease is usually self-limited, requiring no
specific therapy. Encephalitis occurs rarely.
Disseminated forms of the disease—bacillary angiomatosis,
peliosis hepatis, and retinitis—occur in HIV-infected persons. The
lesions are vasculoproliferative and histopathologically distinct from
those of cat-scratch disease. Unexplained fever in patients with late
stages of HIV infection is not uncommonly due to bartonellosis. B
quintana, the agent of trench fever, can also cause bacillary
angiomatosis and persistent bacteremia or endocarditis (which will
be “culture-negative” unless specifically sought), the latter two
entities being associated with homelessness. Due to the fastidious
nature of the organism and its special growth requirements,
serologic testing (eg, demonstration of a high antibody titer in an
indirect immunofluorescence assay) or nucleic acid amplification
tests are often required to establish a diagnosis.
Bacillary angiomatosis responds to treatment with a macrolide or
doxycycline administered in standard doses for 4–8 weeks.
Bacteremia and endocarditis can be effectively treated with a 6-
week course of doxycycline (200 mg orally or intravenously in two
divided doses per day) plus gentamicin 3 mg/kg/d intravenously for
the first 2 weeks. Relapse may occur.
Florin TA et al. Beyond cat scratch disease: widening spectrum of
Bartonella henselae infection. Pediatrics. 2008 May;
121(5):e1413–25. [PMID: 18443019]
 
Maman E et al. Musculoskeletal manifestations of cat scratch
disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Dec 15;45(12):1535–40. [PMID:
18190312]
 
ANAEROBIC INFECTIONS
Anaerobic bacteria comprise the majority of normal human flora.
Normal microbial flora of the mouth (anaerobic spirochetes,
Prevotella, fusobacteria), the skin (anaerobic diphtheroids), the
large bowel (bacteroides, anaerobic streptococci, clostridia), and
the female genitourinary tract (bacteroides, anaerobic streptococci,
fusobacteria) produce disease when displaced from their normal
sites into tissues or closed body spaces.
Anaerobic infections tend to be polymicrobial and abscesses are
common. Pus and infected tissue often are malodorous. Septic
thrombophlebitis and metastatic infection are frequent and may
require incision and drainage. Diminished blood supply that favors
proliferation of anaerobes because of reduced tissue oxygenation
may interfere with the delivery of antimicrobials to the site of
anaerobic infection. Cultures, unless carefully collected under
anaerobic conditions, may yield negative results.
Important types of infections that are most commonly caused by
anaerobic organisms are listed below. Treatment of all these
infections consists of surgical exploration and judicious excision in
conjunction with administration of antimicrobial drugs.
1. Head & Neck Infections
Prevotella 
melaninogenica 
(formerly Bacteroides
melaninogenicus) and anaerobic spirochetes are commonly
involved in periodontal infections. These organisms, fusobacteria,
and peptostreptococci may cause chronic sinusitis, peritonsillar
abscess, chronic otitis media, and mastoiditis. F necrophorum has
been recognized as a common cause of pharyngitis in adolescents
and young adults. F necrophorum infection has been associated
with septic internal jugular thrombophlebitis (Lemierre syndrome)
and cause septic pulmonary embolization. Hygiene, drainage, and
surgical debridement are as important in treatment as antimicrobials.
Oral anaerobic organisms have been uniformly susceptible to
penicillin, but there has been a recent trend of increasing penicillin
resistance, usually due to β-lactamase production. Therefore,
ampicillin/sulbactam 1.5-3 g intravenously every 6 hours (if
parenteral therapy is required) or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid
875/125 mg orally twice daily, or clindamycin can be used (600 mg
intravenously every 8 hours or 300 mg orally every 6 hours).
Antimicrobial treatment is continued for a few days after signs and
symptoms of infection have resolved. Indolent, established
infections (eg, mastoiditis or osteomyelitis) may require prolonged
courses of therapy, eg, 4–6 weeks or longer.
Centor RM. Expand the pharyngitis paradigm for adolescents and
young adults. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Dec 1;151(11):812–5.
[PMID: 19949147]
 
2. Chest Infections
Usually in the setting of poor oral hygiene and periodontal disease,
aspiration of saliva (which contains 108 anaerobic organisms per
milliliter in addition to aerobes) may lead to necrotizing pneumonia,
lung abscess, and empyema. Polymicrobial infection is the rule and
anaerobes—particularly P melaninogenica, fusobacteria, and
peptostreptococci—are common etiologic agents. Most pulmonary
infections respond to antimicrobial therapy alone. Percutaneous
chest tube or surgical drainage is indicated for empyema.
Penicillin-resistant Bacteroides fragilis and P melaninogenica
are commonly isolated and have been associated with clinical
failures. Clindamycin, 600 mg intravenously once, followed by 300
mg orally every 6–8 hours, is the treatment of choice for these
infections. Metronidazole does not cover facultative streptococci,
which often are present, and if used, a second agent that is active
against streptococci, such as ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously or
intramuscularly daily, should be added. Penicillin, 2 million units
intravenously every 4 hours, followed by amoxicillin, 500 mg every
8 hours orally, is an alternative; however, increasing prevalence of
β-lactamase producing organisms is a concern. Moxifloxacin, 400
mg orally or intravenously once daily, may be used. Because these
infections respond slowly, a prolonged course of therapy (eg, 4–6
weeks) is generally recommended.
Bartlett JG. The role of anaerobic bacteria in lung abscess. Clin
Infect Dis. 2005 Apr 1;40(7):923–5. [PMID: 15824980]
 
3. Central Nervous System
Anaerobes are a common cause of brain abscess, subdural
empyema, or septic central nervous system thrombophlebitis. The
organisms reach the central nervous system by direct extension from
sinusitis, otitis, or mastoiditis or by hematogenous spread from
chronic lung infections. Antimicrobial therapy—eg, ceftriaxone, 2 g
intravenously every 12 hours, plus metronidazole, 750 mg
intravenously every 8 hours—is an important adjunct to surgical
drainage. Duration of therapy is 6–8 weeks. Some small multiple
brain abscesses can be treated with antibiotics alone without
surgical drainage.
Menon S et al. Current epidemiology of intracranial abscesses: a
prospective 5 year study. J Med Microbiol. 2008 Oct;57(Pt
10):1259–68. [PMID: 18809555]
 
4. Intra-abdominal Infections
In the colon there are up to 1011 anaerobes per gram of content—
predominantly B fragilis, clostridia, and peptostreptococci. These
organisms play a central role in most intra-abdominal abscesses
following trauma to the colon, diverticulitis, appendicitis, or
perirectal abscess and may also participate in hepatic abscess and
cholecystitis, often in association with aerobic coliform bacteria. The
bacteriology includes anaerobes as well as enteric gram-negative
rods and on occasion enterococci. Therapy should be directed both
against anaerobes and gram-negative aerobes. Agents that are
active against B fragilis include metronidazole, chloramphenicol,
moxifloxacin, tigecycline, ertapenem, imipenem, doripenem,
ampicillin-sulbactam, ticarcillin-clavulanic acid, and piperacillin-
tazobactam. Resistance to cefoxitin, cefotetan, and clindamycin is
increasingly encountered. Most third-generation cephalosporins
have poor efficacy.
Table 33–7 summarizes the antibiotic regimens for management
of moderate to moderately severe infections (eg, patient
hemodynamically stable, good surgical drainage possible or
established, low APACHE score, no multiple organ failure) and
severe infections (eg, major peritoneal soilage, large or multiple
abscesses, patient hemodynamically unstable), particularly if drug-
resistant organisms are suspected. An effective oral regimen for
patients able to take it is presented also.
Solomkin JS et al. Diagnosis and management of complicated
intra-abdominal infection in adults and children: guidelines by the
Surgical Infection Society and the Infectious Diseases Society of
America. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jan 15;50(2):133–164. [PMID:
20034345]
 
5. Female Genital Tract & Pelvic Infections
The normal flora of the vagina and cervix includes several species of
bacteroides, peptostreptococci, group B streptococci, lactobacilli,
coliform bacteria, and, occasionally, spirochetes and clostridia.
These organisms commonly cause genital tract infections and may
disseminate from there.
While salpingitis is often caused by gonococci and chlamydiae,
tubo-ovarian and pelvic abscesses are associated with anaerobes in
most cases. Postpartum infections may be caused by aerobic
streptococci or staphylococci, but anaerobes are often found, and
the worst cases of postpartum or postabortion sepsis are associated
with clostridia and bacteroides. These have a high mortality rate,
and treatment requires both antimicrobials directed against
anaerobes and coliforms (see above) and abscess drainage or early
hysterectomy.
 
Table 33–7. Treatment of anaerobic intra-abdominal infections.
 
Community-onset
Oral therapy
      Moxifloxacin 400 mg every 24 hours
Intravenous therapy
      Moderate to moderately severe infections:
          Ertapenem 1 g every 24 hours
                             or—
          Ceftriaxone 1 g every 24 hours (or ciprofloxacin 400
mg every 12 hours, if penicillin allergic) plus metronidazole
500 mg every 8 hours
                             or—
          Tigecycline 100 mg once followed by 50 mg every
12 hours
                              or—
          Moxifloxacin 400 mg every 24 hours
      Severe infections:
          Imipenem, 0.5 g every 6–8 hours or meropenem 1 g
every 8 hours or doripenem 0.5 g every 8 hours or
piperacillin/tazobactam 3.75 g every 6 hours
      Health-care–associated intravenous therapy
          Imipenem, 0.5 g every 6–8 hours or meropenem 1 g
every 8 hours or doripenem 0.5 g every 8 hours or
piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g every 6 hours1
                             or—
          Ceftazidime or cefepime 2 g every 8 hours plus
metronidazole 0.5 g every 8 hours
1Dosage higher than for community-onset severe infection to provide
antipseudomonal coverage.
Soper DE. Pelvic inflammatory disease. Obstet Gynecol. 2010
Aug;116(2 Pt 1):419–28. [PMID: 20664404]
 
6. Bacteremia & Endocarditis
Anaerobic bacteremia usually originates from the gastrointestinal
tract, the oropharynx, decubitus ulcers, or the female genital tract.
Endocarditis due to anaerobic and microaerophilic streptococci and
bacteroides originates from the same sites. Most cases of anaerobic
or micro-aerophilic streptococcal endocarditis can be effectively
treated with 12–20 million units of penicillin G daily for 4–6 weeks,
but optimal therapy of other types of anaerobic bacterial
endocarditis must rely on laboratory guidance. Anaerobic
corynebacteria (propionibacteria), clostridia, and bacteroides
occasionally cause endocarditis.
7. Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
Anaerobic infections in the skin and soft tissue usually follow
trauma, inadequate blood supply, or surgery and are most common
in areas that are contaminated by oral or fecal flora. These
infections also occur in injection drug users and persons sustaining
animal to human bites. There may be progressive tissue necrosis
(Figure 33–5) and a putrid odor.
Several terms, such as bacterial synergistic gangrene, synergistic
necrotizing cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis, and nonclostridial crepitant
cellulitis, have been used to classify these infections. Although there
are some differences in microbiology among them, their
differentiation on clinical grounds alone is difficult. All are mixed
infections caused by aerobic and anaerobic organisms and require
aggressive surgical debridement of necrotic tissue for cure. Surgical
consultation is obligatory to assist in diagnosis and treatment.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics active against both anaerobes and
gram-positive and gram-negative aerobes (eg, vancomycin plus
piperacillin-tazobactam) should be instituted empirically and
modified by culture results (see Table 30–5). They are given for
about a week after progressive tissue destruction has been
controlled and the margins of the wound remain free of
inflammation.
Anaya DA et al. Necrotizing soft-tissue infection: diagnosis and
management. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Mar 1;44(5):705–10. [PMID:
17278065]
 
ACTINOMYCOSIS
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of recent dental infection or abdominal trauma.
 Chronic pneumonia or indolent intra-abdominal or cervicofacial
abscess.
 Sinus tract formation.
 
Figure 33–5. Gangrene of the right foot causing necrosis of the
toes. (Courtesy of William Archibald, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
 General Considerations
Actinomyces israelii and other species of Actinomyces occur in
the normal flora of the mouth and tonsillar crypts. They are
anaerobic, gram-positive, branching filamentous bacteria (1 mcm in
diameter) that may fragment into bacillary forms. When introduced
into traumatized tissue and associated with other anaerobic bacteria,
these actinomycetes become pathogens.
The most common site of infection is the cervicofacial area
(about 60% of cases). Infection typically follows extraction of a
tooth or other trauma. Lesions may develop in the gastrointestinal
tract or lungs following ingestion or aspiration of the organism from
its endogenous source in the mouth. Interestingly, T whippelii, the
causative agent of Whipple disease, is an actinomycete and
therefore is related to the species that cause actinomycosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Cervicofacial actinomycosis—Cervicofacial actinomycosis
develops slowly. The area becomes markedly indurated, and the
overlying skin becomes reddish or cyanotic. Abscesses eventually
draining to the surface persist for long periods. Sulfur granules—
masses of filamentous organisms—may be found in the pus. There
is usually little pain unless there is secondary infection. Trismus
indicates that the muscles of mastication are involved. Radiography
may reveal bony involvement.
2. Thoracic actinomycosis—Thoracic involvement begins with
fever, cough, and sputum production with night sweats and weight
loss. Pleuritic pain may be present. Multiple sinuses may extend
through the chest wall, to the heart, or into the abdominal cavity.
Ribs may be involved. Radiography shows areas of consolidation
and in many cases pleural effusion. Cervicofacial or thoracic disease
may occasionally involve the central nervous system, most
commonly brain abscess or meningitis.
3. Abdominal actinomycosis—Abdominal actinomycosis usually
causes pain in the ileocecal region, spiking fever and chills, vomiting,
and weight loss; it may be confused with Crohn disease. Irregular
abdominal masses may be palpated. Pelvic inflammatory disease
caused by actinomycetes has been associated with prolonged use of
an intrauterine contraceptive device. Sinuses draining to the exterior
may develop. CT scanning reveals an inflammatory mass extended
to involve bone.
B. Laboratory Findings
The anaerobic, gram-positive organism may be demonstrated as a
granule or as scattered branching gram-positive filaments in the pus.
Anaerobic culture is necessary to distinguish actinomycetes from
nocardiae because specific therapy differs for the two infections.
 Treatment
Penicillin G is the drug of choice. Ten to 20 million units are given
via a parenteral route for 4–6 weeks, followed by oral penicillin V,
500 mg four times daily. Alternatives include ampicillin, 12 g/d
intravenously for 4–6 weeks followed by oral amoxicillin 500 mg
three times daily or doxycycline 100 mg twice daily intravenously or
orally. Response to therapy is slow. Therapy should be continued
for weeks to months after clinical manifestations have disappeared
in order to ensure cure. Surgical procedures such as drainage and
resection may be beneficial.
With penicillin and surgery, the prognosis is good. The difficulties
of diagnosis, however, may permit extensive destruction of tissue
before the diagnosis is identified and therapy is started.
Sharkawy AA. Cervicofacial actinomycosis and mandibular
osteomyelitis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2007 Jun;21(2): 543–56.
[PMID: 17561082]
 
NOCARDIOSIS
 
Nocardia asteroides, an aerobic filamentous soil bacterium, causes
pulmonary 
and 
systemic 
nocardiosis. 
Broncho-pulmonary
abnormalities (eg, alveolar proteinosis) predispose to colonization,
but infection is unusual unless the patient is also receiving systemic
corticosteroids or is otherwise immunosuppressed.
 Clinical Findings
Pulmonary involvement usually begins with malaise, loss of weight,
fever, and night sweats. Cough and production of purulent sputum
are the chief complaints. Radiography may show infiltrates
accompanied by pleural effusion. The lesions may penetrate to the
exterior through the chest wall, invading the ribs.
Dissemination involves any organ. Brain abscesses and
subcutaneous nodules are most frequent. This is seen exclusively in
immunocompromised patients.
N asteroides is usually found as delicate, branching, gram-
positive filaments. It may be weakly acid-fast, occasionally causing
diagnostic confusion with tuberculosis. Identification is made by
culture.
 Treatment
For cutaneous infections, therapy is initiated with intravenous
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole administered at a dosage of 5–10
mg/kg/d (based on trimethoprim) and continued with oral
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-strength tablet twice a
day. Surgical procedures such as drainage and resection may be
needed as adjunctive therapy. A higher dose of 15 mg/kg/d (based
on trimethoprim) should be used for disseminated or pulmonary
infections. Resistance to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may be
increasing and initiating treatment with two drugs while awaiting
antibiotic susceptibilities is reasonable in cases of disseminated or
severe localized disease. Imipenem, 500 mg intravenously every 6
hours, is an alternative. Consultation with an infectious diseases
expert should be considered.
Response may be slow, and therapy must be continued for at
least 6 months. The prognosis in systemic nocardiosis is poor when
diagnosis and therapy are delayed.
Nocardia brasiliensis typically causes a digital lesion—
resembling herpetic whitlow—and ascending lymphangitis in normal
hosts. Antimicrobial treatment is as for N asteroides infection, and
the prognosis is excellent.
Martínez R et al. Pulmonary nocardiosis: risk factors, clinical
features, diagnosis and prognosis. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2008
May;14(3):219–27. [PMID: 18427245]
 
Uhde KB et al. Antimicrobial-resistant nocardia isolates, United
States, 1995–2004. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Dec 15;51(12):1445–8.
[PMID: 21058914]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY
MYCOBACTERIA
 
NONTUBERCULOUS ATYPICAL MYCOBACTERIAL
DISEASES
About 10% of mycobacterial infections are caused by atypical
mycobacteria. Atypical mycobacterial infections are among the
most common opportunistic infections in advanced HIV disease.
These organisms have distinctive laboratory characteristics, occur
ubiquitously in the environment, are not communicable from person
to person, and are often resistant to standard antituberculous drugs.
1. Pulmonary Infections
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) causes a chronic, slowly
progressive pulmonary infection resembling tuberculosis in
immunocompetent patients, who typically have underlying
pulmonary disease.
Treatment of immunocompetent patients with pulmonary infection
is empiric and based entirely on anecdotal data. A combination of
agents is probably best. Rifampin, 600 mg orally once daily, plus
ethambutol, 15–25 mg/kg/d orally, plus streptomycin, 1 g
intramuscularly three to five times a week for the first 4–6 months,
have been used. The role of rifabutin, fluoroquinolones, and the
macrolides is not known, but based on their excellent efficacy in
immunocompromised AIDS patients, they may actually be more
effective than the relatively weak agents traditionally used in
immunocompetent patients. Clarithromycin is a very potent drug in
the treatment of MAC in AIDS patients. Based on this, inclusion of
clarithromycin in the initial treatment regimen of immunocompetent
patients is prudent. Therapy is continued for a total of 18–24
months.
M kansasii can produce clinical disease resembling tuberculosis,
but the illness progresses more slowly. Most such infections occur
in patients with preexisting lung disease, though 40% of patients
have no known pulmonary disease. Microbiologically, M kansasii
is similar to M tuberculosis and is sensitive to the same drugs
except pyrazinamide, to which it is resistant. Therapy with isoniazid,
ethambutol, and rifampin for 2 years (or 1 year after sputum
conversion) has been successful.
Less common causes of pulmonary disease include M xenopi, M
szulgai, 
and M gordonae. These organisms have variable
sensitivities, and treatment is based on results of sensitivity tests.
The rapid growing mycobacteria, M abscessus, M chelonae, and
M fortuitum also can cause pneumonia in the occasional patient.
2. Lymphadenitis
Most cases of lymphadenitis (scrofula) in adults are caused by M
tuberculosis and can be a manifestation of disseminated disease. In
children, the majority of cases are due to nontuberculous
mycobacterial species, with MAC being the most common followed
by M scrofulaceum in the United States and M malmoense and M
haemophilum in Northern Europe. M kansasii, M bovis, M
chelonae, and M fortuitum are less commonly observed. Unlike
disease caused by M tuberculosis, which requires systemic therapy
for 6 months, infection with nontuberculous mycobacteria can be
successfully treated by surgical excision without antituberculous
therapy.
3. Skin & Soft Tissue Infections
Skin and soft tissue infections such as abscesses, septic arthritis,
and osteomyelitis can result from direct inoculation or
hematogenous dissemination or may occur as a complication of
surgery.
M abscessus, M chelonae, and M fortuitum are frequent
causes of this type of infection. Most cases occur in the extremities
and initially present as nodules. Ulceration with abscess formation
often follows. The organisms are resistant to the usual
antituberculous drugs but may be sensitive to a variety of antibiotics,
including 
erythromycin, 
doxycycline, 
amikacin, 
cefoxitin,
sulfonamides, imipenem, and ciprofloxacin. Therapy includes
surgical debridement along with drug therapy. Initially, parenteral
drugs are given for several weeks, and this is followed by an oral
regimen to which the organism is sensitive. The duration of therapy
is variable but usually continues for several months after the soft
tissue lesions have healed.
M marinum infection (“swimming pool granuloma”) presents as
a nodular skin lesion following exposure to nonchlorinated water.
The lesions respond to therapy with clarithromycin, doxycycline,
minocycline, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
M ulcerans infection (Buruli ulcer) is seen mainly in Africa and
Australia and produces a large ulcerative lesion. Therapy consists of
surgical excision and skin grafting.
4. Disseminated Mycobacterium avium Infection
MAC produces asymptomatic colonization or a wide spectrum of
diseases, including coin lesions, bronchitis in patients with chronic
lung disease, and invasive pulmonary disease that is often cavitary
and occurs in patients with underlying lung disease. MAC causes
disseminated disease in the late stages of HIV infection, when the
CD4 cell count is > 50/mcL. Persistent fever and weight loss are
the most common symptoms. The organism can usually be cultured
from multiple sites, including blood, liver, lymph node, or bone
marrow. Blood culture is the preferred means of establishing the
diagnosis and has a sensitivity of 98%.
 Treatment
Agents with proved activity against MAC are rifabutin,
azithromycin, clarithromycin, and ethambutol. Amikacin and
ciprofloxacin work in vitro, but clinical results are inconsistent. A
combination of two or more active agents should be used to prevent
rapid emergence of secondary resistance. Clarithromycin, 500 mg
orally twice daily, plus ethambutol, 15 mg/kg/d orally as a single
dose, with or without rifabutin, 300 mg/d orally, is the treatment of
choice. Azithromycin, 500 mg orally once daily, may be used
instead of clarithromycin. Insufficient data are available to permit
specific recommendations about second-line regimens for patients
intolerant of macrolides or those with macrolide-resistant organisms.
MAC therapy may be discontinued in patients who have been
treated with 12 months of therapy for disseminated MAC, who
have no evidence of active disease, and whose CD4 counts exceed
100 cells/mcL while receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART).
 Prevention
Antimicrobial prophylaxis of MAC prevents disseminated disease
and prolongs survival. It is the standard of care to offer it to all
HIV-infected patients with CD4 counts ≤ 50/mcL. In contrast to
active infection, single-drug oral regimens of clarithromycin, 500 mg
twice daily, azithromycin, 1200 mg once weekly, or rifabutin, 300
mg once daily, are appropriate. Clarithromycin or azithromycin is
more effective and better tolerated than rifabutin, and therefore
preferred. Primary prophylaxis for MAC infection can be stopped
in patients who have responded to antiretroviral combination
therapy with elevation of CD4 counts > 100 cells/mcL for 3
months.
Bodle EE et al. Epidemiology of nontuberculous mycobacteria in
patients without HIV infection, New York City. Emerg Infect Dis.
2008 Mar;14(3):390–6. [PMID: 18325252]
 
Griffith DE et al; ATS Mycobacterial Diseases Subcommittee;
American Thoracic Society; Infectious Disease Society of
America. An official ATS/IDSA statement: diagnosis, treatment,
and prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial diseases. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Feb 15;175(4):367–416. [PMID:
17277290]
 
Winthrop KL et al. Pulmonary nontuberculous mycobacterial
disease prevalence and clinical features: an emerging public health
disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Oct 1;182(7):977–82.
[PMID: 20508209]
 
MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS INFECTIONS
Tuberculosis is discussed in Chapter 9. Further information and
expert consultation can be obtained from the Francis J. Curry
National 
Tuberculosis 
Center 
at 
the 
Web 
site
http://www.nationaltbcenter.edu or, by phone, 415-502-4600, or
fax, 415-502-4620.
TUBERCULOUS MENINGITIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Gradual onset of listlessness, irritability, and anorexia.
 Headache, vomiting, and seizures common.
 Cranial nerve abnormalities typical.
 Tuberculosis focus may be evident elsewhere.
 Cerebrospinal fluid shows several hundred lymphocytes, low
glucose, and high protein.
 
 General Considerations
Tuberculous meningitis is caused by rupture of a meningeal
tuberculoma resulting from earlier hematogenous seeding of tubercle
bacilli from a pulmonary focus, or it may be a consequence of
miliary spread.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is usually gradual, with listlessness, irritability, anorexia,
and fever, followed by headache, vomiting, convulsions, and coma.
In older patients, headache and behavioral changes are prominent
early symptoms. Nuchal rigidity and cranial nerve palsies occur as
the meningitis progresses. Evidence of active tuberculosis elsewhere
or a history of prior tuberculosis is present in up to 75% of patients.
B. Laboratory Findings
The spinal fluid is frequently yellowish, with increased pressure,
100–500 cells/mcL (predominantly lymphocytes, though neutrophils
may be present early during infection), increased protein, and
decreased glucose. Acid-fast stains of cerebrospinal fluid usually
are negative, and cultures also may be negative in 15–25% of
cases. Nucleic acid amplification tests for rapid diagnosis of
tuberculosis have variable sensitivity and specificity and none are
FDA-approved for use in meningitis. Chest X-ray often reveals
abnormalities compatible with tuberculosis but may be normal.
 Differential Diagnosis
Tuberculous meningitis may be confused with any other type of
meningitis, but the gradual onset, the predominantly lymphocytic
pleocytosis of the spinal fluid, and evidence of tuberculosis
elsewhere often point to the diagnosis. The tuberculin skin test is
usually (not always) positive. Fungal and other granulomatous
meningitides, syphilis, and carcinomatous meningitis are in the
differential diagnosis.
 Complications
Complications of tuberculous meningitis include seizure disorders,
cranial nerve palsies, stroke, and obstructive hydro-cephalus with
impaired cognitive function. These result from inflammatory exudate
primarily involving the basilar meninges and arteries.
 Treatment
Presumptive diagnosis followed by early, empiric antituberculous
therapy is essential for survival and to minimize sequelae. Even if
cultures are not positive, a full course of therapy is warranted if the
clinical setting is suggestive of tuberculous meningitis.
Regimens that are effective for pulmonary tuberculosis are
effective also for tuberculous meningitis (see Table 9–17). Rifampin,
isoniazid, and pyrazinamide all penetrate into cerebrospinal fluid
well. The penetration of ethambutol is more variable, but therapeutic
concentrations can be achieved, and the drug has been successfully
used for meningitis. Aminoglycosides penetrate less well. Regimens
that do not include both isoniazid and rifampin may be effective but
are less reliable and generally must be given for longer periods.
Many authorities recommend the addition of corticosteroids for
patients with focal deficits or altered mental status. Dexamethasone,
0.15 mg/kg intravenously or orally four times daily for 1–2 weeks,
then discontinued in a tapering regimen over 4 weeks, may be used.
Prasad K et al. Corticosteroids for managing tuberculous
meningitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Jan 23;
(1):CD002244. [PMID: 18254003]
 
Shaw JE et al. Meningeal tuberculosis: high long-term mortality
despite standard therapy. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010
May;89(3):189–95. [PMID: 20453606]
 
Török ME et al. Clinical and microbiological features of HIV-
associated tuberculous meningitis in Vietnamese adults. PLoS
ONE. 2008 Mar 19;3(3):e1772. [PMID: 18350135]
 
LEPROSY (Hansen Disease)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pale, anesthetic macular—or nodular and erythematous—skin
lesions.
 Superficial nerve thickening with associated anesthesia.
 History of residence in endemic area in childhood.
 Acid-fast bacilli in skin lesions or nasal scrapings, or
characteristic histologic nerve changes.
 
 General Considerations
Leprosy (Hansen disease) is a chronic infectious disease caused by
the acid-fast rod M leprae. The mode of transmission probably is
respiratory and involves prolonged exposure in childhood. The
disease is endemic in tropical and subtropical Asia, Africa, Central
and South America, and the Pacific regions, and rarely seen
sporadically in the southern United States.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The onset is insidious. The lesions involve the cooler body tissues:
skin, superficial nerves, nose, pharynx, larynx, eyes, and testicles.
Skin lesions may occur as pale, anesthetic macular lesions 1–10 cm
in diameter; discrete erythematous, infiltrated nodules 1–5 cm in
diameter; or diffuse skin infiltration. Neurologic disturbances are
caused by nerve infiltration and thickening, with resultant anesthesia,
and motor abnormalities. Bilateral ulnar neuropathy is highly
suggestive. In untreated cases, disfigurement due to the skin
infiltration and nerve involvement may be extreme, leading to trophic
ulcers, bone resorption, and loss of digits.
The disease is divided clinically and by laboratory tests into two
distinct types: lepromatous and tuberculoid. The lepromatous type
(also referred to as multibacillary leprosy) occurs in persons with
defective cellular immunity. The course is progressive and malignant,
with nodular skin lesions; slow, symmetric nerve involvement;
abundant acid-fast bacilli in the skin lesions; and a negative lepromin
skin test. In the tuberculoid type (paucibacillary leprosy), cellular
immunity is intact and the course is more benign and less
progressive, with macular skin lesions, severe asymmetric nerve
involvement of sudden onset with few bacilli present in the lesions,
and a positive lepromin skin test. Intermediate (“borderline”) cases
are frequent. Eye involvement (keratitis and iridocyclitis), nasal
ulcers, epistaxis, anemia, and lymphadenopathy may occur.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory confirmation of leprosy requires the demonstration of
acid-fast bacilli in a skin biopsy. Biopsy of skin or of a thickened
involved nerve also gives a typical histo-logic picture. M leprae
does not grow in artificial media but does grow in the foot pads of
armadillos.
 Differential Diagnosis
The skin lesions of leprosy often resemble those of lupus
erythematosus, sarcoidosis, syphilis, erythema nodosum, erythema
multiforme, cutaneous tuberculosis, and vitiligo.
 Complications
Kidney failure and hepatomegaly from secondary amyloidosis may
occur with long-standing disease.
 Treatment
Combination therapy is recommended for treatment of all types of
leprosy. Single-drug treatment is accompanied by emergence of
resistance, and primary resistance to dapsone also occurs. For
borderline and lepromatous cases (ie, multibacillary disease), the
World Health Organization recommends a triple oral drug-regimen
of rifampin, 600 mg once a month; dapsone, 100 mg daily; and
clofazimine, 300 mg once a month and 50 mg daily for 12 months
although longer courses may be needed for patients with high
burden of disease. For indeterminate and tuberculoid leprosy
(paucibacillary disease), the recommendation is rifampin, 600 mg
once a month, plus dapsone, 100 mg daily for 6 months.
Two reactional states—erythema nodosum leprosum and
reversal reactions—may occur as a consequence of therapy. The
reversal reaction, typical of borderline lepromatous leprosy,
probably results from enhanced host immunity. Skin lesions and
nerves become swollen and tender, but systemic manifestations are
not seen. Erythema nodosum leprosum, typical of lepromatous
leprosy, is a consequence of immune injury from antigen-antibody
complex deposition in skin and other tissues; in addition to skin and
nerve manifestations, fever and systemic involvement may be seen.
Prednisone, 60 mg/d orally, or thalidomide, 300 mg/d orally (in the
nonpregnant patient only), is effective for erythema nodosum
leprosum. Improvement is expected within a few days after initiating
prednisone, and thereafter the dose may be tapered over several
weeks to avoid recurrence. Thalidomide is also tapered over
several weeks to a 100-mg bedtime dose. Erythema nodosum
leprosum is usually confined to the first year of therapy, and
prednisone or thalidomide can be discontinued. Thalidomide is
ineffective for reversal reactions, and prednisone, 60 mg/d, is
indicated. Reversal reactions tend to recur, and the dose of
prednisone should be slowly tapered over weeks to months.
Therapy for leprosy should not be discontinued during treatment of
reactional states.
Walsh DS et al. Recent advances in leprosy and Buruli ulcer
(Mycobacterium ulcerans infection). Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2010
Oct;23(5):445–55. [PMID: 20581668]
 
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY
CHLAMYDIAE
 
Chlamydiaceae is a family of obligate intracellular parasites closely
related to gram-negative bacteria. They include two important
genera of human pathogens—Chlamydia, which includes the
species C trachomatis, and Chlamydophila, which include the
species C psittaci (formerly known as C psittaci) and C
pneumoniae 
(formerly 
known 
as C pneumoniae). The
differentiation of genera is based on differences in intracellular
inclusions, sulfonamide susceptibility, antigenic composition, and
disease production. C trachomatis causes many different human
infections involving the eye (trachoma, inclusion conjunctivitis), the
genital tract (lymphogranuloma venereum, nongonococcal urethritis,
cervicitis, salpingitis), or the respiratory tract in infants
(pneumonitis). C psittaci causes psittacosis and C pneumoniae is a
cause of respiratory tract infections.
CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS INFECTIONS
1. Lymphogranuloma Venereum
ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 General Considerations
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) is an acute and chronic
sexually transmitted disease caused by C trachomatis types L1–
L3. The disease is acquired during intercourse or through contact
with contaminated exudate from active lesions. The incubation
period is 5–21 days. After the genital lesion disappears, the
infection spreads to lymph channels and lymph nodes of the genital
and rectal areas. Inapparent infections and latent disease are not
uncommon.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
In men, the initial vesicular or ulcerative lesion (on the external
genitalia) is evanescent and often goes unnoticed. Inguinal buboes
appear 1–4 weeks after exposure, are often bilateral, and have a
tendency to fuse, soften, and break down to form multiple draining
sinuses, with extensive scarring. In women, the genital lymph
drainage is to the perirectal glands. Early anorectal manifestations
are proctitis with tenesmus and bloody purulent discharge; late
manifestations are chronic cicatrizing inflammation of the rectal and
perirectal tissue. These changes lead to obstipation and rectal
stricture and, occasionally, rectovaginal and perianal fistulas. They
are also seen in homosexual men.
B. Laboratory Findings
The complement fixation test may be positive (titers > 1:64), but
cross-reaction with other chlamydiae occurs. Although a positive
reaction may reflect remote infection, high titers usually indicate
active disease. Nucleic acid detection tests are sensitive, but not
FDA-approved for rectal specimens and cannot differentiate LGV
from non-LGV strains.
 Differential Diagnosis
The early lesion of LGV must be differentiated from the lesions of
syphilis, genital herpes, and chancroid; lymph node involvement
must be distinguished from that due to tularemia, tuberculosis,
plague, neoplasm, or pyogenic infection; and rectal stricture must be
distinguished from that due to neoplasm and ulcerative colitis.
 Treatment
If diagnostic testing for LGV is not available, patients with a clinical
presentation suggestive of LGV should be treated empirically. The
antibiotic of choice is doxycycline (contraindicated in pregnancy),
100 mg orally twice daily for 21 days. Erythromycin, 500 mg orally
four times a day for 21 days, is also effective. Azithromycin, 1 g
orally once weekly for 3 weeks, may also be effective.
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum
in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in
article text. [PMID: 21160459]
 
2. Chlamydial Urethritis & Cervicitis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Common cause of urethritis, cervicitis, and post-gonococcal
urethritis.
 Diagnosis made by nucleic acid amplification of urine or swab
specimen.
 
 General Considerations
C trachomatis immunotypes D–K are isolated in about 50% of
cases of nongonococcal urethritis and cervicitis. In other cases,
Ureaplasma urealyticum or Mycoplasma genitalium can be
grown as a possible etiologic agent. C trachomatis is an important
cause of postgonococcal urethritis. Coinfection with gonococci and
chlamydiae is common, and postgonococcal (ie, chlamydial)
urethritis may persist after successful treatment of the gonococcal
component. Occasionally, epididymitis, prostatitis, or proctitis is
caused by chlamydial infection. Chlamydiae are a leading cause of
infertility in females in the United States.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Females infected with chlamydiae may be asymptomatic or may
have symptoms and signs of cervicitis, salpingitis, or pelvic
inflammatory disease. The urethral or cervical discharge due to C
trachomatis tends to be less painful, less purulent, and watery
compared with gonococcal infection.
B. Laboratory Findings
A patient with urethritis or cervicitis and absence of gram-negative
diplococci on Gram stain and of N gonorrhoeae on culture is
assumed to have chlamydial infection until proven otherwise. The
diagnosis should be confirmed, whenever possible, by the FDA-
approved, highly sensitive nucleic acid amplification tests for use
with urine or vaginal swabs. A negative nucleic acid amplification
test for chlamydia reliably excludes the diagnosis of chlamydial
urethritis or cervicitis and therapy need not be administered.
C. Screening
Active screening for chlamydial infection is recommended in certain
settings: pregnant women; all sexually active women 25 years of age
and under; older women with risk factors for sexually transmitted
diseases; and men with risk factors for sexually transmitted
diseases, such as HIV-positive men or men who have sex with men.
 Treatment
Recommended regimens are a single oral 1-g dose of azithromycin
(preferred and safe in pregnancy), 100 mg of doxycycline orally for
7 days (contraindicated in pregnancy), or 500 mg of levofloxacin
once daily for 7 days (also contraindicated in pregnancy).
Presumptively administered therapy still may be indicated for some
patients (such as for an individual with gonococcal infection in
whom no chlamydial testing was performed or a test other than a
nucleic acid amplification test was used to exclude the diagnosis, or
an individual for whom a test result is pending but is considered
unlikely to follow-up, and for sexual contacts of documented
cases). As for all patients in whom sexually transmitted diseases are
diagnosed, studies for HIV and syphilis should also be performed.
Lusk MJ et al. Cervicitis: a review. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008
Feb;21(1):49–55. [PMID: 18192786]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum
in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in
article text. [PMID: 21160459]
 
CHLAMYDOPHILA PSITTACI & PSITTACOSIS
(Ornithosis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, chills, and cough; headache common.
 Atypical pneumonia with slightly delayed appearance of signs of
pneumonitis.
 Contact with infected bird (psittacine, pigeons, many others) 7–
15 days previously.
 Isolation of chlamydiae or rising titer of complement-fixing
antibodies.
 
 General Considerations
Psittacosis is acquired from contact with birds (parrots, parakeets,
pigeons, chickens, ducks, and many others), which may or may not
be ill. The history may be difficult to obtain if the patient acquired
infection from an illegally imported bird.
 Clinical Findings
The onset is usually rapid, with fever, chills, myalgia, dry cough, and
headache. Signs include temperature-pulse dissociation, dullness to
percussion, and rales. Pulmonary findings may be absent early.
Dyspnea and cyanosis may occur later. Endocarditis, which is
culture-negative, may occur. The radiographic findings in typical
psittacosis are those of atypical pneumonia, which tends to be
interstitial and diffuse in appearance, though consolidation can
occur. Psittacosis is indistinguishable from other bacterial or viral
pneumonias by radiography.
The organism is rarely isolated from cultures. The diagnosis is
usually made serologically; antibodies appear during the second
week and can be demonstrated by complement fixation or
immunofluorescence. Antibody response may be suppressed by
early chemotherapy.
 Differential Diagnosis
The illness is indistinguishable from viral, mycoplasmal, or other
atypical pneumonias except for the history of contact with birds.
Psittacosis is in the differential diagnosis of culture-negative
endocarditis.
 Treatment
Treatment consists of giving tetracycline, 0.5 g orally every 6 hours
or 0.5 g intravenously every 12 hours, for 14–21 days.
Erythromycin, 500 mg orally every 6 hours, may be effective as
well.
CHLAMYDOPHILA PNEUMONIAE INFECTION
C pneumoniae causes pneumonia and bronchitis. The clinical
presentation of pneumonia is that of an atypical pneumonia. The
organism accounts for approximately 10% of community-acquired
pneumonias, ranking second to mycoplasma as an agent of atypical
pneumonia. A putative role in coronary artery disease has not held
up to close scientific scrutiny.
Like C psittaci, strains of C pneumoniae are resistant to
sulfonamides. Erythromycin or tetracycline, 500 mg orally four times
a day for 10–14 days, appears to be effective therapy.
Fluoroquinolones, such as levofloxacin (500 mg once daily for 7–14
days) or moxifloxacin (400 mg once daily for 7–14 days), are
active in vitro against C pneumoniae and probably are effective. It
is unclear if empiric coverage for atypical pathogens in hospitalized
patients with community-acquired pneumonia provides a survival
benefit or improves clinical outcome.
Kumar S et al. Acute respiratory infection due to Chlamydia
pneumoniae: current status of diagnostic methods. Clin Infect Dis.
2007 Feb 15;44(4):568–76. [PMID: 17243062]
 
She RC et al. Limited utility of culture for Mycoplasma
pneumoniae and Chlamydophila pneumoniae for diagnosis of
respiratory tract infections. J Clin Microbiol. 2010
Sep;48(9):3380–2. [PMID: 20610673]
 
 
 
Spirochetal Infections
Susan S. Philip, MD, MPH
SYPHILIS
 
NATURAL HISTORY & PRINCIPLES OF DIAGNOSIS &
TREATMENT
Syphilis is a complex infectious disease caused by Treponema
pallidum, a spirochete capable of infecting almost any organ or
tissue in the body and causing protean clinical manifestations (Table
34–1). Transmission occurs most frequently during sexual contact
(including oral sex), through minor skin or mucosal lesions; sites of
inoculation are usually genital but may be extragenital. The risk of
acquiring syphilis after unprotected sex with an individual with
infectious syphilis is approximately 30–50%. Rarely, it can also be
transmitted through nonsexual contact, blood transfusion, or via the
placenta from mother to fetus (congenital syphilis).
The natural history of acquired syphilis is generally divided into
two major clinical stages: early (infectious) syphilis and late
syphilis. The two stages are separated by a symptom-free latent
phase during the first part of which (early latency) infectious lesions
are liable to recur. Infectious syphilis includes the primary lesions
(chancre and regional lymphadenopathy), the secondary lesions
(commonly involving skin and mucous membranes, occasionally
bone, central nervous system, or liver), relapsing lesions during early
latency, and congenital lesions. The hallmark of these lesions is an
abundance of spirochetes; tissue reaction is usually minimal. Late
syphilis consists of so-called benign (gummatous) lesions involving
skin, bones, and viscera; cardiovascular disease (principally
aortitis); and a variety of central nervous system and ocular
syndromes. These forms of syphilis are not contagious. The lesions
contain few demonstrable spirochetes, but tissue reactivity
(vasculitis, necrosis) is severe and suggestive of hypersensitivity
phenomena.
Public health efforts to control syphilis focus on the diagnosis and
treatment of early (infectious) cases and their partners.
Most cases of syphilis in the United States continue to occur in
MSM. From 2008 to 2009, the rates of primary and secondary
syphilis decreased slightly in white men and women and Hispanic
women but increased among black men and women and Hispanic
men. The highest rates were in black men, with 31 cases/100,000
population. In 2009, 53% of the primary and secondary syphilis
cases were reported from the South. The rate of congenital syphilis
cases decreased between 2008 and 2009, to 10 cases/100,000
live births. Despite the increase in primary and secondary syphilis in
MSM in certain urban areas, such as San Francisco, a concomitant
increase in the incidence of HIV has not been observed.
COURSE & PROGNOSIS
The lesions associated with primary and secondary syphilis are self-
limiting, even without treatment, and resolve with few or no residua.
Late syphilis may be highly destructive and permanently disabling
and may lead to death. Many experts now believe that while
infection is almost never completely eradicated in the absence of
treatment, most infections remain latent without sequelae, and only a
small number of latent infections progress to further disease.
CLINICAL STAGES OF SYPHILIS
1. Primary Syphilis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of sexual contact (may be unreliable).
 Painless ulcer on genitalia, perianal area, rectum, pharynx,
tongue, lip, or elsewhere.
 Nontender enlargement of regional lymph nodes.
 Fluid expressed from lesion contains T pallidum by
immunofluorescence or darkfield microscopy.
 Serologic nontreponemal and treponemal tests.
 
 
Table 34–1. Stages of syphilis and common clinical manifestations.
 
Primary syphilis
     Genital ulcer: painless ulcer with clean base and firm
indurated borders
     Regional lymphadenopathy
Secondary syphilis
     Skin and mucous membranes
        Rash: diffuse (may include palms and soles), macular,
papular, pustular, and combinations
     Condylomata lata
        Mucous patches: painless, silvery ulcerations of
mucous membrane with surrounding erythema
     Generalized lymphadenopathy
     Constitutional symptoms
        Fever, usually low-grade        Malaise
        Anorexia Arthralgias and myalgias
     Central nervous system
        Asymptomatic
        Symptomatic
        Headache
        Meningitis
        Cranial neuropathies (II–VIII)
     Ocular
        Iritis
        Iridocyclitis
     Other
        Renal: glomerulonephritis, nephrotic syndrome
        Liver: hepatitis
        Bone and joint: arthritis, periostitis
Late syphilis
     Late benign (gummatous): granulomatous lesion usually
involving skin, mucous membranes and bones, but any
organ can be involved
     Cardiovascular
        Aortic regurgitation
        Coronary ostial stenosis
        Aortic aneurysm
     Neurosyphilis
        Asymptomatic
        Meningovascular
          Seizures
          Hemiparesis or hemiplegia
        Tabes dorsalis
            Impaired proprioception and vibratory sensation
           Argyll Robertson pupil
           Shooting pains
           Ataxia
           Romberg sign
           Urinary and fecal incontinence
           Charcot joint
        General paresis
           Personality changes
           Hyperactive reflexes
           Argyll Robertson pupil
           Decreased memory
           Slurred speech
           Optic atrophy
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
This is the stage of invasion and may pass unrecognized. The typical
lesion is the chancre at the site or sites of inoculation, most
frequently located on the penis (Figure 34–1), labia, cervix, or
anorectal region. Anorectal lesions are especially common among
MSM. Chancres also occur occasionally in the oropharynx (lip,
tongue, or tonsil) and rarely on the breast or finger. An initial small
erosion 10–90 days (average, 3–4 weeks) after inoculation appears
then rapidly develops into a painless superficial ulcer with a clean
base and firm, indurated margins. This is associated with
enlargement of regional lymph nodes, which are rubbery, discrete,
and nontender. Bacterial infection of the chancre may occur and
may lead to pain. Healing occurs without treatment, but a scar may
form, especially with secondary bacterial infection. Multiple
chancres may be present, particularly in HIV-positive patients.
Although the “classic” ulcer of syphilis has been described as
nontender, nonpurulent, and indurated, only 31% of patients have
this triad.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Microscopic examination—In early (infectious) syphilis,
darkfield microscopic examination by a skilled observer of fresh
exudate from lesions or material aspirated from regional lymph
nodes is up to 90% sensitive for diagnosis. The darkfield
examination requires expertise for proper specimen collection and
identification of characteristic features of morphology and motility of
pathogenic spirochetes, and repeated examinations may be
necessary. Therefore, this testing is usually only available in select
sexually transmitted disease clinics. Darkfield examination of oral
lesions is not recommended because of the presence of
nonpathogenic treponemes in the mouth. Spirochetes usually are not
found in late syphilitic lesions by this technique.
Figure 34–1. Primary syphilis with a large chancre on the glans
of the penis. (Courtesy of Richard P. Usatine, MD; used, with
permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley
H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-
Hill, 2009.)
 
Table 34–2. Percentage of patients with positive serologic tests for
syphilis.1
 
1Based on untreated cases.
FTA-ABS, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test; VDRL, Venereal
Disease Research Laboratory test.
An immunofluorescent staining technique for demonstrating T
pallidum in dried smears of fluid taken from early syphilitic lesions
is available through some state health department laboratories but is
not widely used. Slides are fixed and treated with fluorescein-
labeled anti-treponemal antibody that has been preabsorbed with
nonpathogenic treponemes. The slides are then examined for
fluorescing spirochetes in an ultraviolet microscope. Because of its
simplicity, high specificity, and convenience to clinicians (slides can
be mailed), this technique has replaced darkfield microscopy in
some health departments and medical center laboratories.
2. Serologic tests for syphilis—(Table 34–2.) There are two
general categories of serologic tests for syphilis: (1) Nontreponemal
tests detect antibodies to lipoidal antigens present in the host after
modification by T pallidum. (2) Treponemal tests use live or killed
T pallidum as antigen to detect antibodies specific for pathogenic
treponemes.
A. NONTREPONEMAL ANTIGEN TESTS—The most commonly used
nontreponemal antigen tests are the Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory (VDRL) and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests, which
measure the ability of heated serum to flocculate a suspension of
cardiolipin–cholesterol–lecithin. 
The 
flocculation 
tests 
are
inexpensive, rapid, and easy to perform and have therefore been
commonly used for routine screening. A different, enzyme
immunoassay (EIA)-based algorithm has been recently introduced
and is discussed below. Quantitative expression of the reactivity of
the serum, based on titration of dilutions of serum, is valuable in
establishing the diagnosis and in evaluating the efficacy of treatment,
since titers usually correlate with disease activity.
Nontreponemal tests generally become positive 4–6 weeks after
infection or 1–3 weeks after the appearance of a primary lesion;
they are almost invariably positive in the secondary stage, with titers
≥ 1:16. In the late stages, titers tend to be lower (< 1:4). These
serologic tests are not highly specific and must be closely correlated
with other clinical and laboratory findings. The tests are positive in
patients with non–sexually transmitted treponematoses (see below).
More important, false-positive serologic reactions are frequently
encountered in a wide variety of other conditions, including
connective tissue diseases, infectious mononucleosis, malaria, febrile
diseases, leprosy, injection drug use, infective endocarditis, old age,
hepatitis C viral infection, and pregnancy. False-positive reactions
are usually of low titer and transient and may be distinguished from
true positives by specific treponemal antibody tests. False-negative
results can be seen when very high antibody titers are present (the
prozone phenomenon). If syphilis is strongly suspected and the
nontreponemal test is negative, the laboratory should be instructed
to dilute the specimen to detect a positive reaction. The RPR and
VDRL tests are equally reliable, but titers of RPR tend to be higher
than the VDRL. Thus, when these tests are used to follow disease
activity, the same testing method should be used and preferably
should be performed at the same laboratory.
Nontreponemal antibody titers are used to assess adequacy of
therapy. The time required for the VDRL or RPR to become
negative depends on the stage of the disease, the level of the initial
titer, and whether the infection is an initial or repeat episode. In
general, persons with repeat infections, higher initial titers, more
advanced stages of disease, or those who are HIV positive at the
time of treatment have a slower seroconversion rate and are more
likely to remain serofast (ie, titers do not become negative). Data
based on currently recommended treatment regimens (see below)
suggest that in primary and secondary syphilis it may take 6 months
to see a fourfold decrease in titer and 12 months to see an eightfold
drop. In patients with early latent syphilis, response is even slower,
with a fourfold drop in titer taking 12–24 months. Seronegativity
was seen in 72% of patients with primary syphilis and only 56% of
those with secondary syphilis after 3 years.
B. TREPONEMAL ANTIBODY TESTS—These tests measure
antibodies capable of reacting with T pallidum antigens. The T
pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) test and the T pallidum particle
agglutination (TPPA) test are comparable in specificity and
sensitivity to the fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test
(FTA-ABS). The TPPA test, because of ease of performance, has
supplanted the FTA-ABS test as the means of confirming the
diagnosis of syphilis.
The treponemal tests are of value principally in determining
whether a positive nontreponemal antigen test is a false-positive
result (see above) or is indicative of syphilis. Because of their great
sensitivity, particularly in the late stages of the disease, these tests
are also of value when there is clinical evidence of syphilis but the
nontreponemal serologic test for syphilis is negative. Treponemal
tests are reactive in most patients with primary syphilis and in almost
all patients with secondary syphilis. Although a reactive treponemal
serologic test remains the same throughout a patient's life in most
cases, the specific treponemal antibody test (like nontreponemal
antigen tests) may revert to negative with adequate therapy. Final
decisions about the significance of the results of serologic tests for
syphilis must be based on a total clinical appraisal.
C. EIA-BASED SCREENING ALGORITHMS—Newer screening
algorithms reverse the traditional test order and begin with an
automated treponemal test, the EIA, or CLIA (chemiluminescence
assay) and then follow up with a nontreponemal test (RPR or
VDRL) if the treponemal test is positive. This algorithm is faster and
decreases costs to laboratories when compared with traditional
screening. Compared with traditional treponemal-specific tests, the
EIAs have sensitivities of 95–99% and specificities of 100%.
The EIA-based algorithm can cause difficulties in clinical
management. A positive EIA with a negative RPR or VDRL should
be evaluated with a second treponemal test, but interpretation of
discordant results is not yet standardized and a clinician may benefit
from an expert opinion.
D. RAPID TREPONEMAL TESTS—None are FDA approved for use
in the United States, but these tests are used worldwide, particularly
in limited resource settings.
3. Polymerase chain reaction—Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
has been increasingly evaluated and utilized worldwide for the
diagnosis of genital ulcer disease, including syphilis, but these tests
are not yet commercially available in the United States.
4. Cerebrospinal fluid examination—See Neurosyphilis section.
 Differential Diagnosis
The syphilitic chancre may be confused with genital herpes,
chancroid (usually painful and uncommon in the United States),
lymphogranuloma venereum (also uncommon), or neoplasm. Any
genital ulcer should be considered a possible primary syphilitic
lesion. Simultaneous evaluation for herpes simplex virus types 1 and
2 using PCR or culture should also be done in these cases.
 Prevention & Screening
Avoidance of sexual contact is the only completely reliable method
of prevention but is an impractical public health measure. Latex or
polyurethane condoms are effective but protect covered areas only.
Screening every 6–12 months for syphilis among MSM has been
recommended based on preliminary data suggesting that this may
decrease the rate of transmission. High-risk individuals (those who
have multiple encounters with anonymous partners or who have sex
in conjunction with the use of drugs) should be screened every 3–6
months. Pregnant women should be screened at the first prenatal
visit and again in the third trimester if there is a high risk of infection.
Indicators of high risk include lack of insurance, poverty, sex work,
illicit drug use, history of other sexually transmitted diseases, and
living in communities with high syphilis morbidity. Patients treated
for other sexually transmitted diseases should also be tested for
syphilis, and persons who have known or suspected contact with
patients who have syphilis should be evaluated and treated to abort
development of infectious syphilis (see Treating Syphilis Contacts
below).
 Treatment
A. Antibiotic Therapy
Penicillin remains the preferred treatment for syphilis, since there
have been no documented cases of penicillin resistant T pallidum
(Table 34–3). Although doxycycline is an alternative for some
patients, pregnant women must be treated with penicillin (see
below).
 
Table 34–3. Recommended treatment for syphilis.1
 
1Penicillin is the only documented effective treatment in pregnancy, so
pregnant patients with true allergy should be desensitized and treated with
penicillin according to stage of disease as above.
2Patients treated with alternative therapies require close clinical and
serologic monitoring.
3Fewer data for ceftriaxone treatment, optimal dose or duration not known.
There are limited data for ceftriaxone, although optimum dose
and duration are not well defined. Azithromycin is no longer
recommended in many areas due to demonstrated resistance.
Patients treated for neurosyphilis should receive at least one dose of
long-acting (benzathine) penicillin at the completion of therapy. All
patients treated with a non-penicillin regimen must have close
clinical and serologic follow up, as noted below.
B. Managing Jarisch–Herxheimer Reaction
The Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction, manifested by fever and
aggravation of the existing clinical picture in the hours following
treatment, is ascribed to the sudden massive destruction of
spirochetes and is not IgE-mediated. It is most common in early
syphilis, particularly secondary syphilis where it can occur in 66% of
cases. The reaction resolves spontaneously within 24 hours;
treatment should not be avoided, but in cases of syphilitic laryngitis,
auditory neuritis or labyrinthitis, or involvement of the coronary
ostia, patients must be monitored closely for morbidity associated
with the reaction. It may also prompt preterm labor in pregnant
women so these patients should either be admitted for treatment if
they are at high risk for preterm labor, or closely observed with a
plan for emergent care if needed.
The reaction may be blunted by simultaneous administration of
antipyretics, although no proved method of prevention exists. There
are limited data for the use of corticosteroids in select cases. In
cases with increased risk of morbidity due to the Jarisch–
Herxheimer reaction, consultation with an infectious disease expert
is recommended. Patients should be reminded that the reaction
does not signify an allergy to penicillin.
C. Local Measures (Mucocutaneous Lesions)
Local treatment is usually not necessary. No local antiseptics or
other chemicals should be applied to a suspected syphilitic lesion
until specimens for microscopy have been obtained.
D. Public Health Measures
Patients with infectious syphilis must abstain from sexual activity for
7–10 days after treatment. By law, all cases of syphilis must be
reported to the appropriate local public health agency for assistance
in identifying and treating sexual contacts. In addition, all patients
with syphilis should have an HIV test at the time of diagnosis. In
areas of high HIV prevalence, a repeat HIV test should be
performed in 3 months if the initial test result was negative.
E. Treating Syphilis Contacts
Patients who have been sexually exposed to infectious syphilis
within the preceding 3 months may be infected but sero-negative
and thus should be treated as for early syphilis even if serologic tests
are negative. Persons exposed more than 90 days previously should
be treated based on serologic results. If their partners are
unavailable for testing or the patient is unreliable for follow-up,
empiric therapy is indicated.
Patients with gonorrhea and a known exposure to syphilis should
be treated with separate regimens effective against both diseases.
 Follow-Up Care
Because treatment failures and reinfection may occur, patients
treated for syphilis should be monitored clinically and serologically
at 3–6 month intervals. Response to therapy may be difficult to
assess, and no definite criteria exist for cure in patients with primary
or secondary syphilis. In primary and secondary syphilis, failure of
nontreponemal antibody titers to decrease fourfold by 6 months
may identify a group at high risk for treatment failure. Optimal
management of these patients is unclear, but at a minimum, close
clinical and serologic follow-up is indicated. If titers fail to decrease
fourfold by 6-12 months, an HIV test should be repeated (all
patients with syphilis should have an HIV test at the time of
diagnosis); a lumbar puncture should be considered since
unrecognized neurosyphilis can be a cause of treatment failure; and,
if careful follow-up cannot be ensured (3-month intervals for HIV-
positive individuals and 6-month intervals for HIV-negative
patients), treatment should be repeated with 2.4 million units of
benzathine penicillin intramuscularly weekly for 3 weeks. If
symptoms or signs persist or recur after initial therapy or there is a
fourfold or greater increase in nontreponemal titers, therapy has
either failed or the patient has been reinfected. In those individuals,
an HIV test should be performed, a lumbar puncture done (unless
reinfection is a certainty), and re-treatment given as indicated
above.
2. Secondary Syphilis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Generalized maculopapular skin rash.
 Mucous membrane lesions, including patches and ulcers.
 Weeping papules (condyloma lata) in moist skin areas.
 Generalized nontender lymphadenopathy.
 Fever may be present.
 Meningitis, hepatitis, osteitis, arthritis, iritis may be present.
 Many treponemes in moist lesions by immuno-fluorescence or
darkfield microscopy.
 Serologic tests for syphilis positive.
 
 Clinical Findings
The secondary stage of syphilis usually appears a few weeks (or up
to 6 months) after development of the chancre, when dissemination
of T pallidum produces systemic signs (fever, lymphadenopathy) or
infectious lesions at sites distant from the site of inoculation. The
most common manifestations are skin and mucosal lesions. The skin
lesions are nonpruritic, macular, papular, pustular, or follicular (or
combinations of any of these types, but generally not vesicular),
though the maculopapular rash is the most common. The skin
lesions usually are generalized; involvement of the palms and soles
(Figure 34–2) occurs in 80% of cases. Annular lesions simulating
ringworm may be observed in dark-skinned individuals. Mucous
membrane lesions may include mucous patches (Figure 34–3),
which can be found on the lips, mouth, throat, genitalia, and anus.
Specific lesions—condylomata lata ( Figure 34–4)—are fused,
weeping papules on the moist areas of the skin and mucous
membranes and are sometimes mistaken for genital warts. The
mucous membrane lesions are highly infectious.
Figure 34–2. Secondary syphilis lesions on the soles of the feet.
(Courtesy of Dr. Gavin Hart, Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
Meningeal (aseptic meningitis or acute basilar meningitis),
hepatic, renal, bone, and joint invasion may occur, with resulting
cranial nerve palsies, jaundice, nephrotic syndrome, and periostitis.
Alopecia (moth-eaten appearance) and uveitis may also occur.
The serologic tests for syphilis are positive in almost all cases
(see Primary Syphilis). The moist cutaneous and mucous membrane
lesions often show T pallidum on dark-field microscopic
examination. A transient cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis is
seen in 30–70% of patients with secondary syphilis, though only 5%
have positive serologic CSF reactions. There may be evidence of
hepatitis or nephritis (immune complex type) as circulating immune
complexes are deposited in blood vessel walls.
Figure 34–3. Secondary syphilis mucous patch of the tongue.
(Courtesy of Kenneth Katz MD, MSc, MSCE.)
 
Figure 34–4. Secondary syphilis perianal condylomata lata.
(Courtesy of Dr. Joseph Engelman, San Francisco City Clinic.)
 
Skin lesions may be confused with the infectious exanthems,
pityriasis rosea, and drug eruptions (Figure 34–5). Visceral lesions
may suggest nephritis or hepatitis due to other causes. The diffusely
red throat may mimic other forms of pharyngitis.
Figure 34–5. Secondary syphilis rash of the buttocks and legs.
(Courtesy of J. Pledger, BSS/VD, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
 Treatment
Treatment is as for primary syphilis unless central nervous system
or ocular disease is present, in which case a lumbar puncture should
be performed and, if positive, treatment for neurosyphilis given
(Table 34–3). See Primary Syphilis for follow-up care and
treatment of contacts.
3. Latent Syphilis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Early latent syphilis: infection < 1 year in duration.
 Late latent syphilis: infection > 1 year in duration.
 No physical signs.
 History of syphilis with inadequate treatment.
 Positive serologic tests for syphilis.
 
 General Considerations
Latent syphilis is the clinically quiescent phase during the interval
after the disappearance of secondary lesions. Early latent syphilis
is defined as the first year after primary infection and may relapse to
secondary syphilis if undiagnosed or inadequately treated (see
above). Relapse is almost always accompanied by a rising titer in
quantitative serologic tests; indeed, a rising titer may be the first or
only evidence of relapse. About 90% of relapses occur during the
first year after infection.
Early latent infection can be diagnosed if there was documented
seroconversion or a fourfold increase in nontreponemal titers in the
past 12 months; the patient can recall symptoms of primary or
secondary syphilis; or the patient had a sex partner with
documented primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis.
After the first year of latent syphilis, the patient is said to be in the
late latent (“hidden”) phase and noninfectious to sex partners.
Transmission to the fetus, however, can probably occur in any
phase. There are (by definition) no clinical manifestations during the
latent phase, and the only significant laboratory findings are positive
serologic tests. A diagnosis of latent syphilis is justified only when
the history and physical examination show no evidence of tertiary
disease or neurosyphilis. The latent phase may last from months to a
lifetime.
 Treatment
Treatment of early latent syphilis and follow up is as for
primary syphilis unless central nervous system disease is present
(Table 34–3). Treatment of late latent syphilis is shown in Table
34–3. The treatment of this stage of the disease is intended to
prevent the late sequelae. If there is evidence of central nervous
system involvement, a lumbar puncture should be performed and, if
positive, the patient should receive treatment for neurosyphilis.
Titers may not decline as rapidly following treatment as in early
syphilis. Nontreponemal serologic tests should be repeated at 6, 12,
and 24 months. If titers increase fourfold or if initially high titers (≥
1:32) fail to decrease fourfold by 12–24 months or if symptoms or
signs consistent with syphilis develop, an HIV test and lumbar
puncture should be performed and re-treatment given according to
the stage of the disease.
4. Late (Tertiary) Syphilis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Infiltrative tumors of skin, bones, liver (gummas).
 Aortitis, aneurysms, aortic regurgitation.
 Central nervous system disorders, including meningovascular and
degenerative changes, paresthesias, shooting pains, abnormal
reflexes, dementia, or psychosis.
 
 General Considerations
This stage may occur at any time after secondary syphilis, even after
years of latency, and is rarely seen in the modern antibiotic era. Late
lesions probably represent, at least in part, a delayed
hypersensitivity reaction of the tissue to the organism and are usually
divided into two types: (1) a localized gummatous reaction, with a
relatively rapid onset and generally prompt response to therapy
(“benign late syphilis”) and (2) diffuse inflammation of a more
insidious onset that characteristically involves the central nervous
system and large arteries, is often fatal if untreated, and is at best
arrested by treatment. Gummas may involve any area or organ of
the body but most often affect the skin or long bones.
Cardiovascular disease is usually manifested by aortic aneurysm,
aortic regurgitation, or aortitis. Various forms of diffuse or localized
central nervous system involvement may occur.
Late syphilis must be differentiated from neoplasms of the skin,
liver, lung, stomach, or brain; other forms of meningitis; and primary
neurologic lesions.
Although almost any tissue and organ may be involved in late
syphilis, the following are the most common types of involvement:
skin, mucous membranes, skeletal system, eyes, respiratory system,
gastrointestinal system, cardiovascular system, and nervous system.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Skin—Cutaneous lesions of late syphilis are of two varieties: (1)
multiple nodular lesions that eventually ulcerate (lues maligna) or
resolve by forming atrophic, pigmented scars and (2) solitary
gummas that start as painless subcutaneous nodules, then enlarge,
attach to the overlying skin, and eventually ulcerate (Figure 34–6).
2. Mucous membranes—Late lesions of the mucous membranes
are nodular gummas or leukoplakia, highly destructive to the
involved tissue.
Figure 34–6. gumma of the nose due to longstanding tertiary
syphilis. (Courtesy of J. Pledger, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
3. Skeletal system—Bone lesions are destructive, causing
periostitis, osteitis, and arthritis with little or no associated redness
or swelling but often marked myalgia and myositis of the
neighboring muscles. The pain is especially severe at night.
4. Eyes—Late ocular lesions are gummatous iritis, chorioretinitis,
optic atrophy, and cranial nerve palsies, in addition to the lesions of
central nervous system syphilis.
5. Respiratory system—Respiratory involvement by late syphilis
is caused by gummatous infiltrates into the larynx, trachea, and
pulmonary parenchyma, producing discrete pulmonary densities.
There may be hoarseness, respiratory distress, and wheezing
secondary to the gummatous lesion itself or to subsequent stenosis
occurring with healing.
6. Gastrointestinal system—Gummas involving the liver produce
the usually benign, asymptomatic hepar lobatum. A picture
resembling Laennec cirrhosis is occasionally produced by liver
involvement. Gastric involvement can consist of diffuse infiltration
into the stomach wall or focal lesions that endoscopically and
microscopically can be confused with lymphoma or carcinoma.
Epigastric pain, early satiety, regurgitation, belching, and weight loss
are common symptoms.
7. Cardiovascular system—Cardiovascular lesions (10–15% of
late syphilitic lesions) are often progressive, disabling, and life-
threatening. Central nervous system lesions are often present
concomitantly. Involvement usually starts as an arteritis in the
supracardiac portion of the aorta and progresses to one or more of
the following: (1) narrowing of the coronary ostia, with resulting
decreased coronary circulation, angina, and acute myocardial
infarction; (2) scarring of the aortic valves, producing aortic
regurgitation, and eventually congestive heart failure; and (3)
weakness of the wall of the aorta, with saccular aneurysm formation
(Figure 34–7) and associated pressure symptoms of dysphagia,
hoarseness, brassy cough, back pain (vertebral erosion), and
occasionally rupture of the aneurysm. Recurrent respiratory
infections are common as a result of pressure on the trachea and
bronchi.
8. Nervous system (neurosyphilis)—See following section.
Figure 34–7. ascending saccular aneurysm of the thoracic aorta
in tertiary syphilis. (Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
 Treatment
Treatment of tertiary syphilis (excluding neurosyphilis) is the same as
late latent syphilis (Table 34–3). Reversal of positive serologic tests
does not usually occur. A second course of penicillin therapy may
be given, but there is no known method for reliable eradication of
the treponeme from humans in the late stages of syphilis. Viable
spirochetes are occasionally found in the eyes, in CSF, and
elsewhere in patients with “adequately” treated syphilis, but claims
for their capacity to cause progressive disease are speculative.
In the presence of definite CSF or neurologic abnormalities, one
should treat for neurosyphilis. The pretreatment clinical and
laboratory 
evaluation 
should 
include 
neurologic, 
ocular,
cardiovascular, psychiatric, and CSF examinations.
5. Neurosyphilis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Can occur at any stage of disease.
 Consider both clinical presentation and laboratory data.
 Carefully evaluate HIV-positive patients and consider CSF
evaluation for atypical symptoms or lack of decrease in
nontreponemal serology titers.
 
 General Considerations
Neurosyphilis can occur at any stage of disease and can be a
progressive, disabling, and life-threatening complication. CSF
pleocytosis has been reported in 10–20% of patients with primary
syphilis. Asymptomatic and meningovascular syphilis occur earlier
(months to years after infection, sometimes coexisting with primary
and secondary syphilis) than tabes dorsalis and general paresis (2–
50 years after infection).
 Clinical Findings
A. Classification
1. Asymptomatic neuroinvasion—This form is characterized by
spinal fluid abnormalities (positive spinal fluid serology, increased
cell count, occasionally increased protein) without symptoms or
signs of neurologic involvement. There are no clear data to support
that these asymptomatic CSF abnormalities have clinical
significance.
2. Meningovascular syphilis—This form is characterized by
meningeal involvement or changes in the vascular structures of the
brain (or both), producing symptoms of acute or chronic meningitis
(headache, irritability); cranial nerve palsies (basilar meningitis);
unequal reflexes; irregular pupils with poor light and accommodation
reflexes; and when large vessels are involved, cerebrovascular
accidents. The CSF shows increased cells (100–1000/mcL),
elevated protein, and may have a positive serologic test (CSF
VDRL) for syphilis. The symptoms of acute meningitis are rare in
late syphilis.
3. Tabes dorsalis—This form is a chronic progressive
degeneration of the parenchyma of the posterior columns of the
spinal cord and of the posterior sensory ganglia and nerve roots.
The symptoms and signs are impairment of proprioception and
vibration sense, Argyll Robertson pupils (which react poorly to light
but well to accommodation), and muscular hypotonia and
hyporeflexia. Impairment of proprioception results in a wide-based
gait and inability to walk in the dark. Paresthesias, analgesia, or
sharp recurrent pains in the muscles of the leg (“shooting” or
“lightning” pains) may occur. Crises are also common in tabes:
gastric crises, consisting of sharp abdominal pains with nausea and
vomiting (simulating an acute abdomen); laryngeal crises, with
paroxysmal cough and dyspnea; urethral crises, with painful bladder
spasms; and rectal and anal crises. Crises may begin suddenly, last
for hours to days, and cease abruptly. Neurogenic bladder with
overflow incontinence is also seen. Painless trophic ulcers may
develop over pressure points on the feet. Joint damage may occur
as a result of lack of sensory innervation (Charcot joint, Figure 34–
8). The CSF may have a normal or increased cell count, elevated
protein, and variable results of serologic tests.
Figure 34–8. Neuropathic arthropathy (Charcot joint) from
tertiary syphilis. (Courtesy of Susan Lindsley, Public Health Image
Library, CDC.)
 
4. General paresis—This is generalized involvement of the
cerebral cortex with insidious onset of symptoms. There is usually a
decrease in concentrating power, memory loss, dysarthria, tremor
of the fingers and lips, irritability, and mild headaches. Most striking
is the change of personality; the patient becomes slovenly,
irresponsible, confused, and psychotic. The CSF findings resemble
those of tabes dorsalis. Combinations of the various forms of
neurosyphilis (especially tabes and paresis) are not uncommon.
B. Laboratory Findings
See Serologic Tests for Syphilis, above; these tests should also be
performed in cases of suspected neurosyphilis.
1. Indications for a lumbar puncture—In early syphilis (primary
and secondary syphilis and early latent syphilis of < 1 year
duration), invasion of the central nervous system by T pallidum
with CSF abnormalities occurs commonly, but clinical neurosyphilis
rarely develops in patients who have received the standard therapy
outlined above. Thus, unless clinical symptoms and signs of
neurosyphilis or ophthalmologic involvement (uveitis, neuroretinitis,
optic neuritis, iritis) are present, a lumbar puncture in early syphilis is
not recommended as part of the routine evaluation. In latent syphilis,
routine lumbar puncture is not indicated since the yield is low and
findings rarely influence therapeutic decisions. CSF evaluation is
recommended, however, if neurologic or ophthalmologic symptoms
and signs are present, if there is evidence of treatment failure (see
earlier discussion), or if there is evidence of active tertiary syphilis
(eg, aortitis, iritis, optic atrophy, the presence of a gumma).
2. Spinal fluid examination—CSF findings in neurosyphilis are
variable. In “classic” cases, there is an elevation of total protein,
lymphocytic pleocytosis, and a positive CSF reagin test (VDRL).
The serum nontreponemal titers will be reactive in most cases. In
later stages of syphilis, normal CSF analysis in the presence of
infection can occur, but it is unusual. False-positive reagin tests
rarely occur in the CSF; a positive test confirms the presence of
neurosyphilis. Because the CSF VDRL may be negative in 30–70%
of cases of neurosyphilis, a negative test does not exclude
neurosyphilis. The CSF FTA-ABS is sometimes used; it is a highly
sensitive test but lacks specificity, and a high serum titer of FTA-
ABS may result in a positive CSF titer in the absence of
neurosyphilis.
 Treatment
Current recommendations for the therapy of neurosyphilis include
high doses of aqueous penicillin to achieve better penetration and
higher levels of drug in the CSF than is possible with benzathine
penicillin (Table 34–3). Because of concerns about slowly dividing
organisms that may persist after only 10–14 days of therapy, many
experts recommend subsequent administration of 2.4 million units of
the longer-acting benzathine penicillin intramuscularly once weekly
for up to 3 weeks as additional therapy. There are some data for
using ceftriaxone to treat neurosyphilis as well, but because this and
other regimens have not been adequately studied, patients with a
history of an IgE-mediated reaction to penicillin should be skin
tested for allergy to penicillin and, if positive, desensitized.
All patients treated for neurosyphilis should have nontreponemal
serologic tests done every 3 months. Guidelines established by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend
spinal fluid examinations at 6-month intervals until the CSF cell
count is normal; however, there are data to suggest that in certain
patients normalization of serum titers are an acceptable surrogate
for CSF response. In general, CSF white blood cell count and CSF
VDRL normalize more quickly (usually in 12 months) than CSF
protein concentration, which can remain abnormal for extended
periods. If the serum nontreponemal titers do not normalize, the
CSF analysis should be repeated. A second course of penicillin
therapy may be given if the CSF cell count has not decreased at 6
months or is not normal at 2 years.
7. Syphilis in HIV-infected Patients
Syphilis is common among HIV-infected individuals. Some data
suggest that syphilis coinfection is associated with an increase in
HIV viral load and a decrease in CD4 count that normalizes with
therapy. Researchers from a prospective cohort study of HIV-
infected individuals reported that they found no association with
HIV disease progression in persons with syphilis coinfection.
However, for optimal patient care as well as prevention of
transmission to partners, guidelines for the primary care of HIV-
infected patients recommend routine syphilis screening.
Interpretation of serologic tests should be the same for HIV-
positive and HIV-negative persons. Although unusual serologic
responses have been reported in HIV-positive patients, including
high titers of nontreponemal tests, delayed appearance of positive
titers, and false-negative tests, most HIV-positive patients respond
serologically in largely the same way as noninfected patients. All
HIV-positive patients in care should be screened at least twice a
year to identify latent disease because by establishing a serologic
history, unnecessary lumbar punctures and prolonged treatment for
latent syphilis of uncertain duration can be avoided. If the diagnosis
of syphilis is suggested on clinical grounds but reagin tests are
negative, alternative tests should be performed. These tests include
darkfield examination of lesions and direct fluorescent antibody
staining for T pallidum of lesion exudate or biopsy specimens.
Treatment of HIV-positive patients with primary and secondary
syphilis is the same as for HIV-negative patients. Because of
concerns about the adequacy of this therapy, some experts
recommend additional therapy with 2.4 million units of benzathine
penicillin intramuscularly weekly for 3 weeks instead of single-dose
therapy. However, despite occasional reports of neurosyphilis
developing in HIV-infected patients despite appropriate therapy for
early disease, most HIV-infected patients with primary or
secondary syphilis respond appropriately to currently recommended
regimens. In all cases, careful clinical and serologic follow-up should
be done at 3, 6, 9, 12, and 24 months. HIV-infected patients with
late latent syphilis, syphilis of uncertain duration, and neurosyphilis
should be treated like HIV-negative individuals, with follow-up at 6,
12, 18, and 24 months. A study among HIV-clinic patients in
Baltimore found that the use of antiretroviral therapy was associated
with reduced serologic failure rates after syphilis treatment.
The diagnosis of neurosyphilis in HIV-infected patients is
complicated by the fact that CSF abnormalities are frequently seen
if lumbar puncture is performed. The significance of these
abnormalities is unknown, and similar abnormalities are frequently
seen in non–HIV-infected patients with primary or secondary
syphilis. Thus, CSF testing is not recommended in those with early
disease and a normal neurologic examination. In contrast, a lumbar
puncture should be performed in all patients, regardless of HIV-
infection status, if neurologic signs are present or if therapy has
failed. Following treatment, CSF white blood cell counts normalize
within 12 months regardless of HIV status, while the CSF VDRL is
slower to normalize in HIV-infected individuals, especially those
with CD4 counts < 200 cells/mcL. As discussed above, the same
criteria for failure apply to HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients,
and re-treatment regimens are the same.
Because clinical experience in treating HIV-infected patients with
syphilis is based on penicillin regimens, few options exist for treating
the penicillin-allergic patient. Doxycycline or tetracycline regimens
can be used for primary, secondary, and early latent syphilis as well
as for late latent syphilis and latent syphilis of unknown duration
though with caution and close follow-up (Table 34–3). For
neurosyphilis, penicillin regimens are optimal even if this requires
skin testing and desensitization; limited data exist for ceftriaxone.
8. Syphilis in Pregnancy
All pregnant women should have a nontreponemal serologic test for
syphilis at the time of the first prenatal visit (see Chapter 19). In
women who may be at increased risk for syphilis or for populations
in which there is a high prevalence of syphilis, additional
nontreponemal tests should be performed during the third trimester
at 28 weeks and again at delivery. The serologic status of all
women who have delivered should be known before discharge from
the hospital. Seropositive women should be considered infected and
should be treated unless prior treatment with fall in antibody titer is
medically documented.
The only acceptable treatment for syphilis in pregnancy is
penicillin in dosage schedules appropriate for the stage of
disease (see above). Penicillin prevents congenital syphilis in 90%
of cases, even when treatment is given late in pregnancy.
Tetracycline and doxycycline are contraindicated in pregnancy.
Erythromycin should not be used because of failure to eradicate
infection in the fetus, and insufficient data are available to justify a
recommendation for ceftriaxone or azithromycin. Thus, women with
a history of penicillin allergy should be skin tested and desensitized if
necessary.
The infant should be evaluated immediately, as noted below, and
at 6–8 weeks of age.
9. Congenital Syphilis
Congenital syphilis is a transplacentally transmitted infection that
occurs in infants of untreated or inadequately treated mothers. The
physical findings at birth are quite variable: The infant may have
many or minimal signs or even no signs until 6–8 weeks of life
(delayed form). The most common findings are on the mucous
membranes and skin—maculopapular rash, condylomas, mucous
membrane patches, and serous nasal discharge (snuffles). These
lesions 
are 
infectious; T pallidum can easily be found
microscopically, and the infant must be isolated. Other common
findings are hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, or osteochondritis. These
early active lesions subsequently heal, but if the disease is left
untreated it produces the characteristic stigmas of congenital syphilis
—interstitial keratitis, Hutchinson teeth, saddle nose, saber shins,
deafness, and central nervous system involvement.
The presence of negative serologic tests at birth in both the
mother and the infant usually means that the newborn is free of
infection. However, recent infection near the time of delivery may
result in negative tests because there has been insufficient time to
develop a serologic response. Thus, it is necessary to maintain a
high index of suspicion in infants born to high-risk mothers (HIV-
positive, illicit drug users). All infants born to mothers with positive
nontreponemal and treponemal antibody titers should have blood
drawn for an RPR or VDRL test and, if positive, be referred to a
pediatrician for further evaluation and therapy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Consultation with the local public health department may
help obtain all prior positive syphilis serologic results and
may be helpful in complicated or atypical cases.
•    Early (infectious) syphilis cases may be contacted for
partner notification and treatment by local public health
authorities.
 When to Admit
 
•    Pregnant women with syphilis and true penicillin allergy
should be admitted for desensitization and treatment.
•    Women in late pregnancy treated for early syphilis
should have close outpatient monitoring or be admitted
because the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction can induce
premature labor.
•    Patients with neurosyphilis usually require admission for
treatment with aqueous penicillin.
Fenton KA et al. Infectious syphilis in high-income settings in the
21st century. Lancet Infect Dis. 2008 Apr;8(4):244–53. [PMID:
18353265]
 
Hildreth CJ et al. JAMA patient page. Syphilis. JAMA. 2009 Feb
18;301(7):792. [PMID: 19224758]
 
Kent ME et al. Reexamining syphilis: an update on epidemiology,
clinical manifestations, and management. Ann Pharmacother. 2008
Feb;42(2):226–36. [PMID: 18212261]
 
Seña AC et al. Novel Treponema pallidum serologic tests: a
paradigm shift in syphilis screening for the 21st century. Clin Infect
Dis. 2010 Sep 15;51(6):700–8. [PMID: 20687840]
 
Weintrob AC et al. Syphilis co-infection does not affect HIV
disease progression. Int J STD AIDS. 2010 Jan;21(1):57–9.
[PMID: 19933204]
 
Workowski KA et al; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum
in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in
article text. [PMID: 21160459]
 
NON–SEXUALLY
TRANSMITTED
TREPONEMATOSES
 
A variety of treponemal diseases other than syphilis occur
endemically in many tropical areas of the world. They are
distinguished from disease caused by T pallidum by their nonsexual
transmission, their relatively high incidence in certain geographic
areas and among children, and their tendency to produce less
severe visceral manifestations. As in syphilis, organisms can be
demonstrated in infectious lesions with darkfield microscopy or
immunofluorescence but cannot be cultured in artificial media; the
serologic tests for syphilis are positive; the diseases have primary,
secondary, and sometimes tertiary stages; and penicillin is the drug
of choice. There is evidence that infection with these agents may
provide partial resistance to syphilis and vice versa. Treatment with
penicillin in doses appropriate to primary syphilis (eg, 2.4 million
units of benzathine penicillin G intramuscularly) is generally curative
in any stage of the non–sexually transmitted treponematoses. In
cases of penicillin hypersensitivity, tetracycline, 500 mg orally four
times a day for 10–14 days, is usually the recommended alternative.
YAWS (Frambesia)
Yaws is a contagious disease largely limited to tropical regions that
is caused by T pallidum subspecies pertenue. It is characterized
by granulomatous lesions of the skin, mucous membranes, and
bone. Yaws is rarely fatal, though if untreated it may lead to chronic
disability and disfigurement. Yaws is acquired by direct nonsexual
contact, usually in childhood, although it may occur at any age. The
“mother yaw,” a painless papule that later ulcerates, appears 3–4
weeks after exposure. There is usually associated regional
lymphadenopathy. Six to 12 weeks later, secondary lesions that are
raised papillomas and papules that weep highly infectious material
appear and last for several months or years. Painful ulcerated
lesions on the soles are called “crab yaws” because of the resulting
gait. Late gummatous lesions may occur, with associated tissue
destruction involving large areas of skin and subcutaneous tissues.
The late effects of yaws, with bone change, shortening of digits, and
contractions, may be confused with similar changes occurring in
leprosy. Central nervous system, cardiac, or other visceral
involvement is rare. See above for therapy.
PINTA
Pinta is a non–sexually transmitted spirochetal infection caused by T
carateum. It occurs endemically in rural areas of Latin America,
especially in Mexico, Colombia, and Cuba, and in some areas of
the Pacific. A nonulcerative, erythematous primary papule spreads
slowly into a papulosquamous plaque showing a variety of color
changes (slate, lilac, black). Secondary lesions resemble the primary
one and appear within a year after it. These appear successively,
new lesions together with older ones; are most common on the
extremities; and later show atrophy and depigmentation. Some
cases show pigmentary changes and atrophic patches on the soles
and palms, with or without hyperkeratosis, that are indistinguishable
from “crab yaws.” Very rarely, central nervous system or
cardiovascular disease is observed late in the course of infection.
See above for therapy.
ENDEMIC SYPHILIS
Endemic syphilis is an acute or chronic infection caused by T
pallidum subspecies endemicum. It has been reported in a number
of countries, particularly in the eastern Mediterranean area, often
with local names: bejel in Syria, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq, and
dichuchwa, njovera, and siti in Africa. It also occurs in Southeast
Asia. The local forms have distinctive features. Moist ulcerated
lesions of the skin or oral or nasopharyngeal mucosa are the most
common manifestations. Generalized lymphadenopathy and
secondary and tertiary bone and skin lesions are also common.
Deep leg pain points to periostitis or osteomyelitis. In the late stages
of disease, destructive gummatous lesions similar to those seen in
yaws can develop, resulting in loss of cartilage and saber shin
deformity. Cardiovascular and central nervous system involvement
are rare. See above for therapy.
Kestelyn P. Venereal and endemic treponematoses in the
developing world. Int Ophthalmol Clin. 2010 Spring;50(2):41–55.
[PMID: 20375861]
 
Rinaldi A. Yaws: a second (and maybe last?) chance for
eradication. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2008;2(8):e275. [PMID:
18846236]
 
SELECTED SPIROCHETAL
DISEASES
 
RELAPSING FEVER
The infectious organisms in relapsing fever are spirochetes of the
genus Borrelia. The infection has two forms: tick-borne and louse-
borne. The main reservoir is rodents, which serve as the source of
infection for ticks (eg, ornithodoros). Tick-borne relapsing fever
may be transmitted transovarially from one generation of ticks to the
next. Humans can be infected by tick bites or by rubbing crushed
tick tissues or feces into the bite wound. Tick-borne relapsing fever
is endemic but is not transmitted from person to person. The
distribution and seasonal incidence of the disease are determined by
the ecology of the ticks in different areas. Different species (or
strain) names have been given to Borrelia in different parts of the
world where the organisms are transmitted by different ticks. In the
United States, infected ticks are found throughout the West,
especially in mountainous areas, but clinical cases are uncommon in
humans.
The louse-borne form is primarily seen in the developing world.
Large epidemics may occur in louse-infested populations, and
transmission is favored by crowding, malnutrition, and cold climate.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
There is an abrupt onset of fever, chills, tachycardia, nausea and
vomiting, arthralgia, and severe headache. Hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly may develop, as well as various types of rashes
(macular, popular, petechial) that usually occur at the end of a
febrile episode. Delirium occurs with high fever, and there may be
various neurologic and psychic abnormalities. The attack terminates,
usually abruptly, after 3–10 days. After an interval of 1–2 weeks,
relapse occurs, but often it is somewhat milder. Three to ten
relapses may occur before recovery in tick-borne disease, whereas
louse-borne disease is associated with only one or two relapses.
B. Laboratory Findings
During episodes of fever, large spirochetes are seen in blood
smears stained with Wright or Giemsa stain. The organisms can be
cultured in special media but rapidly lose pathogenicity. The
spirochetes can multiply in injected rats or mice and can be seen in
their blood.
A variety of anti-borrelia antibodies develop during the illness;
sometimes the Weil–Felix test for rickettsioses and nontreponemal
serologic tests for syphilis may also be falsely positive. Infection
with B recurrentis can cause false-positive indirect fluorescent
antibody and Western blot tests for Borrelia burgdorferi, and
some cases may be misdiagnosed as Lyme disease. CSF
abnormalities occur in patients with meningeal involvement. Mild
anemia and thrombocytopenia are common, but the white blood cell
count tends to be normal.
 Differential Diagnosis
The manifestations of relapsing fever may be confused with malaria,
leptospirosis, meningococcemia, yellow fever, typhus, or rat-bite
fever.
 Prevention
Prevention of tick bites (as described for rickettsial diseases) and
delousing procedures applicable to large groups can prevent illness.
Arthropod vectors should be controlled if possible.
Postexposure prophylaxis with doxycycline 200 mg orally on day
1 and 100 mg daily for 4 days has been shown to prevent recurrent
fever following tick bites in highly endemic areas.
 Treatment
A single dose of tetracycline or erythromycin, 0.5 g orally, or a
single dose of procaine penicillin G, 600,000–800,000 units
intramuscularly (adults) or 400,000 units intramuscularly (children),
probably constitutes adequate treatment for louse-borne relapsing
fevers. Because of higher relapse rates, tick-borne disease is
treated with 0.5 g of tetracycline or erythromycin given orally four
times daily for 10 days. If central nervous system invasion is
suspected, penicillin G, 3 million units intravenously every 4 hours,
or ceftriaxone, 1 g intravenously daily, should be given for 10-14
days. Jarisch–Herxheimer reactions occur commonly following
treatment and may be life-threatening, so patients should be closely
monitored (see Syphilis, above). One study in patients with louse-
borne relapsing fever showed that administration of anti-TNF
antibodies prior to antibiotic therapy can be effective in preventing
the reaction.
 Prognosis
The overall mortality rate is usually about 5%. Fatalities are most
common in old, debilitated, or very young patients. With treatment,
the initial attack is shortened and relapses are largely prevented.
Balicer RD et al. Postexposure prophylaxis of tick-borne relapsing
fever. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2010 Mar;29(3): 253–8.
[PMID: 20012878]
 
Dworkin MS et al. Tick-borne relapsing fever. Infect Dis Clin
North Am. 2008 Sept 22(3):449–68. [PMID: 18755384]
 
RAT-BITE FEVER
Rat-bite fever is an uncommon acute infectious disease caused by
the treponeme Spirillum minus (Asia), covered in this section, or
the bacteria Streptobacillus moniliformis (North America). It is
transmitted to humans by the bite of a rat. Inhabitants of rat-infested
dwellings and laboratory workers are at greatest risk.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
I n Spirillum infections, the original rat bite, unless secondarily
infected, heals promptly, but 1 to several weeks later the site
becomes swollen, indurated, and painful; assumes a dusky purplish
hue; and may ulcerate. Regional lymphangitis and lymphadenitis,
fever, chills, malaise, myalgia, arthralgia, and headache are present.
Splenomegaly may occur. A sparse, dusky-red maculopapular rash
appears on the trunk and extremities in many cases, and there may
be frank arthritis.
After a few days, both the local and systemic symptoms subside,
only to reappear several days later. This relapsing pattern of fever
for 3–4 days alternating with afebrile periods lasting 3–9 days may
persist for weeks. The other features, however, usually recur only
during the first few relapses. Endocarditis is a rare complication of
infection.
B. Laboratory Findings
Leukocytosis is often present, and the nontreponemal test for
syphilis is often falsely positive. The organism may be identified in
darkfield examination of the ulcer exudate or aspirated lymph node
material; more commonly, it is observed after inoculation of a
laboratory animal with the patient's exudate or blood. It has not
been cultured in artificial media.
 Differential Diagnosis
Rat-bite fever must be distinguished from the rat-bite–induced
lymphadenitis and rash of streptobacillary fever. Clinically, the
severe arthritis and myalgias seen in streptobacillary disease are
rarely seen in disease caused by S minus. Reliable differentiation
requires an increasing titer of agglutinins against S moniliformis or
isolation of the causative organism. Other diseases in the differential
include tularemia, rickettsial disease, Pasteurella multocida
infections, and relapsing fever.
 Treatment
Penicillin is given for 10–14 days. During the acute phase of illness,
the intravenous route is used (1–2 million units every 4–6 hours)
and once improvement has occurred, therapy is completed with oral
medication, penicillin V 500 mg four times daily to complete 10–14
days of therapy. For the penicillin-allergic patient, tetracycline 500
mg orally four times daily or doxycycline 100 mg twice a day can
be used.
 Prognosis
The reported mortality rate of about 10% should be markedly
reduced by prompt diagnosis and antimicrobial treatment.
Dworkin J et al. A case of septic arthritis from rat-bite fever in
Hawai'i. Hawaii Med J. 2010 Mar;69(3):65–7. [PMID:
20397505]
 
LEPTOSPIROSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Clinical illness can vary from asymptomatic to fatal liver and
kidney disease.
 Anicteric leptospirosis is the more common and milder form of
the disease.
 Icteric leptospirosis (Weil syndrome) is characterized by
impaired kidney and liver function, abnormal mental status, and
hemorrhagic pneumonia and has a 5–40% mortality rate.
 
 General Considerations
Leptospirosis is an acute and often severe treponemal infection that
frequently affects the liver or other organs and is caused by the
multiple serovars of Leptospira inter-rogans. The disease is
worldwide in distribution, and it is among the most common
zoonotic diseases. The leptospires are often transmitted to humans
by the ingestion of food and drink contaminated by the urine of the
reservoir animal. The organism may also enter through minor skin
lesions and probably via the conjunctiva. Recreational cases have
followed swimming or rafting in contaminated water, and
occupational cases occur among sewer workers, rice planters,
abattoir workers, and farmers. Sporadic urban cases have been
seen in the homeless exposed to rat urine. The incubation period is
2–20 days.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Anicteric leptospirosis, the more common and milder form of the
disease, is often biphasic. The initial or “septicemic” phase begins
with abrupt fever to 39–40 °C, chills, abdominal pain, severe
headache, and myalgias, especially of the calf muscles. There may
be marked conjunctival suffusion. Leptospires can be isolated from
blood, CSF, and tissues. Following a 1- to 3-day period of
improvement in symptoms and absence of fever, the second or
“immune” phase begins. Leptospires are absent from blood and
CSF but are still present in the kidney, and specific antibodies
appear. A recurrence of symptoms is seen as in the first phase of
disease with the onset of meningitis. Uveitis (which can be unilateral
or bilateral and usually involves the entire uveal tract), rash, and
adenopathy may occur. A rare but severe manifestation is
hemorrhagic pneumonia. The illness is usually self-limited, lasting 4–
30 days, and complete recovery is the rule.
Icteric leptospirosis (Weil syndrome) is the most severe form
of the disease, characterized by impaired kidney and liver function,
abnormal mental status, hemorrhagic pneumonia, hypotension, and
a 5–40% mortality rate. Symptoms and signs often are continuous
and not biphasic.
Leptospirosis with jaundice must be distinguished from hepatitis,
yellow fever, and relapsing fever.
B. Laboratory Findings
The leukocyte count may be normal or as high as 50,000/mcL
(0.05/L), with neutrophils predominating. The urine may contain
bile, protein, casts, and red cells. Oliguria is common, and in severe
cases uremia may occur. Elevated bili-rubin and aminotransferases
are seen in 75%, and elevated creatinine (> 1.5 mg/dL) (> 132.6
mcmol/L) is seen in 50% of cases. In cases with meningeal
involvement, organisms may be found in the CSF during the first 10
days of illness. Early in the disease, the organism may be identified
by darkfield examination of the patient's blood (a test requiring
expertise since false-positives are frequent in inexperienced hands)
or by culture on a semisolid medium (eg, Fletcher EMJH). Cultures
take 1–6 weeks to become positive. The organism may also be
grown from the urine from the tenth day to the sixth week.
Diagnosis is usually made by means of serologic tests. Agglutination
tests (microscopic, using live organisms, and macroscopic, using
killed antigen) become positive after 7–10 days of illness, peak at
3–4 weeks, and may persist at high levels for many years. Thus, to
make a diagnosis, a fourfold or greater rise in titer must be
documented. The agglutination tests are cumbersome to perform
and require trained personnel. Indirect hemagglutination and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests are also
available. The IgM EIA is particularly useful in making an early
diagnosis, since it is positive as early as 2 days into illness, a time
when the clinical manifestations may be nonspecific, and it is
extremely sensitive and specific (93%). PCR methods (presently
investigational) appear to be sensitive, specific, positive early in
disease, and able to detect leptospiral DNA in blood, urine, CSF,
and aqueous humor. Serum creatine kinase (CK) is usually elevated
in persons with leptospirosis and normal in persons with hepatitis.
 Complications
Myocarditis, aseptic meningitis, acute kidney injury, and pulmonary
infiltrates with hemorrhage are not common but are the usual causes
of death. Iridocyclitis may occur.
 Prevention
The mainstay of prevention is avoidance of potentially contaminated
food and water.
Prophylaxis with doxycycline, 200 mg orally once weekly, can
be given during periods of possible exposure; however, a 2009
meta-analysis of published trials demonstrated no clear efficacy.
Human vaccine is used in some limited settings but is not available in
the United States.
 Treatment
Various antimicrobial drugs, including penicillin, ceftriaxone, and
tetracyclines, show antileptospiral activity. Penicillin (eg, 1.5 million
units every 6 hours intravenously) or ceftriaxone (1 g daily
intravenously) is the drug of choice in severe leptospirosis and is
especially effective if started within the first 4 days of illness.
Jarisch–Herxheimer reactions may occur (see Syphilis, above).
Doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days, is also effective
as therapy if started early, but this agent is most often used in mild
to moderate disease. Although therapy for mild disease is
controversial, most clinicians treat with oral penicillin, 500 mg four
times daily, or doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily, for 7 days.
Azithromycin is also active, but clinical experience is limited.
 Prognosis
Without jaundice, the disease is almost never fatal. With jaundice,
the mortality rate is 5% for those under age 30 years and 40% for
those over age 60 years.
 When to Admit
Patients with jaundice or other evidence of severe disease should be
admitted for close monitoring and may require admission to an
intensive care unit.
Brett-Major DM et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis for leptospirosis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Jul 8; (3):CD007342.
[PMID: 19588424]
 
Lau C et al. Leptospirosis: an emerging disease in travellers. Travel
Med Infect Dis. 2010 Jan;8(1):33–9. [PMID: 20188303]
 
Slack A. Leptospirosis. Aust Fam Physician. 2010 Jun–
Jul;39(6):495–8. [PMID: 20628664]
 
LYME DISEASE (Lyme Borreliosis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Erythema migrans, a flat or slightly raised red lesion that expands
with central clearing.
 Headache or stiff neck.
 Arthralgias, arthritis, and myalgias; arthritis is often chronic and
recurrent.
 Wide geographic distribution, with most United States cases in
the Northeast, mid-Atlantic, upper Midwest, and Pacific coastal
regions.
 
 General Considerations
This illness, named after the town of Old Lyme, Connecticut, is the
most common tick-borne disease in the United States and Europe
and is caused by genospecies of the spirochete B burgdorferi. In
the United States, the causative genospecies is B burgdorferi senu
strictu, whereas in Europe and Asia B garinii and B afzelii
predominate. Most US cases are reported from the mid-Atlantic,
northeastern, and north central regions of the country. The true
incidence of Lyme disease is not known for a number of reasons:
(1) serologic tests are not standardized (see below); (2) clinical
manifestations are nonspecific; and (3) even with reliable testing,
serology is insensitive in early disease.
The vector of Lyme disease varies geographically and is Ixodes
scapularis in the northeastern, north central, and mid-Atlantic
regions of the United States; I pacificus on the West Coast; Ixodes
r in Europe; and I persulcatus in Asia. The disease also occurs in
Australia. Mice and deer make up the major animal reservoir of B
burgdorferi, but other rodents and birds may also be infected.
Domestic animals such as dogs, cattle, and horses can also develop
clinical illness, usually manifested as arthritis.
Under experimental conditions, ticks must feed for 24–36 hours
or longer to transmit infections. Most cases are reported in the
spring and summer months. Human epidemiologic studies have
indicated that the incidence of disease is significantly higher when
tick attachment is for longer than 72 hours than if it is < 72 hours,
though rare cases have been documented with attachment of < 24
hours. In addition, the percentage of ticks infected varies on a
regional basis. In the northeastern and midwestern regions, 15–65%
of I scapularis ticks are infected with the spirochete; in the western
United States, only 2% of I pacificus are infected. These are
important epidemiologic features in assessing the likelihood that tick
exposure will result in disease. Exposure to I pacificus is unlikely to
result in disease, since so few ticks are infected, but this is not true
of exposure to I scapularis. Eliciting a history of brushing a tick off
the skin (ie, the tick was not feeding) or removing a tick on the
same day as exposure (ie, the tick did not feed long enough)
decreases the likelihood that infection will develop.
Ixodes ticks are smaller than the more common dog ticks
(Dermacentor variabilis). Larvae are < 1 mm in size, and the adult
female is 2–3 mm in size, with a red body and black legs. After a
blood meal, ticks can reach two to three times their unengorged
size. Because the tick is so small, the bite is usually painless and
goes unnoticed. After feeding, the tick drops off in 2–4 days. If a
tick is found, it should be removed immediately. The best way to
accomplish this is to use a fine-tipped tweezers to pull firmly and
repeatedly on the tick's mouth part—not the tick's body—until the
tick releases its hold. Saving the tick in a bottle of alcohol for future
identification may be useful, especially if symptoms develop.
 Clinical Findings
Prior clinical description of Lyme disease divided the illness into
three stages: stage 1, flu-like symptoms and a typical skin rash
(erythema migrans, see Figure 6–32); stage 2, weeks to months
later, facial (cranial nerve VII) palsy or meningitis; and stage 3,
months to years later, arthritis. The problem with this simplified
scheme is that there is a great deal of overlap, and the skin, central
nervous system, and musculoskeletal system can be involved early
or late. A more accurate classification divides disease into early and
late manifestations and specifies whether disease is localized or
disseminated.
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Stage 1, early localized infection—Stage 1 infection is
characterized by erythema migrans. About 1 week after the tick bite
(range, 3–30 days; median 7–10 days), a flat or slightly raised red
lesion appears at the site, which is commonly seen in areas of tight
clothing such as the groin, thigh, or axilla. This lesion expands over
several days. Although originally described as a lesion that
progresses with central clearing (“bulls-eye” lesion), often there is a
more homogeneous appearance or even central intensification.
About 10–20% of patients either do not have typical skin lesions or
the lesions go unnoticed. Most patients with erythema migrans will
have a concomitant viral-like illness (the “summer flu”) characterized
by myalgias, arthralgias, headache, and fatigue. Fever may or may
not be present. Even without treatment, the symptoms and signs of
erythema migrans resolve in 3–4 weeks. Although the classic lesion
of erythema migrans is not difficult to recognize, atypical forms can
occur that may lead to misdiagnosis. Vesicular, urticarial, and
evanescent erythema migrans have all been reported. Similarly,
chemical reactions to tick and spider bites (these usually recede in
24–48 hours whereas erythema migrans increases in size in this time
period), drug eruptions, urticaria, and staphylococcal and
streptococcal cellulitis have been mistaken for erythema migrans.
Completely asymptomatic disease, without erythema migrans or
flu-like symptoms, can occur but is very uncommon in the United
States. Serosurveys done as part of vaccination trials found
asymptomatic seroconversion in 7% or less of the population.
2. Stage 2, early disseminated infection—Up to 50–60% of
patients with erythema migrans are bacteremic (especially if multiple
lesions are present) leading to dissemination of the spirochete
resulting in a wide variety of symptoms and signs. Within days to
weeks of the original infection, secondary skin lesions that are not
associated with a tick bite develop in about 50% of patients. These
lesions are similar in appearance to the primary lesion but are
usually smaller. Malaise, fatigue, fever, headache (sometimes
severe), neck pain, and generalized achiness are common with the
skin lesions. Most symptoms are transient, although fatigue may
persist for months. After hematogenous spread, the organism may
sequester itself in certain areas and produces focal symptoms.
Some patients experience cardiac (4–10% of patients) or
neurologic (10–15% of patients) manifestations. Involvement of the
heart includes myopericarditis, with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias
and heart block. Neurologic manifestations include both the central
and peripheral nervous systems. The most common central nervous
system manifestation is an aseptic meningitis with mild headache and
neck stiffness. The most common peripheral manifestation is a
cranial neuropathy, ie, facial palsy (usually unilateral but can be
bilateral, see Figure 24-2). A sensory or motor radiculopathy and
mononeuritis multiplex occur less frequently. Conjunctivitis, keratitis
and, rarely, panophthalmitis can also occur.
3. Stage 3, late persistent infection—Stage 3 infection occurs
months to years after the initial infection and again primarily
manifests itself as musculoskeletal, neurologic, and skin disease. In
early reports, musculoskeletal complaints developed in up to 60%
of patients. With early recognition and treatment of disease, joint
complaints develop in < 10% of patients. The classic manifestation
of late disease is a monarticular or oligoarticular arthritis most
commonly affecting the knee or other large weight bearing joints.
While these joints may be quite swollen, these patients generally
report less pain compared to patients with bacterial septic arthritis.
Even if untreated, the arthritis is self-limited, resolving in a few
weeks to months. Multiple recurrences are common but are usually
less severe than the original disease. Joint fluid reflects an
inflammatory arthritis with a mean white blood cell count of
25,000/mcL (0.025/L) with a predominance of neutrophils. Chronic
arthritis develops in about 10% of patients. The pathogenesis of
chronic Lyme arthritis may be an immunologic phenomenon rather
than persistence of infection. The observations that persons with
chronic arthritis have an increased frequency of HLA-DR4 gene
expression, antibodies to OspA and OspB protein in joint fluid
(major outer surface proteins of B burgdorferi), 
lack B
burgdorferi DNA in synovial fluid as detected by PCR, and often
do not respond to antibiotics—all support the inference of an
immunologic mechanism.
Rarely, the nervous system (both central and peripheral) can be
involved in late Lyme disease. In the United States, a subacute
encephalopathy, characterized by memory loss, mood changes, and
sleep disturbance, is seen. In Europe, a more severe
encephalomyelitis caused by B garinii is seen and presents with
cognitive dysfunction, spastic paraparesis, ataxia, and bladder
dysfunction. Peripheral nervous system involvement includes
intermittent paresthesias, often in a stocking glove distribution, or
radicular pain.
The cutaneous manifestation of late infection, which can occur up
to 10 years after infection, is acrodermatitis chronicum
atrophicans. It has been described mainly in Europe and is due to
infection with B afzelii, a genospecies that commonly causes
disease in Europe but not the United States. There is usually bluish-
red discoloration of a distal extremity with associated swelling.
These lesions become atrophic and sclerotic with time and
eventually resemble localized scleroderma. Cases of diffuse fasciitis
with eosinophilia, an entity that resembles scleroderma, have been
rarely associated with infection with B burgdorferi.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of Lyme disease is based on both clinical
manifestations and laboratory findings. The National Surveillance
Case Definition specifies a person with exposure to a potential tick
habitat (within the 30 days just prior to developing erythema
migrans) with (1) erythema migrans diagnosed by a physician or (2)
at least one late manifestation of the disease and (3) laboratory
confirmation as fulfilling the criteria for Lyme disease.
Nonspecific laboratory abnormalities can be seen, particularly in
early disease. The most common are an elevated sedimentation rate
of > 20 mm/h seen in 50% of cases, and mildly abnormal liver
function tests are present in 30%. The abnormal liver function tests
are transient and return to normal within a few weeks of treatment.
A mild anemia, leukocytosis (11,000–18,000/mcL) (0.011–
0.018/L), and microscopic hematuria have been reported in ≤ 10%
of patients.
Laboratory confirmation requires serologic tests to detect
specific antibodies to B burgdorferi in serum, preferably by ELISA
and not by indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA), which is less
sensitive and specific and can lead to diagnostic confusion. A two-
test approach is recommended for the diagnosis of active Lyme
disease, with all specimens positive or equivocal by ELISA then
confirmed with an Western immunoblot assay that can detect both
IgM and IgG antibodies. IgM antibody appears first 2–4 weeks
after onset of erythema migrans, peaks at 6–8 weeks, and then
declines to low levels after 4–6 months of illness. The presence of
IgM antibody in patients with prolonged symptoms persisting for
several months is likely to be a false-positive result. IgG occurs later
(6–8 weeks after onset of disease), peaks at 4–6 months, and may
remain elevated at low levels indefinitely despite appropriate
therapy and resolution of symptoms. When an Western immunoblot
is done during the first 4 weeks of illness, both IgM and IgG should
be tested. A positive immunoblot requires that antibodies are
detected against two (for IgM) or five (for IgG) specific protein
antigens from B burgdorferi.
If a patient with suspected early Lyme disease has negative
serologic studies, acute and convalescent titers should be obtained
since up to 50% of patients with early disease can be antibody
negative in the first several weeks of illness. A fourfold rise in
antibody titer would be diagnostic of recent infection. In patients
with later stages of disease, almost all are antibody positive. False-
positive reactions in the ELISA and IFA have been reported in
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, infectious mononucleosis, subacute infective
endocarditis, syphilis, relapsing fever, leptospirosis, enteroviral and
other viral illnesses, and patients with gingival disease (presumably
because of cross-reactivity with oral treponemes). False-negative
serologic reactions occur early in illness, and antibiotic therapy early
in disease can abort subsequent seroconversion.
The diagnosis of late neuroborreliosis is often difficult since
clinical manifestations, such as subtle memory impairment, may be
difficult to document. Most patients with neuroborreliosis have a
history of previous erythema migrans or monarticular or
polyarticular arthritis, and the vast majority have antibody present in
serum. When CSF is sampled from patients with encephalopathy,
there may be evidence of inflammation (pleocytosis or elevated
protein, or both), and localized antibody production, ie, a ratio of
CSF to serum antibody of > 1.0. The role of other tests such as
PCR in detection of DNA or ELISA in detecting the presence of
outer surface protein A (OspA) antigen is unclear, but in difficult
cases these tests can be performed and, if positive, help establish
the diagnosis. Patients with late disease and peripheral neuropathy
almost always have positive serum antibody tests, usually have
abnormal electrophysiology tests, and may have abnormal nerve
biopsies showing perivascular collections of lymphocytes. Because
disease involves peripheral nerves, the CSF is usually normal and
does not demonstrate local antibody production.
Caution should be exercised in interpreting serologic tests
because they are not subject to national standards, and inter-
laboratory variation is a major problem. In addition, some
laboratories perform tests that are entirely unreliable and should
never be used to support the diagnosis of Lyme disease (eg, the
Lyme urinary antigen test, immunofluorescent staining for cell wall-
deficient forms of B burgdorferi, lymphocyte transformation tests,
using PCR on inappropriate specimens such as blood or urine).
Finally, testing is often done in patients with nonspecific symptoms
such as headache, arthralgia, myalgia, fatigue, and palpitations. Even
in endemic areas, the pretest probability of having Lyme disease is
low in these patients, and the probability of a false-positive test
result is greater than that of a true-positive result. For these reasons,
the American College of Physicians has established guidelines for
laboratory evaluation of patients with suspected Lyme disease:
 
1. The diagnosis of early Lyme disease is clinical (ie,
exposure in an endemic area, with physician-documented
erythema migrans), and does not require laboratory
confirmation. (Tests are often negative at this stage.)
 
2. Late disease requires objective evidence of clinical
manifestations (recurrent brief attacks of monarticular or
oligoarticular arthritis of the large joints; lymphocytic
meningitis, cranial neuritis [facial palsy], peripheral
neuropathy 
or, 
rarely, 
encephalomyelitis—but not
headache, fatigue, paresthesias, or stiff neck alone;
atrioventricular conduction defects with or without
myocarditis) and laboratory evidence of disease (two-
stage testing with ELISA and Western blot, as described
above).
 
3. Patients with nonspecific symptoms without objective
signs of Lyme disease should not have serologic testing
done. It is in this setting that false-positive tests occur more
commonly than true-positive tests.
 
4. The role of serologic testing in neuroborreliosis is
unclear, as sensitivity and specificity of CSF serologic tests
have not been determined. However, it is rare for a patient
with neuroborreliosis to have positive serologic tests on
CSF without positive tests on serum (see below).
 
5. Other tests such as the T cell proliferative assay and
urinary antigen detection have not yet been studied well
enough to be routinely used.
Culture for B burgdorferi can be performed but are not routine
and are usually reserved for clinical studies. Aspiration of erythema
migrans lesions has yielded positive cultures in up to 30% of cases,
whereas culture of a 2-mm punch biopsy is positive in 50–70%.
PCR of a skin biopsy is even more sensitive, with positivity rates of
80%. In early disease, blood cultures are positive in up to 50% if
large volumes (9 mL) are used, but CSF is rarely culture positive.
The ability to culture organisms from skin lesions is greatly
influenced by antibiotic therapy. Even a brief course of several days
will result in negative cultures. Special silver staining of chronically
inflamed synovial tissue demonstrates spirochetes in one-third of
patients.
PCR is very specific for detecting the presence of Borrelia
DNA, but sensitivity is variable and depends on which body fluid is
tested, the stage of the disease, and collection and testing technique.
In general, PCR is more sensitive than culture, especially in chronic
disease. Up to 85% of synovial fluid samples are positive in active
arthritis. In contrast, 38% of CSF samples in acute neuroborreliosis
are PCR positive, and only 25% are positive in chronic
neuroborreliosis. The significance of a positive reaction is unclear.
Whether a positive PCR indicates persistence of viable organisms
that will respond to further treatment or is a marker for residual
DNA (not active infection) has not been clarified. A negative PCR
result does not rule out disease.
 Complications
Several observational studies, including serosurveys of over 2000
pregnant women in endemic areas, and case control studies of
nearly 800 infants with congenital heart disease have not found any
association between seropositivity or tick exposure in prospective
mothers and the prevalence of congenital malformations, fetal death,
and prematurity. Thus, if B burgdorferi causes a congenital
syndrome like some other spirochetal illnesses, it must be extremely
uncommon.
 Prevention
There is no human vaccine currently available. Simple preventive
measures such as avoiding tick-infested areas, covering exposed
skin with long-sleeved shirts and wearing long trousers tucked into
socks, wearing light-colored clothing, using repellents, and
inspecting for ticks after exposure will greatly reduce the number of
tick bites. Environmental controls directed at limiting ticks on
residential property would be helpful, but trying to limit the deer,
tick, or white-footed mouse populations over large areas is not
feasible.
Prophylactic antibiotics following tick bites is recommended in
certain high risk situations if all of the following criteria are met: (1) a
tick identified as an adult or nymphal I scapularis has been
attached for at least 36 hours; (2) prophylaxis can be started within
72 hours of the time the tick was removed; (3) more than 20% of
ticks in the area are known to be infected with B burgdorferi; and
(4) there is no contraindication to the use of doxycycline (not
pregnant, age > 8 years, not allergic). As noted above, I scapularis
ticks in the northeastern, mid-Atlantic, and upper midwestern states
are infected with B burgdorferi at a high rate (> 20%) whereas I
pacificus ticks on the West Coast are not (about 2%). The drug of
choice for prophylaxis is a single 200 mg dose of doxycycline. If
doxycycline is contraindicated, no prophylaxis should be given,
since short course prophylactic therapy with other agents has not
been studied and if early disease does develop appropriate therapy
is very effective in preventing long-term sequelae. Individuals who
have removed ticks (including those who have had prophylaxis)
should be monitored carefully for 30 days for possible coinfections.
 Coinfections
Lyme disease, babesiosis (see Chapter 35), and human granulocytic
anaplasmosis (formerly human granulocytic ehrlichiosis) (see
Chapter 32) are endemic in similar areas of the country and are
transmitted by the same tick, I scapularis. Coinfection with two or
even all three of these organisms can occur, causing a clinical
picture that is not “classic” for any of these diseases. The presence
of erythema migrans is highly suggestive of Lyme disease, whereas
flu-like symptoms without rash are more suggestive of babesiosis or
anaplasmosis. The complete blood count is usually normal in Lyme
disease, but in patients with Lyme disease and babesiosis, anemia
and thrombocytopenia are more common. Patients with Lyme
disease and anaplasmosis are more likely to have leukopenia.
Coinfection should be considered and excluded in patients who
have persistent high fevers 48 hours after starting appropriate
therapy for Lyme disease; in patients with persistent symptoms
despite resolution of rash; and in those with anemia, leukopenia, or
thrombocytopenia.
Even in patients with documented Lyme disease, immunity is not
complete. Reinfection, although uncommon, is predominantly seen
in patients successfully treated for early disease (erythema migrans)
who do not develop antibody titers. Clinical manifestations and
serologic response is similar to an initial infection.
 Treatment
Present recommendations for therapy are outlined in Table 34–4.
For erythema migrans, antibiotic therapy shortens the duration of
rash and prevents late sequelae. Doxycycline is most commonly
used and has the advantage of being active against Anaplasma
phagocytophilum (formerly Ehrlichia). Amoxicillin is also effective
and is recommended for pregnant or lactating women and for those
who cannot tolerate doxycycline. Cefuroxime axetil, is as effective
as doxycycline, but because of its cost it should be considered an
alternative choice for those who cannot tolerate doxycycline or
amoxicillin or for those in whom the drugs are contraindicated.
Erythromycin and azithromycin are less effective, associated with
higher rates of relapse, and are not recommended as first-line
therapy.
 
Table 34–4. treatment of lyme disease.
 
 
 
Manifestations
Drug and Dosage
Tick bite
No treatment in most circumstances
(see text); observe
Erythema
migrans
Doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily,
or amoxicillin, 500 mg orally three
times daily, or cefuroxime axetil, 500
mg orally twice daily—all for 2–3
weeks
Neurologic disease
     Facial palsy
(without
meningitis)
Doxycycline, amoxicillin, or cefuroxime
axetil as above for 2–3 weeks
     Other central
nervous system
disease
Ceftriaxone, 2 g intravenously once
daily, or penicillin G, 18–24 million
units daily intravenously in six divided
doses, or cefotaxime, 2 g intravenously
every 8 hours—all for 2–4 weeks
Cardiac disease
     Atrioventricular
block and
myopericarditis1
An oral or parenteral (if more severe
disease) regimen as described above
can be used
Arthritis
Oral dosage
Doxycycline, amoxicillin, or cefuroxime
     Oral dosage
axetil as above for 28 days (see text)
     Parenteral
dosage
Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, or penicillin G
as above for 2–4 weeks
Acrodermatitis
chronicum
atrophicans
Doxycycline, amoxicillin, or cefuroxime
axetil as above for 3 weeks
     “Chronic Lyme
disease” or “post-
Lyme disease
syndrome”
Symptomatic therapy;, prolonged
antibiotics are not recommended
1Symptomatic patients, those with second- or third-degree block and
those with first-degree block with a PR interval ≥ 300 milliseconds should
be hospitalized for observation.
Isolated facial palsy (without meningitis or peripheral neuropathy)
can be treated with doxycycline, amoxicillin, or cefuroxime axetil for
2–3 weeks. Although therapy does not affect the rate of resolution
of the cranial neuropathy, it does prevent development of late
manifestations of disease.
The need for a lumbar puncture in patients with seventh nerve
palsy is controversial. Some clinicians perform lumbar puncture on
all patients with facial palsy and others only if there are symptoms or
signs of meningitis. If meningitis is present, therapy with a parenteral
antibiotic is indicated. Ceftriaxone is most commonly used, but
penicillin is equally efficacious. In European countries, doxycycline
400 mg/d orally for 14 days is frequently used and is comparable in
efficacy to ceftriaxone.
Patients with atrioventricular block or myopericarditis (or both)
can be treated with either oral or parenteral agents for 2–3 weeks.
Hospitalization and observation is indicated for symptomatic
patients, those with second- or third- degree block, and those with
first-degree block with a PR interval ≥ 300 milliseconds. Once
stabilized, hospitalized patients can be transitioned to one of the oral
regimens to complete therapy.
Therapy of arthritis is difficult because some patients do not
respond to any therapy, and those who do respond may do so
slowly. Oral agents (doxycycline, amoxicillin, or cefuroxime axetil)
are as effective as intravenous regimens (ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, or
penicillin). A reasonable approach to the patient with Lyme arthritis
is to start with oral therapy for 28 days, and if this fails (persistent or
recurrent joint swelling), to re-treat with an oral regimen for 28 days
or switch to an intravenous regimen for 2–4 weeks. If some
improvement has occurred with initial treatment with an oral
regimen, another course of oral therapy is reasonable. If there has
been no response or worsening with initial oral therapy, a parenteral
regimen should be used. Re-treatment should be delayed for several
months because of the slow resolution of joint symptoms. If arthritis
persists after re-treatment, symptomatic therapy with nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs is recommended. For severe refractory
pain, synovectomy may be required.
Based on the limited published data, therapy of Lyme disease in
pregnancy should be the same as therapy in other patients with the
exception that doxycycline should not be used.
Clinicians are often confronted with patients with non-specific
symptoms (such as fatigue and myalgias) and positive serologic tests
for Lyme disease who request (or demand) therapy for their illness.
It is important in managing these patients to remember (1) that the
diagnosis of Lyme disease is primarily a clinical one, and nonspecific
symptoms alone are not diagnostic; (2) that serologic tests are
fraught with difficulty (as noted above), and in areas where disease
prevalence is low, false-positive serologic tests are much more
common than true-positive tests; and (3) that parenteral therapy
with ceftriaxone for 2–4 weeks is costly and has been associated
with significant adverse effects, including cholelithiasis and
Clostridium difficile colitis. Parenteral therapy should be reserved
for those most likely to benefit, ie, those with cutaneous, neurologic,
cardiac, or rheumatic manifestations that are characteristic of Lyme
disease.
 Prognosis
Most patients respond to appropriate therapy with prompt
resolution of symptoms within 4 weeks. True treatment failures are
thus uncommon, and in most cases re-treatment or prolonged
treatment of Lyme disease is instituted because of misdiagnosis or
misinterpretation of serologic results (both IgG and IgM antibodies
can persist for prolonged periods despite adequate therapy) rather
than inadequate therapy or response. Prolonged courses of
antibiotic therapy for nonspecific symptoms that persist after
completion of appropriate assessment (and treatment, if necessary)
for Lyme disease is not recommended.
The long-term outcome of adult patients with Lyme disease is
generally favorable, but some patients have chronic complaints.
Joint pain, memory impairment, and poor functional status
secondary to pain are common subjective complaints in patients
with Lyme disease, but physical examination and neurocognitive
testing fail to document the presence of these symptoms as
objective sequelae. Similarly, in highly endemic areas, patients with
a diagnosis of Lyme disease commonly complain of pain, fatigue,
and an inability to perform certain physical activities when followed
for several years. However, these complaints occur just as
commonly in age-matched controls without a history of Lyme
disease. Attempts to document chronic cardiac disease in patients
treated for Lyme disease also have been unsuccessful. The long-
term outcome of treated neuroborelliosis is favorable, with complete
recovery in 75% of patients. Of the remaining individuals, only 12%
had sequelae that affected their daily activities.
 When to Refer
Consultation with an infectious diseases specialist with experience in
diagnosing and treating Lyme disease can be helpful in atypical or
prolonged cases.
 When to Admit
Admission for parenteral antibiotics is indicated for any patient with
symptomatic central nervous system or cardiac disease as well as
those with second- or third-degree atrioventricular block, or first-
degree block with a PR interval ≥ 300 milliseconds.
Aguero-Rosenfeld ME. Lyme disease: laboratory issues. Infect Dis
Clin North Am. 2008 Jun;22(2):301–13. [PMID: 18452803]
 
Elamin M et al. The clinical spectrum of Lyme neuroborreliosis. Ir
Med J. 2010 Feb;103(2):46–9. [PMID: 20666055]
 
Halperin JJ. Nervous system Lyme disease. Infect Dis Clin North
Am. 2008 Jun;22(2):261–74. [PMID: 18452800]
 
Murray TS et al. Lyme disease. Clin Lab Med. 2010
Mar;30(1):311–28. [PMID: 20513553]
 
O'Connell S. Lyme borreliosis: current issues in diagnosis and
management. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2010 Jun;23(3):231–5.
[PMID: 20407371]
 
 
 
Protozoal & Helminthic
Infections
Philip J. Rosenthal, MD
PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
 
AFRICAN TRYPANOSOMIASIS (Sleeping Sickness)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure to tsetse flies; chancre at bite site uncommon.
 Irregular fever, headache, joint pain, rash, edema,
lymphadenopathy progressing to somnolence and neurologic
abnormalities.
 Trypanosomes in blood or lymph node aspirates; positive
serologic tests.
 Trypanosomes and increased white cells and protein in
cerebrospinal fluid.
 
 General Considerations
African trypanosomiasis is caused by the hemoflagellates
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense and Trypanosoma brucei
gambiense. The organisms are transmitted by bites of tsetse flies
(genus Glossina), which inhabit shaded areas along streams and
rivers. Trypanosomes ingested in a blood meal develop over 18–35
days in the fly; when the fly feeds again on a mammalian host, the
infective stage is injected. Human disease occurs in rural areas of
sub-Saharan Africa from south of the Sahara to about 15 degrees
south 
latitude. T b gambiense causes West African
trypanosomiasis, and is transmitted in the moist sub-Saharan
savannas and forests of west and central Africa. T b rhodesiense
causes East African trypanosomiasis, and is transmitted in the
savannas of east and southeast Africa.
T b rhodesiense infection is primarily a zoonosis of game animals
and cattle; humans are infected sporadically. Humans are the
principal mammalian host for T b gambiense, but domestic animals
can be infected. African trypanosomiasis is an increasing threat,
especially where control has been disrupted by civil strife. The
largest number of cases is in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Annual incidence estimates are about 100,000 cases and 48,000
deaths, mostly due to T b gambiense, leading to the loss of 1.5
million disability-adjusted life years. Infections are rare among
travelers, including visitors to game parks.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. West African trypanosomiasis—Chancres at the site of the
bite are uncommon. After an asymptomatic period that may last for
months, hemolymphatic disease presents with fever, headache,
myalgias, arthralgias, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy, with
discrete, nontender, rubbery nodes, referred to as Winterbottom
sign when in a posterior cervical distribution. Other common signs
are mild splenomegaly, transient edema, and a pruritic erythematous
rash. Febrile episodes may be broken by afebrile periods of up to
several weeks. The hemolymphatic stage progresses over months to
meningoencephalitic 
disease, 
with 
somnolence, 
irritability,
personality changes, severe headache, and parkinsonian symptoms
progressing to coma and death.
2. East African trypanosomiasis—Chancres at the bite site are
more commonly recognized with T b rhodesiense infection, with a
painful lesion of 3–10 cm and regional lymphadenopathy that
appears about 48 hours after the tsetse fly bite and lasts 2–4
weeks. East African disease follows a much more acute course,
with the onset of symptoms usually within a few days of the insect
bite. The hemolymphatic stage includes intermittent fever and rash,
but lymph-adenopathy is less common than with West African
disease. Myocarditis can cause tachycardia and death due to
arrhythmias or heart failure. If untreated, East African
trypanosomiasis progresses over weeks to months to
meningoencephalitic disease, somnolence, coma, and death.
B. Laboratory Findings
Definitive diagnosis requires identification of trypanosomes.
Microscopic examination of fluid expressed from a chancre or
lymph node may show motile trypanosomes or, in fixed specimens,
parasites stained with Giemsa. During the hemolymphatic stage,
detection of parasites in Giemsa-stained blood smears is common in
East African disease but difficult in West African disease. Serial
specimens should be examined, since parasitemias vary greatly over
time. Meningoencephalitic (or second stage) disease is defined by
the World Health Organization (WHO) as cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) showing at least five mononuclear cells per microliter,
elevated protein, or presence of trypanosomes. Concentration
techniques can aid identification of parasites in blood or CSF.
Serologic tests are also available. The simple card agglutination test
for trypanosomes (CATT) has excellent sensitivity and specificity
for West African disease and can be performed in the field;
however, the diagnosis should be confirmed by identification of the
parasites.
 Treatment
Detection of trypanosomes is a prerequisite for treatment of African
trypanosomiasis because of the significant toxicity of most available
therapies. Treatment recommendations depend on the type of
trypanosomiasis (Table 35–1), which is determined by geography,
and stage of disease, which requires examination of CSF.
A. West African Trypanosomiasis
1. Early stage infection—Pentamidine (4 mg/kg intramuscularly
or intravenously every day or every other day for 7 days) is used to
treat infection that does not involve the central nervous system
(CNS). The side effects of pentamidine include immediate
hypotension; tachycardia; gastrointestinal symptoms during
administration; sterile abscesses; and pancreatic (hypoglycemia),
liver, and kidney abnormalities. An alternate drug is eflornithine
(100 mg/kg/d intravenously every 6 hours for 14 days).
2. Late stage infection—Eflornithine is the drug of choice for
infection that involves the CNS; the dosage is the same as that used
to treat early disease. Eflornithine has less toxicity than older
trypanocidal drugs, but it can cause gastrointestinal symptoms and
bone marrow suppression and is limited by lack of availability and
the need for infusions four times daily. Alternative therapies are
melarsoprol (see below) or nifurtimox (5 mg/kg orally three times
per day for 14 days), and drug combinations (eg, oral nifurtimox
plus twice-daily eflornithine) may offer improved efficacy over
monotherapies, with simplified regimens and decreased toxicity.
 
Table 35–1. Treatment of african trypanosomiasis.
 
CNS, central nervous system.
B. East African Trypanosomiasis
Pentamidine and eflornithine are not reliably effective, and early
disease is treated with suramin. The dosing regimens of suramin
vary (eg, 100–200 mg test dose, then 20 mg/kg [maximum 1 g]
intravenously on days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 21 or weekly for 5 doses).
Suramin toxicities include vomiting and, rarely, seizures and shock
during infusions as well as subsequent fever, rash, headache,
neuropathy, and kidney and bone marrow dysfunction.
Suramin does not enter the CNS, so East African
trypanosomiasis involving the CNS is treated with melarsoprol
(three series of 3.6 mg/kg/d intravenously for 3 days, with 7-day
breaks between the series or a 10-day intravenous course with 0.6
mg/kg on day 1, 1.2 mg/kg on day 2, and 1.8 mg/kg on days 3–
10). Melarsoprol also acts against West African disease, but
eflornithine is preferred due to its lower toxicity. Immediate side
effects of melarsoprol include fever and gastrointestinal symptoms.
The most important side effect is a reactive encephalopathy that can
progress to seizures, coma, and death. To help avoid this side
effect, corticosteroids are coadministered (recommended regimens
include dexamethasone 1 mg/kg/d intravenously for 2–3 days or
oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg/d for 5 days, and then 0.5 mg/kg/d until
treatment completion). In addition, increasing resistance to
melarsoprol is a serious concern. Suramin and melarsoprol are
available in the United States from the CDC Drug Service, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333; telephone:
404-639-3670.
 Prevention & Control
Individual prevention in endemic areas should include long sleeves
and pants, insect repellents, and mosquito nets. Control programs
focusing on vector elimination and treatment of infected persons and
animals have shown good success in many areas but suffer from
limited resources.
Bisser S et al. Equivalence trial of melarsoprol and nifurtimox
monotherapy and combination therapy for the treatment of
second-stage Trypanosoma brucei gambiense sleeping sickness.
J Inf Dis. 2007 Feb 1;195(3):322–9. [PMID: 17205469]
 
Brun R et al. Human African trypanosomiasis. Lancet. 2010 Jan
9;375(9709):148–59. [PMID: 19833383]
 
Priotto G et al. Nifurtimox-eflornithine combination therapy for
second-stage Trypanosoma brucei gambiense sleeping sickness:
a randomized clinical trial in Congo. Clin Inf Dis. 2007 Dec
1;45(11):1435–42. [PMID: 17990225]
 
Priotto G et al. Nifurtimox-eflornithine combination therapy for
second-stage African Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
trypanosomiasis: a multicentre, randomised, phase III, non-
inferiority trial. Lancet. 2009 Jul 4;374(9683):56–64. [PMID:
19559476]
 
AMERICAN TRYPANOSOMIASIS (Chagas Disease)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
Acute stage
 Inflammatory lesion at inoculation site.
 Fever.
 Hepatosplenomegaly.
 Lymphadenopathy.
 Myocarditis.
 Parasites in blood is diagnostic.
Chronic stage
 Heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias.
 Thromboembolism.
 Megaesophagus.
 Megacolon.
 Serologic tests are usually diagnostic.
 
 General Considerations
Chagas disease is caused by Trypanosoma cruzi, a protozoan
parasite found only in the Americas; it infects wild animals and to a
lesser extent humans from southern South America to the southern
United States. An estimated 10–12 million people are infected,
mostly in rural areas. Recent control efforts in endemic countries
have decreased disease incidence to about 40,000 new infections
and 12,500 deaths per year. The disease is often acquired in
childhood. In many countries in South America, Chagas disease is
the most important cause of heart disease. In the United States, the
vector is found and some animals are infected, but only a few
instances of local transmission have been reported.
T cruzi is transmitted by reduviid (triatomine) bugs infected by
ingesting blood from animals or humans who have circulating
trypanosomes. Multiplication occurs in the digestive tract of the bug
and infective forms are eliminated in feces. Infection in humans
occurs when the parasite penetrates the skin through the bite
wound, mucous membranes, or the conjunctiva. Transmission can
also occur by blood transfusion, organ or bone marrow
transplantation, congenital transfer, or ingestion of food
contaminated with vector feces. From the bloodstream, T cruzi
invades many cell types but has a predilection for myocardium,
smooth muscle, and CNS glial cells. Multiplication causes cellular
destruction, inflammation, and fibrosis, with progressive disease
over decades.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
As many as 70% of infected persons remain asymptomatic. The
acute stage is seen principally in children and lasts 1–2 months.
The earliest findings are at the site of inoculation either in the eye—
Romaña 
sign 
(unilateral 
edema, 
conjunctivitis, 
and
lymphadenopathy)—or in the skin—a chagoma (swelling with local
lymphadenopathy). Subsequent findings include fever, malaise,
headache, 
mild 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
and 
generalized
lymphadenopathy. Acute myocarditis and meningoencephalitis are
rare but can be fatal.
An asymptomatic latent period (indeterminate phase) may last for
life, but symptomatic disease develops in 10–30% of infected
individuals, commonly many years after infection.
Chronic Chagas disease generally manifests as abnormalities in
cardiac and smooth muscle. Cardiac disease includes arrhythmias,
congestive heart failure, and embolic disease. Smooth muscle
abnormalities lead to megaesophagus and megacolon, with
dysphagia, regurgitation, aspiration, constipation, and abdominal
pain. These findings can be complicated by superinfections. In
immunosuppressed persons, including AIDS patients and transplant
recipients, latent Chagas disease may reactivate; findings have
included brain abscesses and meningoencephalitis.
B. Diagnostic Testing
Diagnosis should be considered in persons with suggestive findings
who have resided in an endemic area. Transmission by blood
transfusion and congenital transmission should also be considered.
The diagnosis is made by detecting parasites. With acute infection,
evaluation of fresh blood or buffy coats may show motile
trypanosomes, and fixed preparations may show Giemsa-stained
parasites. Trypanosomes may be identified in lymph nodes, bone
marrow, or pericardial or spinal fluid. When initial tests are
unrevealing in a suspicious case, xenodiagnosis using laboratory
vectors, laboratory culture, or animal inoculation may provide a
diagnosis, but these methods are expensive and slow.
Chronic Chagas disease is usually diagnosed serologically.
Many different serologic assays are available, but sensitivity and
specificity are not ideal, so confirmatory assays are advised after an
initial positive test, as is standard for blood bank testing in South
America. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may offer an important
new modality for diagnosis, but sensitivity of PCR assays has been
disappointing.
 Treatment
Treatment is inadequate because the two drugs used, nifurtimox and
benznidazole, often cause severe side effects, must be used for long
periods, and are ineffective against chronic infection. In acute and
congenital infections, the drugs can reduce the duration and severity
of infection, but cure is achieved in only about 70% of patients.
During the chronic phase of infection, although parasitemia may
disappear in up to 70% of patients, treatment does not clearly alter
the progression of the disease. Nevertheless, there is general
consensus that treatment should be considered in all T
cruzi-infected persons regardless of clinical status or time since
infection. In particular, treatment is recommended for acute,
congenital, and reactivated infections and for children and young
adults with chronic disease.
Nifurtimox is given orally in daily doses of 8–10 mg/kg in four
divided doses after meals for 90–120 days. Side effects include
gastrointestinal (anorexia, vomiting) and neurologic (headaches,
ataxia, insomnia, seizures) symptoms, which appear to be reversible
and to lessen with dosage reduction. Benznidazole is an alternative
therapy that is given orally at a dosage of 5 mg/kg/d in divided
doses for 60 days. Its side effects include granulocytopenia, rash,
and peripheral neuropathy. In the United States, nifurtimox is
available from the CDC Drug Service, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333; telephone: 404-639-3670.
Patients with chronic Chagas disease may also benefit from anti
arrhythmic therapy, standard therapy for congestive heart failure,
and conservative and surgical management of mega esophagus and
megacolon.
 Prevention & Control
In South America, a major eradication program based on improved
housing, use of residual pyrethroid insecticides and pyrethroid-
impregnated bed curtains, and screening of blood donors has
achieved striking reductions in new infections. In endemic areas and
ideally in donors from endemic areas, blood should not be used for
transfusion unless at least two serologic tests are negative.
Alarcón de Noya B et al. Large urban outbreak of orally acquired
acute Chagas disease at a school in Caracas, Venezuela. J Infect
Dis. 2010 May 1;201(9):1308–15. [PMID: 20307205]
 
Bern C et al. Evaluation and treatment of Chagas disease in the
United States: a systematic review. JAMA. 2007 Nov 14;
298(18):2171–81. [PMID: 18000201]
 
Diazgranados CA et al. Chagasic encephalitis in HIV patients:
common presentation of an evolving epidemiological and clinical
association. Lancet Infect Dis. 2009 May;9(5):324–30. [PMID:
19393962]
 
Lescure FX et al. Chagas disease: changes in knowledge and
management. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010 Aug;10(8):556–70. [PMID:
20670903]
 
Rassi A Jr et al. Chagas Disease. Lancet. 2010 Apr
17;375(9723):1388–402. [PMID: 20399979]
 
LEISHMANIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Sand fly bite in an endemic area.
 Visceral leishmaniasis: irregular fever, progressive
hepatosplenomegaly, pancytopenia, wasting.
 Cutaneous leishmaniasis: chronic, painless, moist ulcers or dry
nodules.
 Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis: destructive nasopharyngeal
lesions.
 Amastigotes in macrophages in aspirates, touch preparations, or
biopsies.
 Positive culture, serologic tests, PCR, or skin test.
 
 General Considerations
Leishmaniasis is a zoonosis transmitted by bites of sand flies of the
genus Lutzomyia in the Americas and Phlebotomus elsewhere.
When sand flies feed on an infected host, the parasitized cells are
ingested with the blood meal. Leishmaniasis is caused by about 20
species of Leishmania; taxonomy is complex. Clinical syndromes
are generally dictated by the infecting species, but some species can
cause more than one syndrome.
An estimated 350 million persons are at risk for leishmaniasis.
The estimated annual incidence of disease is 1–1.5 million new
cases of cutaneous and 500,000 cases of visceral disease, leading
to an estimated 50,000–60,000 deaths. The incidence of disease is
increasing in many areas.
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar) is caused mainly by
Leishmania donovani in the Indian subcontinent and East Africa;
Leishmania infantum in the Mediterranean, Middle East, China,
parts of Asia, and Horn of Africa; and Leishmania chagasi in
South and Central America. Other species may occasionally cause
visceral disease. Over 90% of cases occur in five countries: India,
Bangladesh, Nepal, Sudan, and Brazil. In each locale, the disease
has particular clinical and epidemiologic features. The incubation
period is usually 4–6 months (range: 10 days to 24 months).
Without treatment, the fatality rate reaches 90%. Early diagnosis
and treatment reduces mortality to 2–5%.
Old World cutaneous leishmaniasis is caused mainly by
Leishmania tropica, Leishmania major, 
and Leishmania
aethiopica in the Mediterranean, Middle East, Africa, Central Asia,
and Indian subcontinent. New World cutaneous leishmaniasis is
caused by Leishmania mexicana and Leishmania amazonensis in
Central and South America. Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
(espundia) occurs in lowland forest areas of the Americas and is
caused by Leishmania braziliensis, Leishmania panamensis, and
Leishmania peruviana.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar)—Most infections are
subclinical, but a small number progress to full-blown disease. A
local nonulcerating nodule at the site of the sand fly bite may
precede systemic manifestations but usually is inapparent. The onset
of illness may be acute, within 2 weeks of infection, or insidious.
Symptoms and signs include fever, chills, sweats, weakness,
anorexia, weight loss, cough, and diarrhea. The spleen progressively
becomes greatly enlarged, firm, and nontender. The liver is
somewhat enlarged, and generalized lymphadenopathy may occur.
Hyperpigmentation of skin can be seen, leading to the name kala
azar (“black fever”). Other signs include skin lesions, petechiae,
gingival bleeding, jaundice, edema, and ascites. As the disease
progresses, severe wasting and malnutrition are seen; death
eventually occurs, often due to secondary infections, within months
to a few years. Post-kala azar dermal leishmaniasis may appear
after apparent cure in the Indian subcontinent and Sudan. It may
simulate leprosy, with hypopigmented macules or nodules
developing on preexisting lesions. Viscerotropic leishmaniasis has
been reported in small numbers of American military personnel in
the Middle East, with mild systemic febrile illnesses after L tropica
infections.
Figure 35–1. skin ulcer due to cutaneous leishmaniasis.
(Courtesy of D. S. Martin, Public Health Image Library, CDC.)
 
2. Old World and New World cutaneous leishmaniasis
—Cutaneous swellings appear 2 weeks to several months after
sand fly bites and can be single or multiple. Characteristics of
lesions and courses of disease vary depending on the leishmanial
species and host immune response. Lesions begin as small papules
and develop into nonulcerated dry plaques or large encrusted ulcers
with well-demarcated raised and indurated margins (Figure 35–1).
Satellite lesions may be present. The lesions are painless unless
secondarily infected. Local lymph nodes may be enlarged. Systemic
symptoms are uncommon, but fever, constitutional symptoms, and
regional lymphadenopathy may be seen. For most species, healing
occurs spontaneously in months to a few years, but scarring is
commonly seen.
Leishmaniasis recidivans is a relapsing form of L tropica
infection associated with hypersensitivity, in which the primary lesion
heals centrally, but spreads laterally, with extensive scarring.
Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis involves spread from a central
lesion to local dissemination of nodules and a protracted course.
Disseminated cutaneous leishmaniasis involves multiple nodular
or ulcerated lesions, often with mucosal involvement.
3. Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (espundia)—In Latin
America, mucosal lesions develop in a small percentage of persons
infected with L braziliensis and some other species, usually months
to years after resolution of a cutaneous lesion. Nasal congestion is
followed by ulceration of the nasal mucosa and septum, progressing
to involvement of the mouth, lips, palate, pharynx, and larynx.
Extensive destruction can occur, and secondary bacterial infection is
common. Similar syndromes have been reported with some other
species in other areas.
4. Infections in patients with AIDS—Leishmaniasis is an
opportunistic infection in persons with AIDS seen in southern
Europe and other areas. Visceral leishmaniasis can present late in
the course of HIV infection, with fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and
pancytopenia. The gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, and skin
may also be involved.
B. Laboratory Findings
Identifying parasites in tissue samples or culture material provides a
definitive 
diagnosis. 
In visceral leishmaniasis, fine-needle
aspiration of the spleen for culture and tissue evaluation is generally
safe, and yields a diagnosis in over 95% of cases. Bone marrow
aspiration is less sensitive but safer and diagnostic in most cases.
Giemsa-stained buffy coat of peripheral blood may occasionally
show organisms. For all tissue biopsies and touch preparations,
Giemsa staining will show amastigotes within macrophages. Cultures
with media available from the CDC will grow promastigotes within
a few days to weeks. PCR can also identify the infection.
Inoculation of laboratory animals can also be used but is time
consuming. Species are identified by molecular, isoenzyme, and
monoclonal antibody methods. Serologic tests may facilitate
diagnosis, but none are sufficiently sensitive or specific to be used
alone. Antibody levels are typically high with visceral leishmaniasis
but not cutaneous disease. For cutaneous lesions, biopsies should
be taken from the raised border of a skin lesion, with samples for
histopathology, touch preparation, and culture. The histopathology
shows inflammation with mononuclear cells. Macrophages filled
with amastigotes may be present, especially early in infection. An
intradermal leishmanin (Montenegro) skin test is positive in most
individuals with cutaneous disease but negative in those with
progressive visceral or diffuse cutaneous disease; this test is not
approved in the United States. In mucocutaneous leishmaniasis,
diagnosis is established by detecting amastigotes in scrapings,
biopsy preparations, or aspirated tissue fluid, but organisms may be
rare. Cultures from these samples may grow organisms. Serologic
studies are often negative, but the leishmanin skin test is usually
positive.
 Treatment
A. Visceral Leishmaniasis
The treatment of choice for visceral leishmaniasis is liposomal
amphotericin B, which is generally effective and well tolerated but
very expensive. Liposomal amphotericin B is approved for this use
in the United States; other lipid formulations are under study.
Standard dosing is 3 mg/kg/d intravenously on days 1–5, 14, and
21, but simpler regimens may be equally effective. Infusion-related
side effects include gastrointestinal symptoms, fever, chills, dyspnea,
hypotension, and hepatic and renal toxicity. Conventional
amphotericin B deoxycholate, which is much less expensive, is also
highly effective but with more toxicity. It is administered as a slow
intravenous infusion of 1 mg/kg/d for 20 days or 0.5–1 mg/kg every
second day for up to 8 weeks.
Pentavalent antimonials remain the most commonly used drugs to
treat leishmaniasis in most areas. Response rates are good outside
India, but in India, resistance is a major problem. Two preparations
are available, sodium stibogluconate in the United States and many
other areas and meglumine antimonate in Latin America and
francophone countries; the compounds appear to have comparable
activities. In the United States, sodium stibogluconate can be
obtained from the CDC Drug Service, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333; telephone: 404-639-3670.
Treatment with either antimonial is given once daily at a dose of
20 mg/kg/d intravenously (preferred) or intramuscularly for 20 days
for cutaneous leishmaniasis and 28 days for visceral or
mucocutaneous disease. Toxicity increases over time, with
development of gastrointestinal symptoms, fever, headache,
myalgias, arthralgias, pancreatitis, and rash. Intramuscular injections
can cause sterile abscesses. Monitoring should include serial ECGs,
and changes are indications for discontinuation to avoid progression
to serious arrhythmias.
Miltefosine is the first oral drug for the treatment of leishmaniasis,
and it provides excellent results in India, where resistance to
antimonials is increasing. It can be administered at a daily oral dose
of 2.5 mg/kg in two divided doses for 28 days and was also
effective in regimens including a single dose of liposomal
amphotericin followed by 7–14 days of miltefosine. A 28-day
course of miltefosine (2.5 mg/kg/d) was also effective for the
treatment of New World cutaneous leishmaniasis. Vomiting,
diarrhea, and elevations in transaminases and kidney function
studies are common, but generally short-lived, side effects.
Miltefosine is registered for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis in
India and may become the standard of care in that country, although
additional study is needed.
Pentamidine isethionate is an alternative therapy for visceral
leishmaniasis, given daily or on alternate days for 15 doses of 2–4
mg/kg intramuscularly or intravenously. Side effects include
immediate hypotension; tachycardia; and gastrointestinal symptoms
during administration; sterile abscesses; and pancreatic, liver, and
kidney abnormalities.
The aminoglycoside paromomycin (11 mg/kg/d intramuscularly
for 21 days) was shown to be similarly efficacious to amphotericin
B for the treatment of visceral disease in India. It is much less
expensive than liposomal amphotericin B or miltefosine. Approval
of an intramuscular preparation for visceral leishmaniasis was
received in India in 2006. The drug is well tolerated; side effects
include ototoxicity and reversible elevations in liver enzymes.
B. Cutaneous Leishmaniasis
In the Old World, cutaneous leishmaniasis is generally self-healing
over some months and does not metastasize to the mucosa, so it
may be justified to withhold treatment in regions without
mucocutaneous disease if lesions are small and cosmetically
unimportant. Lesions on the face or hands are generally treated.
New World leishmaniasis has a greater risk of progression to
mucocutaneous disease, so treatment is more often warranted.
Standard therapy is with pentavalent antimonials for 20 days, as
described above. Other treatments include those discussed above
for visceral disease, azole antifungals, and allopurinol. Topical
therapy has included intralesional antimony, paromomycin ointment,
cryotherapy, local heat, and surgical removal. Diffuse cutaneous
leishmaniasis and related chronic skin processes generally respond
poorly to therapy.
C. Mucocutaneous Leishmaniasis
Cutaneous infections from regions where parasites include those
that cause mucocutaneous disease (eg, L braziliensis in parts of
Latin America) should all be treated to help prevent disease
progression. Treatment of mucocutaneous disease with antimonials
is disappointing, with responses in only about 60% in Brazil. Other
therapies listed above for visceral leishmaniasis may also be used,
although they have not been well studied for this indication.
 Prevention & Control
Personal protection measures for avoidance of sand fly bites include
use of insect repellants, fine-mesh insect netting, long sleeves and
pants, and avoidance of warm shaded areas where flies are
common. Disease control measures include destruction of animal
reservoir hosts, mass treatment of humans in disease-prevalent
areas, residual insecticide spraying in dwellings, limiting contact with
dogs 
and 
other 
domesticated 
animals, 
and 
use 
of
permethrinimpregnated collars for dogs.
Bhattacharya SK et al. Phase 4 trial of miltefosine for the treatment
of Indian visceral leishmaniasis. J Infect Dis. 2007 Aug
15;196(4):591–8. [PMID: 17624846]
 
Chappuis F et al. Visceral leishmaniasis: what are the needs for
diagnosis, treatment and control? Nat Rev Microbiol. 2007
Nov;5(11):873–82. [PMID: 17938629]
 
González U et al. Interventions for American cutaneous and
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009
Apr 15; (2):CD004834. [PMID: 19370612]
 
Murray HW et al. Advances in leishmaniasis. Lancet. 2005 Oct
29–Nov 4;366(9496):1561–77. [PMID: 16257344]
 
Reithinger R et al. Cutaneous leishmaniasis. Lancet Infect Dis.
2007 Sep;7(9):581–96. [PMID: 17714672]
 
Sundar S. Injectable paromomycin for visceral leishmaniasis in
India. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jun 21;356(25):2571–81. [PMID:
17582067]
 
Sundar S et al. New treatment approach in Indian visceral
leishmaniasis: single-dose liposomal amphotericin B followed by
short-course oral miltefosine. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Oct
15;47(8):1000–6. [PMID: 18781879]
 
van Griensven J. Combination therapy for visceral leishmaniasis.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2010 Mar;10(3):184–94. [PMID: 20185097]
 
MALARIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Residence or exposure in a malaria-endemic area.
 Intermittent attacks of chills, fever, and sweating.
 Headache, myalgia, vomiting, splenomegaly; anemia,
thrombocytopenia.
 Intraerythrocytic parasites identified in thick or thin blood smears.
 Complications of falciparum malaria: cerebral malaria, severe
anemia, hypotension, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, acute
kidney injury, hypoglycemia, acidosis, and hemolysis.
 
 General Considerations
Malaria is the most important parasitic disease of humans, causing
hundreds of millions of illnesses and about a million deaths each
year. The disease is endemic in most of the tropics, including much
of South and Central America, Africa, the Middle East, the Indian
subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and Oceania. Transmission,
morbidity, and mortality are greatest in Africa, where most deaths
from malaria are in young children. Malaria is also common in
travelers from nonendemic areas to the tropics.
Four species of the genus Plasmodium classically cause human
malaria. Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for nearly all
severe disease. It is endemic in most malarious areas and is by far
the predominant species in Africa. Plasmodium vivax is about as
common as P falciparum, except in Africa. P vivax uncommonly
causes severe disease, although this outcome may be more common
than previously appreciated. Plasmodium ovale and Plasmodium
malariae are much less common causes of disease, and generally
do not cause severe illness. Plasmodium knowlesi, a parasite of
macaque monkeys, is now recognized to cause occasional illnesses,
including some severe disease, in humans in Southeast Asia.
Malaria is transmitted by the bite of infected female anopheline
mosquitoes. During feeding, mosquitoes inject sporozoites, which
circulate to the liver, and rapidly infect hepatocytes, causing
asymptomatic liver infection. Merozoites are subsequently released
from the liver, and they rapidly infect erythrocytes to begin the
asexual erythrocytic stage of infection that is responsible for human
disease. Multiple rounds of erythrocytic development, with
production of merozoites that invade additional erythrocytes, lead to
large numbers of circulating parasites and clinical illness. Some
erythrocytic parasites also develop into sexual gametocytes, which
are infectious to mosquitoes, allowing completion of the life cycle
and infection of others.
Malaria may uncommonly be transmitted from mother-to-infant
(congenital malaria), by blood transfusion, and in nonendemic areas
by mosquitoes infected after biting infected immigrants or travelers.
I n P vivax and P ovale, parasites also form dormant liver
hypnozoites, which are not killed by most drugs, allowing
subsequent relapses of illness after initial elimination of erythrocytic
infections. For all plasmodial species, parasites may recrudesce
following initial clinical improvement after suboptimal therapy.
In highly endemic regions, where people are infected repeatedly,
antimalarial immunity prevents severe disease in most older children
and adults. However, young children, who are relatively
nonimmune, are at high risk for severe disease from P falciparum
infection, and this population is responsible for most deaths from
malaria. Pregnant women are also at increased risk for severe
falciparum malaria. In areas with lower endemicity, individuals of all
ages commonly present with uncomplicated or severe malaria.
Travelers, who are generally nonimmune, are at high risk for severe
disease from falciparum malaria at any age.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
An acute attack of malaria typically begins with a prodrome of
headache and fatigue, followed by fever. A classic malarial
paroxysm includes chills, high fever, and then sweats. Patients may
appear to be remarkably well between febrile episodes. Fevers are
usually irregular, especially early in the illness, but without therapy
may become regular, with 48-hour cycles (P vivax and P ovale)
or 72-hour cycles (P malariae), especially with non-falciparum
disease. Headache, malaise, myalgias, arthralgias, cough, chest
pain, abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are
common. Seizures may represent simple febrile convulsions or
evidence of severe neurologic disease. Physical findings may be
absent or include signs of anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, and mild
hepatomegaly. Rash and lymphadenopathy are not typical in
malaria, and thus suggestive of another cause of fever. When
treated appropriately, uncomplicated malaria generally responds
well, with a mortality of about 0.1%.
In the developed world, it is imperative that all persons with
suggestive symptoms, in particular fever, who have traveled in an
endemic area be evaluated for malaria. The risk for falciparum
malaria is greatest within 2 months of return from travel; other
species may cause disease many months—and occasionally more
than a year—after return from an endemic area.
Severe malaria is defined as the presence of signs of severe
illness or organ dysfunction or a high parasite load (peripheral
parasitemia > 5% or > 200,000 parasites/mcL). It is principally a
result of P falciparum infection because this species uniquely
infects erythrocytes of all ages and mediates the sequestration of
infected erythrocytes in small blood vessels, thereby evading
clearance of infected erythrocytes by the spleen.
Severe falciparum malaria can include dysfunction of any organ
system, including neurologic abnormalities progressing to alterations
in consciousness, repeated seizures, and coma (cerebral malaria);
severe anemia; hypotension and shock; noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema and the acute respiratory distress syndrome; acute kidney
injury due to acute tubular necrosis or, less commonly, severe
hemolysis; hypoglycemia; acidosis; hemolysis with jaundice; hepatic
dysfunction; retinal hemorrhages and other fundoscopic
abnormalities; bleeding abnormalities, including disseminated
intravascular coagulation; and secondary bacterial infections,
including pneumonia and Salmonella bacteremia. In the developing
world, severe malaria and deaths from the disease are mostly in
young children, in particular from cerebral malaria and severe
anemia. Cerebral malaria is a consequence of a single severe
infection while severe anemia follows multiple malarial infections,
intestinal helminths, and nutritional deficiencies. In the developed
world, mortality from malaria is mostly in adults, and often follows
extended illnesses and secondary complications long after
eradication of the malarial infection. Pregnant women are at
particular risk during their first pregnancy, probably due to the
selection of P falciparum strains that preferentially sequester in the
placenta; multiparous women are more likely to have antibodies
against these strains and thus avoid severe disease. Malaria in
pregnancy also increases the likelihood of poor pregnancy
outcomes, with increased prematurity, low birth weight, and
mortality.
Uncommon disorders resulting from immunologic responses to
chronic infection are massive splenomegaly and, with P malariae
infection, immune complex glomerulopathy with nephrotic
syndrome. HIV-infected individuals are at increased risk for malaria
and for severe disease, in particular with advanced
immunodeficiency.
B. Laboratory Findings
Giemsa-stained blood smears remain the mainstay of diagnosis
(Figures 35–2 through 35–5), although other routine stains (eg,
Wright stain) will also demonstrate parasites. Thick smears provide
efficient evaluation of large volumes of blood, but thin smears are
simpler for inexperienced personnel and better for discrimination of
parasite species. Single smears are usually positive in infected
individuals, although parasitemias may be very low in nonimmune
individuals. If illness is suspected, repeating smears in 8- to 24-hour
intervals is appropriate. The severity of malaria correlates only
loosely with the quantity of infecting parasites, but high parasitemias
(especially > 10–20% of erythrocytes infected or > 200,000–
500,000 parasites/mcL) or the presence of malarial pigment (a
breakdown product of hemoglobin) in > 5% of neutrophils are
associated with a particularly poor prognosis.
Figure 35–2. Thin film Giemsa-stained micrograph with
Plasmodium falciparum ring forms. (Courtesy of Steven Glenn,
Laboratory & Consultation Division, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
Figure 35–3. Thin film Giemsa-stained micrograph with
Plasmodium malariae trophozoite. (Courtesy of Steven Glenn,
Laboratory & Consultation Division, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
Figure 35–4. Thin film Giemsa-stained micrograph with
Plasmodium vivax schizont. (Courtesy of Steven Glenn,
Laboratory & Consultation Division, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
Figure 35–5. Thin film Giemsa-stained micrograph with
Plasmodium ovale trophozoite. (Courtesy of Steven Glenn,
Laboratory & Consultation Division, Public Health Image Library,
CDC.)
 
A second means of diagnosis is rapid diagnostic tests to identify
circulating plasmodial antigens with a simple “dipstick” format.
These tests are not well standardized but are increasingly available
around the world, including in the United States. At best, they offer
sensitivity and specificity near that of high-quality blood smear
analysis and are simpler to perform.
Serologic tests indicate history of disease but are not useful for
diagnosis of acute infection. PCR is highly sensitive but not available
for routine diagnosis. In immune populations, highly sensitive tests,
such as PCR, have limited value because subclinical infections,
which are of uncertain significance and not routinely treated, are
common.
 
Table 35–2. Major antimalarial drugs.
 
1Not available in the United States.
Modified, with permission, from Katzung BG. Basic & Clinical
Pharmacology. 11th edition. McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Other diagnostic findings with uncomplicated malaria include
thrombocytopenia, anemia, leukocytosis or leukopenia, liver
function abnormalities, and hepatosplenomegaly. Severe malaria can
present with the laboratory abnormalities expected for the advanced
organ dysfunction discussed above.
 Treatment
Malaria is the most common cause of fever in much of the tropics
and in travelers seeking medical attention after return from endemic
areas. Fevers are often treated presumptively in endemic areas, but
ideally, treatment should follow definitive diagnosis, especially in
nonimmune individuals (see Tables 35–4 and 35–5).
Symptomatic malaria is caused only by the erythrocytic stage of
infection. Available antimalarial drugs (Table 35–2) act against this
stage, except for primaquine, which acts principally against hepatic
parasites.
A. Non-Falciparum Malaria
The first-line drug for non-falciparum malaria from most areas
remains chloroquine. Due to increasing resistance of P vivax to
chloroquine, alternative therapies are recommended when
resistance is suspected, particularly for infections acquired in
Indonesia, Oceania, and Peru. These infections can be treated with
artemisinin-based combination therapies or other first-line regimens
for P falciparum infections as discussed below. For P vivax or P
ovale, eradication of erythrocytic parasites with chloroquine should
be accompanied by treatment with primaquine (after evaluating for
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency; see
below) to eradicate dormant liver stages (hypnozoites), which may
lead to relapses with recurrent erythrocytic infection and malaria
symptoms after weeks to months if left untreated. P malariae
infections need only be treated with chloroquine.
B. Uncomplicated Falciparum Malaria
Decisions about how to treat falciparum malaria are affected by the
potential for drug resistance, the high cost and limited availability of
newer agents for developing world populations, and potential
toxicity. The drug sensitivity of individual strains can be determined,
but such testing is slow and not useful clinically. Rather, therapeutic
decisions are made based on the infecting species and geography. P
falciparum is now commonly resistant to chloroquine and
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in most areas, with the principal
exceptions of Central America west of the Panama Canal and
Hispaniola. Falciparum malaria from other areas should not be
treated with these older drugs, and decisions regarding appropriate
chemoprophylaxis 
should 
follow 
the 
same 
geographic
considerations.
In the developing world, malaria is often treated with suboptimal
regimens due to the high cost and limited supplies of newer agents.
Chloroquine is still widely used in Africa, and its poor efficacy may
be underappreciated due to its antipyretic properties, the ability of
some immune individuals to recover from acute malaria without
effective therapy, and the fact that recrudescences may not lead to
symptoms until weeks after partially effective therapy. Sulfadoxine-
pyrimethamine is slower acting than most other agents, and suffers
from increasing resistance in most areas. Recommendations for the
treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in the developing
world have undergone major change in recent years, with
artemisinin-based combinations, all including a short-acting
artemisinin and longer-acting partner drug, now first-line therapies in
nearly all endemic countries. The WHO currently recommends five
artemisinin-based combinations to treat falciparum malaria (Table
35–3), but the efficacy of these regimens varies. Other combination
therapies are under development. Another drug that remains
generally effective for falciparum malaria is quinine, but it must be
taken for an extended period to cure disease and is poorly
tolerated. Thus, in the developing world, quinine should be reserved
for the treatment of severe malaria and for treatment after another
regimen has failed (Table 35–4).
In developed countries, malaria is an uncommon but potentially
life-threatening infection of travelers and immigrants, many of whom
are nonimmune, so they are at risk for rapid progression to severe
disease. Nonimmune individuals with falciparum malaria should
generally be admitted to the hospital due to risks of rapid
progression of disease. Options for the treatment of uncomplicated
falciparum malaria in the United States have increased with the
approval of artemether-lumefantrine in 2009; this drug will likely
become the standard for this indication (Table 35–4).
C. Severe Malaria
Severe malaria is a medical emergency. Parenteral treatment is
indicated for severe malaria, as defined above, and with inability to
take oral drugs. With appropriate prompt therapy and supportive
care, rapid recoveries may be seen in even very ill individuals.
Standard therapy for severe malaria has been intravenous quinine
in most areas and, in the United States, intravenous quinidine, which
is equally effective. However, the standard of care is now changing,
since intravenous artesunate has shown superiority over quinine.
Patients receiving intravenous quinine or quinidine should receive
continuous cardiac monitoring; if QTc prolongation exceeds 25% of
baseline, the infusion rate should be reduced. Blood glucose should
be monitored every 4–6 hours, and 5–10% dextrose may be
coadministered to decrease the likelihood of hypoglycemia.
Appropriate care of severe malaria includes maintenance of fluids
and electrolytes; respiratory and hemodynamic support; and
consideration of blood transfusions, anticonvulsants, antibiotics for
bacterial infections, and hemofiltration or hemodialysis. With high
parasitemia (> 5–10%), exchange transfusion has been used, but
beneficial effects have not clearly been demonstrated, and its role
remains uncertain.
Intravenous artesunate has shown superior efficacy and better
tolerability than intravenous quinine for severe malaria in large
randomized trials in Asian adults and African children. It is now the
standard of care for severe malaria, although it is not yet available in
much of the developing world, where quinine remains standard
therapy.
 
Table 35–3. WHO recommendations for the treatment of
uncomplicated falciparum malaria.
 
 
 
Regimen
Notes
Artemether-
lumefantrine
(Coartem, Riamet)
Coformulated, first-line therapy in
many countries.
     Approved in the United States.
Artesunate-
amodiaquine
(ASAQ)
Coformulated, first-line therapy in
multiple African countries.
Artesunate-
mefloquine
First-line therapy in parts of
Southeast
     Asia and South America.
Artesunate-
sulfadoxine-
pyrimethamine
First-line in some countries, but
efficacy lower than other regimens in
most areas.
Dihydroartemisinin-
piperaquine
Newer coformulated combination.
     First-line in some Southeast
Asian countries.
World Health Organization: Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria.
World Health Organization. Geneva 2010. ISBN 978 92 4 154792 5.
In the United States intravenous artesunate is available on an
investigational basis through the CDC (for enrollment call 770-488-
7788); if approved, the drug is provided emergently from CDC
Quarantine Stations. The drug is administered in four doses of 2.4
mg/kg over 3 days, every 12 hours on day 1, and then daily. If
artesunate cannot be obtained promptly, severe malaria should be
treated with intravenous quinine or quinidine. In endemic regions, if
parenteral therapy is not available, intrarectal administration of
artemether or artesunate is also effective.
D. Antimalarial Drugs
1. Chloroquine—Chloroquine remains the drug of choice for the
treatment of sensitive P falciparum and other species of malaria
parasites. Chloroquine is active against erythrocytic parasites of all
human malaria species. It does not eradicate hepatic stages, so must
be used with primaquine to eradicate P vivax and P ovale
infections. Chloroquine-resistant P falciparum is widespread in
nearly all areas of the world with falciparum malaria, with the
exceptions of Central America west of the Panama Canal, Mexico,
and Hispaniola. Chloroquine-resistant P vivax has been reported
from a number of areas, most notably Southeast Asia and Oceania.
Chloroquine is the drug of choice for the treatment of non-
falciparum and sensitive falciparum malaria. It rapidly terminates
fever (in 24–48 hours) and clears parasitemia (in 48–72 hours)
caused by sensitive parasites. Chloroquine is also the preferred
chemoprophylactic agent in malarious regions without resistant
falciparum malaria. Eradication of P vivax and P ovale requires a
course of primaquine.
Chloroquine is usually well tolerated, even with prolonged use.
Pruritus is common, primarily in Africans. Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, headache, anorexia, malaise, blurring of vision, and
urticaria are uncommon. Dosing after meals may reduce some
adverse events.
 
Table 35–4. Treatment of malaria.
 
1All dosages are oral and refer to salts unless otherwise indicated. See
text for additional information on all agents, including toxicities and
cautions. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s guidelines
(phone: 
877-FYI-TRIP; http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/) 
for 
additional
information and pediatric dosing.
2Not available in the United States.
3Available in the United States only on an investigational basis through the
CDC (phone: 770-488-7788).
4Cardiac monitoring should be in place during intravenous administration
of quinidine or quinine.
5Avoid loading doses in persons who have received quinine, quinidine, or
mefloquine in the prior 24 hours.
6With all parenteral regimens, change to an oral regimen as soon as the
patient can tolerate it.
G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
2. Amodiaquine and piperaquine—Amodiaquine is a 4-
aminoquinoline that is closely related to chloroquine. Amodiaquine
has been widely used to treat malaria because of its low cost,
limited toxicity and, in some areas, effectiveness against
chloroquine-resistant strains of P falciparum. Use of amodiaquine
decreased after recognition of rare but serious side effects, notably
agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, and hepatotoxicity. However,
serious side effects are rare with short-term use, and amodiaquine is
a component of a new combination therapy (artesunate-
amodiaquine) recommended to treat falciparum malaria (Table 35–
3). Chemoprophylaxis with amodiaquine is best avoided because of
increased toxicity with long-term use.
Piperaquine is another 4-aminoquinoline that was previously
heavily used in China and has been coformulated with
dihydroartemisinin in an artemisinin-based therapy. Piperaquine
appears to be well tolerated, to have minimal problems with
resistance (despite prior reports of resistance in China), and in
combination with dihydroartemisinin to offer a highly efficacious
therapy for falciparum malaria.
3. Mefloquine—Mefloquine is effective therapy for many
chloroquine-resistant strains of P falciparum and against other
malarial species. Although toxicity is a concern, mefloquine is also a
recommended chemoprophylactic drug. Resistance to mefloquine
has been reported sporadically from many areas, but it appears to
be uncommon except in regions of Southeast Asia with high rates of
multi drug resistance (especially border areas of Thailand).
For treatment of uncomplicated malaria, mefloquine is rapidly
active and can be administered as a single dose or in two doses
over 1 day. It is used in combination with artesunate in Southeast
Asia, where resistance to mefloquine has been seen but the
combination remains effective in most areas. It should be taken with
meals and swallowed with a large amount of water. Mefloquine is
recommended by the CDC for chemoprophylaxis in all malarious
areas except those with no chloroquine resistance (where
chloroquine is preferred) and some rural areas of Southeast Asia
with a high prevalence of mefloquine resistance. Eradication of P
vivax and P ovale requires a course of primaquine.
Adverse effects with weekly dosing of mefloquine for
chemoprophylaxis include nausea, vomiting, dizziness, sleep and
behavioral disturbances, epigastric pain, diarrhea, abdominal pain,
headache, rash and, uncommonly, seizures and psychosis.
Mefloquine should be avoided in persons with histories of
psychiatric disease or seizures.
Adverse effects are more common (up to 50% of treatments)
with the higher dosages of mefloquine required for treatment. These
effects may be lessened by splitting administration into two doses
separated by 6–8 hours. Serious neuropsychiatric toxicities
(depression, confusion, acute psychosis, or seizures) have been
reported in < 1 in 1000 treatments, but some authorities believe that
these are more common. Mefloquine can also alter cardiac
conduction, and so it should not be coadministered with quinine,
quinidine, or halofantrine, and caution is required if these drugs are
used to treat malaria after mefloquine chemoprophylaxis.
Mefloquine is generally considered safe in young children and
pregnant women.
4. Quinine and quinidine—Quinine dihydrochloride and quinidine
gluconate remain first-line therapies for falciparum malaria,
especially severe disease, although toxicity concerns complicate
therapy. Quinine acts rapidly against the four species of human
malaria parasites. Quinidine, the dextrorotatory stereoisomer of
quinine, is at least as effective as quinine in the treatment of severe
falciparum malaria.
Resistance of P falciparum to quinine is common in some areas
of Southeast Asia, where the drug may fail if used alone to treat
falciparum malaria. However, quinine still provides at least a partial
therapeutic effect in most patients.
Quinine and quinidine are effective treatments for severe
falciparum malaria, although intravenous artesunate is becoming the
standard of care (see Artemisinins section below). Quinine can be
administered slowly intravenously or, in a dilute solution,
intramuscularly, but parenteral quinine is not available in the United
States, where quinidine is used. The drugs can be administered in
divided doses or by continuous intravenous infusion; treatment
should begin with a loading dose to rapidly achieve effective plasma
concentrations. Intravenous quinine and quinidine should be
administered with cardiac monitoring because of their cardiac
toxicity and the relative unpredictability of their pharmacokinetics.
Therapy should be changed to oral quinine or another agent as soon
as the patient has improved and can tolerate oral medications.
In areas without newer combination regimens, oral quinine sulfate
is an alternative first-line therapy for uncomplicated falciparum
malaria, although poor tolerance may limit compliance. Quinine is
commonly used with a second drug (most often doxycycline) to
shorten the duration of use (usually to 3 days) and to limit toxicity.
Therapeutic dosages of quinine and quinidine commonly cause
tinnitus, headache, nausea, dizziness, flushing, and visual
disturbances. Hypersensitivity reactions include rash, urticaria,
angioedema, and bronchospasm. Hematologic abnormalities include
hemolysis (especially with G6PD deficiency), leukopenia,
agranulocytosis, and thrombocytopenia. Therapeutic doses may
cause hypoglycemia through stimulation of insulin release; this is a
particular problem in severe infections and in pregnant patients, who
have increased sensitivity to insulin. Overly rapid infusions can cause
severe hypotension. ECG abnormalities (QT prolongation) are fairly
common, but dangerous arrhythmias are uncommon when the drugs
are administered appropriately. Blackwater fever is a rare severe
illness, probably due to hypersensitivity, that includes marked
hemolysis and hemoglobinuria in the setting of quinine therapy for
malaria. Quinine should not be given concurrently with mefloquine
and should be used with caution in a patient who has previously
received mefloquine. Absorption may be blocked by aluminum-
containing antacids. Quinine can raise plasma levels of warfarin and
digoxin. Dosage must be reduced in renal insufficiency.
5. Primaquine—Primaquine 
phosphate, 
a 
synthetic 
8-
aminoquinoline, is the drug of choice for the eradication of dormant
liver forms of P vivax and P ovale. It is well absorbed orally,
reaching peak plasma levels in 1–2 hours, with a plasma half-life of
3–8 hours. Primaquine is active against hepatic stages of all human
malaria parasites. This action is optimal soon after therapy with
chloroquine or quinine. Primaquine also acts against erythrocytic
stage parasites, although this activity is too weak for the treatment
of active disease, and against gametocytes.
For P vivax and P ovale infections, chloroquine is used to
eradicate erythrocytic forms, and if the G6PD level is normal, a 14-
day course of primaquine is initiated to eradicate liver hypnozoites
and prevent a subsequent relapse. Some strains of P vivax,
particularly in New Guinea and Southeast Asia, are relatively
resistant to primaquine. For this reason, the CDC has recently
doubled the recommended dosage for primaquine to eradicate liver
forms (to 52.6 mg primaquine phosphate, or 30 mg base/day), but
it remains possible that liver forms may not be eradicated by a single
treatment.
Standard chemoprophylaxis does not prevent a relapse of P
vivax or P ovale infections, since liver hypnozoites are not
eradicated by chloroquine or other standard treatments. To diminish
the likelihood of relapse, some authorities advocate the use of a
treatment course of primaquine after the completion of travel to an
endemic area. Primaquine can also be used for chemoprophylaxis
to prevent P falciparum and P vivax infection in persons with
normal levels of G6PD.
Primaquine in recommended doses is generally well tolerated. It
infrequently causes nausea, epigastric pain, abdominal cramps, and
headache, especially when taken on an empty stomach. Rare
adverse effects include leukopenia, agranulocytosis, leukocytosis,
and cardiac arrhythmias. Standard doses of primaquine may cause
hemolysis or methemoglobinemia (manifested by cyanosis),
especially in persons with G6PD deficiency or other hereditary
metabolic defects. Patients should be tested for G6PD deficiency
before primaquine is prescribed. When a patient is deficient in
G6PD, treatment strategies may consist of (1) withholding therapy
and treating subsequent relapses, if they occur, with chloroquine;
(2) treating patients with standard dosing, paying close attention to
their hematologic status; or (3) treating with weekly primaquine (45
mg base) for 8 weeks. G6PD-deficient individuals of Mediterranean
and Asian ancestry are most likely to have severe deficiency, while
those of African ancestry usually have a milder biochemical defect.
This difference can be taken into consideration in choosing a
treatment strategy. Primaquine should be discontinued if there is
evidence of hemolysis or anemia and should be avoided in
pregnancy.
6. Inhibitors of folate synthesis—Inhibitors of two parasite
enzymes involved in folate metabolism, dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR) and dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS), are used, generally
in combination regimens, for the treatment and prevention of
malaria, although the drugs are rather slow acting and now limited
by resistance.
Fansidar is a fixed combination of sulfadoxine (500 mg) and
pyrimethamine (25 mg). The long half-lives of its components allow
weekly dosing for chemoprophylaxis, but due to rare serious side
effects with long-term dosing, this drug is no longer recommended
for this purpose. Sulfadoxinepyrimethamine became a common
back-up drug after chloroquine in Africa, and replaced chloroquine
as the first-line therapy in a number of countries. Advantages of
sulfa-doxine-pyrimethamine include ease of administration (a single
oral dose) and low cost. However, resistance to sulfa-doxine-
pyrimethamine, is now a major problem. In addition, it is not reliably
effective in P vivax infections, and its usefulness against P ovale
and P malariae infections has not been adequately studied, limiting
its utility outside of Africa.
Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is a component of two combination
regimens for uncomplicated malaria recommended by the WHO
(Table 35–3). Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine plus artesunate has
shown efficacy in some areas but is best replaced by more effective
combination regimens in most areas. Amodiaquine plus sulfadoxine-
pyrimethamine has shown surprisingly good efficacy in many parts
of Africa, despite increasing resistance to both components, and
probably offers the most practical treatment for uncomplicated
malaria in many endemic areas without access to artemisinin-based
therapies. 
Another 
antifolate 
combination, 
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, is widely used to prevent coinfections in patients
infected with HIV, and it offers partial protection against malaria.
Malarone, a combination of proguanil with atovaquone, is discussed
below.
7. Artemisinins—Artemisinin (qinghaosu) is a sesquiterpene
lactone endoperoxide, the active component of an herbal medicine
that has been used for various indications in China for over 2000
years. Analogs have been synthesized to increase solubility and
improve antimalarial efficacy. The most important of these analogs
are artesunate, artemether, and dihydroartemisinin. The WHO is
encouraging availability of oral artemisinins only in coformulated
combination regimens.
Artemisinins act very rapidly against all erythrocytic-stage human
malaria parasites. Artemisinin resistance is not yet an important
problem, but P falciparum isolates with diminished in vitro
susceptibility to artemether have been described, and delayed
clearance of parasites has been seen after treatment with artesunate
in parts of Cambodia.
Artemisinins are playing an increasing role in the treatment of
malaria, 
including 
multidrug-resistant P falciparum malaria.
However, due to their short plasma half-lives, recrudescence rates
are unacceptably high after short-course therapy, and they are best
used in conjunction with another agent. Also because of their short-
half lives, they are not useful in chemoprophylaxis.
Artemisinins should be used for uncomplicated malaria in
combination regimens including a longer-acting partner drug, known
as artemisinin-based combination therapy. Artesunate plus
mefloquine has demonstrated excellent efficacy against multidrug
resistant parasites in Thailand, but this regimen is too expensive for
widespread use in Africa and other areas. The artemisinin-based
combination regimens that are currently most advocated in Africa
are artesunate plus amodiaquine (ASAQ) and artemether plus
lumefantrine (Coartem), each of which is available as a
coformulated product and is the recommended therapy for
uncomplicated malaria in a number of countries, although
implementation has been slow in some areas. A third available
coformulated regimen that has performed well in clinical trials, and
was added to the list of WHO-recommended regimens for
uncomplicated falciparum malaria in 2010, is dihydroartemisinin plus
piperaquine; this is the first-line regimen in some countries in
Southeast Asia.
In studies of severe malaria, intramuscular artemether was at least
as effective as intramuscular quinine, and intravenous artesunate was
superior to intravenous quinine in terms of efficacy and tolerability.
Thus, the standard of care for severe malaria is intravenous
artesunate, when it is available, although parenteral quinine and
quinidine remain acceptable alternatives. Artesunate and artemether
have also been effective in the treatment of severe malaria when
administered rectally, offering a valuable treatment modality when
parenteral therapy is not available.
Artemisinins appear to be very well tolerated. The most
commonly reported adverse effects have been nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea, which may often be due to acute malaria, rather than
drug toxicity. Neutropenia, anemia, hemolysis, and elevated levels
of liver enzymes have been noted rarely. Artemisinins are
teratogenic in animals, and they should be avoided in the first
trimester of pregnancy for uncomplicated malaria. However, for
severe malaria, for which all available treatments entail some risk,
the WHO endorses the use of intravenous artesunate or quinine
while additional data are gathered on artesunate safety.
8. Atovaquone plus proguanil (Malarone)—Atovaquone, a
hydroxynaphthoquinone, is not effective when used alone, due to
rapid development of drug resistance. However, Malarone, a fixed
combination of atovaquone (250 mg) and the antifolate proguanil
(100 mg), is highly effective for both the treatment and
chemoprophylaxis of falciparum malaria, and it is approved for both
indications in the United States (Table 35–4). It also appears to be
active against other species of malaria parasites. Unlike most other
antimalarials, Malarone provides activity against both erythrocytic
and hepatic stage parasites.
For treatment, Malarone is given at an adult dose of four tablets
daily for 3 days. For chemoprophylaxis, Malarone must be taken
daily. It has an advantage over mefloquine and doxycycline in
requiring shorter periods of treatment before and after the period at
risk for malaria transmission, due to activity against liver-stage
parasites. It should be taken with food.
Malarone is generally well tolerated. Adverse effects include
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, and rash,
and these are more common with the higher dose required for
treatment. Reversible elevations in liver enzymes have been
reported. The safety of atovaquone in pregnancy is unknown.
9. Antibiotics—A number of antibacterials in addition to the folate
antagonists and sulfonamides are slow-acting antimalarials. None of
the antibiotics should be used as single agents for the treatment of
malaria due to their slow rate of action.
Tetracycline and doxycycline are active against asexual
erythrocytic forms of all human malaria parasites. Doxycycline is
commonly used in the treatment of falciparum malaria in conjunction
with quinidine or quinine, allowing a shorter and better-tolerated
course of those drugs (Table 35–4). Doxycycline is also a standard
chemoprophylactic drug, especially for use in areas of Southeast
Asia with high rates of resistance to other antimalarials, including
mefloquine. Doxycycline side effects include gastrointestinal
symptoms, candidal vaginitis, and photosensitivity. The drug should
be taken while upright with a large amount of water to avoid
esophageal irritation. Clindamycin can be used in conjunction with
quinine or quinidine in those for whom doxycycline is not
recommended, such as children and pregnant women (Table 35–4).
The most common toxicities with clindamycin are gastrointestinal.
Azithromycin also has antimalarial activity and is now under study
for treatment and chemoprophylaxis.
10. Halofantrine and lumefantrine—Halofantrine hydrochloride,
a phenanthrene-methanol related to quinine, is effective against
erythrocytic stages of all four human malaria species. Because of
toxicity concerns, it should not be taken with meals. Halofantrine is
rapidly effective against most chloroquine-resistant strains of P
falciparum, but its use is limited by irregular absorption and cardiac
toxicity. As treatment for falciparum malaria, halofantrine is given
orally in three 500-mg doses at 6-hour intervals, and this course is
repeated in 1 week for nonimmune individuals. Halofantrine is
generally well tolerated. The most common adverse effects are
abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, cough, rash, headache, pruritus,
and elevated liver enzymes. Of greater concern, the drug alters
cardiac conduction, with dose-related prolongation of QT and PR
intervals. This effect is worsened by prior mefloquine therapy. Rare
instances of dangerous arrhythmias and some deaths have been
reported. The drug is contraindicated in patients with cardiac
conduction defects and should not be used in those who have
recently taken mefloquine. It is also contraindicated in pregnancy.
Lumefantrine, an aryl alcohol related to halofantrine, is available
only as a fixed-dose combination with artemether (Coartem or
Riamet). As with halofantrine, oral absorption is highly variable and
improved when the drug is taken with food. Use of Coartem with a
fatty meal is recommended. Coartem is highly effective for the
treatment of falciparum malaria, but it is fairly expensive and
requires twice-daily dosing. Despite these limitations, due to its
reliable efficacy against falciparum malaria, Coartem is now the
first-line therapy for malaria in many malarious countries. Coartem is
well tolerated; side effects include headache, dizziness, loss of
appetite, gastrointestinal symptoms, and palpitations. Importantly,
Coartem does not appear to cause the cardiac toxicity seen with
halofantrine.
 Prevention
Malaria is transmitted by night-biting anopheline mosquitoes. Bed
nets, in particular nets treated with permethrin insecticides, are
heavily promoted as inexpensive means of antimalarial protection,
and improvement in mortality rates has been demonstrated.
Extensive efforts are also underway to develop a malaria vaccine,
and partial protection of African children has been demonstrated,
but a vaccine offering complete protection is not anticipated in the
near future. The availability of improved modalities to control
mosquito vectors and treat and prevent malaria has heightened
enthusiasm for malaria elimination, and there have been important
gains in some areas; however, control remains very challenging in
highly endemic regions, and elimination is not expected in these
areas in the forseeable future.
When travelers from nonendemic to endemic countries are
counseled on the prevention of malaria, it is imperative to emphasize
measures to prevent mosquito bites (insect repellents, insecticides,
and bed nets), since parasites are increasingly resistant to multiple
drugs and no chemoprophylactic regimen is fully protective.
Chemoprophylaxis is recommended for all travelers from
nonendemic regions to endemic areas, although risks vary greatly
for different locations, and some tropical areas entail no risk;
specific recommendations for travel to different locales are available
from the CDC (www.cdc.gov). Current recommendations from the
CDC include the use of chloroquine for chemoprophylaxis in the
few areas with only chloroquine-sensitive malaria parasites
(principally the Caribbean and Central America west of the Panama
Canal), mefloquine or Malarone for most other malarious areas, and
doxycycline for areas with a high prevalence of multidrug-resistant
falciparum malaria (principally parts of Southeast Asia) (Table 35–
5). Recommendations should be checked regularly (Phone: 877-
FYI-TRIP; Internet: http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/) because they
may change in response to changing resistance patterns and
increasing experience with new drugs. In some circumstances, it
may be appropriate for travelers to not use chemoprophylaxis but
to carry supplies of drugs with them in case a febrile illness develops
and medical attention is unavailable. Regimens for self-treatment
include artemisinin-based combinations, Malarone, and quinine.
Most 
authorities 
do 
not 
recommend 
routine 
terminal
chemoprophylaxis with primaquine to eradicate dormant hepatic
stages of P vivax and P ovale after travel, but this may be
appropriate in some circumstances, especially for travelers with
major exposure to these parasites.
 
Table 35–5. Drugs for the prevention of malaria in travelers.1
 
1Recommendations may change, as resistance to all available drugs is
increasing. See text for additional information on toxicities and cautions.
For additional details and pediatric dosing, see Centers for Disease
Control 
and 
Prevention’s 
guidelines 
(phone: 
800-CDC-INFO;
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/). Travelers to remote areas should consider
carrying effective therapy (see text) for use if a febrile illness develops, and
they cannot reach medical attention quickly.
2Areas without known chloroquine-resistant P falciparum are Central
America west of the Panama Canal, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, and
most malarious countries of the Middle East. Malarone or mefloquine is
currently recommended for other malarious areas except for border areas
of Thailand, where doxycycline is recommended.
3For drugs other than primaquine, begin 1–2 weeks before departure
(except 2 days before for doxycycline and Malarone) and continue for 4
weeks after leaving the endemic area (except 1 week for Malarone). All
dosages refer to salts unless otherwise indicated.
4Screen for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency before using
primaquine.
Reproduced, with permission, from Katzung BG. Basic & Clinical
Pharmacology. 11th edition. McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Regular chemoprophylaxis is not a standard management
practice in developing world populations due to the expense and
potential toxicities of long-term therapy. However, there is
increasing interest in intermittent preventive therapy, whereby at-risk
populations, in particular pregnant women and children, receive
antimalarial therapy at set intervals. This strategy may decrease the
incidence of malaria while allowing antimalarial immunity to develop.
Intermittent preventive therapy has been best studied with
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, a long-acting drug that is administered
in a single dose. During pregnancy, sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
provided once during both the second and third trimesters has
improved pregnancy outcomes. In infants, therapy with sulfadoxine-
pyrimethamine following standard immunization schedules has
offered benefits. With increasing resistance, it is not clear if
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine will retain prophylactic efficacy or if
other drugs with shorter half-lives will be effective.
 When to Refer
Referral to an expert on infectious diseases or travel medicine is
important with all cases of malaria in the United States, and in
particular for falciparum malaria, as management can be complex,
but referral should not lead to a delay in initial diagnosis and
therapy, since delays in therapy can lead to severe illness or death.
 When to Admit
 
•    Non-falciparum malaria generally does not cause
severe disease and responds well to therapy, and so
admission is only warranted if a patient presents with
specific problems that require hospital management.
•    Patients with falciparum malaria are generally admitted
because the disease can progress rapidly to severe
illness; exceptions may be made with individuals who are
from malaria-endemic areas, and thus expected to have a
degree of immunity, who are without evidence of severe
disease, and who are judged able to return promptly for
medical attention if their disease progresses.
Baird JK. Effectiveness of antimalarial drugs. N Engl J Med. 2005
Apr 14;352(15):1565–77. [PMID: 15829537]
 
Baird JK. Resistance to therapies for infection by Plasmodium
vivax. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2009 Jul;22(3):508–34. [PMID:
19597012]
 
Dondorp AM et al. Artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jul 30;361(5):455–67.
[PMID: 19641202]
 
Dondorp AM et al; AQUAMAT Group. Artesunate versus
quinine in the treatment of severe falciparum malaria in African
children (AQUAMAT): an open-label, randomised trial. Lancet.
2010 Nov 13;376(9753):1647–57. [PMID: 21062666]
 
Freedman DO. Clinical practice. Malaria prevention in short-term
travelers. N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 7;359(6):603–12. [PMID:
18687641]
 
Greenwood PM et al. Malaria. 2005 Apr 23–
29;365(9469):1487–98. [PMID: 15850634]
 
Griffith KS et al. Treatment of malaria in the United States: a
systematic review. JAMA. 2007 May 23;297(20):2264–77.
[PMID: 17519416]
 
Nosten F et al. Artemisinin-based combination treatment of
falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2007 Dec; 77(6
Suppl):181–92. [PMID: 18165491]
 
O'Meara WP et al. Changes in the burden of malaria in sub-
Saharan Africa. Lancet Infect Dis. 2010 Aug;10(8):545–55.
[PMID: 20637696]
 
Rosenthal PJ. Artesunate for the treatment of severe falciparum
malaria. N Engl J Med. 2008 Apr 24;358(17):1829–36. [PMID:
18434652]
 
Whitty CJ et al. Malaria: an update on treatment of adults in non-
endemic countries. BMJ. 2006 Jul 29;333(7561):241–5. [PMID:
16873859]
 
World Health Organization. Guidelines for the treatment of
malaria, 2nd edition. Geneva, Switzerland, 2010.
http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/
atoz/9789241547925/en/index.html
 
BABESIOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of tick bite or exposure to ticks.
 Fever, flu-like symptoms, anemia.
 Intraerythrocytic parasites on Giemsa-stained blood smears.
 Positive serologic tests.
 
 General Considerations
Babesiosis is an uncommon intraerythrocytic infection caused mainly
by two Babesia species and transmitted by Ixodes ticks. In
Europe, where only a few dozen cases of babesiosis have been
reported, infection is caused by Babesia divergens, which also
infects cattle. In the United States, hundreds of cases of babesiosis
have been reported, and infection is caused by Babesia microti,
which also infects wild mammals. Most babesiosis in the United
States occurs in the coastal northeast, with some cases also in the
upper midwest, following the geographic range of the vector Ixodes
scapularis, and Lyme disease and anaplasmosis, which are spread
by the same vector. Rare episodes of illnesses caused by B microti,
B divergens, and other Babesia-like organisms have been reported
from other areas. Babesiosis can also be transmitted by blood
transfusion.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
With B microti infections, symptoms appear 1 week to several
weeks after a tick bite; parasitemia is evident after 2–4 weeks.
Patients usually do not recall the tick bite. The typical flu-like illness
develops gradually and is characterized by fever, fatigue, headache,
arthralgia, and myalgia. Other findings may include nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, sore throat, depression, emotional lability, anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and splenomegaly. Parasitemia may continue for
months to years, with or without symptoms, and the disease is
usually self-limited. Severe complications are most likely to occur in
older persons or in those who have had splenectomy. Serious
complications include respiratory failure, hemolytic anemia,
disseminated intravascular coagulation, congestive heart failure, and
acute kidney injury. In a study of hospitalized patients, the mortality
rate was 6.5%. Most recognized B divergens infections in Europe
have been in patients who have had splenectomy. These infections
progress rapidly with high fever, severe hemolytic anemia, jaundice,
hemoglobinuria, and acute kidney injury, with death rates over
40%.
B. Laboratory Findings
Identification of the intraerythrocytic parasite on Giemsa-stained
blood smears establishes the diagnosis (Figure 35–6). These can be
confused with malaria parasites, but the morphology is distinctive.
Repeated smears are often necessary because well under 1% of
erythrocytes may be infected, especially early in infection, although
parasitemias can exceed 10%. An indirect immunofluorescent
antibody test for B microti is available from the CDC; antibody is
detectable within 2–4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and
persists for months. Diagnosis can also be made by PCR or by
inoculation of hamsters or gerbils.
 Treatment
Most patients have a mild illness and recover without therapy.
Standard therapy is a 7-day course of quinine (650 mg orally three
times daily) plus clindamycin (600 mg orally three times daily). An
alternative is a 7-day course of atovaquone (750 mg orally every 12
hours) plus azithromycin (600 mg orally once daily). Exchange
transfusion has been used successfully in severely ill asplenic
patients and those with parasitemia > 10%.
Gubernot DM et al. Babesia infection through blood transfusions:
reports received by the US Food and Drug Administration, 1997–
2007. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Jan 1;48(1):25–30. [PMID:
19035776]
 
Krause PJ et al. Persistent and relapsing babesiosis in immuno-
compromised patients. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Feb 1;46(3):370–6.
[PMID: 18181735]
 
Vannier E et al. Human babesiosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am.
2008 Sep;22(3):469–88. [PMID: 18755385]
 
Figure 35–6. Blood smear showing Babesia spp. rings with
basophilic stippling. (Courtesy of Dr. Mae Melvin, Public Health
Image Library, CDC.)
 
TOXOPLASMOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Infection confirmed by isolation of Toxoplasma gondii or
identification of tachyzoites in tissue or body fluids.
Primary infection
 Fever, malaise, headache, sore throat.
 Lymphadenopathy.
 Positive Igg and IgM serologic tests.
Congenital infection
 Follows acute infection of seronegative mothers and leads to Cns
abnormalities and retinochoroiditis.
Infection in immunocompromised persons
 Reactivation leads to encephalitis, retinochoroiditis, pneumonitis,
myocarditis.
 Positive Igg but negative IgM serologic tests.
 
 General Considerations
T gondii, an obligate intracellular protozoan, is found worldwide in
humans and in many species of mammals and birds. The definitive
hosts are cats. Humans are infected after ingestion of cysts in raw or
undercooked meat, ingestion of oocysts in food or water
contaminated by cats, transplacental transmission of trophozoites
or, rarely, direct inoculation of trophozoites via blood transfusion or
organ transplantation. Toxoplasma seroprevalence varies widely. It
has decreased in the United States to about 20–30%, but it is much
higher in other countries in both the developed and developing
worlds, where it may exceed 80%.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The clinical manifestations of toxoplasmosis may be grouped into
four syndromes.
1. Primary infection in the immunocompetent person—After
ingestion, T gondii infection progresses from the gastrointestinal
tract to lymphatics, and then dissemination. Most acute infections
are asymptomatic. About 10–20% are symptomatic after an
incubation period of 1–2 weeks. Acute infections in
immunocompetent persons typically present as mild, febrile illnesses
that resemble infectious mononucleosis. Nontender cervical or
diffuse lymphadenopathy may persist for weeks to months.
Systemic findings may include fever, malaise, headache, sore throat,
rash, myalgias, hepatosplenomegaly, and atypical lymphocytosis.
Rare severe manifestations are pneumonitis, meningoencephalitis,
hepatitis, 
myocarditis, 
polymyositis, 
and 
retinochoroiditis.
Symptoms may fluctuate, but most patients recover spontaneously
within at most a few months.
2. Congenital infection—Congenital transmission occurs as a
result of infection, which may be symptomatic or asymptomatic, in a
nonimmune woman during pregnancy. Fetal infection follows
maternal infection in 30–50% of cases, but this risk varies by
trimester: 10–25% during the first, 30–50% during the second, and
60% or higher during the third trimester. In the United States, an
estimated 400 to 4000 congenital infections occur yearly. While the
risk of fetal infection increases, the risk of severe fetal disease
decreases over the course of pregnancy. Early fetal infections
commonly lead to spontaneous abortion, stillbirths, or severe
neonatal disease, including neurologic manifestations. Neurologic
findings can include seizures, psychomotor retardation, deafness,
and hydrocephalus. Retinochoroiditis and other sight-threatening
eye lesions may develop. Systemic findings include fever or
hypothermia, jaundice, vomiting, diarrhea, hepatosplenomegaly,
pneumonitis, myocarditis, and rash. Infections later in pregnancy
less commonly lead to major fetal problems. Most infants appear
normal at birth, but they may have subtle abnormalities and progress
to symptoms and signs of congenital toxoplasmosis later in life.
Hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy may develop in the first
few months of life; CNS and eye disease often present later. The
most common late presentation of congenital toxoplasmosis is
retinochoroiditis.
3. 
Retinochoroiditis—This 
manifestation 
of 
congenital
toxoplasmosis presents weeks to years after congenital infection,
commonly in teenagers or young adults. Retinochoroiditis also is
seen in persons who acquire infection early in life, and these patients
more often present with unilateral disease. Uveitis is also seen.
Disease presents with pain, photophobia, and visual changes,
usually without systemic symptoms. Signs and symptoms eventually
improve, but visual defects may persist. Rarely, progression may
result in glaucoma and blindness.
4. Reactivated disease in the immunocompromised person
—Reactivated toxoplasmosis occurs in patients with AIDS, cancer,
or those given immunosuppressive drugs. In patients with advanced
AIDS, the most common manifestation is encephalitis, with multiple
necrotizing brain lesions. The encephalitis usually presents
subacutely, with fever, headache, altered mental status, focal
neurologic findings, and other evidence of brain lesions. Less
common manifestations of toxoplasmosis in patients with AIDS are
chorioretinitis and pneumonitis. Chorioretinitis presents with ocular
pain and alterations in vision. Pneumonitis presents with fever,
cough, and dyspnea. Toxoplasmosis can develop in seronegative
recipients of solid organ or bone marrow transplants due to
reactivation or transmission of infection. Reactivation also can occur
in those with hematologic malignancies or treated with
immunosuppressive drugs. Toxoplasmosis is similar to that in
individuals with AIDS, but with immunodeficiency due to
malignancy or immunosuppressive drugs, pneumonitis and
myocarditis are more common. Less commonly, generalized
toxoplasmosis in immunocompromised individuals can involve other
organ systems.
B. Diagnostic Testing
1. Identification of parasites—Organisms can be seen in tissue
or body fluids, although they may be difficult to identify; special
staining techniques can facilitate identification. The demonstration of
tachyzoites indicates acute infection; cysts may represent either
acute or chronic infection. With lymphadenopathy due to
toxoplasmosis, examination of lymph nodes usually does not show
organisms. Parasite identification can also be made by inoculation of
tissue culture or mice. PCR can be used for sensitive identification
of organisms in amniotic fluid, blood, CSF, aqueous humor, and
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
2. Serologic diagnosis—Multiple serologic methods are used,
including 
the 
Sabin-Feldman 
dye 
test, 
enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), indirect fluorescent antibody test,
and agglutination tests. IgG antibodies are seen within 1–2 weeks of
infection, and usually persist for life. IgM antibodies peak earlier
than IgG and decline more rapidly, although they may persist for
years. In immunocompromised individuals in whom reactivation is
suspected, a positive IgG assay indicates distant infection, and thus
the potential for reactivated disease; a negative IgG argues strongly
against reactivation toxoplasmosis. With reactivation in immuno-
compromised persons, IgM tests are generally negative.
3. During pregnancy and in newborns—Conversion from a
negative to positive serologic test or rising titers are suggestive of
acute infection, but tests are not routinely performed during
pregnancy. When pregnant women are screened, negative IgG and
IgM assays exclude active infection, but indicate the risk of infection
during the pregnancy. The pattern of positive IgG with negative IgM
is highly suggestive of chronic infection, with no risk of congenital
disease unless the mother is severely immunocompromised. A
positive IgM test is concerning for new infection because of the risk
of congenital disease. Confirmatory testing should be performed
before consideration of treatment or possible termination of
pregnancy due to the limitations of available tests. Tests of the
avidity of anti-IgG antibodies can be helpful, but a battery of tests is
needed for confirmation of acute infection during pregnancy. When
acute infection during pregnancy is suspected, PCR of amniotic fluid
offers a sensitive assessment for congenital disease; this test should
optimally be performed at 18 weeks of gestation. In newborns,
positive IgM or IgA antibody tests are indicative of congenital
infection, although the diagnosis is not ruled out by a negative test.
Positive IgG assays may represent transfer of maternal antibodies
without infection of the infant. Organisms may be identified by PCR;
smears; or culture of blood, CSF, or tissue.
4. In immunocompetent individuals—Individuals with a
suggestive clinical syndrome should be tested for IgG and IgM
antibodies. Seroconversion, a 16-fold rise in antibody titer, or an
IgM titer > 1:64 are suggestive of acute infection, although false-
positive results may occur. Acute infection can also be diagnosed
by detection of tachyzoites in tissue, culture of organisms, or PCR
of blood or body fluids. Histologic evaluation of lymph nodes can
show characteristic morphology, with or without organisms.
5. In immunodeficient individuals—A presentation consistent
with toxoplasmic encephalitis warrants imaging of the brain. CT and
MRI scans typically show multiple ring-enhancing cerebral lesions,
most commonly involving the corticomedullary junction and basal
ganglia. MRI is the more sensitive imaging modality. In AIDS
patients with a positive IgG serologic test and no recent
antitoxoplasma or antiviral therapy, the predictive value of a typical
imaging study is about 80%. The other common diagnosis in this
setting is CNS lymphoma, which more typically causes a single
brain lesion. The differential diagnosis also includes tuberculoma,
bacterial brain abscess, fungal abscess, and carcinoma. Diagnosis of
CNS toxoplasmosis is most typically made after a therapeutic trial,
with clinical and radiologic improvement expected within 2–3
weeks. Definitive diagnosis requires brain biopsy and search for
organisms and typical histology. In retinochoroiditis, funduscopic
examination shows vitreous inflammatory reaction, white retinal
lesions, and pigmented scars. Diagnosis of other clinical entities in
immunocompromised individuals is generally based on histology.
 Treatment
A. Approach to Treatment
Therapy is generally not necessary in immunocompetent persons,
since primary illness is self-limited. However, for severe, persistent,
or visceral disease, treatment for 2–4 weeks may be considered.
Treatment is appropriate for primary infection during pregnancy
because the risk of fetal transmission or the severity of congenital
disease may be reduced. For retinochoroiditis, most episodes are
self-limited, and opinions vary on indications for treatment.
Treatment is often advocated for episodes with decreases in visual
acuity, multiple or large lesions, macular lesions, significant
inflammation, or persistence for over a month. Immuno-
compromised patients with active infection must be treated. For
those with transient immunodeficiency, therapy can be continued for
4–6 weeks after cessation of symptoms. For those with persistent
immunodeficiency, such as AIDS patients, full therapy for 4–6
weeks is followed by maintenance therapy with lower doses of
drugs. Immunodeficient patients who are asymptomatic but have a
positive 
IgG 
serologic 
test 
should 
receive 
long-term
chemoprophylaxis.
B. Choice of Drugs
Drugs for toxoplasmosis are active only against tachyzoites, so they
do not eradicate infection. Standard therapy is the combination of
pyrimethamine (200 mg loading dose, then 50–75 mg [1 mg/kg]
orally once daily) plus sulfadiazine (1–1.5 g orally four times daily),
with folinic acid (10–20 mg orally once daily) to prevent bone
marrow suppression. Patients should be screened for a history of
sulfonamide sensitivity (skin rashes, gastrointestinal symptoms,
hepatotoxicity). To prevent crystal-induced nephrotoxicity, good
urinary output should be maintained. Pyrimethamine side effects
include headache and gastrointestinal symptoms. Even with folinic
acid therapy, bone marrow suppression may occur; platelet and
white blood cell counts should be monitored at least weekly. A
first-line alternative to sulfadiazine is clindamycin (600 mg orally four
times 
daily). Other possible alternatives are trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole or combining pyrimethamine with atovaquone,
clarithromycin, azithromycin, or dapsone. Pyrimethamine is not used
during the first trimester of pregnancy due to its teratogenicity.
Standard therapy for the treatment of acute toxoplasmosis during
pregnancy is with spiramycin (1 g orally three times daily until
delivery). This therapy is used only to decrease the risk of fetal
infection; it reduces the frequency of transmission to the fetus by
about 60%. Spiramycin does not cross the placenta, so when fetal
infection is documented or for acute infections late in pregnancy
(which commonly lead to fetal transmission) treatment with
combination regimens as described above is indicated.
 Prevention
Prevention of primary infection centers on avoidance of
undercooked meat or contact with material contaminated by cat
feces, particularly for seronegative pregnant women and
immunocompromised persons. For meat, irradiation, cooking to
66°C, or freezing to –20°C kills tissue cysts. Thorough cleaning of
hands and surfaces is needed after contact with raw meat or areas
contaminated by cats. Oocysts passed in cat feces can remain
infective for a year or more, but fresh oocysts are not infective for
48 hours. For best protection, litter boxes should be changed daily
and soaked in boiling water for 5 minutes. In addition, gloves should
be worn when gardening, fruits and vegetables should be thoroughly
washed, and ingestion of dried meat should be avoided.
Universal screening of pregnant women for T gondii antibodies is
conducted in some countries but not the United States. Pregnant
women should ideally have their serum examined for IgG and IgM
antibody, and those with negative titers should adhere to the
prevention measures described above. Seronegative women who
continue to have environmental exposure should undergo repeat
sero-logic screening several times during pregnancy.
For immunocompromised individuals, chemoprophylaxis to
prevent primary or reactivated infection is warranted. For transplant
recipients, pyrimethamine (25 mg daily orally for 6 weeks) has been
used. For advanced AIDS patients and others, chemoprophylaxis
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet
daily or two tablets three times weekly), used primarily for
protection against Pneumocystis, is also effective against T gondii.
Alternatives are pyrimethamine plus either sulfadoxine or dapsone
(various regimens). In AIDS patients, chemoprophylaxis can be
discontinued if antiretroviral therapy leads to immune reconstitution.
Derouin F et al. Prevention of toxoplasmosis in transplant patients.
Clin Microbiol Infect. 2008 Dec;14(12):1089–101. [PMID:
19018809]
 
Miro JM. Discontinuation of primary and secondary Toxoplasma
gondii prophylaxis is safe in HIV-infected patients after
immunological restoration with highly active antiretroviral therapy:
results of an open, randomized, multicenter clinical trial. Clin Infect
Dis. 2006 Jul 1;43(1):79–89. [PMID: 16758422]
 
Montoya JG et al. Management of Toxoplasma gondii infection
during pregnancy. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Aug 15;47(4):554–66.
[PMID: 18624630]
 
Montoya JG et al. Toxoplasmosis. Lancet. 2004 Jun
12;363(9425):1965–76. [PMID: 15194258]
 
AMEBIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Organisms or antigen present in stools or abscess aspirate.
 Positive serologic tests with colitis or hepatic abscess but may
represent prior infections.
Mild to moderate colitis
 Recurrent diarrhea.
Severe colitis
 Severe bloody diarrhea with fever, abdominal pain, and
tenderness.
 Prostration.
 Progression to hemorrhage or perforation.
Hepatic abscess
 Fever, abdominal pain.
 Hepatomegaly, hepatic abscess on imaging studies.
 
 General Considerations
The Entamoeba complex contains three morphologically identical
species: Entamoeba dispar and Entamoeba moshkovskii, which
are avirulent, and Entamoeba histolytica, which may be an
avirulent intestinal commensal or lead to serious disease. Disease
follows penetration of the intestinal wall, resulting in diarrhea, and
with severe involvement, dysentery or extraintestinal disease, most
commonly liver abscess.
E histolytica infections are present worldwide but are most
prevalent in subtropical and tropical areas under conditions of
crowding, poor sanitation, and poor nutrition. Of the estimated 500
million persons worldwide infected with Entamoeba, most are
infected with E dispar and an estimated 10% with E histolytica.
The prevalence of E moshkovskii is unknown. Mortality from
invasive E histolytica infections is estimated at 100,000 per year.
Humans are the only established E histolytica host. Transmission
occurs through ingestion of cysts from fecally contaminated food or
water, facilitated by person-to-person spread, flies and other
arthropods as mechanical vectors, and use of human excrement as
fertilizer. Urban outbreaks have occurred because of common-
source water contamination.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Intestinal amebiasis—In most infected persons, the organism
lives as a commensal, and the carrier is without symptoms. With
symptomatic disease, diarrhea may begin within a week of infection,
although an incubation period of 2–4 weeks is more common, with
gradual onset of abdominal pain and diarrhea. Fever is uncommon.
Periods of remission and recurrence may last days to weeks or
longer. Abdominal examination may show distention, tenderness,
hyperperistalsis, and hepatomegaly. Microscopic hematochezia is
common. More severe presentations include colitis and dysentery,
with more extensive diarrhea (10–20 stools per day) and bloody
stools. With dysentery, physical findings include high fevers,
prostration, vomiting, abdominal pain and tenderness, hepatic
enlargement, and hypotension. Severe presentations are more
common in young children, pregnant women, those who are mal-
nourished, and those receiving corticosteroids. Thus, in endemic
regions, corticosteroids should not be started for presumed
inflammatory bowel disease without first ruling out amebiasis.
Fulminant amebic colitis can progress to necrotizing colitis, intestinal
perforation, mucosal sloughing, and severe hemorrhage, with
mortality rates over 40%. More chronic complications of intestinal
amebiasis include chronic diarrhea with weight loss, which may last
for months to years; bowel ulcerations; and amebic appendicitis.
Localized granulomatous lesions (amebomas) can present after
either dysentery or chronic intestinal infection. Clinical findings
include pain, obstructive symptoms, and hemorrhage and may
suggest intestinal carcinoma.
2. Extraintestinal amebiasis—The most common extraintestinal
manifestation is amebic liver abscess. This can occur with colitis, but
more frequently presents without history of prior intestinal
symptoms. Patients present with the acute or gradual onset of
abdominal pain, fever, an enlarged and tender liver, anorexia, and
weight loss. Diarrhea is present in a small number of patients.
Physical examination may show intercostal tenderness. Abscesses
are most commonly single and in the right lobe of the liver, and they
are much more common in men. Without prompt treatment, amebic
abscesses may rupture into the pleural, peritoneal, or pericardial
space, which is often fatal. Amebic infections may rarely occur
throughout the body, including the lungs, brain, and genitourinary
system.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory studies with intestinal amebiasis show leukocytosis and
hematochezia, with fecal leukocytes not present in all cases. With
extraintestinal amebiasis, leukocytosis and elevated liver function
studies are seen.
C. Diagnostic Testing
Diagnosis is by finding E histolytica or its antigen or by serologic
tests. However, each method has limitations.
1. Intestinal amebiasis—Diagnosis is most commonly made by
identifying organisms in the stool. E histolytica and E dispar
cannot be distinguished, but the identification of amebic trophozoites
or cysts in a symptomatic patient is highly suggestive of amebiasis.
Stool evaluation for organisms is not highly sensitive (~30–50% for
amebic colitis), and at least three stool specimens should be
evaluated after concentration and staining. Multiple serologic assays
are available; these tests are fairly sensitive, although sensitivity is
lower (~70% in colitis) early in illness, and they cannot distinguish
recent and old disease, as they remain positive for years after
infection. A commercially available stool antigen test (TechLab II)
offers improved sensitivity (> 90% for colitis); it requires fresh or
frozen (not preserved) stool specimens. PCR-based tests are
available but not used routinely. Colonoscopy of uncleansed bowel
typically shows no specific findings in mild intestinal disease; in
severe disease, ulcers may be found with intact intervening friable
mucosa, resembling inflammatory bowel disease (Figure 35–7).
Examination of fresh ulcer exudate for motile trophozoites and for E
histolytica antigen may yield a diagnosis.
Figure 35–7. gross pathology showing intestinal ulcers due to
amebiasis. (Courtesy of Dr. Mae Melvin, Public Health Image
Library, CDC.)
 
2. Hepatic abscess—Serologic tests for anti-amebic antibodies
are almost always positive, except very early in the infection. Thus,
a negative test in a suspicious case should be repeated in about a
week. The TechLab II test can also be used to test serum, with
good sensitivity if used before the initiation of therapy. Examination
of stools for organisms or antigen is frequently negative; the antigen
test is positive in ~40% of cases. As imaging studies cannot
distinguish amebic and pyogenic abscesses, when a diagnosis is not
available from serologic studies, percutaneous aspiration may be
indicated, ideally with an image-guided needle. Aspiration typically
yields brown or yellow fluid. Detection of organisms in the aspirate
is uncommon, but detection of E histolytica antigen is very sensitive
and diagnostic. The key risk of aspiration is peritoneal spillage
leading to peritonitis from amebas or other (pyogenic or
echinococcal) organisms.
D. Imaging
Liver abscesses can be identified by ultrasonography, CT, or MRI,
typically with round or oval low-density nonhomogeneous lesions,
with abrupt transition from normal liver to the lesion, and
hypoechoic centers. Abscesses are most commonly single, but
more than one may be present. The right lobe is usually involved.
 Treatment
Treatment of amebiasis generally entails the use of metronidazole or
tinidazole to eradicate tissue trophozoites and a luminal amebicide
to eradicate intestinal cysts (Table 35–6). Asymptomatic infection
with E dispar does not require therapy. This organism cannot be
differentiated morphologically from E histolytica, but with negative
serology E dispar colonization is likely, and treatment is not
indicated. Colonization with E histolytica is generally treated with a
luminal agent. Effective luminal agents are diloxanide furoate (500
mg orally three times daily with meals for 10 days), iodoquinol
(diiodohydroxyquin; 650 mg orally three times daily for 21 days),
and paromomycin (30 mg/kg base orally, maximum 3 g, in three
divided doses after meals daily for 7 days). Side effects associated
with luminal agents are flatulence with diloxanide furoate, mild
diarrhea with iodoquinol, and gastrointestinal symptoms with
paromomycin. Relative contraindications are thyroid disease for
iodoquinol and kidney disease for iodoquinol or paromomycin.
 
Table 35–6. Treatment of amebiasis.1
 
1See text for additional details and cautions.
2Not available in the United States.
Treatment of intestinal amebiasis requires metronidazole (750 mg
orally three times daily for 10 days) or tinidazole (2 g orally once
daily for 3 days for mild disease and 5 days for serious disease)
plus a luminal agent (Table 35–6). Metronidazole has most
commonly been used in the United States, but tinidazole offers
simpler dosing and less side effects. Metronidazole often induces
transient nausea, vomiting, epigastric discomfort, headache, or a
metallic taste. A disulfiram-like reaction may occur if alcohol is
coingested. Metronidazole should be avoided in pregnant or nursing
mothers if possible. The same toxicities and concerns probably
apply for tinidazole, although it appears to be better tolerated. Fluid
and electrolyte replacement is also important for patients with
significant diarrhea. Surgical management of acute complications of
intestinal amebiasis is best avoided whenever possible. Successful
therapy of severe amebic colitis may be followed by post-
dysenteric colitis, with continued diarrhea without persistent
infection; this syndrome generally resolves in weeks to months.
Alternatives for the treatment of intestinal amebiasis are
tetracycline (250–500 mg orally four times daily for 10 days) plus
chloroquine (500 mg orally daily for 7 days). Emetine or
dehydroemetine, which are not available in the United States, can
be given subcutaneously (preferred) or intravenously in a dose of 1–
1.5 mg/kg/d; the maximum daily dose is 90 mg for dehydroemetine
and 65 mg for emetine). These agents are effective but cardiotoxic
with a narrow therapeutic range and should be used only until
severe disease is controlled. They cause nausea, vomiting, and pain
at the injection site.
Amebic liver abscess is also treated with metronidazole or
tinidazole plus a luminal agent (even if intestinal infection is not
documented; Table 35–6). Metronidazole can be used
intravenously when necessary. With failure of initial response to
metronidazole 
or 
tinidazole, 
chloroquine, 
emetine 
or
dehydroemetine may be added. Needle aspiration may be helpful
for large abscesses (over 5–10 cm), in particular if the diagnosis
remains uncertain, if there is an initial lack of response, or if a patient
is very ill, suggesting imminent abscess rupture. With successful
therapy, abscesses disappear slowly (over months).
 Prevention & Control
Prevention requires safe water supplies; sanitary disposal of human
feces; adequate cooking of food; protection of food from fly
contamination; handwashing; and, in endemic areas, avoidance of
fruits and vegetables that cannot be cooked or peeled. Water
supplies can be boiled, treated with iodine (0.5 mL tincture of
iodine per liter for 20 minutes; cysts are resistant to standard
concentrations of chlorine), or filtered.
Bercu TE et al. Amebic colitis: new insights into pathogenesis and
treatment. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2007 Oct;9(5):429–33.
[PMID: 17991346]
 
Fotedar R et al. Laboratory diagnostic techniques for Entamoeba
species. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2007 Jul;20(3):511–32. [PMID:
17630338]
 
Gonzales ML et al. Antiamoebic drugs for treating amoebic colitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009 Apr 15; (2):CD006085.
[PMID: 19370624]
 
Haque R et al. Amebiasis. N Engl J Med. 2003 Apr
17;348(16):1565–73. [PMID: 12700377]
 
Pritt BS et al. Amebiasis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008
Oct;83(10):1154–9. [PMID: 18828976]
 
Stanley SL Jr. Amoebiasis. Lancet. 2003 Mar
22;361(9362):1025–34. [PMID: 12660071]
 
INFECTIONS WITH PATHOGENIC FREE-LIVING
AMEBAS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute meningoencephalitis or chronic granulomatous encephalitis
after contact with warm fresh water.
 Keratitis, particularly in contact lens users.
 
The free-living amebas that cause disease in humans are of the
genera Acanthamoeba, Naegleria, Balamuthia, and Sappinia.
The organisms are widely distributed in soil and fresh and brackish
water. Acanthamoeba and Naegleria species have been found to
harbor Legionella, Vibrio cholerae, and other endosymbiotic
bacteria and may serve as a reservoir for these organisms.
1. Primary Amebic Meningoencephalitis
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis is a fulminating, hemorrhagic,
necrotizing meningoencephalitis that occurs in healthy children and
young adults and is rapidly fatal. It is caused by free-living amebas,
most 
commonly Naegleria fowleri, 
but 
also Balamuthia
mandrillaris 
and Acanthamoeba 
species. N fowleri is a
thermophilic organism found in fresh and polluted warm lake water,
domestic water supplies, swimming pools, thermal water, and
sewers. Most patients give a history of exposure to warm fresh
water. The incubation period varies from 2 to 15 days. Early
symptoms include headache, fever, stiff neck, and lethargy, often
associated with rhinitis and pharyngitis. Vomiting, disorientation, and
other signs of meningoencephalitis develop within 1 or 2 days,
followed by coma and then death within 7–10 days. No distinctive
clinical features distinguish the infection from acute bacterial
meningoencephalitis. CSF shows hundred to thousands of
leukocytes and erythrocytes per cubic millimeter. Protein is usually
elevated, and glucose is normal or moderately reduced. A fresh wet
mount of the CSF may show motile trophozoites. Staining with
Giemsa or Wright stain will identify the trophozoites. Species
identification is based on morphology and immunologic methods.
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis is nearly always fatal.
Amphotericin B appears to be the drug of choice; one survivor was
treated with intravenous and intrathecal amphotericin B, intravenous
miconazole, and oral rifampin.
2. Granulomatous Amebic Encephalitis
Acanthamoeba species and B mandrillaris can cause an
encephalitis that is more chronic in nature than primary amebic
meningoencephalitis. One case of encephalitis caused by Sappinia
has also been described. Neurologic disease may be preceded by
skin lesions, including ulcers and nodules. After an uncertain
incubation period neurologic symptoms develop slowly, with
headache, meningismus, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, and low-grade
fevers progressing over weeks to months to focal neurologic
findings, mental status abnormalities, and eventually coma and
death. CT and MRI show single or multiple nonspecific lesions.
Lumbar puncture is dangerous due to increased intracranial
pressure. CSF shows a lymphocytic pleocytosis with elevated
protein; amebas are not typically seen. Diagnosis can be made by
biopsy of skin or brain lesions. Information on the treatment of
granulomatous amebic encephalitis is limited. Some patients have
been successfully treated with various combinations of flucytosine,
pentamidine, fluconazole or itraconazole, sulfadiazine, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, and azithromycin.
3. Acanthamoeba Keratitis
Acanthamoeba keratitis is a painful, sight-threatening corneal
infection. It is associated with corneal trauma, most commonly after
use of contact lenses and contaminated saline solution. Symptoms
include severe eye pain, photo-phobia, tearing, and blurred vision.
The keratitis progresses slowly, with waxing and waning clinical
findings over months, and can progress to blindness. Lack of
response to antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral topical treatments
and potential use of contaminated contact lens solution are
suggestive of the diagnosis. Ocular examination shows corneal ring
infiltrates, but these can also be caused by other pathogens. The
diagnosis can be made by examination or culture of corneal
scrapings. Available diagnostic techniques include examination of a
wet preparation for cysts and motile trophozoites, examination of
stained specimens, evaluation with immunofluorescent reagents,
culture of organisms, and PCR.
Acanthamoeba keratitis can be cured with local therapy. Topical
propamidine isethionate (0.1%), chlorhexidine digluconate (0.02%),
polyhexamethylene biguanide, neomycin-polymyxin B-gramicidin,
miconazole, and combinations of these agents have been used
successfully. Oral itraconazole or ketoconazole can be added for
deep keratitis. Drug resistance has been reported. Use of
corticosteroid therapy is controversial. In some cases, debridement
and penetrating keratoplasty have been performed in addition to
medical therapy. Corneal grafting can be done after the amebic
infection has been eradicated.
Dart JK et al. Acanthamoeba keratitis: diagnosis and treatment
update, 2009. Am J Ophthalmol. 2009 Oct;148(4):487–499.e2.
[PMID: 19660733]
 
Visvesvara GS et al. Pathogenic and opportunistic free-living
amoebae: Acanthamoeba spp., Balamuthia mandrillaris,
Naegleria fowleri, and Sappinia diploidea. FEMS Immunol
Med Microbiol. 2007 Jun;50(1):1–26. [PMID: 17428307]
 
COCCIDIOSIS (Cryptosporidiosis, Isosporiasis,
Cyclosporiasis, Sarcocystosis) & MICROSPORIDIOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute diarrhea, especially in children in developing countries.
 Outbreaks of diarrhea secondary to contaminated water or food.
 Prolonged diarrhea in immunocompromised persons.
 Diagnosis mostly by identifying organisms in specially stained
stool specimens.
 
 General Considerations
The causes of coccidiosis are Cryptosporidium species (C
parvum, C hominis, and others); Isospora belli; Cyclospora
cayetanensis; and Sarcocystis species. Microsporidiosis is caused
by at least 14 species, most commonly Enterocytozoon bieneusi
a n d Encephalitozoon intestinalis. These infections occur
worldwide, particularly in the tropics and in regions where hygiene
is poor. They are causes of endemic childhood gastroenteritis
(particularly in malnourished children in developing countries);
institutional and community outbreaks of diarrhea; traveler's
diarrhea; and acute and chronic diarrhea in immunosuppressed
patients, in particular those with AIDS. They are all notable for the
potential to cause prolonged diarrhea, often lasting for a number of
weeks. Clustering occurs in households, day care centers, and
among sexual partners.
The infectious agents are oocysts (coccidiosis) or spores
(microsporidiosis) transmitted from person to person or by
contaminated drinking or swimming water or food. Ingested oocysts
release sporozoites that invade and multiply in enterocytes, primarily
in the small bowel. Coccidian oocysts and microsporidian cysts can
remain viable in the environment for years.
I belli and C cayetanensis appear to infect only humans. C
cayetanensis has caused a number of food-borne outbreaks in the
United States in recent years, most commonly associated with
imported fresh produce. Sarcocystis infects many species; humans
are intermediate hosts (infected by ingestion of fecal sporocysts) for
some species but definitive hosts for Sarcocystis bovihominis and
Sarcocystis suihominis (infected by ingestion of tissue cysts in
under-cooked beef and pork, respectively).
Cryptosporidiosis is a zoonosis (C parvum principally infects
cattle), but most human infections are acquired from humans, in
particular with C hominus. Cryptosporidia are highly infectious and
readily transmitted in day care settings and households. They have
caused large community outbreaks due to contaminated water
supplies (causing ~400,000 illnesses in Milwaukee in 1993) and are
the leading cause of recreational water–associated outbreaks of
gastroenteritis. Of note, coccidia and microsporidians will generally
be missed on routine evaluations of stool for ova and parasites, as
they require special staining techniques for identification.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Cryptosporidiosis—The incubation period appears to be about
1–14 days. In developing countries, disease is seen primarily in
children under 5 years of age, where cryptosporidiosis causes 5–
10% of cases of childhood diarrhea. Presenting symptoms in
children include acute watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, and cramps,
with rapid resolution in most patients; however, symptoms quite
commonly persist for 2 weeks or more. In developed countries,
most patients are adults. Diarrhea in immunocompetent individuals
typically lasts from 5 to 10 days. It is usually watery, with
accompanying abdominal pain and cramps, nausea, vomiting, and
fever. Relapses may follow initial resolution of symptoms. Mild
illness and asymptomatic infection may also be common.
Cryptosporidiosis is a well-characterized cause of diarrhea in
those with AIDS. It was common in this population before the
advent of highly active antiretroviral therapy, particularly in those
with advanced immunosuppression. Clinical manifestations are
variable, but patients commonly have chronic diarrhea with frequent
foul smelling stools, malabsorption, and weight loss. Severe, life-
threatening watery diarrhea may be seen. Cryptosporidiosis also
causes extraintestinal disease with AIDS, including pulmonary
infiltrates with dyspnea and biliary tract infection with sclerosing
cholangitis and AIDS cholangiopathy.
2. Isosporiasis—The incubation period for I belli is about 1 week.
In immunocompetent persons, it usually causes a self-limited watery
diarrhea lasting 2–3 weeks, with abdominal cramps, anorexia,
malaise, and weight loss. Fever is unusual. Chronic symptoms may
persist for months in some patients. In immunocompromised
patients, isosporiasis more commonly causes severe and chronic
diarrhea, with complications including marked dehydration,
malnutrition, and hemorrhagic colitis. Extraintestinal disease has
been reported rarely.
3. Cyclosporiasis—C cayetanensis oocysts must undergo a
period of sporulation of 7 days or more after shedding before they
become infectious. Therefore, person-to-person spread is unlikely,
and spread has typically been due to contaminated food (especially
fresh produce) and water. The incubation period is 1–11 days.
Infections can be asymptomatic. Cyclosporiasis causes an illness
similar to that described for the other pathogens described in this
section, with watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, fatigue,
and anorexia. Fever is seen in 25% of cases. Symptoms typically
continue for 2 weeks or longer and may persist for months.
Relapses of diarrhea are common. Diarrhea may be preceded by a
flu-like prodrome and followed by persistent fatigue. In
immunocompromised patients, cyclosporiasis is typically more
severe and prolonged, with chronic fulminant watery diarrhea and
weight loss.
4. Sarcocystosis—Sarcocystis infection may be common in some
developing countries, but it is usually asymptomatic. Infection
appears to most commonly follow the ingestion of undercooked
beef or pork, leading to the development of cysts in muscle, with
myalgias, fever, bronchospasm, pruritic rash, lymphadenopathy, and
subcutaneous nodules. Ingestion of fecal sporocysts may lead to
gastrointestinal symptoms.
5. Microsporidiosis—Microsporidia are obligate intracellular
protozoans that cause a wide spectrum of diseases. Many infections
are of zoonotic origin, but human-to-human transmission has been
documented. Infection is mainly by ingestion of spores, but also by
direct inoculation of the eyes. In immunocompetent hosts,
microsporidian infections most commonly present as self-limited
diarrhea. Ocular infections have also been described. Disease from
microsporidia is seen mainly in immunocompromised persons,
particularly those with AIDS. Infections in AIDS patients are most
commonly with E bieneusi and E intestinalis. They cause chronic
diarrhea, with anorexia, bloating, weight loss, and wasting,
especially in those with advanced immunodeficiency. Fever is
usually not seen. Other illnesses in immunocompromised persons
associated 
with 
microsporidians 
(including 
the 
genera
Enterocytozoon, Encephalitozoon, Brachiola, Vittaforma,
Pleistophora, Trachipleistophora, and Microsporidium) include
biliary tract disease (AIDS cholangiopathy), genitourinary infection
with cystitis, kidney disease, hepatitis, peritonitis, myositis,
respiratory infections including sinusitis, central nervous system
infections including granulomatous encephalitis, and disseminated
infections. Ocular infections with Encephalitozoon species cause
conjunctivitis and keratitis, presenting as redness, photophobia, and
loss of visual acuity.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Cryptosporidiosis—Typically, stool is without blood or
leukocytes. Diagnosis is traditionally made by detecting the
organism in stool using a modified acid-fast stain; this technique is
relatively insensitive, and multiple specimens should be evaluated
before ruling out the diagnosis. Of note, routine evaluation for ova
and parasites typically does not include a modified acid-fast stain,
so this must be specifically requested in many laboratories. Antigen
detection offers improved sensitivity and specificity, both of which
are well over 90% with a number of available assays, and these
methods may now be considered the optimal means of diagnosis.
2. Isosporiasis—Diagnosis of isosporiasis is by examination of
stool wet mounts or after modified acid-fast staining, in which the
organism is clearly distinguishable from other parasites. Other stains
also show the organism. Shedding of oocysts may be intermittent,
so the sensitivity of stool evaluation is not high, and multiple samples
should be examined. The organism may also be identified in
duodenal aspirates or small bowel biopsies.
3. Cyclosporiasis—Diagnosis is made by examination of stool wet
mounts or after modified acid-fast staining. Multiple specimens may
need to be examined to make a diagnosis. The organism can also
be identified in small bowel aspirates or biopsy specimens.
4. Sarcocystosis—Eosinophilia and elevated creatine kinase may
be seen. Diagnosis is by identification of the acid-fast organisms in
stool or by identification of trophozoites or bradyzoites in tissue
biopsies.
5. Microsporidiosis—Diagnosis can be made by identification of
organisms in specially stained stool, fluid, or tissue specimens, for
example with Weber chromotrope-based stain. Electron
microscopy is helpful for confirmation of the diagnosis and
speciation. PCR and culture techniques are available but not used
routinely.
 Treatment
Most acute infections with these pathogens in immuno-competent
persons are self-limited and do not require treatment. Supportive
treatment for severe or chronic diarrhea includes fluid and
electrolyte replacement and, in some cases, parenteral nutrition.
1. Cryptosporidiosis—Treatment 
of 
cryptosporidiosis 
is
challenging. No agent is clearly effective. Modest benefits have
been seen in some (but not other) studies with paromomycin, a non-
absorbed aminoglycoside (25–35 mg/kg orally for 14 days has
been used), and nitazoxanide (500 mg–1 g orally twice daily for 3
days in nonimmunocompromised and 2–8 weeks in advanced
AIDS patients), which is approved in the United States for this
indication. It can cause mild gastrointestinal toxicity. Other agents
that have been used with mixed success in AIDS patients with
cryptosporidiosis include azithromycin, spiramycin, bovine
hyperimmune 
colostrum, 
and 
octreotide. 
Reversing
immunodeficiency with effective antiretroviral therapy is of greatest
importance.
2. 
Isosporiasis—Isosporiasis 
is 
effectively 
treated 
in
immunocompetent 
and 
immunosuppressed 
persons 
with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg/800 mg orally two to four
times daily for 10 days, with the higher dosage for patients with
AIDS). An alternative therapy is pyrimethamine (75 mg orally in
four divided doses) with folinic acid (10–25 mg/d orally).
Maintenance therapy with low-dose trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(160 mg/800 mg daily or three times per week) or Fansidar (1
tablet weekly) prevents relapse in those with persistent
immunosuppression.
3. Cyclosporiasis—Cyclosporiasis is also treated with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (dosing as for isosporiasis). With
AIDS, long-term maintenance therapy (160 mg/800 mg three times
weekly) helps prevent relapse. For patients intolerant of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin (500 mg orally twice
daily for 7 days) showed efficacy, albeit with less ability to clear the
organism than trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
4. Sarcocystosis—For sarcocystosis, no specific treatment is
established, but sulfadiazine cleared intestinal cysts in one study.
5. Microsporidiosis—Treatment of microsporidiosis is complex.
Infections with most species, including those causing gastrointestinal
and other manifestations, should be treated with albendazole (400
mg orally twice daily for 2–4 weeks), which has activity against a
number of species, but relatively poor efficacy (about 50%) against
E bieneusi, the most common microsporidial cause of diarrhea in
AIDS patients. Fumagillin, which is used to treat honeybees and fish
with microsporidian infections, has shown benefit in clinical trials at
a dose of 20 mg three times per day for 14 days; treatment was
accompanied 
by 
reversible 
thrombocytopenia. As 
with
cryptosporidiosis, the best means of controlling microsporidiosis in
AIDS patients is to restore immune function with effective
antiretroviral therapy. Ocular microsporidiosis can be treated with
fumagillin solution (3 mg/mL); this probably should be given with
concurrent systemic therapy with albendazole. Adjunctive
management may include corticosteroids to decrease inflammation
and keratoplasty.
 Prevention
Water purification is important for control of these infections.
Chlorine disinfection is not effective against cryptosporidial oocysts,
so other purification measures are needed. Immunocompromised
patients should boil or filter drinking water and should consider
avoidance of lakes and swimming pools. Routine precautions
(hand-washing, gloves, disinfection) should prevent institutional
patient-to-patient 
spread. 
Optimal 
means 
of 
preventing
microsporidial infections are not well understood, but water
purification as discussed above and body substance precautions for
immunocompromised and hospitalized individuals are likely
effective.
Davies AP et al. Cryptosporidiosis. BMJ. 2009 Oct
19;339:b4168. [PMID: 19841008]
 
Didier ES et al. Microsporidiosis: current status. Curr Opin Infect
Dis. 2006 Oct;19(5):485–92. [PMID: 16940873]
 
Ortega YR et al. Update on Cyclospora cayetanensis, a food-
borne and waterborne parasite. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2010
Jan;23(1):218–34. [PMID: 20065331]
 
Pierce KK et al. Update on human infections caused by intestinal
protozoa. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2009 Jan;25(1):12–7. [PMID:
19119509]
 
GIARDIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Acute diarrhea; may be profuse and watery.
 Chronic diarrhea with greasy, malodorous stools.
 Abdominal cramps, distention, flatulence, and malaise.
 Cysts or trophozoites in stools.
 
 General Considerations
Giardiasis is a protozoal infection of the upper small intestine caused
by the flagellate Giardia lamblia (also called Giardia intestinalis
and Giardia duodenalis). The parasite occurs worldwide, most
abundantly in areas with poor sanitation. In developing countries,
young children are very commonly infected. In the United States
and Europe, the infection is the most common intestinal protozoal
pathogen; the US estimate is of 100,000 to 2.5 million new
infections leading to 5000 hospital admissions yearly. Groups at
special risk include travelers to Giardia-endemic areas, those who
swallow contaminated water during recreation or wilderness travel,
men who have sex with men, and persons with impaired immunity.
Outbreaks are common in households, children's day care centers,
and residential facilities, and may occur as a result of contamination
of water supplies.
The organism occurs in feces as a flagellated trophozoite and as a
cyst. Only the cyst form is infectious by the oral route; trophozoites
are destroyed by gastric acidity. Humans are a reservoir for the
pathogen; dogs, cats, beavers, and other mammals have been
implicated but not confirmed as reservoirs. Under suitable moist,
cool conditions, cysts can survive in the environment for weeks to
months. Cysts are transmitted as a result of fecal contamination of
water or food, by person-to-person contact, or by anal-oral sexual
contact. The infectious dose is low, requiring as few as ten cysts.
After the cysts are ingested, trophozoites emerge in the duodenum
and jejunum. Epithelial damage and mucosal invasion are
uncommon. Hypogammaglobulinemia, low secretory IgA levels in
the gut, achlorhydria, and malnutrition favor the development of
infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
It is estimated that about 50% of infected persons have no
discernable infection, about 10% become asymptomatic cyst
passers, and 25–50% develop an acute diarrheal syndrome. Acute
diarrhea may clear spontaneously but is commonly followed by
chronic diarrhea. The incubation period is usually 1–3 weeks but
may be longer. The illness may begin gradually or suddenly. Cysts
may not be detected in the stool at the onset of the illness. The
acute phase may last days or weeks, and is usually self-limited,
although cyst excretion may be prolonged. The initial illness may
include profuse watery diarrhea, and hospitalization may be
required due to dehydration, particularly in young children. Typical
symptoms of chronic disease are abdominal cramps, bloating,
flatulence, nausea, malaise, and anorexia. Fever and vomiting are
uncommon. Diarrhea is usually not severe in the chronic stage of
infection; stools are greasy or frothy and foul smelling, without
blood, pus, or mucus. The diarrhea may be daily or recurrent;
intervening periods may include constipation. Symptoms can persist
for weeks to months. Weight loss is frequent. Chronic disease can
include malabsorption, including fat- and protein-losing enteropathy
and vitamin deficiencies.
B. Laboratory Findings
Most patients seek medical attention after having been ill for over a
week, commonly with weight loss of 5 kg or more. Stool is
generally without blood or leukocytes. Diagnosis is traditionally
made by the identification of trophozoites or cysts in stool. A wet
mount of liquid stool may identify motile trophozoites. Stained fixed
specimens may show cysts or trophozoites. Sensitivity of stool
analysis is not ideal, estimated at 50–80% for a single specimen and
over 90% for three specimens. Sampling of duodenal contents with
a string test or biopsy is no longer generally recommended, but
biopsies may be helpful in very ill or immunocompromised patients.
When giardiasis is suspected, antigen assays may be simpler and
cheaper than repeated stool examinations, but these tests will not
identify other stool pathogens. Multiple tests, which identify antigens
of trophozoites or cysts, are available. They are generally quite
sensitive (85–98%) and specific (90–100%).
 Treatment
The treatments of choice for giardiasis are metronidazole (250 mg
orally three times daily for 5–7 days) or tinidazole (2 g orally once).
The drugs are not universally effective; cure rates for single courses
are typically about 80–95%. Toxicities are as described for
treatment of amebiasis, but the lower dosages used for giardiasis
limit side effects. A recent meta-analysis showed albendazole (400
mg orally once daily for 5 days) to have equivalent efficacy and
fewer side effects compared with metronidazole, and so it may be
considered another first-line agent for giardiasis. Nitazoxanide (500
mg orally twice daily for 3 days) is generally well tolerated but may
cause mild gastrointestinal side effects. Other drugs with activity
against Giardia include furazolidone (100 mg orally four times a
day for 7 days), which is about as effective as the other named
drugs but causes gastrointestinal side effects, and paromomycin
(500 mg orally three times a day for 7 days), which appears to have
somewhat lower efficacy but unlike metronidazole, tinidazole, and
furazolidone is safe in pregnancy. Symptomatic giardiasis should
always be treated. Treatment of asymptomatic patients should be
considered, since they can transmit the infection to others. With a
presumptive diagnosis but negative diagnostic studies, an empiric
course of treatment is sometimes appropriate. Household or day
care contacts with an index case should be tested and treated if
infected.
 Prevention
Community chlorination (0.4 mg/L) of water is relatively ineffective
for inactivating cysts, so filtration is required. For wilderness or
international travelers, bringing water to a boil for 1 minute or
filtration with a pore size < 1 mcm are adequate. In day care
centers, appropriate disposal of diapers and frequent hand washing
are essential.
Rossignol JF. Cryptosporidium and Giardia: Treatment options
and prospects for new drugs. Exp Parasitol. 2010 Jan;124(1):45–
53. [PMID: 19632225]
 
Solaymani-Mohammadi S et al. A meta-analysis of the
effectiveness of albendazole compared with metronidazole as
treatments for infections with Giardia duodenalis. PLoS Negl
Trop Dis. 2010 May 11;4(5):e682. [PMID: 20485492]
 
OTHER INTESTINAL FLAGELLATE INFECTIONS
Balantidium coli is a large ciliated intestinal protozoan found
worldwide, but particularly in the tropics. Pigs are the main
reservoir. The infection is rare in humans, and results from ingestion
of cysts passed in stools of humans or swine. In the new host, the
cyst wall dissolves and the trophozoite may invade intestinal
mucosa, causing abscesses and ulcerations. Many infections are
asymptomatic. Chronic infections may cause recurrent diarrhea or
dysentery. Deaths have occurred from intestinal perforation and
hemorrhage.
Dientamoeba fragilis is a protozoan that commonly causes
infection without symptoms, so its role in human disease remains
somewhat controversial. Symptoms attributed to the pathogen
include diarrhea, abdominal pain, and anorexia. Other flagellates
may infect humans, are generally considered nonpathogens, but may
be markers for fecal-oral contamination.
Diagnosis of balantidiasis is established by finding trophozoites or
cysts in stool, or in ulcer scrapings of the large bowel. D fragilis
infection can be hard to diagnose because it only exists in the
trophozoite form; the sensitivity of evaluation of three stools is 70–
90%. The treatment of choice for balantidiasis is tetracycline, 500
mg orally four times daily for 10 days. The alternative is iodoquinol
(diiodohydroxyquin), 650 mg orally three times daily for 21 days,
and metronidazole, paromomycin, and nitazoxanide have also been
used successfully. D fragilis infections have been successfully
treated with metronidazole, iodoquinol, paromomycin, and
tetracycline, but failures have been reported recently with
metronidazole; all the regimens are the same as for balantidiasis.
Schuster FL et al. Current world status of Balantidium coli. Clin
Microbiol Rev. 2008 Oct;21(4):626–38. [PMID: 18854484]
 
Stark D et al. A review of the clinical presentation of
dientamoebiasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Apr;82(4):614–9.
[PMID: 20348509]
 
TRICHOMONIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Copious vaginal discharge in women.
 Nongonococcal urethritis in men.
 Motile trichomonads on wet mounts.
 
 General Considerations
Trichomoniasis is caused by the protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis
and is among the most common sexually transmitted diseases,
causing vaginitis in women and nongonococcal urethritis in men. It
can also occasionally be acquired by other means, since it can
survive in moist environments for several hours.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
T vaginalis is often harbored asymptomatically. For women with
symptomatic disease, after an incubation period of 5 days to 4
weeks, a vaginal discharge develops, often with vulvovaginal
discomfort, pruritus, dysuria, dyspareunia, or abdominal pain.
Examination shows a copious discharge, which is usually not foul
smelling but is often frothy and yellow or green in color.
Inflammation of the vaginal walls and cervix with punctate
hemorrhages are common. Most men infected with T vaginalis are
asymptomatic, but it can be isolated from about 10% of men with
nongonococcal urethritis. In men with trichomonal urethritis, the
urethral discharge is generally more scanty than with other causes of
urethritis.
B. Diagnostic Testing
Diagnosis is typically made by identifying the organism in vaginal or
urethral secretions. Examination of wet mounts will show motile
organisms. Tests for bacterial vaginosis (pH > 4.5, fishy odor after
addition of potassium hydroxide) are often positive with
trichomoniasis. Rapid antigen and nucleic acid amplification tests
that are highly specific and much more sensitive than wet mounts are
available but are not yet widely used.
 Treatment
The treatment of choice is metronidazole or tinidazole, each as a 2 g
single oral dose. Tinidazole may be better tolerated and active
against some resistant parasites. Toxicities of these drugs are
discussed in the section on amebiasis. If the large single dose cannot
be tolerated, an alternative metronidazole dosage is 500 mg orally
twice daily for 1 week. All infected persons should be treated, even
if asymptomatic, to prevent subsequent symptomatic disease and
limit spread. Treatment failure suggests reinfection, but
metronidazole-resistant organisms have been reported. These may
be treated with tinidazole, longer courses of metronidazole,
furazolidone, or other experimental therapies (see Chapter 18).
Nanda N et al. Trichomoniasis and its treatment. Expert Rev Anti
Infect Ther. 2006 Feb;4(1):125–35. [PMID: 16441214]
 
Wendel KA et al. Trichomoniasis: challenges to appropriate
management. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Apr 1;44 Suppl 3:S123–9.
[PMID: 17342665]
 
HELMINTHIC INFECTIONS
 
TREMATODE (FLUKE) INFECTIONS
SCHISTOSOMIASIS (Bilharziasis)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of fresh water exposure in an endemic area.
 Acute schistosomiasis: fever, headache, myalgias, cough,
urticaria, diarrhea, and eosinophilia.
 Intestinal schistosomiasis: abdominal pain, diarrhea, and
hepatomegaly, progressing to anorexia, weight loss, and features
of portal hypertension.
 Urinary schistosomiasis: hematuria and dysuria, progressing to
hydroureter, hydronephrosis and urinary infections.
 Diagnosis based on characteristic eggs in feces or urine; biopsy
of rectal or bladder mucosa; positive serology.
 
 General Considerations
Schistosomiasis, which affects more than 200 million persons
worldwide, leads to severe consequences in 20 million persons and
about 100,000 deaths annually. The disease is caused by five
species of trematode blood flukes. Four species cause intestinal
schistosomiasis, with infection of mesenteric venules: Schistosoma
mansoni, which is present in Africa, the Arabian peninsula, South
America, and the Caribbean; Schistosoma japonicum, which is
endemic in China and Southeast Asia; Schistosoma mekongi,
which is endemic near the Mekong River in Southeast Asia; and
Schistosoma intercalatum, which occurs in parts of Africa.
Schistosoma haematobium causes urinary schistosomiasis, with
infection of venules of the urinary tract, and is endemic in Africa and
the Middle East. Transmission of schistosomiasis is focal, with
greatest prevalence in poor rural areas. Control efforts have
diminished transmission significantly in many areas, but high level
transmission remains common in sub-Saharan Africa and some
other areas. Prevalence of infection and illness typically peaks at
about 15–20 years of age.
Humans are infected with schistosomes after contact with fresh
water containing cercariae released by infected snails. Infection is
initiated by penetration of skin or mucous membranes. After
penetration, schistosomulae migrate to the portal circulation, where
they rapidly mature. After about 6 weeks, adult worms mate, and
migrate to terminal mesenteric or bladder venules, where females
deposit their eggs. Some eggs reach the lumen of the bowel or
bladder and are passed with feces or urine, while others are
retained in the bowel or bladder wall or transported in the
circulation to other tissues, in particular the liver. Disease in endemic
areas is primarily due to a host response to eggs, with granuloma
formation and inflammation, eventually leading to fibrosis. Chronic
infection can result in scarring of mesenteric or vesicular blood
vessels, leading to portal hypertension and alterations in the urinary
tract. In previously uninfected individuals, such as travelers with
fresh water contact in endemic regions, acute schistosomiasis may
occur, with a febrile illness 2–8 weeks after infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
1. Cercarial dermatitis—Following cercarial penetration,
localized erythema develops in some individuals, which can
progress to a pruritic maculopapular rash that persists for some
days. Dermatitis can be caused by human schistosomes and, in non-
tropical areas, by bird schistosomes that cannot complete their life
cycle in humans (swimmer's itch).
2. Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome)—A febrile
illness may develop 2–8 weeks after exposure in persons without
prior infection, most commonly after heavy infection with S
mansoni or S japonicum. Presenting symptoms and signs include
acute onset of fever; headache; myalgias; cough; malaise; urticaria;
diarrhea, 
which 
may 
be 
bloody; 
hepatosplenomegaly;
lymphadenopathy; and pulmonary infiltrates. Localized lesions may
occasionally cause severe manifestations, including CNS
abnormalities and death. Acute schistosomiasis usually resolves in
2–8 weeks.
3. Chronic schistosomiasis—Many infected persons have light
infections and are asymptomatic, but an estimated 50–60% have
symptoms and 5–10% have advanced organ damage.
Asymptomatic infected children may suffer from anemia and growth
retardation. Symptomatic patients with intestinal schistosomiasis
typically experience abdominal pain, fatigue, diarrhea, and
hepatomegaly. Over years, anorexia, weight loss, weakness,
colonic polyps, and features of portal hypertension develop. Late
manifestations include hematemesis from esophageal varices,
hepatic failure, and pulmonary hypertension. Urinary schistosomiasis
may present within months of infection with hematuria and dysuria,
most commonly in children and young adults. Fibrotic changes in the
urinary tract can lead to hydroureter, hydronephrosis, bacterial
urinary infections and, ultimately, kidney disease or bladder cancer.
B. Laboratory Findings
Microscopic examination of stool or urine for eggs, evaluation of
tissue, or serologic tests establish the diagnosis. Characteristic eggs
can be identified on smears of stool or urine, but filtration or
concentration techniques can improve yields. Quantitative tests that
yield > 400 eggs per gram of feces or 10 mL of urine are indicative
of heavy infections with increased risk of complications. Diagnosis
can also be made by biopsy of the rectum, colon, liver, or bladder.
Serologic tests include an ELISA available from the CDC that is
99% specific for all species. The test is 99% sensitive for S
mansoni, 95% sensitive for S haematobium, but < 50% sensitive
for S japonicum. Species-specific immuno blots can increase
sensitivity. In acute schistosomiasis, leukocytosis and marked
eosinophilia may occur; serologic tests may become positive before
eggs are seen in stool or urine. After therapy, eggs may be shed in
stool or urine for months, and so the identification of eggs in fluids
or tissue or positive serologic tests cannot distinguish past or active
disease. Tests for egg viability are available. With a diagnosis of
schistosomiasis, evaluation for the extent of disease is warranted,
including liver function studies and imaging of the liver with intestinal
disease and ultrasound or other imaging studies of the urinary
system in urinary disease.
 Treatment
Treatment is indicated for all schistosome infections. In areas where
recurrent infection is common, treatment is valuable in reducing
worm burdens and limiting clinical complications. The drug of
choice for schistosomiasis is praziquantel. The drug is administered
for 1 day at an oral dose of 40 mg/kg (in one or two doses) for S
mansoni, S haematobium, and S intercalatum infections and a
dose of 60 mg/kg (in two or three doses) for S japonicum and S
mekongi. Cure rates are generally > 80% after a single treatment,
and those not cured have marked reduction in the intensity of
infection. Praziquantel is active against invading cercariae but not
developing schistosomulae. Therefore, the drug may not prevent
illness when given after exposure and, for recent infections, a repeat
course after a few weeks may be appropriate. Praziquantel may be
used during pregnancy. Resistance to praziquantel has been
reported. Toxicities include abdominal pain, diarrhea, urticaria,
headache, nausea, vomiting, and fever, and may be due both to
direct effects of the drug and responses to dying worms. Alternative
therapies are oxamniquine for S mansoni infection and metrifonate
for S haemotobium infection. Both of these drugs currently have
limited availability (they are not available in the United States), and
resistance may be a problem. No second-line drug is available for S
japonicum infections. The antimalarial drug artemether has activity
against schistosomulae and adult worms and may be effective in
chemoprophylaxis; however, it is expensive, and long-term use in
malarious areas might select for resistant malaria parasites. With
severe disease, use of corticosteroids in conjunction with
praziquantel may decrease complications. Treatment should be
followed by repeat examinations for eggs about every 3 months for
1 year after therapy, with re-treatment if eggs are seen.
 Prevention
Travelers to endemic areas should avoid fresh water exposure.
Vigorous toweling after exposure may limit cercarial penetration.
Chemoprophylaxis with artemether has shown efficacy but is not
standard practice. Community control of schistosomiasis includes
improved sanitation and water supplies, elimination of snail habitats,
and intermittent administration of treatment to limit worm burdens.
Fenwick A et al. Schistosomiasis: challenges for control, treatment
and drug resistance. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2006 Dec;19(6):577–
82. [PMID: 17075334]
 
Gryseels B et al. Human schistosomiasis. Lancet. 2006 Sep
23;368(9541):1106–18. [PMID: 16997665]
 
Jauréguiberry S et al. Acute schistosomiasis, a diagnostic and
therapeutic challenge. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2010 Mar;16(3):225–
31. [PMID: 20222897]
 
Ross AG et al. Katayama syndrome. Lancet Infect Dis. 2007
Mar;7(3):218–24. [PMID: 17317603]
 
Wang LD et al. A strategy to control transmission of Schistosoma
japonicum in China. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jan 8;360(2):121–8.
[PMID: 19129526]
 
LIVER, LUNG, AND INTESTINAL
FLUKES
FASCIOLIASIS
Infection by Fasciola hepatica, the sheep liver fluke, results from
ingestion of encysted metacercariae on watercress or other aquatic
vegetables. Infection is prevalent in sheep-raising areas in many
countries, especially parts of South America, the Middle East, and
southern Europe. Fasciola gigantica has a more restricted
distribution in Asia and Africa and causes similar findings. Eggs are
passed from host feces into fresh water, leading to infection of
snails, and then deposition of metacercariae on vegetation. In
humans, metacercariae excyst, penetrate into the peritoneum,
migrate through the liver, and mature in the bile ducts, where they
cause local necrosis and abscess formation.
Two clinical syndromes are seen, related to acute migration of
worms and chronic infection of the biliary tract. Symptoms related
to migration of larvae present 6–12 weeks after ingestion. Typical
findings are abdominal pain, fever, malaise, weight loss, urticaria,
eosinophilia, and leukocytosis. Tender hepatomegaly and elevated
liver function tests may be seen. Rarely, migration to other organs
may lead to localized disease. The symptoms of worm migration
subside after 2–4 months, followed by asymptomatic infection by
adult worms or intermittent symptoms of biliary obstruction, with
biliary colic and, at times, findings of cholangitis. Early diagnosis is
difficult, as eggs are not found in the feces during the acute
migratory phase of infection. Clinical suspicion should be based on
clinical findings and marked eosinophilia in at risk individuals. CT
and other imaging studies show hypodense migratory lesions of the
liver. Serologic assays may be positive about 1 month before eggs
are seen in stool, but specificities of available tests are not ideal.
Definitive diagnosis is made by the identification of characteristic
eggs in stool. Repeated examinations may be necessary. In chronic
infection, imaging studies show masses obstructing the extrahepatic
biliary tract.
Fascioliasis is unusual among fluke infections, in that it does not
respond well to treatment with praziquantel. The treatment of choice
is triclabendazole, which is also used in veterinary medicine, but is
not available in the United States. Standard dosing of 10 mg/kg
orally in a single dose or two doses over 12 hours achieves a cure
rate of about 80%, but repeat dosing is indicated if abnormal
radiologic findings or eosinophilia do not resolve. The second-line
drug for fascioliasis is bithionol (30–50 mg/kg/d orally in three
divided doses on alternate days for 10–15 days); this drug is no
longer available in the United States. Treatment with either drug can
be accompanied by abdominal pain and other gastrointestinal
symptoms. Prevention of fascioliasis involves avoidance of ingestion
of raw aquatic plants.
CLONORCHIASIS & OPISTHORCHIASIS
Infection by Clonorchis sinensis, the Chinese liver fluke, is
endemic in areas of Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, South east Asia,
and the far eastern part of Russia. Millions of people are affected
and, in some communities, prevalence can reach over 80%.
Opisthorchiasis is principally caused by Opisthorchis felineus
(regions of the former Soviet Union) or Opisthorchis viverrini
(Thailand, Laos, Vietnam). Clonorchiasis and opisthorchiasis are
clinically indistinguishable. Parasite eggs are shed into water in
human or animal feces, where they infect snails, which release
cercariae, which infect fish. Human infection follows ingestion of
raw, undercooked, or pickled freshwater fish containing
metacercariae. These parasites excyst in the duodenum and ascend
into the biliary tract, where they mature and remain for many years,
shedding eggs in the bile.
Most patients harbor few parasites and are asymptomatic. An
acute illness can occur 2–3 weeks after initial infection, with fever,
abdominal pain, tender hepatomegaly, urticaria, and eosinophilia.
The acute syndrome is difficult to diagnose, since ova may not
appear in the feces until 3–4 weeks after onset of symptoms. In
chronic heavy infections, findings include abdominal pain, anorexia,
weight loss, and tender hepatomegaly. More serious findings can
include recurrent bacterial cholangitis and sepsis, cholecystitis, liver
abscess, and pancreatitis. An increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma
has been documented.
Early diagnosis is presumptive, based on clinical findings and
epidemiology. Subsequent diagnosis is made by finding
characteristic eggs in stool or duodenal or biliary contents.
Repeated concentration tests of stool may be necessary. Imaging
studies show characteristic biliary tract dilatations with filling defects
due to flukes. Serologic tests can be helpful but are limited by
suboptimal specificity.
The drug of choice is praziquantel, 25 mg/kg orally three times
daily for 2 days, which provides cure rates over 95%. One day of
treatment may be sufficient. Re-treatment may be required,
especially in some areas with known decreased praziquantel
efficacy. The second-line drug is albendazole (400 mg orally twice
daily for 7 days), which appears to be somewhat less effective.
PARAGONIMIASIS
Eight species of Paragonimus lung flukes cause human disease.
The most important is Paragonimus westermani. Paragonimus
species are endemic in East Asia, Oceania, West Africa, and South
America, where millions of persons are infected. Eggs are released
into fresh water, where parasites infect snails, and then cercariae
infect crabs and crayfish. Human infection follows consumption of
raw, undercooked, or pickled freshwater shellfish. Metacercariae
then excyst, penetrate into the peritoneum, and pass into the lungs,
where they mature into adult worms over about 2 months.
Most persons have moderate worm burdens and are
asymptomatic. In symptomatic cases, abdominal pain and diarrhea
develop 2 days to 2 weeks after infection, followed by fever,
cough, chest pain, urticaria, and eosinophilia. Acute symptoms may
last for several weeks. Chronic infection can cause cough
productive of brown sputum, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and chest pain,
with 
progression 
to 
chronic 
bronchitis, 
bronchiectasis,
bronchopneumonia, lung abscess, and pleural disease. Ectopic
infections can cause disease in other organs, most commonly the
CNS, where disease can present with seizures, headaches, and
focal neurologic findings due to parasite meningitis, and intracerebral
lesions.
The diagnosis of paragonimiasis is made by identifying
characteristic eggs in sputum or stool or identifying worms in
biopsied tissue. Multiple examinations and concentration techniques
may be needed. Serologic tests may be helpful; an ELISA available
from the CDC has sensitivity and specificity > 95%. Chest
radiographs may show varied abnormalities of the lungs or pleura,
including infiltrates, nodules, cavities, and fibrosis, and the findings
can be confused with those of tuberculosis. With CNS disease,
skull radiographs can show clusters of calcified cysts, and CT or
MRI can show clusters of ring-enhancing lesions.
Treatment is with praziquantel (25 mg/kg orally three times daily
for 2 days), which provides efficacy of at least 90%. Alternative
therapies are bithionol and triclabendazole. As with cysticercosis,
for cerebral paragonimiasis, praziquantel should generally be used
with corticosteroids. Chronic infection may lead to permanent lung
dysfunction and pleural disease requiring drainage procedures.
INTESTINAL FLUKES
The large intestinal fluke, Fasciolopsis buski, is a common parasite
of pigs and humans in eastern and southern Asia. Eggs shed in
stools hatch in fresh water, followed by infection of snails, and
release of cercariae that encyst on aquatic plants. Humans are
infected by eating uncooked plants, including water chestnuts,
bamboo shoots, and watercress. Adult flukes mature in about 3
months and live in the small intestine attached to the mucosa, leading
to local inflammation and ulceration. Other intestinal flukes that
cause similar syndromes include Heterophyes (North Africa and
Turkey) and Metagonimus (East Asia) species; these species are
transmitted by undercooked freshwater fish.
Infections with intestinal flukes are often asymptomatic, although
eosinophilia may be marked. In symptomatic cases, after an
incubation period of 1–2 months, manifestations include epigastric
pain and diarrhea. Other gastrointestinal symptoms, ileus, edema,
and ascites may be seen uncommonly. Diagnosis is based on
identification of characteristic eggs or adult flukes in the stool. In
contrast to other fluke infections, illness more than 6 months after
travel in an endemic area is unlikely. The drug of choice is
praziquantel, 25 mg/kg orally as a single dose. Alternative therapies
are triclabendazole and niclosamide (for most species).
Fried B et al. Food-borne trematode infections of humans in the
United States of America. Parasitol Res. 2010 May;106(6):1263–
80. [PMID: 20352454]
 
Keiser J et al. Food-borne trematodiases. Clin Microbiol Rev.
2009 Jul;22(3):466–83. [PMID: 19597009]
 
Marcos LA. Update on hepatobiliary flukes: fascioliasis,
opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008
Oct;21(5):523–30. [PMID: 18725803]
 
CESTODE INFECTIONS
NONINVASIVE CESTODE INFECTIONS
The four major tapeworms that cause noninvasive infections in
humans are the beef tapeworm Taenia saginata, the pork
tapeworm Taenia solium, the fish tapeworm Diphyllobothrium
latum, each of which can reach many meters in length, and the
dwarf tapeworm Hymenolepis nana. Taenia and Hymenolepis
species are broadly distributed, especially in the tropics; D latum is
most prevalent in temperate regions. Other tapeworms that can
cause noninvasive human disease include the rodent tapeworm
Hymenolepis diminuta, the dog tapeworm Dipylidium caninum,
and 
other Taenia 
and Diphyllobothrium species. Invasive
tapeworm infections, including T solium (when infective eggs, rather
than cysticerci are ingested) and Echinococcus species, will be
discussed separately.
1. Beef Tapeworm
Infection is most common in cattle breeding areas. Humans are the
definitive host. Gravid segments of T saginata are passed in human
feces to soil, where they are ingested by grazing animals, especially
,
y
g
y g
g
,
p
y
cattle. The eggs then hatch to release embryos that encyst in muscle
as cysticerci. Humans are infected by eating raw or undercooked
infected beef. Most individuals infected with T saginata are
asymptomatic, but abdominal pain and other gastrointestinal
symptoms may be present. Eosinophilia is common. The most
common presenting finding is the passage of proglottids in the stool.
2. Pork Tapeworm
T solium is transmitted to pigs that ingest human feces. Humans can
be either the definitive host (after consuming undercooked pork,
leading to tapeworm infection) or the intermediate host (after
consuming food contaminated with human feces containing T
solium eggs, leading to cysticercosis, which is discussed under
invasive tapeworm infections). As with the beef tapeworm, infection
with T solium adult worms is generally asymptomatic, but
gastrointestinal symptoms may occur. Infection is generally
recognized after passage of proglottids. Autoinfection with eggs can
progress to cysticercosis.
3. Fish Tapeworm
Infection with D latum follows ingestion of undercooked freshwater
fish, most commonly in temperate regions. Eggs from human feces
are taken up by crustaceans, these are eaten by fish, which are then
infectious to humans. Infection with multiple worms over many years
can occur. Infections are most commonly asymptomatic, but
nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea, may
occur. Diagnosis usually follows passage of proglottids. Prolonged
heavy infection can lead to megaloblastic anemia and neuropathy
from vitamin B12 deficiency, which is due to infection-induced
dissociation of the vitamin from intrinsic factor and to utilization of
the vitamin by worms.
4. Dwarf Tapeworm
H nana is the only tapeworm that can be transmitted between
humans. Infections are common in warm areas, especially with poor
hygiene and institutionalized populations. Infection follows ingestion
of food contaminated with human feces. Eggs hatch in the intestines,
where onco-spheres penetrate the mucosa, encyst as cysticercoid
larvae, and then rupture after about 4 days to release adult worms.
Autoinfection can lead to amplification of infection. Infection with H
nana, the related rodent tapeworm H diminuta, or the dog
tapeworm D caninum can also follow accidental ingestion of
infected insects. H nana are dwarf in size relative to other
tapeworms but can reach 5 cm in length. Heavy infection is
common, especially in children, and can be accompanied by
abdominal discomfort, anorexia, and diarrhea.
 Laboratory Findings
Diagnosis is usually made based on the identification of
characteristic eggs or proglottids in stool. Egg release may be
irregular, so examination of multiple specimens or concentration
techniques may be needed.
 Treatment
The treatment of choice for noninvasive tapeworm infections is
praziquantel. A single dose of praziquantel (5–10 mg/kg orally) is
highly effective, except for H nana, for which the dosage is 25
mg/kg. Treatment of H nana is more difficult, as the drug is not
effective against maturing cysts. Therefore, with heavy infections
with this parasite a repeat treatment after 1 week, and screening
after therapy to document cure are appropriate. Therapy can be
accompanied by headache, malaise, dizziness, abdominal pain, and
nausea.
The alternative therapy for these infections is niclos-amide. A
single dose of niclosamide (2 g chewed) is effective against D
latum, Taenia, and D caninum infections. For H nana, therapy is
continued daily for 1 week. Niclosamide may cause nausea,
malaise, and abdominal pain.
Craig P et al. Intestinal cestodes. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2007
Oct;20(5):524–32. [PMID: 17762788]
 
INVASIVE CESTODE INFECTIONS
1. Cysticercosis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Exposure to T solium through fecal contamination of food.
 Seizures, headache, and other findings of a focal Cns lesion.
 Brain imaging shows cysts; positive serologic tests.
 
 General Considerations
Cysticercosis is due to tissue infection with cysts of T solium that
develop after humans ingest food contaminated with eggs from
human feces, thus acting as an intermediate host for the parasite.
Prevalence is high where the parasite is endemic, in particular
Mexico, Central and South America, the Philippines, and Southeast
Asia. An estimated 20 million persons are infected with cysticerci
yearly, leading to about 400,000 persons with neurologic symptoms
and 50,000 deaths. Antibody prevalence rates up to 10% are
recognized in some endemic areas, and the infection is one of the
most important causes of seizures in the developing world and in
immigrants to the United States from endemic countries.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Neurocysticercosis can cause intracerebral, subarachnoid, and
spinal cord lesions and intraventricular cysts. Single or multiple
lesions may be present. Lesions may persist for years before
symptoms develop, generally due to local inflammation or
ventricular obstruction. Presenting symptoms include seizures, focal
neurologic deficits, altered cognition, and psychiatric disease.
Symptoms develop more quickly with intraventricular cysts, with
findings of hydrocephalus and meningeal irritation, including severe
headache, vomiting, papilledema, and visual loss. A particularly
aggressive form of the disease, racemose cysticercosis, involves
proliferation of cysts at the base of the brain, leading to alterations
of consciousness and death. Spinal cord lesions can present with
progressive focal findings.
Cysticercosis of other organ systems is usually clinically benign.
Involvement of muscles can uncommonly cause discomfort and is
identified by radiographs of muscle showing multiple calcified
lesions. Subcutaneous involvement presents with multiple painless
palpable skin lesions. Involvement of the eyes can present with
ptosis due to extraocular muscle involvement or intraocular
abnormalities.
B. Laboratory Findings
CSF examination may show lymphocytic or eosinophilic
pleocytosis, decreased glucose, and elevated protein. Serologic
tests can indicate prior exposure to T solium, but both sensitivity
and specificity are limited.
C. Imaging
The diagnosis of neurocysticercosis can be difficult. With
neuroimaging by CT or MRI, multiple parenchymal cysts are most
typically seen. Parenchymal calcification is also common.
Ventricular cysts may be difficult to visualize, with MRI offering
better sensitivity than CT.
 Treatment
The medical management of neurocysticercosis is controversial, as
the benefits of cyst clearance must be weighed against potential
harm of an inflammatory response to dying worms. Antihelminthic
therapy hastens radiologic improvement in parenchymal
cysticercosis. However, some randomized trials have shown that
corticosteroids alone are as effective as specific therapy plus
corticosteroids for controlling seizures, and some reports have
shown exacerbation of disease after antihelminthic therapy. Active
lesions with a high likelihood of progression, such as intraventricular
cysts, may benefit from therapy. At the other end of the spectrum,
inactive calcified lesions probably do not benefit from therapy.
Overall, it remains difficult to determine when treatment is indicated.
When treatment is deemed appropriate, standard therapy consists
of albendazole (10–15 mg/kg/d orally for 8 days) or praziquantel
(50 mg/kg/d orally for 15–30 days). Albendazole is probably
preferred, since it has shown better efficacy in some comparisons
and since corticosteroids appear to lower circulating praziquantel
levels but increase albendazole levels. Increasing the dosage of
albendazole to 30 mg/kg/d orally may improve outcomes.
Corticosteroids are usually administered concurrently, but dosing is
not standardized. Patients should be observed for evidence of
localized inflammatory responses. Anticonvulsant therapy is
provided if needed, and shunting is performed if required for
elevated intracranial pressure. Surgical removal of cysts may be
helpful for some difficult cases of neurocysticercosis and for
symptomatic non-neurologic disease.
Garcia HH. Antiparasitic drugs in neurocysticercosis: albendazole
or praziquantel? Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2008 Jun;6(3):295–
8. [PMID: 18588494]
 
Garcia HH et al; Cysticercosis Working Group in Peru.
Neurocysticercosis: updated concepts about an old disease.
Lancet Neurol. 2005 Oct;4(10):653–61. [PMID: 16168934]
 
Matthaiou DK et al. Albendazole versus praziquantel in the
treatment of neurocysticercosis: a meta-analysis of comparative
trials. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2008 Mar 12;2(3):e194. [PMID:
18335068]
 
Sinha S et al. Neurocysticercosis: a review of current status and
management. J Clin Neurosci. 2009 Jul;16(7):867–76. [PMID:
19394828]
 
2. Echinococcosis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History of exposure to dogs or wild canines in an endemic area.
 Large cystic lesions, most commonly of the liver or lung.
 Positive serologic tests.
 
 General Considerations
Echinococcosis occurs when humans are intermediate hosts for
canine tapeworms. Infection is acquired by ingesting food
contaminated with canine feces containing parasite eggs. The
principal species that infect humans are Echinococcus granulosus,
which causes cystic hydatid disease, and Echinococcus
multilocularis, which causes alveolar hydatid disease. E
granulosus is transmitted by domestic dogs in areas with livestock
(sheep, goats, camels, and horses) as intermediate hosts, including
Africa, the Middle East, southern Europe, South America, Central
Asia, Australia, New Zealand, and the southwestern United States.
E multilocularis, which much less commonly causes human
disease, is transmitted by wild canines, and endemic in northern
forest areas of the northern hemisphere, including central Europe,
Siberia, northern Japan, northwestern Canada, and western Alaska.
An increase in the fox population in Europe has been associated
with an increase in human cases. The disease range has also
extended southward in Central Asia and China. Other species that
cause limited disease in humans are endemic in South America and
China.
After humans ingest parasite eggs, the eggs hatch in the intestines
to form oncospheres, which penetrate the mucosa, enter the
circulation, and encyst in specific organs as hydatid cysts. E
granulosus forms cysts most commonly in the liver (65%) and
lungs (25%), but the cysts may develop in any organ, including the
brain, bones, skeletal muscles, kidneys, and spleen. Cysts are most
commonly single. The cysts can persist and slowly grow for many
years.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Infections are commonly asymptomatic and may be noted
incidentally on imaging studies or present with symptoms caused by
an enlarging or superinfected mass. Findings may include abdominal
or chest pain, biliary obstruction, cholangitis, portal hypertension,
cirrhosis, bronchial obstruction leading to segmental lung collapse,
and abscesses. Cyst leakage or rupture may be accompanied by a
severe allergic reaction, including fever and hypotension. Seeding of
cysts after rupture may extend the infection to new areas.
E multilocularis generally causes a more aggressive disease than
E granulosus, with initial infection of the liver, but then local and
distant spread commonly suggesting a malignancy. Symptoms based
on the areas of involvement gradually worsen over years, with the
development of obstructive findings in the liver and elsewhere.
B. Laboratory Findings
Serologic tests, including ELISA and immunoblot, offer sensitivity
and specificity over 80% for E granulosus liver infections, but
lower sensitivity for involvement of other organs. Serologic tests
may also distinguish the two major echinococcal infections.
C. Imaging
Diagnosis is usually based on imaging studies, including
ultrasonography, CT, and MRI. In E granulosus infection, a large
cyst containing daughter cysts is highly suggestive of the diagnosis.
I n E multilocularis infection, imaging shows an irregular mass,
often with areas of calcification.
 Treatment
Treatment of cystic hydatid disease has traditionally involved
cautious surgical resection of cysts, with care not to rupture cysts
during removal. Injection of a cysticidal agent was used to limit
spread in the case of rupture. Newer management algorithms
include treatment with albendazole, often in conjunction with
surgery. When used alone, as in cases where surgery is not
possible, albendazole (10–15 mg/kg/d orally) has demonstrated
efficacy, with courses of 3 months or longer duration, in some cases
with alternating cycles of treatment and rest. Mebendazole (40–50
mg/kg/d orally) is an alternative drug, and praziquantel may also be
effective. In some cases, medical therapy is begun, with surgery
performed if disease persists after some months of therapy. Another
approach, in particular with inoperable cysts, is percutaneous
aspiration, injection, and reaspiration (PAIR). In this approach
(which should not be used if cysts communicate with the biliary
tract), patients receive antihelminthic therapy, and the cyst is
partially aspirated. After diagnostic confirmation by examination for
parasite protoscolices, a scolicidal agent (such as 95% ethanol,
hyper-tonic saline, or 0.5% cetrimide) is injected. Treatment of
alveolar cyst disease is challenging, generally relying on wide
surgical resection of lesions. Therapy with albendazole before or
during surgery may be beneficial and may also provide improvement
or even cure in inoperable cases.
3. Other Invasive Cestode Infections
Ingestion of aquatic copepods infected with larvae of Spirometra
canine or feline tapeworms can lead to sparganosis, especially in
South America and East Asia. Infection can also come from
ingestion of undercooked infected meat (including mammals, birds,
reptiles, and amphibians) or from use of frog or snake-meat
poultices. The worms penetrate the intestinal wall or skin and
migrate to various tissues. Inflammatory lesions, most commonly of
the skin or eyes, are typically present. In cerebral sparganosis, an
intense inflammatory response to worms can lead to severe
neurologic disease. Diagnosis is by biopsy or visualization of the
parasite. Treatment consists of surgical resection or local injection
of ethanol. Antihelminthics do not appear to be helpful. Other non-
human tapeworms can also cause localized and CNS inflammatory
lesions. These are also managed with surgical resection.
Brunetti E et al. Update on cystic hydatid disease. Curr Opin
Infect Dis. 2009 Oct;22(5):497–502. [PMID: 19633552]
 
Brunetti E et al; Writing Panel for the WHO-IWGE. Expert
consensus for the diagnosis and treatment of cystic and alveolar
echinococcosis in humans. Acta Trop. 2010 Apr;114(1):1–16.
[PMID: 19931502]
 
Craig PS et al. Prevention and control of cystic echinococcosis.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2007 Jun;7(6):385–94. [PMID: 17521591]
 
Junghanss T et al. Clinical management of cystic echinococcosis:
state of the art, problems, and perspectives. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2008 Sep;79(3):301–11. [PMID: 18784219]
 
Moro P et al. Echinococcosis: a review. Int J Infect Dis. 2009
Mar;13(2):125–33. [PMID: 18938096]
 
INTESTINAL NEMATODE
(ROUNDWORM) INFECTIONS
ASCARIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Transient cough, urticaria, pulmonary infiltrates, eosinophilia.
 Nonspecific abdominal symptoms.
 Eggs in stool; adult worms occasionally passed.
 
 General Considerations
Ascaris lumbricoides is the most common of the intestinal
helminths, infecting about a quarter of the world's population, with
estimates of over a billion infections, 12 million acute cases, and
10,000 or more deaths annually. Prevalence is high wherever there
is poor hygiene and sanitation or where human feces are used as
fertilizer. Heavy infections are most common in children.
Infection follows ingestion of eggs in contaminated food. Larvae
hatch in the small intestine, penetrate into the bloodstream, migrate
to the lungs, and then travel via airways back to the gastrointestinal
tract, where they develop to adult worms, which can be up to 40
cm in length, and live for 1–2 years.
 Clinical Findings
Most persons with Ascaris infection are asymptomatic. In a small
proportion of patients, symptoms develop during migration of
worms through the lungs, with fever, nonproductive cough, chest
pain, dyspnea, and eosinophilia, occasionally with eosinophilic
pneumonia. Rarely, larvae lodge ectopically in the brain, kidney,
eye, spinal cord, and other sites and may cause local symptoms.
Light intestinal infections usually produce no symptoms. With
heavy infection, abdominal discomfort may be seen. Adult worms
may also migrate and be coughed up, be vomited, or may emerge
through the nose or anus. They may also migrate into the common
bile duct, pancreatic duct, appendix, and other sites, which may
lead to cholangitis, cholecystitis, pyogenic liver abscess,
pancreatitis, obstructive jaundice, or appendicitis. With very heavy
infestations, masses of worms may cause intestinal obstruction,
volvulus, intussusception, or death. Although severe manifestations
of infection are uncommon, the very high prevalence of ascariasis
leads to large numbers of individuals, especially children, with
important sequelae. Moderate to high worm loads in children are
also associated with nutritional abnormalities due to decreased
appetite and food intake, and also decreased absorption of
nutrients.
The diagnosis of ascariasis is made after adult worms emerge
from the mouth, nose, or anus, or by identifying characteristic eggs
in the feces. Due to the very high egg burden, concentration
techniques are generally not needed. Imaging studies demonstrate
worms, with filling defects in contrast studies and at times evidence
of intestinal or biliary obstruction. Eosinophilia is marked during
worm migration but may be absent during intestinal infection.
 Treatment
All infections should ideally be treated. Treatments of choice are
albendazole (single 400 mg oral dose), mebendazole (single 500 mg
oral dose or 100 mg twice daily for 3 days), or pyrantel pamoate
(single 11 mg/kg oral dose, maximum 1 g). These drugs are all well
tolerated but may cause mild gastrointestinal toxicity. They are
considered safe for children above 1 year of age and in pregnancy,
although use in the first trimester is best avoided. Intestinal
obstruction usually responds to conservative management and
antihelminthic therapy. Surgery may be required for appendicitis and
other gastrointestinal complications.
TRICHURIASIS
Trichuris trichiura, the whipworm, infects about a billion persons
throughout the world, particularly in humid tropical and subtropical
environments. Infection is heaviest and most frequent in children.
Infections are acquired by ingestion of eggs. The larvae hatch in the
small intestine and mature in the large bowel to adult worms of
about 4 cm in length. The worms do not migrate through tissues.
Most infected persons are asymptomatic. Heavy infections may
be accompanied by abdominal cramps, tenesmus, diarrhea,
distention, nausea, and vomiting. The Trichuris dysentery syndrome
may develop, particularly in malnourished young children, with
findings resembling inflammatory bowel disease including bloody
diarrhea and rectal prolapse. Chronic infections in children can lead
to iron deficiency anemia, growth retardation, and clubbing of the
fingers.
Trichuriasis is diagnosed by identification of characteristic eggs
and sometimes adult worms in stools. Concentration techniques are
not needed. Eosinophilia is common. Treatment is with albendazole
(400 mg/d orally) or mebendazole (200 mg/d orally), for 1–3 days
for light infections or 3–7 days for heavy infections; addition of
ivermectin to these drugs improved outcomes.
HOOKWORM DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Transient pruritic skin rash and pulmonary symptoms.
 Anorexia, diarrhea, abdominal discomfort.
 Iron deficiency anemia.
 Characteristic eggs and occult blood in the stool.
 
 General Considerations
Infection with the hookworms Ancylostoma duodenale and
Necator americanus is very common, especially in most tropical
and subtropical regions. Both worms are broadly distributed.
Prevalence is estimated at about 1 billion, causing approximately
65,000 deaths each year. When eggs are deposited on warm moist
soil they hatch, releasing larvae that remain infective for up to a
week. With contact, the larvae penetrate skin and migrate in the
bloodstream to the pulmonary capillaries. In the lungs, the larvae
penetrate into alveoli and then are carried by ciliary action upward
to the bronchi, trachea, and mouth. After being swallowed, they
reach and attach to the mucosa of the upper small bowel, where
they mature to adult worms. Ancylostoma infection can also be
acquired by ingestion of the larvae in food or water. Hookworms
attach to the intestinal mucosa and suck blood. Blood loss is
proportionate to the worm burden.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most infected persons are asymptomatic. A pruritic maculopapular
rash (ground itch) may occur at the site of larval penetration, usually
in previously sensitized persons. Pulmonary symptoms may be seen
during larval migration through the lungs, with dry cough, wheezing,
and low-grade fever, but these symptoms are less common than
with ascariasis. About 1 month after infection, as maturing worms
attach to the small intestinal mucosa, gastrointestinal symptoms may
develop, with epigastric pain, anorexia, and diarrhea, especially in
previously unexposed individuals. Persons chronically infected with
large worm burdens may have abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea,
and findings of marked iron-deficiency anemia and protein
malnutrition. Anemia can lead to pallor, weakness, dyspnea, and
congestive heart failure, and protein loss can lead to
hypoalbuminemia, edema, and ascites. These findings may be
accompanied by impairment in growth and cognitive development in
children. Infection with the dog hook-worm Ancylostoma caninum
can uncommonly lead to abdominal pain, diarrhea, and eosinophilia,
with intestinal ulcerations and regional lymphadenitis.
B. Laboratory Findings
Diagnosis is based on the demonstration of characteristic eggs in
feces; concentration techniques are usually not needed. Microcytic
anemia, occult blood in the stool, and hypoalbuminemia are
common. Eosinophilia is common, especially during worm
migration.
 Treatment
Treatment is with albendazole (single 400 mg oral dose) or
mebendazole (100 mg orally twice daily for 3 days). These drugs
are teratogenic, but experience suggests that they are safe in
children over 1 year of age and during the second and third
trimesters of pregnancy. Occasional adverse effects are diarrhea
and abdominal pain. Pyrantel pamoate and levamisole are also
effective. Anemia should be managed with iron replacement and, for
severe symptomatic anemia, blood transfusion. Mass treatment of
children with single doses of albendazole or mebendazole at regular
intervals limits worm burdens and the extent of disease and is
advocated by the WHO.
STRONGYLOIDIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Transient pruritic skin rash and pulmonary symptoms.
 Anorexia, diarrhea, abdominal discomfort.
 Hyperinfection syndrome in the immunocompromised.
 Larvae detected in stool.
 With hyperinfection, larvae detected in sputum or other fluids.
 Eosinophilia.
 
 General Considerations
Strongyloidiasis is caused by infection with Strongyloides
stercoralis. Although much less prevalent than ascariasis,
trichuriasis, or hookworm infections, strongyloidiasis is nonetheless
a significant problem, infecting tens of millions of individuals in
tropical and subtropical regions. Infection is also endemic in some
temperate regions of North America, Europe, Japan, and Australia.
Of particular importance is the predilection of the parasite to cause
severe infections in immunocompromised individuals due to its
ability to replicate in humans. A related parasite, Strongyloides
fuelleborni, infects humans in parts of Africa and New Guinea.
Among 
nematodes, S stercoralis is uniquely capable of
maintaining its full life cycle both within the human host and in soil.
Infection occurs when filariform larvae in soil penetrate the skin,
enter the bloodstream, and are carried to the lungs, where they
escape from capillaries into alveoli, ascend the bronchial tree, and
are then swallowed and carried to the duodenum and upper
jejunum, where maturation to the adult stage takes place. Females
live embedded in the mucosa for up to 5 years, releasing eggs that
hatch in the intestines as free rhabditiform larvae that pass to the
ground via the feces. In moist soil, these larvae metamorphose into
infective filariform larvae. Autoinfection can occur in humans, when
some rhabditiform larvae develop into filariform larvae that
penetrate the intestinal mucosa or perianal skin, and enter the
circulation. The most dangerous manifestation of S stercoralis
infection is the hyperinfection syndrome, with dissemination of
large numbers of filariform larvae to the lungs and other tissues in
immunocompromised individuals. Mortality with this syndrome
approaches 100% without treatment and has been about 25% with
treatment. The hyperinfection syndrome is seen in patients receiving
corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive medications; patients
with hematologic malignancies, malnutrition, or alcoholism; or
persons with AIDS. The risk seems greatest for those receiving
corticosteroids, and considering the large number of at risk
individuals, the risk in those with AIDS seems relatively low.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
As with other intestinal nematodes, most infected persons are
asymptomatic. An acute syndrome can be seen at the time of
infection, with a pruritic, erythematous, maculopapular rash, usually
of the feet. These symptoms may be followed by pulmonary
symptoms (including dry cough, dyspnea, and wheezing) and
eosinophilia after a number of days, followed by gastrointestinal
symptoms after some weeks, as with hookworm infections. Chronic
infection may be accompanied by epigastric pain, nausea, diarrhea,
and anemia. Maculopapular or urticarial rashes of the buttocks,
perineum, and thighs, due to migrating larvae, may be seen. Large
worm burdens can lead to malabsorption or intestinal obstruction.
Eosinophilia is common but may fluctuate.
With hyperinfection large numbers of larvae can migrate to
many tissues, including the lungs, CNS, kidneys, and liver.
Gastrointestinal symptoms can include abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and more severe findings related to intestinal
obstruction, perforation, or hemorrhage. Bacterial sepsis, probably
secondary to intestinal ulcerations, is a common presenting finding.
Pulmonary findings include pneumonitis, cough, hemoptysis, and
respiratory failure. Sputum may contain adult worms, larvae, and
eggs. CNS disease includes meningitis and brain abscesses; the
CSF may contain larvae. Various presentations can progress to
shock and death.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of strongyloidiasis can be difficult, as eggs are seldom
found in feces. Diagnosis is usually based on the identification of
rhabditiform larvae in the stool or duodenal contents. These larvae
must be distinguished from hookworm larvae, which may hatch after
stool collection. Repeated examinations of stool or examination of
duodenal fluid may be required for diagnosis because the sensitivity
of individual tests is only about 30%. Hyperinfection is diagnosed
by the identification of large numbers of larvae in stool, sputum, or
other body fluids. An ELISA from the CDC offers about 90%
sensitivity and specificity, but cross-reactions with other helminths
may occur. Eosinophilia and mild anemia are common, but
eosinophilia may be absent with hyperinfection. Hyperinfection may
include extensive pulmonary infiltrates, hypoproteinemia, and
abnormal liver function studies.
C. Screening
It is important to be aware of the possibility of strongyloidiasis in
persons with even a distant history of residence in an endemic area,
since the infection can be latent for decades. Screening of at-risk
individuals for infection is appropriate before institution of
immunosuppressive therapy. Screening can consist of serologic
tests, with stool examinations in those with positive serologic tests,
but consideration of presumptive treatment even if the stool
evaluations are negative (see below).
 Treatment
Full eradication of S stercoralis is more important than with other
intestinal helminths due to the ability of the parasite to replicate in
humans. The treatment of choice for routine infection is ivermectin
(200 mcg orally daily for 1–2 days). This treatment has replaced
thiabendazole (25 mg/kg orally twice daily for 3 days), which is
relatively poorly tolerated, and albendazole (400 mg orally twice
daily for 3 days), which is less effective. For hyperinfection,
ivermectin should be administered daily until the clinical syndrome
has resolved and larvae have not been identified for at least 2
weeks. Follow-up examinations for larvae in stool or sputum are
necessary, with repeat dosing if the infection persists. With
continued immunosuppression, eradication may be difficult, and
regular repeated doses of antihelminthic therapy (eg, monthly
ivermectin) may be required.
ENTEROBIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Nocturnal perianal pruritus.
 Identification of eggs or adult worms on perianal skin or in stool.
 
 General Considerations
Enterobius vermicularis, the pinworm, is a common cause of
intestinal infections worldwide, with maximal prevalence in school-
age children. Enterobiasis is transmitted person-to-person via
ingestion of eggs after contact with the hands or perianal region of
an infected individual, food or fomites that have been contaminated
by an infected individual, or infected bedding or clothing. Auto
infection also occurs. Eggs hatch in the duodenum and larvae
migrate to the cecum. Females mature in about a month, and remain
viable for about another month. During this time they migrate
through the anus to deposit large numbers of eggs on the perianal
skin. Due to the relatively short lifespan of these helminths,
continuous reinfection, as in institutional settings, is required, for
long-standing infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most individuals with pinworm infection are asymptomatic. The
most common symptom is perianal pruritus, particularly at night, due
to the presence of the female worms or deposited eggs. Insomnia,
restlessness, and enuresis are common in children. Perianal
scratching may result in excoriation and impetigo. Many mild
gastrointestinal symptoms have also been attributed to enterobiasis,
but associations are not proven. Serious sequelae are uncommon.
Rarely, worm migration results in inflammation or granulomatous
reactions of the gastrointestinal or genitourinary tracts. Colonic
ulceration and eosinophilic colitis have been reported.
B. Laboratory Findings
Pinworm eggs are usually not found in stool. Diagnosis is made by
finding adult worms or eggs on the perianal skin. A common test is
to apply clear cellophane tape to the perianal skin, ideally in the
early morning, followed by microscopic examination for eggs. The
sensitivity of the tape test is reported to be about 50% for a single
test and 90% for three tests. Nocturnal examination of the perianal
area or gross examination of stools may reveal adult worms, which
are about 1 cm in length. Eosinophilia is rare.
 Treatment
Treatment is with single oral doses of albendazole (400 mg),
mebendazole (100 mg) or pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg, to a
maximum of 1 g). The dose is repeated in 2 weeks due to frequent
reinfection. Other infected family members should be treated
concurrently, and treatment of all close contacts may be appropriate
when rates of reinfection are high in family, school, or institutional
settings. Standard handwashing and hygiene practices are helpful in
limiting spread. Perianal scratching should be discouraged. Washing
of clothes and bedding should kill pinworm eggs.
Bethony J et al. Soil-transmitted helminth infections: ascariasis,
trichuriasis, and hookworm. Lancet. 2006 May
6;367(9521):1521–32. [PMID: 16679166]
 
Hotez PJ et al. Neglected tropical diseases in sub-saharan Africa:
review of their prevalence, distribution, and disease burden. PLoS
Negl Trop Dis. 2009 Aug 25;3(8):e412. [PMID: 19707588]
 
Keiser J et al. Efficacy of current drugs against soil-transmitted
helminth infections: systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA.
2008 Apr 23;299(16):1937–48. [PMID: 18430913]
 
Ramanathan R et al. Strongyloides stercoralis infection in the
immunocompromised host. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2008
Mar;10(2):105–10. [PMID: 18462583]
 
Reddy M et al. Oral drug therapy for multiple neglected tropical
diseases: a systematic review. JAMA. 2007 Oct 24;298(16):
1911–24. [PMID: 17954542]
 
INVASIVE NEMATODE (ROUNDWORM)
INFECTIONS
DRACUNCULIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Tender cutaneous ulcer and worm protruding from the skin of an
individual who has ingested untreated water in rural africa.
 
 General Considerations
Dracunculiasis is caused by the nematode Dracunculus
medinensis, or Guinea worm. It causes chronic cutaneous ulcers
with protruding worms in rural Africa. It occurs only in humans and
is a major cause of disability, although recent control efforts have
been remarkably successful, with decreased annual incidence from
about 3.5 million cases in the late 1980s to 3185 reported cases in
2009. Dracunculiasis has been eradicated from Asia, but remains
endemic in six countries in West and Northeast Africa, most notably
in southern Sudan. The disease occurs almost exclusively in isolated
rural areas; all ages are affected, and prevalence may reach 60%.
Infection occurs after swallowing water containing the infected
intermediate host, the crustacean Cyclops (known as copepods or
water fleas). In the stomach, larvae escape from the copepods and
migrate through the intestinal mucosa to the retroperitoneum, where
mating occurs. Females then migrate to subcutaneous tissue, usually
of the legs, over about a year. A subcutaneous ulcer then forms.
Upon contact with water, the parasite discharges large numbers of
larvae, which are ingested by copepods. Adult worms, which can
be up to a meter in length, are gradually extruded. Worm death and
disintegration in tissue may provoke a severe inflammatory reaction.
 Clinical Findings
Patients are usually asymptomatic until the time of worm extrusion.
At that time a painful papule develops, with erythema, pruritus, and
burning, usually on the lower leg. Multiple lesions may be present.
At this time, some patients may also develop a short-lived systemic
reaction, which may include fever, urticaria, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and dyspnea. The skin lesion vesiculates over a few days,
followed by ulceration. The ulcer is tender, often with a visible
worm. The worm is then extruded or absorbed over a few weeks,
followed by ulcer healing. Secondary infections, including infectious
arthritis and tetanus, are common. The disease causes significant
disability; lesions commonly prevent walking for a month or more.
Diagnosis follows identification of a typical skin ulcer with a
protruding worm. When the worm is not visible, larvae may be
identified on smears or seen after immersion in cold water.
Eosinophilia is usually present.
 Treatment
No drug cures the infection, but metronidazole and mebendazole
are sometimes used to limit inflammation and facilitate worm
removal. Wet compresses may relieve discomfort. Occlusive
dressings improve hygiene and limit shedding of infectious larvae.
Worms are typically removed by sequentially rolling them out over a
small stick. When available, simple surgical procedures can be used
to remove worms. Corticosteroid ointments may hasten healing.
Topical antibiotics may limit bacterial superinfection.
 Prevention
Dracunculiasis has proven to be easier to control than most parasitic
infections. The disease is prevented by avoidance of contaminated
drinking water. This can be accomplished by boiling, chlorination,
or filtration through finely woven cloth. A WHO dracunculiasis
eradication program, initiated in 1986, has been highly successful.
Barry M. The tail end of guinea worm–global eradication without a
drug or a vaccine. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jun 21;356(25):2561–4.
[PMID: 17582064]
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Progress
toward global eradication of dracunculiasis, January 2009–June
2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Oct
1;59(38):1239–42. [PMID: 20881936]
 
Hopkins DR et al. Dracunculiasis eradication: neglected no longer.
Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2008 Oct;79(4):474–9. [PMID:
18840732]
 
TRICHINOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Ingestion of inadequately cooked pork or game.
 Transient intestinal symptoms followed by fever, myalgias, and
periorbital edema.
 Eosinophilia and elevated serum muscle enzymes.
 
 General Considerations
Trichinosis (or trichinellosis) is caused worldwide by Trichinella
spiralis and related Trichinella species. The disease is spread by
ingestion of undercooked meat, most commonly pork in areas
where pigs feed on garbage. When infected raw meat is ingested,
Trichinella larvae are freed from cyst walls by gastric acid and
pass into the small intestine. The larvae then invade intestinal
epithelial cells, develop into adults, and the adults release infective
larvae. These parasites travel to skeletal muscle via the
bloodstream. They invade muscle cells, enlarge, and form cysts.
These larvae may be viable for years. Pigs and other animals
become infected by eating infected uncooked food scraps or other
animals, such as rats.
The worldwide incidence of trichinosis has decreased, but human
infections continue to occur sporadically or in outbreaks. In addition
to undercooked pork, infections have been transmitted by ingestion
of game and other animals, including bear and walrus in North
America and wild boar and horse in Europe. In the United States,
about 100 infections are reported annually, about three-fourths from
pork and the remainder from game animals.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most infections are asymptomatic. In symptomatic cases,
gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea, vomiting, and
abdominal pain, develop within the week after ingestion of
contaminated meat. These symptoms usually last for less than a
week but can occasionally persist for much longer. During the
following week, symptoms and signs related to migrating larvae are
seen. These findings include, most notably, fever, myalgias,
periorbital edema, and eosinophilia. Additional findings may include
headache, cough, dyspnea, hoarseness, dysphagia, macular or
pete-chial rash, and subconjunctival and retinal hemorrhages.
Systemic symptoms usually peak within 2–3 weeks, and commonly
persist for about 2 months. In severe cases, generally with large
parasite burdens, muscle involvement can be pronounced, with
severe muscle pain, edema, and weakness, especially in the head
and neck. Muscle pain may persist for months. Uncommon severe
findings include myocarditis, pneumonitis, and meningoencephalitis,
sometimes leading to death.
B. Laboratory Findings
The clinical diagnosis is supported by findings of elevated serum
muscle enzymes (creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, aspartate
aminotransferase). Serologic tests become positive 3 or more
weeks after infection; a variety of techniques are used, including
ELISA, immunofluorescence, indirect hemagglutinin, precipitin, and
bentonite flocculation assays. Rising antibody titers are highly
suggestive of the diagnosis. Muscle biopsy can usually be avoided,
but if the diagnosis is uncertain, biopsy of a tender, swollen muscle
may identify Trichinella larvae. For maximal yield, biopsy material
should be examined histologically, and a portion should be
enzymatically digested to release larvae, but evaluation before about
3 weeks after infection may not show muscle larvae.
 Treatment
No effective specific therapy for full-blown trichinosis has been
identified. However, if infection is suspected early in the course of
illness, treatment with mebendazole (2.5 mg/kg orally twice daily) or
albendazole (5–7.5 mg/kg orally twice daily) will kill intestinal
worms and may limit progression to tissue invasion. Supportive
therapy for systemic disease consists of analgesics, antipyretics, bed
rest and, in severe illness, corticosteroids. Infection is prevented by
cooking to a temperature of at least 71 °C for at least 1 minute.
Irradiation of meat is also effective in eliminating Trichinella larvae,
but freezing is not fully reliable.
Gottstein B et al. Epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and control
of trichinellosis. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2009 Jan;22(1): 127–45.
[PMID: 19136437]
 
ANGIOSTRONGYLIASIS
Nematodes of rats of the genus Angiostrongylus cause two distinct
syndromes in humans. Angiostrongylus cantonensis, the rat
lungworm, causes eosinophilic meningoencephalitis, primarily in
Southeast Asia and some Pacific islands. Angiostrongylus
costaricensis causes gastrointestinal inflammation. In both diseases,
human infection follows ingestion of larvae within slugs or snails (and
also crabs or prawns for A cantonensis) or on material
contaminated by these organisms. Since the parasites are not in their
natural hosts, they cannot complete their life cycles, but they can
cause disease after migrating to the brain or gastrointestinal tract.
 Clinical Findings
A. A cantonensis Infection
The disease appears to be caused primarily by worm larvae
migrating through the CNS and an inflammatory response to dying
worms. After an incubation period of 1 day to 2 weeks, presenting
symptoms and signs include headache, stiff neck, nausea, vomiting,
cranial nerve abnormalities, and paresthesias. Most cases resolve
spontaneously after 2–8 weeks, but serious sequelae and death
have been reported. The diagnosis is strongly suggested by the
finding of eosinophilic CSF pleocytosis (leukocytosis with over
10% eosinophils) in a patient with a history of travel to an endemic
area. Peripheral eosinophilia may not be present. A cantonensis
larvae have rarely been recovered from the CSF and the eyes.
B. A costaricensis Infection
Parasites penetrate ileocecal vasculature and develop into adults,
which lay eggs, but do not complete their life cycle. Disease is due
to an inflammatory response to dying worms in the intestinal tract,
with an eosinophilic granulomatous response, at times including
vasculitis and ischemic necrosis. Common findings are abdominal
pain, vomiting, and fever. Pain is most commonly localized to the
right lower quadrant, and a mass may be appreciated, all mimicking
appendicitis. Symptoms may recur over months. Uncommon
findings are intestinal perforation or obstruction, or disease due to
migration of worms to other sites. Many cases are managed
surgically, usually for suspected appendicitis. Biopsy of inflamed
intestinal tissue may show worms localized to mesenteric arteries
and eosinophilic granulomas.
 Treatment
Antihelminthic therapy may be harmful for A cantonensis infection,
since responses to dying worms may worsen with therapy. If
antihelminthic treatment is to be used, albendazole is probably the
best choice. Corticosteroids have been used in severe cases, and
these are probably appropriate if antihelminthics are provided. It is
not known if antihelminthic therapy is helpful for A costaricensis
infection.
Ramirez-Avila L et al. Eosinophilic meningitis due to
Angiostrongylus and Gnathostoma species. Clin Infect Dis.
2009 Feb 1;48(3):322–7. [PMID: 19123863]
 
Wang QP et al. Human angiostrongyliasis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2008
Oct;8(10):621–30. [PMID: 18922484]
 
GNATHOSTOMIASIS
A number of species of Gnathostoma, which are parasites of
carnivores, can occasionally infect humans. Most cases have been
seen in Southeast Asia, but the disease has also been described in
many other areas. Eggs shed in the feces of mammals are ingested
by marine crustaceans, which are then ingested by fish, frogs,
snakes, or mammals. Larvae then encyst in muscles. Human
infection follows eating undercooked fish, shellfish, chicken, or pork
and can also be transmitted by ingesting copepods in contaminated
water. After ingestion, larvae cannot complete development in
humans, but rather migrate through tissues.
Acute gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, and fever, may develop soon after infection and
persist for 2–3 weeks. The disease may then progress to findings
consistent with cutaneous or visceral larva migrans. Migratory
subcutaneous erythematous swellings may be painful or pruritic.
Migrating larvae may also invade other tissues, leading to findings in
the eyes, lungs, intestines, and elsewhere. The most serious
complications are due to invasion of the CNS, leading to
eosinophilic meningoencephalitis and other serious findings.
Although a less common cause of eosinophilic meningitis than A
cantonensis infection, gnathostomiasis tends to be more severe.
Severe pain due to migration through spinal roots and focal
neurologic findings may be seen. Symptoms are highly variable over
time. CSF eosinophilic pleocytosis and peripheral eosinophilia are
seen.
The diagnosis of gnathostomiasis is suggested by the history of
intermittent subcutaneous swellings and typical CNS findings and
established by identification of worms in tissues. Worms can
occasionally be identified in skin lesions. Serologic tests may be
helpful in establishing a diagnosis. Treatment is with ivermectin (200
mcg/kg orally single dose) or albendazole (400 mg/kg/d orally for
21 days). However, indications for treatment are uncertain with
CNS disease, as inflammatory responses to dying worms might
worsen outcomes, and corticosteroids may be indicated with
antihelminthics in these cases.
Graeff-Teixeira C et al. Update on eosinophilic
meningoencephalitis and its clinical relevance. Clin Microbiol Rev.
2009 Apr;22(2):322–48. [PMID: 19366917]
 
Herman JS et al. Gnathostomiasis, another emerging imported
disease. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2009 Jul;22(3):484–92. [PMID:
19597010]
 
TOXOCARIASIS
 General Considerations
The dog roundworm Toxocara canis, the cat roundworm
Toxocara cati, and less commonly other helminths may cause
visceral larva migrans. T canis is highly prevalent in dogs. Humans
are infected after ingestion of eggs in material contaminated by dog
or other feces. With T canis, infection is spread principally by
puppies and lactating females, and the eggs must be on the ground
for several weeks before they are infectious. After ingestion by
humans, larvae migrate to various tissues but cannot complete their
life cycle.
 Clinical Findings
Visceral larva migrans is seen principally in young children. Most
infections are asymptomatic. The most commonly involved organs
are the liver and lungs. Presentations include cough, fever,
wheezing, 
hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly, 
lymphadenopathy,
pulmonary infiltrates, and eosinophilia. Involvement of the CNS can
occur rarely, leading to eosinophilic meningitis and other
abnormalities. Ocular larva migrans is a distinct syndrome, usually in
children older than is typical for visceral larva migrans. Children
present with visual deficits, pain, and a retinal mass, which can be
confused 
with 
retinoblastoma. Baylisascaris procyonis, a
roundworm of raccoons, can rarely cause visceral larva migrans in
humans, with typically more severe manifestations than those with T
canis, including eosinophilic meningitis and eye disease.
The diagnosis of visceral larva migrans is suggested by the finding
of eosinophilia in a child with hepatomegaly or other signs of the
disease, especially with a history of exposure to puppies. The
diagnosis is confirmed by the identification of larvae in a biopsy of
infected tissue, usually performed when other diseases are
suspected. Serologic tests may be helpful; an available ELISA was
estimated to have 78% sensitivity and 92% specificity. Most
patients recover without specific therapy, although symptoms may
persist for months.
 Treatment
Treatment with antihelminthics or corticosteroids may be considered
in severe cases. No drugs have been proven to be effective, but
albendazole (400 mg orally twice daily for 5 days), mebendazole,
thiabendazole, diethylcarbamazine, and ivermectin have been used,
and albendazole has been recommended as the treatment of choice.
Despommier D. Toxocariasis: clinical aspects, epidemiology,
medical ecology, and molecular aspects. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2003
Apr;16(2):265–72. [PMID: 12692098]
 
Rubinsky-Elefant G et al. Human toxocariasis: diagnosis,
worldwide seroprevalences and clinical expression of the systemic
and ocular forms. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 2010 Jan;104(1):3–
23. [PMID: 20149289]
 
CUTANEOUS LARVA MIGRANS (Creeping Eruption)
Cutaneous larva migrans is caused principally by larvae of the dog
and cat hookworms, Ancylostoma braziliense and A caninum.
Other animal hookworms, gnathostomiasis, and strongyloidiasis
may also cause this syndrome. Infections are common in warm
areas, including the southeastern United States. They are most
common in children. The disease is caused by the migration of
worms through skin; the non-human parasites cannot complete their
life cycles, so only cause cutaneous disease.
Figure 35–8. Cutaneous larva migrans on the foot. (Courtesy of
Richard P. Usatine, MD from Usatine RP: A rash on the feet and
buttocks. Western Journal of Medicine 1999;170(6):344; used,
with permission, from Usatine RP, Smith MA, Mayeux EJ Jr,
Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color Atlas of Family Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 Clinical Findings
Intensely pruritic erythematous papules develop, usually on the feet
or hands, followed within a few days by serpiginous tracks marking
the course of the parasite, which may travel several millimeters per
day (Figure 35–8). Several tracks may be present. The process
may continue for weeks, with lesions becoming vesiculated,
encrusted, or secondarily infected. Systemic symptoms or
eosinophilia are uncommon.
The diagnosis is based on the characteristic appearance of the
lesions. Biopsy is usually not indicated.
 Treatment
Without treatment, the larvae eventually die and are absorbed. Mild
cases do not require treatment. Thiabendazole (10% aqueous
suspension) can be applied topically three times daily for 5 or more
days. Systemic therapy with albendazole (400 mg orally once or
twice daily for 3–5 days) or ivermectin (200 mcg/kg orally single
dose) is highly effective.
Heukelbach J et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of
hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans. Lancet Infect Dis.
2008 May;8(5):302–9. [PMID: 18471775]
 
ANISAKIASIS
Anisakiasis is caused by infection with larvae of parasites of
saltwater fish and squid. Multiple species of the family Anisakidae
may occasionally infect humans. Definitive hosts for these parasites
are marine mammals. Eggs are passed in the feces and ingested by
crustaceans, which are then eaten by fish and squid. When ingested
by humans in undercooked seafood, larvae penetrate the stomach
or intestinal wall but cannot complete their life cycle. The disease is
most common in Japan.
 Clinical Findings
Clinical manifestations of anisakiasis follow burrowing of worms into
the stomach or intestinal wall, leading to localized ulceration, edema,
and eosinophilic granuloma formation. Symptoms usually occur
within 2 days of parasite ingestion and include severe epigastric or
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Intestinal involvement can
mimic appendicitis. Allergic symptoms, including urticaria,
angioedema, and anaphylaxis, have also been attributed to acute
infection. Acute symptoms generally resolve within 2 weeks, but
chronic symptoms may also be seen, suggesting chronic intestinal
diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease, diverticulitis, or
carcinoma. Rarely, worms may migrate to other sites or be coughed
up. Eosinophilia is usually not seen.
The diagnosis of anisakiasis is suggested in those with acute
abdominal symptoms after ingestion of raw fish. Radiographic
studies may identify stomach or intestinal lesions, and endoscopy
may allow visualization and removal of the worm. When surgery is
performed due to consideration of other diagnoses, eosinophilic
inflammatory lesions and the invading worms are found.
 Treatment
Specific therapy is not indicated, but endoscopic worm removal
hastens recovery. The parasites are killed by cooking or deep
freezing fish.
Yasunaga H et al. Clinical features of bowel anisakiasis in Japan.
Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010 Jul;83(1):104–5. [PMID: 20595486]
 
FILARIASIS
LYMPHATIC FILARIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Episodic attacks of lymphangitis, lymphadenitis, and fever.
 Chronic progressive swelling of extremities and genitals;
hydrocele; chyluria; lymphedema.
 Microfilariae in blood, chyluria, or hydrocele fluid; positive
serologic tests.
 
Lymphatic filariasis is caused by three filarial nematodes:
Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori, and is
among the most important parasitic diseases of man. Approximately
120 million people are infected with these organisms in tropical and
subtropical countries, about a third of these suffer clinical
consequences of the infections, and many are seriously disfigured.
W bancrofti causes about 90% of episodes of lymphatic filariasis.
It is transmitted by Culex, Aedes, and Anopheles mosquitoes and
is widely distributed in the tropics and subtropics, including
subsaharan Africa, Southeast Asia, the western Pacific, India, South
America, and the Caribbean. B malayi is transmitted by Mansonia
and Anopheles mosquitoes and is endemic in parts of China, India,
Southeast Asia, and the Pacific. B timori is found only in islands of
southeastern Indonesia. Mansonella are filarial worms transmitted
by midges and other insects in Africa and South America.
Humans are infected by the bites of infected mosquitoes. Larvae
then move to the lymphatics and lymph nodes, where they mature
over months to thread-like adult worms, and then can persist for
many years. The adult worms produce large numbers of
microfilariae, which are released into the circulation, and infective to
mosquitoes, particularly at night (except for the South Pacific,
where microfilaremia peaks during daylight hours).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Many infections remain asymptomatic despite circulating
microfilariae. Clinical consequences of filarial infection are
principally due to inflammatory responses to developing, mature,
and dying worms. The initial manifestation of infection is often acute
lymphangitis, with fever, painful lymph nodes, edema, and
inflammation spreading peripherally from involved lymph nodes (in
contrast to bacterial lymphangitis, which spreads centrally).
Lymphangitis and lymphadenitis of the upper and lower extremities
is common (Figure 35–9); genital involvement, including
epididymitis and orchitis, with scrotal pain and tenderness, occurs
principally only with W bancrofti infection. Acute attacks of
lymphangitis last for a few days to a week and may recur a few
times per year. Filarial fevers may also occur without lymphatic
inflammation.
Figure 35–9. Elephantiasis of legs due to filariasis. (Public Health
Image Library, CDC.)
 
The most common chronic manifestation of lymphatic filariasis is
swelling of the extremities or genitals due to chronic lymphatic
inflammation and obstruction. Extremities become increasingly
swollen, with a progression over time from pitting edema, to
nonpitting edema, to sclerotic changes of the skin that are referred
to as elephantiasis. Genital involvement, particularly with W
bancrofti, occurs more commonly in men, progressing from painful
epididymitis to hydroceles that are usually painless but can become
very large, with inguinal lymphadenopathy, thickening of the
spermatic cord, scrotal lymphedema, thickening and fissuring of the
scrotal skin, and occasionally chyluria. Lymphedema of the female
genitalia and breasts may also occur.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is a distinct syndrome principally
affecting young adult males with either W bancrofti or B malayi
infection but typically without microfilaremia. This syndrome is
characterized by asthma-like symptoms, with cough, wheezing,
dyspnea, and low-grade fevers, usually at night. Without treatment,
tropical pulmonary eosinophilia can progress to interstitial fibrosis
and chronic restrictive lung disease. Mansonella can inhabit serous
cavities, the retroperitoneum, the eye, or the skin, and cause
abnormalities related to inflammation at these sites.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of lymphatic filariasis is strongly suggested by
characteristic findings of lymphangitis or lymphatic obstruction in
persons with risk factors for the disease. The diagnosis is confirmed
by finding microfilariae, usually in blood, but this may be difficult. In
addition, microfilariae may be absent, especially early in the disease
progression (first 2–3 years) or with chronic obstructive disease. To
increase yields, blood samples are obtained at about midnight in
most areas, but not in the South Pacific, where microfilaremia is
diurnal. Smears are evaluated by wet mount to identify motile
parasites and by Giemsa staining; these examinations can be
delayed until the following morning, with storage of samples at room
temperature. Of note, the periodicity of microfilaremia is variable,
and daytime samples may yield positive results. Microfilariae may
also be identified in hydrocele fluid or chylous urine. Eosinophilia is
usually absent, except during acute inflammatory syndromes.
Available serologic tests, including bentonite flocculation, indirect
hemagglutination, ELISA, and indirect fluorescent antibody tests,
may be helpful but cannot distinguish between past and active
infections. Rapid antigen tests with sensitivity and specificity over
90% are available, and these are increasingly used to guide control
programs. Adult worms may also be found in lymph node biopsy
specimens (although biopsy is not usually clinically indicated) or by
ultrasound of a scrotal hydrocele or lymphedematous breast. When
microfilaremia is lacking, especially if sophisticated techniques are
not available, diagnoses may need to be made on clinical grounds
alone.
 Treatment & Control
A. Drug Treatment
Treatment is somewhat controversial, as no drug can fully control or
reverse the disease, and treatment may cause serious acute
inflammatory symptoms. Diethylcarbamazine is the drug of choice,
but it cannot cure infections due to its limited action against adult
worms. Asymptomatic infection and acute lymphangitis are treated
with this drug (2 mg/kg orally three times daily) for 10–14 days,
leading to a marked decrease in microfilaremia. Therapy may be
accompanied by allergic symptoms, including fever, headache,
malaise, hypotension, and bronchospasm, probably due to release
of antigens from dying worms. For this reason, treatment courses
may begin with a lower dosage, with escalation over the first 4 days
of treatment. Single annual doses of diethylcarbamazine (6 mg/kg
orally), alone or with ivermectin (400 mcg/kg orally) or albendazole
(400 mg orally) may be as effective as longer courses of
diethylcarbamazine. When onchocerciasis or loiasis is suspected, it
may be appropriate to withhold diethylcarbamazine to avoid severe
reactions to dying microfilariae; rather, ivermectin plus albendazole
may be given, although these drugs are less active than
diethylcarbamazine against adult worms. Appropriate management
of advanced obstructive disease is uncertain. Drainage of
hydroceles provides symptomatic relief, although they will recur.
Therapy with diethylcarbamazine cannot reverse chronic lymphatic
changes but is typically provided to lower worm burdens. An
interesting approach under study is to treat with doxycycline (100–
200 mg/d orally for 4–6 weeks), which kills obligate intracellular
Wolbachia bacteria, leading to death of adult filarial worms.
Doxycycline was also effective at controlling Mansonella perstans
infection, which does not respond well to standard antifilarial drugs.
Secondary bacterial infections must be treated. Surgical correction
may be helpful in some cases.
B. Disease Control
Avoidance of mosquitoes is a key measure; preventive measures
include the use of screens, bed nets (ideally treated with
insecticide), and insect repellents. Community-based treatment with
single annual doses of effective drugs offers a highly effective means
of control. The current WHO strategy for control includes mass
treatment of at risk communities with single annual doses of
diethylcarbamazine plus albendazole or, for areas with
onchocerciasis, albendazole plus ivermectin; in some circumstances,
more frequent dosing offers improved control.
Coulibaly YI et al. A randomized trial of doxycycline for
Mansonella perstans infection. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct
8;361(15):1448–58. [PMID: 19812401]
 
Hoerauf A. Filariasis: new drugs and new opportunities for
lymphatic filariasis and onchocerciasis. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008
Dec;21(6):673–81. [PMID: 18978537]
 
Ottesen EA et al. The global programme to eliminate lymphatic
filariasis: health impact after 8 years. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2008
Oct 8;2(10):e317. [PMID: 18841205]
 
Rosenblatt JE. Laboratory diagnosis of infections due to blood and
tissue parasites. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Oct 1;49(7):1103–8.
[PMID: 19691431]
 
Supali T et al. Doxycycline treatment of Brugia malayi-infected
persons reduces microfilaremia and adverse reactions after
diethylcarbamazine and albendazole treatment. Clin Infect Dis.
2008 May 1;46(9):1385–93. [PMID: 18419441]
 
Taylor MJ et al. Lymphatic filariasis and onchocerciasis. Lancet.
2010 Oct 2;376(9747):1175–85. [PMID: 20739055]
 
ONCHOCERCIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe pruritus; skin excoriations, thickening, and
depigmentation; and subcutaneous nodules.
 Conjunctivitis progressing to blindness.
 Microfilariae in skin snips and on slit-lamp examination; adult
worms in subcutaneous nodules.
 
 General Considerations
Onchocerciasis, or river blindness is caused by Onchocerca
volvulus. An estimated 18 million persons are infected, of whom
3–4 million have skin disease, 500,000 have severe visual
impairment, and 300,000 are blinded. Over 99% of infections are in
subsaharan Africa, especially the West African savanna, with about
half of cases in Nigeria and Congo. In some hyperendemic African
villages, close to 100% of individuals are infected, and 10% or
more of the population is blind. The disease is also prevalent in the
southwestern Arabian peninsula and Latin America, including
southern Mexico, Guatemala, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and
northwestern Brazil. Onchocerciasis is transmitted by simulium flies
(blackflies). These insects breed in fast-flowing streams and bite
during the day.
After the bite of an infected blackfly, larvae are deposited in the
skin, where adults develop over 6–12 months. Adult worms live in
subcutaneous connective tissue or muscle nodules for a decade or
more. Microfilariae are released from the nodules and migrate
through subcutaneous and ocular tissues. Disease is due to
responses to worms and to intracellular Wolbachia bacteria.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
After an incubation period of up to 1–3 years, the disease typically
produces an erythematous, papular, pruritic rash, which may
progress to chronic skin thickening and depigmentation. Itching may
be severe and unresponsive to medications, such that more
disability-adjusted life years are lost to onchocercal skin problems
than to blindness. Numerous firm, nontender, movable
subcutaneous nodules of about 0.5–3 cm, which contain adult
worms, may be present. Due to differences in vector habits, these
nodules are more commonly on the lower body in Africa but on the
head and upper body in Latin America. Inguinal and femoral
lymphadenopathy is common, at times resulting in a “hanging groin,”
with lymph nodes hanging within a sling of atrophic skin. Patients
may also have systemic symptoms, with weight loss and
musculoskeletal pain.
The most serious manifestations of onchocerciasis involve the
eyes. Microfilariae migrating through the eyes elicit host responses
that lead to pathology. Findings include punctate keratitis and
corneal opacities, progressing to sclerosing keratitis and blindness.
Iridocyclitis, glaucoma, choroiditis, and optic atrophy may also lead
to vision loss. The likelihood of blindness after infection varies
greatly based on geography, with the risk greatest in savanna
regions of West Africa.
B. Diagnostic Testing
The diagnosis is made by identifying microfilariae in skin snips, by
visualizing microfilariae in the cornea or anterior chamber by slit-
lamp examination, by identification of adult worms in a biopsy or
aspirate of a nodule or, uncommonly, by identification of
microfilariae in urine. Skin snips from the iliac crest (Africa) or
scapula (Americas) are allowed to stand in saline for 2–4 hours or
longer, and then examined microscopically for microfilariae. Deep
punch biopsies are not needed, and if suspicion persists after a skin
snip is negative, the procedure should be repeated. Ultrasound may
identify characteristic findings suggestive of adult worms in skin
nodules. When the diagnosis remains difficult, the Mazzotti test can
be used. In this test, a 50-mg dose of diethylcarbamazine is given.
A positive test, with exacerbation of skin rash and pruritus, usually
within 3 hours, is highly suggestive of the diagnosis. This test should
only be used in suspected lightly infected patients (after other tests
are negative), as this treatment can elicit severe skin and eye
reactions in heavily infected individuals. A related and safer test
using topical diethylcarbamazine is available in some areas.
Eosinophilia is a common, but inconsistent finding. Serologic tests
are poorly standardized, nonspecific, and generally unhelpful, as in
endemic areas positivity is not indicative of acute disease.
 Treatment & Control
The treatment of choice is ivermectin, which has replaced
diethylcarbamazine due to a much lower risk of severe reactions to
therapy. Ivermectin kills microfilariae, but not adult worms, so
disease control requires repeat administrations. Treatment is with a
single oral dose of 150 mcg/mL, but schedules for re-treatment
have not been standardized. One regimen is to treat every 3 months
for 1 year, followed by treatment every 6–12 months for the
suspected lifespan of adult worms (about 15 years). Treatment
results in marked reduction in numbers of microfilariae in the skin
and eyes, although its impact on the progression of visual loss
remains uncertain. Toxicities of ivermectin are generally mild; fever,
pruritus, urticaria, myalgias, edema, hypotension, and tender
lymphadenopathy may be seen, presumably due to reactions to
dying worms. Ivermectin should be used with caution in patients
also at risk for loiasis, since it can elicit severe reactions including
encephalopathy. In patients with severe skin findings not controlled
by ivermectin, therapy with suramin may be considered. This is the
only drug known to kill adult worms, but it is very toxic. As with
other filarial infections, doxycycline acts against O volvulus by
killing intracellular Wolbachia bacteria. A course of 100 mg/day for
6 weeks kills the bacteria and prevents parasite embryogenesis for
at least 18 months. Doxycycline is under study for onchocerciasis
control but has no clear role in treatment of individual affected
patients.
Protection against onchocerciasis includes avoidance of biting
flies. Major efforts are underway to control insect vectors in Africa.
In addition, mass distribution of ivermectin for intermittent
administration at the community level is ongoing, and the prevalence
of severe skin and eye disease is decreasing.
Basáñez MG et al. Effect of single-dose ivermectin on
Onchocerca volvulus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2008 May;8(5):310–22. [PMID: 18471776]
 
Diawara L et al. Feasibility of onchocerciasis elimination with
ivermectin treatment in endemic foci in Africa: first evidence from
studies in Mali and Senegal. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2009 Jul
21;3(7):e497. [PMID: 19621091]
 
Osei-Atweneboana MY et al. Prevalence and intensity of
Onchocerca volvulus infection and efficacy of ivermectin in
endemic communities in Ghana: a two-phase epidemiological
study. Lancet. 2007 Jun 16;369(9578):2021–9. [PMID:
17574093]
 
Udall DN. Recent updates on onchocerciasis: diagnosis and
treatment. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Jan 1;44(1):53–60. [PMID:
17143815]
 
LOIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Subcutaneous swellings; adult worms migrating across the eye.
 Encephalitis, which may be brought on by treatment.
 Microfilariae in the blood.
 
 General Considerations
Loiasis is a chronic filarial disease caused by infection with Loa loa.
The infection occurs in humans and monkeys in rainforest areas of
West and central Africa. An estimated 3–13 million persons are
infected. The disease is transmitted by chrysops flies, which bite
during the day. Over 6–12 months after infection, larvae develop
into adult worms, which migrate through subcutaneous tissues,
including the subconjunctiva (leading to the term “eye worm”).
Adults can live for up to 17 years.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Many infected persons are asymptomatic, although they may have
high levels of microfilaremia and eosinophilia. Transient
subcutaneous swellings (Calabar swellings) develop in symptomatic
persons. The swellings are non erythematous, up to 20 cm in
diameter, and may be preceded by local pain or pruritus. They
usually resolve after 2–4 days but occasionally persist for several
weeks. Calabar swellings are commonly seen around joints and
may recur at the same or different sites. Visitors from nonendemic
areas are more likely to have allergic-type reactions, including
pruritus, urticaria, and angioedema. Adult worms may be seen to
migrate across the eye, with either no symptoms or conjunctivitis,
with pain and edema. The most serious complication of loiasis is
encephalitis, which is most common in those with high level
microfilaremia and microfilariae in the CSF. Symptoms may range
from headache and insomnia to coma and death. Encephalitis may
be brought on by treatment with diethylcarbamazine or ivermectin.
Other complications of loiasis include kidney disease, with
hematuria and proteinuria; endomyocardial fibrosis; and peripheral
neuropathy.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis is established by identifying microfilariae in blood.
Blood is evaluated as for lymphatic filariasis, but for loiasis blood
should be obtained during the day. The failure to find microfilariae
does not rule out the diagnosis. Identification of a migrating eye
worm is also diagnostic. Serologic tests may be helpful in persons
from nonendemic areas who may be acutely ill without detectable
microfilaremia, but such tests have limited utility for residents of
endemic areas because most of them will have positive test results.
Diagnostic PCR methods have been described.
 Treatment
The treatment of choice is diethylcarbamazine, which eliminates
microfilariae and has some activity against adult worms. Treatment
with 8–10 mg/kg/d orally for 21 days is curative in about 50% of
amicrofilaremic patients, and repeat courses increase efficacy. Mild
side effects are common with therapy, including fever, pruritus,
arthralgias, nausea, diarrhea, and Calabar swellings. These
symptoms may be lessened by administration of antihistamines or
corticosteroids. Patients with large worm burdens are at greater risk
for serious complications of therapy, including kidney injury, shock,
encephalitis, coma, and death. Treatment with ivermectin, which is
highly active against microfilariae, but not adult worms, also entails a
high risk of severe reactions. To attempt to avoid these sequelae,
pretreatment with corticosteroids and antihistamines, and escalating
dosage of diethylcarbamazine have been used, but this strategy
does not prevent encephalitis. The circulating parasite load that
indicates particular risk for severe complications with therapy has
been estimated at 2500/mL or greater. Strategies to treat patients
with high parasite loads include (1) no treatment; (2) apheresis, if
available, to remove microfilariae prior to therapy with
diethylcarbamazine; or (3) therapy with albendazole, which appears
to be well tolerated due to its slow antiparasitic effects, prior to
therapy with diethylcarbamazine or ivermectin.
Boussinesq M. Loiasis. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 2006
Dec;100(8):715–31. [PMID: 17227650]
 
Padgett JJ et al. Loiasis: African eye worm. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg. 2008 Oct;102(10):983–9. [PMID: 18466939]
 
 
 
Mycotic Infections
Samuel A. Shelburne, MD
Richard J. Hamill, MD
Fungal infections have assumed an increasingly important role as use
of broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents has increased and the
number of immunodeficient patients has grown. Some pathogens
(eg, Cryptococcus, Candida, Pneumocystis, Fusarium) rarely
cause serious disease in normal hosts. Other endemic fungi (eg,
Histoplasma, Coccidioides, Paracoccidioides) commonly cause
disease in normal hosts but tend to be more aggressive in
immunocompromised ones. Superficial mycoses are discussed in
Chapter 6.
Successful management of most systemic fungal infections
requires knowledge of the natural history of these diseases as well
as familiarity with the unique pharmacokinetics, adverse effects, and
drug interactions of the various therapeutic agents. Furthermore,
most affected individuals usually have significant underlying illnesses.
Consequently, clinicians with extensive experience in the
management of these disorders should be routinely consulted.
CANDIDIASIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Common normal flora but opportunistic pathogen.
 Gastrointestinal mucosal disease, particularly esophagitis, most
common.
 Catheter-associated fungemia occurs in patients who have
sustained mucosal injury or received broad-spectrum antibiotics.
 
 General Considerations
Candida albicans can be cultured from the mouth, vagina, and
feces of most people. Cutaneous and oral lesions are discussed in
Chapters 6 and 8, respectively. The risk factors for invasive
candidiasis include prolonged neutropenia, recent abdominal
surgery, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, advanced chronic
kidney disease, the presence of intravascular catheters (especially
when providing total parenteral nutrition), and injection drug use.
Cellular immunodeficiency predisposes to mucocutaneous disease.
When no other underlying cause is found, persistent oral or vaginal
candidiasis should arouse a suspicion of HIV infection.
 Clinical Findings & Treatment
A. Mucosal Candidiasis
Esophageal involvement is the most frequent type of significant
mucosal disease. Presenting symptoms include substernal
odynophagia, gastroesophageal reflux, or nausea without substernal
pain. Oral candidiasis, though often associated, is not invariably
present. Diagnosis is best confirmed by endoscopy with biopsy and
culture. Therapy depends on the severity of disease. If patients are
able to swallow and take adequate amounts of fluid orally,
fluconazole, 100 mg/d (or itraconazole solution, 10 mg/mL, 200
mg/d), for 10–14 days will usually suffice. In the individual who is
more ill or in whom esophagitis has developed while taking
fluconazole, options include oral or intravenous voriconazole, 200
mg twice daily; intravenous amphotericin B, 0.3 mg/kg/d;
intravenous caspofungin, 50 mg/d; intravenous anidulafungin, 100
mg on day 1, then 50 mg/d; or intravenous micafungin, 150 mg/d.
Relapse is common with all agents when there is underlying HIV
infection without adequate immune reconstitution.
Vulvovaginal candidiasis occurs in an estimated 75% of women
during their lifetime. Risk factors include pregnancy, uncontrolled
diabetes mellitus, broad-spectrum antimicrobial treatment,
corticosteroid use, and HIV infection. Symptoms include acute
vulvar pruritus, burning vaginal discharge, and dyspareunia. Various
topical azole preparations (eg, clotrimazole, 100 mg vaginal tablet
for 7 days, or miconazole, 200 mg vaginal suppository for 3 days)
are effective. One 150 mg oral dose of fluconazole has been shown
g
to have equivalent efficacy with better patient acceptance. Disease
recurrence is common but can be decreased with weekly
fluconazole therapy (150 mg weekly).
B. Candidal Funguria
Candidal funguria frequently resolves with discontinuance of
antibiotics or removal of bladder catheters. Clinical benefit from
treatment of asymptomatic candiduria has not been demonstrated,
but persistent funguria should raise the suspicion of disseminated
infection. When symptomatic funguria persists, oral fluconazole, 200
mg/d for 7–14 days, can be used. Newer generation azoles (eg,
voriconazole) and echinocandins are not considered standard
therapy for candidal urinary tract infections due to low levels of
active drug in the urine.
C. Disseminated Candidiasis
The diagnosis of disseminated Candida infection is problematic
because Candida species are often isolated from mucosal sites in
the absence of invasive disease while blood cultures are positive
only 50% of the time in disseminated infection. Serologic tests have
not proved useful for distinguishing colonization from invasive
disease. Thus, the decision to treat for Candida when organisms
are isolated from urine or sputum (or both) needs to be
individualized for each patient. A randomized trial of empiric
fluconazole for patients at high risk for, but not proven to have,
disseminated candidiasis showed no clinical benefit compared with
placebo. Isolation of Candida species from blood cultures may
represent a benign, self-limited process, but until proven otherwise it
should be considered a sign of serious, complicated disease.
Antifungal therapy for candidemia is rapidly evolving with the
addition of new agents and the emergence of non-albicans species
causing significant disease. The 2009 guidelines for treatment of
invasive candidiasis recommend fluconazole (loading dose of 800
mg [12 mg/kg] intravenously, then 400 mg [6 mg/kg] intravenously
daily) for less critically ill patients who have had no recent azole
exposure. For patients with moderately severe to severe illness or
for patients who have had recent azole exposure, an echinocandin
such as caspofungin (loading dose of 70 mg intravenously once,
then 50 mg intravenously daily), mica-fungin (100 mg intravenously
daily), anidulafungin (loading dose of 200 mg intravenously once,
then 100 mg intravenously daily) is favored. Therapy for candidemia
should be continued for 2 weeks after the last positive blood culture
and resolution of symptoms and signs of infection. A dilated
fundoscopic examination is recommended for all patients with
candidemia to exclude endophthalmitis and repeat blood cultures
should be drawn to demonstrate organism clearance. Once patients
have become clinically stable, parenteral therapy can be
discontinued and oral fluconazole, 200–800 mg orally given as one
or two doses daily, is used to complete treatment for isolates
known to be or likely to be susceptible to fluconazole. Removal or
exchange of intravascular catheters is generally recommended for
non-neutropenic patients, since this may decrease the duration of
candidemia and overall mortality, which approaches 30%.
Non-albicans species of Candida now account for over 50% of
clinical bloodstream isolates and often have resistance patterns that
are different from C albicans. An echinocandin is recommended for
treatment of Candida glabrata infection with a transition to oral
fluconazole or voriconazole reserved for patients whose isolates are
known to be susceptible to these agents. Similarly, Candida krusei
is generally fluconazole-resistant and so should be treated with an
alternative agent, such as echinocandin or voriconazole. Fluconazole
is the treatment of choice for Candida parapsilosis due to possible
echinocandin resistance in such isolates.
Another form of invasive disease is hepatosplenic candidiasis.
This results from aggressive chemotherapy and prolonged
neutropenia in patients with underlying hematologic cancers.
Typically, fever and variable abdominal pain present weeks after
chemotherapy, when neutrophil counts have recovered. Blood
cultures are generally negative. Hepatic enzymes reveal an alkaline
phosphatase elevation that may be marked. Fluconazole, 400 mg
daily, or a lipid formulation of amphotericin B should be given until
clinical and radiographic improvement occurs.
D. Candidal Endocarditis
Candidal endocarditis is a rare infection that is most frequently
associated with exposure to a healthcare setting. Candidal
endocarditis occurs with increased frequency on prosthetic valves in
the first few months following surgery. The diagnosis is established
definitively by culturing Candida from emboli or from vegetations at
the time of valve replacement. Amphotericin has long been
considered the optimal therapy, given in a dosage of 0.5–1 mg/kg/d
intravenously, along with aggressive surgical intervention. There are
now more data regarding the utility of echinocandins and newer
generation azoles.
In high-risk patients undergoing induction chemo-therapy, bone
marrow transplantation, or liver transplantation, prophylaxis with
antifungal agents has been shown to prevent invasive fungal
infections although the effect on mortality and the preferred agent
remain debated.
Betts RF et al; Caspofungin High-Dose Study Group. A multi-
center, double-blind trial of a high-dose caspofungin treatment
regimen versus a standard caspofungin treatment regimen for adult
patients with invasive candidiasis. Clin Infect Dis. 2009
Jun;48(12):1676–84. [PMID: 19419331]
 
Pappas PG et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of
candidiasis: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of
America. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Mar;48(5):503–35. [PMID:
19191635]
 
Pfaller MA et al. Results from the ARTEMIS DISK Global
Antifungal Susceptibility Study, 1997 to 2007: a 10.5-year analysis
of susceptibilities of Candida species to fluconazole and
voriconazole as determined by CLSI standardized disk diffusion. J
Clin Micro. 2010 Apr;48(4):1366–77. [PMID: 20164282]
 
HISTOPLASMOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Epidemiologically linked to bird droppings and bat exposure;
common along river valleys (especially the ohio River and the
Mississippi River valleys).
 Most patients asymptomatic; respiratory illness most common
clinical problem.
 Widespread disease especially common in AIDS or other
immunosuppressed states, with poor prognosis.
 Biopsy of affected organs with culture or urinary polysaccharide
antigen most useful in disseminated disease.
 
 General Considerations
Histoplasmosis is caused by Histoplasma capsulatum, a
dimorphic fungus that has been isolated from soil contaminated with
bird or bat droppings in endemic areas (central and eastern United
States, eastern Canada, Mexico, Central America, South America,
Africa, and southeast Asia). Infection presumably takes place by
inhalation of conidia. These convert into small budding cells that are
engulfed by phagocytes in the lungs. The organism proliferates and
undergoes lymphohematogenous spread to other organs.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most cases of histoplasmosis are asymptomatic or mild and thus go
unrecognized. Past infection is recognized by pulmonary and splenic
calcification noted on incidental radiographs. Symptomatic infection
may present with mild influenza-like illness, often lasting 1–4 days.
Moderately severe infections are frequently diagnosed as atypical
pneumonia. These patients have fever, cough, and mild central chest
pain lasting 5–15 days.
Clinically evident infections occur in several forms: (1) Acute
histoplasmosis frequently occurs in epidemics, often when soil
containing infected bird or bat droppings is disturbed. It is a
relatively severe disease manifested by marked prostration, fever,
and comparatively few pulmonary complaints even when
radiographs show diffuse pneumonia. The illness may last from 1
week to 6 months but is almost never fatal. (2) Progressive
disseminated histoplasmosis is commonly seen in patients with
underlying HIV infection (with CD4 cell counts usually < 100
cells/mcL) or other conditions causing immunosuppression.
Disseminated histoplasmosis has been more frequently reported in
patients from endemic areas taking tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
blocking agents. It is characterized by fever and multiple organ
system involvement. Chest radio-graphs may show a miliary
pattern. Presentation may be fulminant, simulating septic shock, with
death ensuing rapidly unless treatment is provided. Symptoms
usually consist of fever, dyspnea, cough, loss of weight, and
prostration. Ulcers of the mucous membranes of the oropharynx
may be present. The liver and spleen are nearly always enlarged,
and all the organs of the body are involved, particularly the adrenal
glands, though this infrequently results in adrenal insufficiency.
Gastrointestinal involvement may mimic inflammatory bowel
disease. 
(3) Subacute/chronic 
progressive 
pulmonary
histoplasmosis is usually seen in older patients with various lesions
including apical cavities, infiltrates, and nodules found on
radiographs. 
(4) Chronic 
progressive 
disseminated
histoplasmosis usually occurs in middle-aged to elderly men with
no known condition causing immunosuppression. Presentation is
similar to acute disseminated histoplasmosis except for the
chronicity of symptoms; it can result in death if not treated. (5)
Complications 
of 
pulmonary 
histoplasmosis 
include
granulomatous mediastinitis characterized by persistently enlarged
mediastinal lymph nodes and fibrosing mediastinitis in which an
excessive fibrotic response to Histoplasma infection results in
compromise of the great vessels.
B. Laboratory Findings
Most patients with progressive pulmonary disease show anemia of
chronic disease. Bone marrow involvement may be prominent in
disseminated forms with occurrence of pancytopenia. Alkaline
phosphatase and marked lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and ferritin
elevations are also common as are mild elevations of serum
aspartate aminotransferase, although alanine aminotransferase is
often normal.
With pulmonary involvement, sputum culture is rarely positive
except in chronic disease; antigen testing of bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid may be helpful in acute disease. The combination of a urine and
serum antigen assay has an 83% sensitivity for the diagnosis of
acute pulmonary histoplasmosis. Blood or bone marrow cultures
from immunocompromised patients with acute disseminated disease
are positive more than 80% of the time but may take several weeks
for growth. The urine antigen assay has a sensitivity of > 90% for
disseminated disease in AIDS patients and a declining titer can be
used to follow response to therapy.
 Treatment
For progressive localized disease and for mild to moderately severe
nonmeningeal disseminated disease in immunocompetent or
immunocompromised patients, itraconazole, 200–400 mg/d orally
divided into two doses, is the treatment of choice with an overall
response rate of approximately 80%. The oral solution is better
absorbed than the capsule formulation, which requires gastric acid
for absorption. Duration of therapy ranges from weeks to several
months depending on the severity of illness. Intravenous
amphotericin B formulations are used in patients with more severe
illness such as meningitis, with recent guidelines favoring the use of
liposomal or lipid complex amphotericin formulations at a dose of 3
mg/kg/d over amphotericin B deoxycholate. Patients with AIDS-
related histoplasmosis require lifelong suppressive therapy with
itraconazole, 200–400 mg/d orally, although secondary prophylaxis
may be discontinued if immune reconstitution occurs in response to
antiretroviral therapy. There is no clear evidence that antifungal
agents are of benefit for patients with granulomatous mediastinitis or
fibrosing mediastinitis although oral itraconazole is often used.
Hage C et al. Recognition, diagnosis, and treatment of
histoplasmosis complicating tumor necrosis factor blocker therapy.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jan 1;50(1):85–92. [PMID: 19951231]
 
Knox KS et al. Histoplasmosis. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2010
May;7(3):169–72. [PMID: 20463244]
 
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Influenza-like illness with malaise, fever, back-ache, headache,
and cough.
 Erythema nodosum common with acute infection.
 Dissemination may result in meningitis, bony lesions, or skin and
soft tissue abscesses.
 Chest radiograph findings vary widely from pneumonitis to
cavitation.
 Serologic tests useful; spherules containing endospores
demonstrable in sputum or tissues.
 
 General Considerations
Coccidioidomycosis should be considered in the diagnosis of any
obscure illness in a patient who has lived in or visited an endemic
area.
Infection results from the inhalation of arthroconidia of
Coccidioides immitis or C posadasii; both organisms are molds
that grow in soil in certain arid regions of the southwestern United
States, in Mexico, and in Central and South America.
Less than 1% of immunocompetent persons show dissemination,
but among these patients, the mortality rate is high.
In HIV-infected people in endemic areas, coccidioidomycosis is
a common opportunistic infection. In these patients, disease
manifestations range from focal pulmonary infiltrates to widespread
miliary disease with multiple organ involvement and meningitis;
severity is inversely related to the extent of control of the HIV
infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of primary coccidioidomycosis occur in about 40% of
infections. Symptom onset (after an incubation period of 10–30
days) is usually that of a respiratory tract illness with fever and
occasionally chills. Coccidioidomycosis is a common, frequently
unrecognized, etiology of community-acquired pneumonia in
endemic areas.
Arthralgia accompanied by periarticular swelling, often of the
knees and ankles, is common. Erythema nodosum may appear 2–
20 days after onset of symptoms. Persistent pulmonary lesions,
varying from cavities and abscesses to parenchymal nodular
densities or bronchiectasis, occur in about 5% of diagnosed cases.
Disseminated disease occurs in about 0.1% of white and 1% of
nonwhite patients. Filipinos and blacks are especially susceptible, as
are pregnant women of all races. Any organ may be involved.
Pulmonary findings usually become more pronounced, with
mediastinal lymph node enlargement, cough, and increased sputum
production. Lung abscesses may rupture into the pleural space,
producing an empyema. These may also extend to bones and skin,
and pericardial and myocardial involvement has been occasionally
observed. Fungemia may occur and is characterized clinically by a
diffuse miliary pattern on chest radiograph and by early death. The
course may be particularly rapid in immunosuppressed patients.
Physicians caring for immunosuppressed patients in endemic areas
need to consider that patients may be latently infected.
Meningitis occurs in 30–50% of cases of dissemination.
Subcutaneous abscesses and verrucous skin lesions are especially
common in fulminating cases. Lymphadenitis may occur and may
progress to suppuration. HIV-infected persons with disseminated
disease have a higher incidence of miliary infiltrates,
lymphadenopathy, and meningitis, but skin lesions are uncommon.
B. Laboratory Findings
In primary coccidioidomycosis, there may be moderate
leukocytosis and eosinophilia. Serologic testing is useful for both
diagnosis and prognosis. The immunodiffusion tube precipitin test
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) detect IgM
antibodies and are both useful for diagnosis early in the disease
process. Historically, a persistent rising IgG complement fixation
titer (≥ 1:16) has been considered suggestive of disseminated
disease; in addition, complement fixation titers can be used to
assess the adequacy of therapy. Serum complement fixation titer
may be low when there is meningitis but no other disseminated
disease. In patients with HIV-related coccidioidomycosis, the false-
negative rate may be as high as 30%.
Demonstrable complement-fixing antibodies in spinal fluid are
diagnostic of coccidioidal meningitis. These are found in over 90%
of cases. Spinal fluid findings include increased cell count with
lymphocytosis and reduced glucose. Spinal fluid culture is positive in
approximately 30% of meningitis cases. Spherules filled with
endospores may be found in biopsy specimens of soft tissues and
bone; though they are not infectious, they convert to the highly
contagious arthroconidia when grown in culture media. Blood
cultures are rarely positive.
C. Imaging
Radiographic findings vary, but patchy, nodular pulmonary infiltrates
and thin-walled cavities are most common. Hilar lymphadenopathy
may be visible and is seen in localized disease; mediastinal
lymphadenopathy suggests dissemination. There may be pleural
effusions and lytic lesions in bone with accompanying complicated
soft-tissue collections.
 Treatment
General symptomatic therapy is given as needed for disease limited
to the chest with no evidence of progression. For progressive
pulmonary or extrapulmonary disease, amphotericin B intravenously
is used although oral azoles may be used for mild cases (see
Chapter 30). Duration of therapy is determined by a declining
complement fixation titer and a favorable clinical response. For
meningitis, treatment usually is with high-dose oral fluconazole
(400–800 mg/d, or higher) although lumbar or cisternal intrathecal
administration of amphotericin B daily in increasing doses up to 1–
1.5 mg/d is used initially by some physicians or in cases refractory
to fluconazole. Systemic therapy with amphotericin B, 0.6 mg/kg/d
intravenously, is generally given concurrently with intrathecal therapy
but is not sufficient alone for the treatment of meningeal disease.
Voriconazole or posaconazole may be alternatives to intrathecal
amphotericin B in patients who do not respond to fluconazole.
Once the patient is clinically stable, oral therapy with an azole,
usually lifelong, is the recommended alternative to intrathecal
amphotericin B therapy.
Itraconazole, 400 mg orally daily divided into two doses, or
fluconazole, 200–400 mg, or higher, orally once or twice daily
should be given for disease in the chest, bones, and soft tissues;
however, therapy must be continued for 6 months or longer after
the disease is inactive to prevent relapse. Response to therapy
should be monitored by following the clinical response and
progressive decrease in serum complement fixation titers.
Thoracic surgery is occasionally indicated for giant, infected, or
ruptured cavities. Surgical drainage is necessary for management of
soft tissue abscesses and bone disease. Amphotericin B, 1 mg/kg/d
intravenously, is advisable following extensive surgical manipulation
of infected tissue until the disease is inactive, whereupon therapy
may be continued with an azole.
 Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with limited disease is good, but
persistent pulmonary cavities may cause complications such as
hemoptysis or rupture producing pyopneumothorax. Nodules,
cavities, and fibrotic residuals may rarely progress after long periods
of stability or regression. Serial complement fixation titers should be
performed after therapy for patients with coccidioidomycosis; rising
titers warrant reinstitution of therapy because relapse is likely. Late
central nervous system complications of adequately treated
meningitis include cerebral vasculitis and hydro-cephalitis that may
require shunting. Disseminated and meningeal forms still have
mortality rates exceeding 50% in the absence of therapy.
Jaroszewski DE et al. Surgery for pulmonary coccidioidomycosis:
a 10-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009 Dec;88(6):1765–
72. [PMID: 19932232]
 
Masannat FY et al. Coccidioidomycosis in patients with HIV-1
infection in the era of potent antiretroviral therapy. Clin Infect Dis.
2010 Jan 1;50(1):1–7. [PMID: 19995218]
 
Mathisen G et al. Coccidioidal meningitis: clinical presentation and
management in the fluconazole era. Medicine. 2010
Sept;89(5):251–84. [PMID: 20827104]
 
PNEUMOCYSTOSIS (Pneumocystis jiroveci Pneumonia)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Fever, dyspnea, nonproductive cough.
 Bilateral diffuse interstitial disease without hilar adenopathy by
chest radiograph.
 Bibasilar crackles on auscultation in many cases; others have no
findings.
 Reduced partial pressure of oxygen.
 P jiroveci in sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or lung tissue.
 
 General Considerations
Pneumocystis jiroveci, the Pneumocystis species that affects
humans, is distributed worldwide. Although symptomatic P jiroveci
disease is rare in the general population, serologic evidence
indicates that asymptomatic infections have occurred in most
persons by a young age. The overt infection is an acute interstitial
plasma cell pneumonia that occurs with high frequency among two
groups: (1) as epidemics of primary infections among premature or
debilitated or marasmic infants on hospital wards in underdeveloped
parts of the world, and (2) as sporadic cases among older children
and adults who have an abnormal or altered cellular immunity.
Cases occur most commonly in patients with cancer or severe
malnutrition and debility, in patients treated with immunosuppressive
or cytotoxic drugs or irradiation for the management of organ
transplants and cancer and, most frequently, in patients with AIDS
(see Chapter 31).
The mode of transmission in primary infection is unknown, but
the 
evidence 
suggests 
airborne 
transmission. 
Following
asymptomatic primary infection, latent and presumably inactive
organisms are sparsely distributed in the alveoli. Whether acute
disease in older children and adults results from de novo infection or
from reactivation of latent infection is not entirely clear, although
both mechanisms probably contribute.
Pneumocystis pneumonia occurs in up to 80% of AIDS patients
not receiving prophylaxis and is a major cause of death. Its
incidence increases in direct proportion to the fall in CD4 cells, with
most cases occurring at CD4 cell counts < 200/mcL. In non-AIDS
patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy, symptoms frequently
begin after corticosteroids have been tapered or discontinued.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Findings are usually limited to the pulmonary parenchyma;
extrapulmonary disease is reported rarely. In the sporadic form of
the disease associated with deficient cell-mediated immunity, the
onset is typically abrupt, with fever, tachypnea, shortness of breath,
and usually nonproductive cough. Pulmonary physical findings may
be slight and disproportionate to the degree of illness and the
radiologic findings; many patients have bibasilar crackles, but others
do not. Without treatment, the course is usually one of rapid
deterioration and death. Adult patients may present with
spontaneous pneumothorax, usually in patients with previous
episodes or those receiving aerosolized pentamidine prophylaxis.
Patients with AIDS will usually have other evidence of HIV-
associated disease, including fever, fatigue, and weight loss, for
weeks or months preceding the illness.
B. Laboratory Findings
Chest radiographs most often show diffuse “interstitial” infiltration,
which may be heterogeneous, miliary, or patchy early in infection.
There may also be diffuse or focal consolidation, cystic changes,
nodules, or cavitation within nodules. Pleural effusions are not seen.
About 5–10% of patients with Pneumocystis pneumonia have
normal chest films. High-resolution chest CT scans may be quite
suggestive of P jiroveci pneumonia, helping distinguish it from other
causes of pneumonia.
Arterial blood gas determinations usually show hypoxemia with
hypocapnia but may be normal; however, rapid desaturation occurs
if patients are exercised before samples are drawn. Isolated
elevation or rising levels of serum LDH are very sensitive but not
specific findings for P jiroveci. Serologic tests are not helpful in
diagnosis, but several studies have suggested that elevated (1-3)-β-
Dglucan levels have reasonably good sensitivity and specificity for
the diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia. Specific diagnosis
depends on morphologic demonstration of the organisms in clinical
specimens using specific stains. The organism cannot be cultured.
Adequate specimens can sometimes be obtained with induced
sputum by having patients inhale an aerosol of hypertonic saline
(3%) produced by an ultrasonic nebulizer. Specimens are then
stained with Giemsa stain or methenamine silver, either of which
allows detection of cysts. The use of monoclonal antibody with
immunofluorescence has increased the sensitivity of diagnosis.
Alternative 
techniques 
for 
obtaining 
specimens 
include
bronchoalveolar lavage (sensitivity 86–97%) followed by
transbronchial lung biopsy (85–97%), if necessary. Open lung
biopsy and needle lung biopsy are infrequently done but may need
to be performed to diagnose a granulomatous form of
Pneumocystis pneumonia.
 Treatment
See Table 31–5. It is appropriate to start empiric therapy for P
jiroveci pneumonia if the disease is suspected clinically; however, in
both AIDS patients and non-AIDS patients with mild to moderately
severe disease, continued treatment should be based on a proved
diagnosis because of clinical overlap with other infections, the
toxicity of therapy, and the possible coexistence of other infectious
organisms. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMPSMZ) is the
preferred agent because of its low cost and excellent bioavailability
in both AIDS patients and non-AIDS patients with mild to
moderately severe disease. Patients suffering from nausea and
vomiting or intractable diarrhea should be given intravenous TMP-
SMZ until they can tolerate the oral formulation. The impact of
resistance of Pneumocystis to TMP-SMZ is unclear, although
increasing rates of mutations in the DHFR gene that mediate TMP-
SMZ resistance have been reported. The best-studied second-line
option is a combination of clindamycin and primaquine, although
dapsone/trimethoprim, pentamidine, and atovaquone have also been
used. Therapy should be continued with the selected drug for at
least 5–10 days before considering changing agents, as fever,
tachypnea, and pulmonary infiltrates persist for 4–6 days after
starting treatment. Some patients have a transient worsening of their
disease during the first 3–5 days, which may be related to an
inflammatory response secondary to the presence of dead or dying
organisms. Early addition of corticosteroids may attenuate this
response (see Chapter 31). Some clinicians prefer to treat episodes
of AIDS-associated Pneumocystis pneumonia for 21 days rather
than the usual 14 days recommended for non-AIDS cases.
A. Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole
The dosage is TMP 20 mg/kg (12–15 mg/kg may decrease side
effects without decreasing efficacy) and SMZ 100 mg/kg given
orally or intravenously daily in three or four divided doses for 14–
21 days. Patients with AIDS have a high frequency of
hypersensitivity reactions (approaching 50%), which may include
fever, rashes (sometimes severe), malaise, neutropenia, hepatitis,
nephritis, thrombocytopenia, hyperkalemia, and hyperbilirubinemia.
B. Clindamycin/Primaquine
Although 
there 
are 
strong 
data 
indicating 
that
trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole is optimal first-line therapy for
Pneumocystis pneumonia, the data on alternative agents is less
clear. A meta-analysis suggested that clindamycin, 600 mg three
times daily, plus primaquine, 15 mg/d, is the best second-line
therapy with superior results when compared with pentamidine.
Primaquine may cause hemolytic anemia in patients with glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)-deficiency.
C. Pentamidine Isethionate
The use of pentamidine has decreased as alternative agents have
been studied. This drug is administered intravenously (preferred) or
intramuscularly as a single dose of 3 mg (salt)/kg/d for 14–21 days.
Pentamidine causes side effects in nearly 50% of patients.
Hypoglycemia (often clinically inapparent), hyperglycemia,
hyponatremia, and delayed nephrotoxicity with azotemia may occur.
Rarely, a variety of other severe adverse reactions may occur,
including anemia, thrombocytopenia, ventricular arrhythmias, and
fatal pancreatitis. Blood glucose levels should be monitored.
Inadvertent rapid intravenous infusion may cause precipitous
hypotension.
D. Atovaquone
Atovaquone has been approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for patients with mild to moderate disease
who cannot tolerate TMP-SMZ or pentamidine, but failure is
reported in 15–30% of cases. Mild side effects are common, but no
serious reactions have been reported. The dosage is 750 mg three
times daily for 21 days. Atovaquone should be administered with a
fatty meal.
E. Other Drugs
Dapsone, 100 mg/d, plus trimethoprim 15 mg/kg/d, in three divided
doses daily, is an alternative oral regimen for mild to moderate
disease or for continuation of therapy after intravenous therapy is no
longer needed.
F. Prednisone
Based on studies done in patients with AIDS, prednisone is given
for moderate to severe pneumonia (when Pao2 on admission is <
70 mm Hg or oxygen saturation is < 90%) in conjunction with
antimicrobials. The dosage of prednisone is 40 mg twice daily orally
for 5 days, then 40 mg daily for 5 days, and then 20 mg daily until
therapy is completed. The role of prednisone in non-AIDS patients
is unclear, especially in patients in whom symptoms developed
following tapering doses of corticosteroids.
G. Supportive Care
Oxygen therapy is indicated to maintain the oxygen saturation over
90% by pulse oximetry.
 Prevention
Primary prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia in HIV-infected
patients should be given to persons with CD4 counts < 200
cells/mcL, a CD4 percentage below 14%, or weight loss or oral
candidiasis (see Table 31–4). Primary prophylaxis is often used in
patients with hematologic malignancy and transplant recipients,
although the clinical characteristics of persons with these conditions
who would benefit from Pneumocystis prophylaxis have not been
clearly defined. Patients with a history of Pneumocystis pneumonia
should receive secondary prophylaxis until they have had a durable
virologic response to antiretroviral therapy for at least 3–6 months
and maintain a CD4 count of > 200 cells/mcL.
 Prognosis
In the absence of early and adequate treatment, the fatality rate for
the endemic infantile form of Pneumocystis pneumonia is 20–50%;
for the sporadic form in immunodeficient persons, the fatality rate is
nearly 100%. Early treatment reduces the mortality rate to about
3% in the former and 10–20% in AIDS patients. The mortality rate
in other immunodeficient patients is still 30–50%, probably because
of failure to make a timely diagnosis. In immuno-deficient patients
who do not receive prophylaxis, recurrences are common (30% in
AIDS).
Helweg-Larsen J et al. Clinical efficacy of first and second-line
treatments for HIV-associated Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia: a tri-center study. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2009
Dec;64(6):1282–90. [PMID: 19858161]
 
Kovacs JA et al. Evolving health effects of Pneumocystis: one
hundred years of progress in diagnosis and treatment. JAMA.
2009 Jun 24;301(24):2578–85. [PMID: 19549975]
 
Opportunistic Infections Project Team of the Collaboration of
Observational HIV Epidemiological Research in Europe
(COHERE); Mocroft et al. Is it safe to discontinue Pneumocystis
jiroveci pneumonia prophylaxis in patients with virologically
suppressed HIV infection and CD4 cell count > 200 cells/microL.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Sep 1;51(5):611–9. [PMID: 20645862]
 
CRYPTOCOCCOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most common cause of fungal meningitis.
 Predisposing factors: Hematologic cancer chemo-therapy,
Hodgkin disease, corticosteroid therapy, transplant recipients,
TNF inhibitor therapy, HIV infection.
 Symptoms of headache, abnormal mental status; meningismus
seen occasionally, though rarely in HIV-infected patients.
 Demonstration of capsular polysaccharide antigen in
cerebrospinal fluid diagnostic; 95% of HIV-infected and solid-
organ transplant patients also have a positive serum antigen.
 
 General Considerations
Cryptococcosis is mainly caused by Cryptococcus neoformans,
an encapsulated budding yeast that has been found worldwide in
soil and on dried pigeon dung. C gattii is a closely related species
that also causes disease in humans although C gattii may affect
more immunocompetent persons. It has recently been emerging as a
major cause of cryptococcosis in the Pacific Northwestern region of
the United States and may result in more severe disease than C
neoformans.
Infections are acquired by inhalation. In the lung, the infection
may remain localized, heal, or disseminate. Clinically apparent
cryptococcal pneumonia rarely develops in immunocompetent
persons. Progressive lung disease and dissemination most often
occur in the setting of cellular immunodeficiency, including
underlying hematologic cancer under treatment, Hodgkin disease,
long-term corticosteroid therapy, solid-organ transplant, TNF-
inhibitor therapy, or HIV infection.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pulmonary disease ranges from simple nodules to widespread
infiltrates leading to respiratory failure. Disseminated disease may
involve any organ, but central nervous system disease
predominates. Headache is usually the first symptom of meningitis.
Confusion and other mental status changes as well as cranial nerve
abnormalities, nausea, and vomiting may be seen as the disease
progresses. Nuchal rigidity and meningeal signs occur about 50% of
the time but are uncommon in HIV-infected patients. Communi
cating hydrocephalus may complicate the course. C gattii infection
frequently presents with neurologic signs caused by space-
occupying lesions. Primary C neoformans infection of the skin may
mimic bacterial cellulitis, especially in immunocompromised persons.
Clinical worsening associated with improved immunologic status has
been reported in HIV-positive and transplant patients with
cryptococcosis; this entity has been labeled the immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).
B. Laboratory Findings
Respiratory tract disease is diagnosed by culture of respiratory
secretions or pleural fluid. For suspected meningeal disease, lumbar
puncture is the preferred diagnostic procedure. Spinal fluid findings
include increased opening pressure, variable pleocytosis, increased
protein, and decreased glucose, though as many as 50% of AIDS
patients have no pleocytosis. Gram stain of the cerebrospinal fluid
usually reveals budding, encapsulated fungal cells. Cryptococcal
capsular antigen in cerebrospinal fluid and culture together establish
the diagnosis over 90% of the time. Patients with AIDS often have
the antigen in both cerebrospinal fluid and serum, and
extrameningeal disease (lungs, blood, urinary tract) is common. In
patients with AIDS, the serum cryptococcal antigen is also a
sensitive screening test for meningitis, being positive in over 95% of
cases. MRI is more sensitive than CT in finding central nervous
system abnormalities such as cryptococcomas.
 Treatment
Because of decreased efficacy and development of resistance, initial
therapy with an azole is not recommended for treatment of acute
cryptococcal meningitis. Consequently, amphotericin B, 0.7–1
mg/kg/d intravenously is used for 14 days, followed by an additional
8 weeks of fluconazole, 400 mg/d orally. This regimen has been
quite effective, achieving clinical responses and cerebrospinal fluid
sterilization in about 70% of patients. Lipid amphotericin B
preparations (eg, liposomal amphotericin B, 3–4 mg/kg/d) have
equivalent efficacy to conventional amphotericin B with reduced
nephrotoxicity. The addition of flucytosine has been associated with
improved survival, but toxicity is common. Flucytosine is
administered orally at a dose of 100 mg/kg/d divided into four equal
doses and given every 6 hours. Hematologic parameters should be
closely monitored during flucytosine therapy, and the dose should
also be adjusted for any decreases in renal function. Frequent,
repeated lumbar punctures or ventricular shunting should be
performed to relieve high cerebrospinal fluid pressures or if
hydrocephalus is a complication. Failure to adequately relieve raised
intracranial pressure is a major cause of morbidity and mortality.
The end points for amphotericin B therapy and for switching to oral
fluconazole are a favorable clinical response (decrease in
temperature; improvement in headache, nausea, vomiting, and mini-
mental status scores), improvement in cerebrospinal fluid
biochemical parameters and, most importantly, conversion of
cerebrospinal fluid culture to negative.
A similar approach is reasonable for patients with cryptococcal
meningitis in the absence of AIDS, though the mortality rate is
considerably higher. Therapy is generally continued until
cerebrospinal fluid cultures become negative and cerebrospinal fluid
antigen titers are below 1:8.
Maintenance antifungal therapy is important after treatment of an
acute episode in HIV-related cases, since otherwise the rate of
relapse is > 50%. Fluconazole, 200 mg/d, is the maintenance
therapy of choice, decreasing the relapse rate approximately tenfold
compared with placebo and threefold compared with weekly
amphotericin B in patients whose cerebrospinal fluid has been
sterilized by the induction therapy. After successful therapy of
cryptococcal meningitis, it is possible to discontinue secondary
prophylaxis with fluconazole in individuals with AIDS who have had
a satisfactory response to antiretroviral therapy (eg, CD4 cell count
> 100–200 cells/mcL for at least 6 months). Among practitioners
treating patients without AIDS, there has been a trend in recent
years to prescribe a course (eg, 6–12 months) of fluconazole as
maintenance therapy following successful treatment of the acute
illness; recently published guidelines suggest this as an option.
 Prognosis
Factors that indicate a poor prognosis include the activity of the
predisposing conditions, older age, organ failure, lack of spinal fluid
pleocytosis, high initial antigen titer in either serum or cerebrospinal
fluid, decreased mental status, increased intracranial pressure, and
the presence of disease outside the nervous system.
Hamill RJ et al. Comparison of 2 doses of liposomal amphotericin
B and conventional amphotericin B deoxycholate for treatment of
AIDS-associated acute cryptococcal meningitis: a randomized,
double-blind clinical trial of efficacy and safety. Clin Infect Dis.
2010 Jul 15;51(2):225–32. [PMID: 20536366]
 
Perfect JR et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of
cryptococcal disease: 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Feb 1;50(3):291–322.
[PMID: 20047480]
 
ASPERGILLOSIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most common cause of non-candidal invasive fungal infection in
stem cell or organ transplant patients.
 Predisposing factors: leukemia, bone marrow or organ transplant,
late HIV infection.
 Pulmonary, sinus, and CNS are most common disease sites.
 Demonstration of galactomannan or β-D-glucan in serum or other
body fluid samples contributes to early diagnosis and treatment.
 
 General Considerations
Aspergillus fumigatus is the usual cause of aspergillosis, though
many species of Aspergillus may cause a wide spectrum of
disease. The lungs, sinuses, and brain are the organs most often
involved. Clinical illness results either from an aberrant immunologic
response or tissue invasion.
 Clinical Findings
A. Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
This form of aspergillosis occurs in patients with preexisting asthma
who develop worsening bronchospasm and fleeting pulmonary
infiltrates accompanied by eosinophilia, high levels of IgE, and IgG
Aspergillus precipitins in the blood. It also may complicate cystic
fibrosis.
B. Invasive Aspergillosis
Invasive manifestations may be seen in immunocompetent or only
mildly immunocompromised adults. These include chronic sinusitis,
colonization of preexisting pulmonary cavities (aspergilloma), and
chronic necrotizing pulmonary aspergillosis.
1. Sinusitis—Sinus involvement is usually diagnosed histologically
after patients with chronic sinus disease undergo surgery.
2. Aspergillomas—Aspergillomas of the lung occur when
preexisting lung lesions become secondarily colonized with
Aspergillus species. These may be found by incidental radiographic
studies but may also present with significant hemoptysis.
3. Chronic necrotizing aspergillosis—This invasive manifestation
is a relatively rare disease seen in patients with some degree of
immunocompromise and presents with a protracted course
compared with the more common acute invasive form of the
disease. Fibrosis and cavity formation may be prominent.
4. Life-threatening invasive aspergillosis—Severe invasive
aspergillosis most commonly occurs in profoundly immunodeficient
patients, particularly in patients who have undergone hematopoietic
stem cell transplants; in those with prolonged, severe neutropenia;
and in patients with chronic granulomatous disease. Specific risk
factors in patients who have undergone a hematopoietic stem cell
transplant include cytopenias, corticosteroid use, iron overload,
cytomegalovirus disease, and graft-versus-host disease. Pulmonary
disease is most common, with patchy infiltration leading to a severe
necrotizing pneumonia. Invasive sinus disease also occurs. There is
often tissue infarction as the organism grows into blood vessels;
clues to this are the development of pleuritic chest pain and
elevation of serum LDH. At any time, there may be hematogenous
dissemination to the central nervous system, skin, and other organs.
Early diagnosis and reversal of any correctable immunosuppression
are essential. Blood cultures have very low yield. Detection of
galactomannan by ELISA or β-D-glucan, or both, has been used
for the early diagnosis of invasive disease, though multiple
determinations should be done. Higher galactomannan levels are
correlated with increased mortality. False-positive galactomannan
tests have been reported in patients receiving β-lactam antibiotics.
Isolation of Aspergillus from pulmonary secretions does not
necessarily imply invasive disease, although its positive predictive
value increases with more advanced immunosuppression.
Therefore, a definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of
Aspergillus in tissue or culture from a sterile site. CT scan of the
chest may show characteristics quite suggestive of invasive
aspergillosis (eg, “halo sign”).
 Prevention
The high mortality rate and difficulty in diagnosis of invasive
aspergillosis often leads clinicians to institute prophylactic therapy
for patients with profound immunosuppression. The best-studied
agents include fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, and
posaconazole, although patient and agent selection criteria remain
undefined. Widespread use of broad-spectrum azoles raises
concern for development of invasive disease by highly resistant
fungi.
 Treatment
A. Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
For acute exacerbations, oral prednisone is begun at a dose of 1
mg/kg/d and then tapered slowly over several months. Itraconazole
at a dose of 200 mg daily for 16 weeks appears to improve
pulmonary function and decrease corticosteroid requirements in
these patients, although voriconazole may become the preferred
oral agent.
B. Invasive Aspergillosis
1. Sinusitis—These patients may require protracted courses of
antifungals (itraconazole, 200 mg twice daily, for weeks to months)
in addition to the surgical debridement.
2. Aspergilloma—The most effective therapy for symptomatic
aspergilloma remains surgical resection.
3. Chronic necrotizing aspergillosis—Recent guidelines suggest
some benefits from prolonged oral itraconazole therapy.
4. Life-threatening invasive aspergillosis—When severe
invasive aspergillosis is considered clinically likely or is
demonstrable by laboratory testing, rapid institution of voriconazole,
high doses of amphotericin B, or caspofungin may be life-saving.
Voriconazole (6 mg/kg intravenously twice on day 1, then 4
mg/kg/d thereafter) has been shown to be more effective, improve
survival, and be associated with fewer severe side effects than
conventional amphotericin B when used as initial therapy in invasive
aspergillosis. Oral dosing of voriconazole at 4 mg/kg twice daily can
be used for less serious infections or as a step-down strategy after
intravenous therapy. Some experts believe that intravenous lipid
preparations of amphotericin B (3–5 mg/kg/d) should be used
preferentially in this setting because they are better tolerated and
can be given at higher doses.
Caspofungin (70 mg intravenously on day 1, then 50 mg/d
thereafter) is approved for the treatment of invasive aspergillosis in
patients who do not respond to or are intolerant of other treatments.
Other options include mica-fungin (100–150 mg/d intravenously)
and posaconazole (200 mg orally four times daily). In critically ill
patients who are not responding to conventional antifungal
treatment, there may be a role for the addition of caspofungin to
amphotericin B or voriconazole therapy, although randomized trials
are lacking. Surgical debridement is generally done for sinusitis, and
there is increasing data regarding resection of pulmonary lesions,
especially for treatment of life-threatening hemoptysis. The mortality
rate 
of 
pulmonary 
or 
disseminated 
disease 
in 
the
immunocompromised patient remains well above 50%, particularly
in patients with refractory neutropenia.
Baddley JW et al. Factors associated with mortality in transplant
patients with invasive apsergillosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Jun
15;50(12):1559–67. [PMID: 20450350]
 
Kontoyiannis DP et al. Prospective surveillance for invasive fungal
infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients,
2001–2006: overview of the Transplant-Associated Infection
Surveillance Network (TRANSET) database. Clin Infect Dis.
2010 Apr 15;50(8):1091–100. [PMID: 20218877]
 
Riscilli BP et al. Noninvasive pulmonary Aspergillus infections.
 
Clin Chest Med. 2009 Jun;30(2):315–35. [PMID: 19375638]
 
Segal BH. Aspergillosis. N Engl J Med. 2009 Apr
30;360(18):1870–84. [PMID: 19403905]
 
MUCORMYCOSIS
The term “mucormycosis” (zygomycosis, phycomycosis) is applied
to opportunistic infections caused by members of the genera
Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia, and Cunninghamella. Predisposing
conditions include hematologic malignancy, stem cell transplantation,
solid organ transplantation, diabetic ketoacidosis, chronic kidney
disease, desferoxamine therapy, and treatment with corticosteroids
or cytotoxic drugs. These organisms appear in tissues as broad,
branching nonseptate hyphae. Biopsy with histologic examination is
almost always required for diagnosis; cultures are frequently
negative. Invasive disease of the sinuses, orbits, and the lungs may
occur. Widely disseminated disease is seen in patients who have
received aggressive chemotherapy and broad-spectrum antifungal
prophylaxis. A prolonged course of a lipid preparation of
amphotericin B should be started early. Based on in vitro
susceptibility and reports of successful salvage therapy, there may
be a role for posaconazole in the treatment of these infections
following control of acute infection by amphotericin. Other azoles
are likely to be ineffective. There are limited data suggesting
beneficial synergistic activity when amphotericin and caspofungin
are used in combination for mucormycosis. Ongoing studies are
assessing whether iron chelation therapy with deferasirox may also
be helpful. Control of diabetes and other underlying conditions,
along with extensive repeated surgical removal of necrotic,
nonperfused tissue, is essential. Even when these measures are
introduced in a timely fashion, the prognosis is poor, with a 30–
50% mortality rate for localized disease and higher rates in
disseminated cases.
Rüping MJ et al. Forty-one recent cases of invasive zygomycosis
from a global clinical registry. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2010
Feb;65(2):296–302. [PMID: 20008047]
 
Singh N et al. Zygomycosis in solid organ transplant recipients: a
prospective, matched case-control study to assess risks for
disease and outcome. J Infect Dis. 2009 Sep 15;200(6):1002–11.
[PMID: 19659439]
 
Spellberg B et al. Recent advances in the management of
mucormycosis: from bench to bedside. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Jun
15;48(12):1743–51. [PMID: 19435437]
 
BLASTOMYCOSIS
Blastomycosis occurs most often in men infected during
occupational or recreational activities out of doors and in a
geographically limited area of the south central and midwestern
United States and Canada. Disease usually occurs in
immunocompetent individuals.
Chronic pulmonary infection is most common and may be
asymptomatic. When dissemination takes place, lesions are most
frequently seen in the skin, bones, and urogenital system.
Cough, moderate fever, dyspnea, and chest pain are common.
These may resolve or progress, with purulent sputum production,
pleurisy, fever, chills, loss of weight, and prostration. Radiologic
studies, either chest radio-graphs or CT scans, usually reveal
airspace consolidation or masses.
Raised, verrucous cutaneous lesions are commonly present in
disseminated blastomycosis. Bones—often the ribs and vertebrae—
are frequently involved. Epididymitis, prostatitis, and other
involvement of the male urogenital system may occur. Although they
do not appear to be at greater risk for acquisition of disease,
infection in HIV-infected persons may progress rapidly, with
dissemination common.
Laboratory findings usually include leukocytosis and anemia,
though these are not specific. The organism is found in clinical
specimens, such as expectorated sputum or tissue, as a thick-walled
cell 5–20 mcm in diameter that may have a single broad-based bud.
It grows readily on culture. Serologic tests are not well
standardized. A urinary antigen test is available, but it has
considerable cross reactivity with Histoplasma; consequently, its
usefulness in diagnosis and in assessing response to therapy is
unclear.
Itraconazole, 200–400 mg/d orally for at least 2–3 months, is the
therapy of choice for nonmeningeal disease, with a response rate of
over 80%. Amphotericin B, 0.7–1.0 mg/kg/d intravenously (or lipid
formulation amphotericin B), is given for severe disease, treatment
failures, or central nervous system involvement.
Clinical follow-up for relapse should be made regularly for
several years so that therapy may be resumed or another drug
instituted.
Bariolo JR et al. Blastomycosis of the central nervous system: a
multicenter review of diagnosis and treatment in the modern era.
Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Mar 15;50(6):797–804. [PMID: 20166817]
 
Saccente M et al. Clinical and laboratory update on blastomycosis.
Clin Microbiol Rev. 2010 Apr;23(2):367–81. [PMID: 20375357]
 
PARACOCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS (South American
Blastomycosis)
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis infections have been found only in
patients who have resided in South or Central America or Mexico.
Long asymptomatic periods enable patients to travel far from the
endemic areas before developing clinical problems. Weight loss,
pulmonary complaints, or mucosal ulcerations are the most common
symptoms. Cutaneous papules may ulcerate and enlarge both
peripherally and deeper into the subcutaneous tissue. Differential
diagnosis includes mucocutaneous leishmaniasis and syphilis.
Extensive coalescent ulcerations may eventually result in destruction
of the epiglottis, vocal cords, and uvula. Extension to the lips and
face may occur. Eating and drinking are extremely painful. Skin
lesions may occur, usually on the face. Variable in appearance, they
may have a necrotic central crater with a hard hyperkeratotic
border. Lymph node enlargement may follow mucocutaneous
lesions, eventually ulcerating and forming draining sinuses; in some
patients, it is the presenting symptom. Hepatosplenomegaly may be
present as well. HIV-infected patients with paracoccidioidomycosis
are more likely to have extra-pulmonary dissemination and a more
rapid clinical disease course.
Laboratory 
findings 
are 
nonspecific. 
Serology 
by
immunodiffusion is positive in 98% of cases. Complement fixation
titers correlate with progressive disease and fall with effective
therapy. The fungus is found in clinical specimens as a spherical cell
that may have many buds arising from it. If direct examination of
secretions does not reveal the organism, biopsy with Gomori
staining may be helpful.
Itraconazole, 100 mg twice daily orally, is the treatment of choice
and generally results in a clinical response within 1 month and
effective control after 2–6 months. Voriconazole, 200 mg twice
daily orally, appears to be as effective as itraconazole.
Amphotericin B intravenously is the drug of choice for severe and
life-threatening infection.
Ameen M et al. Advances in paracoccidioidomycosis. Clin Exp
Dermatol. 2010 Aug;35(6):576–80. [PMID: 19874328]
 
Morejon KM et al. Paracoccidioidomycosis in patients infected
and not infected with human immunodeficiency virus: a case-
control study. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2009 Mar;80(3):359–66.
[PMID: 19270282]
 
SPOROTRICHOSIS
Sporotrichosis is a chronic fungal infection caused by Sporothrix
schenckii. It is worldwide in distribution; most patients have had
contact with soil, sphagnum moss, or decaying wood. Transmission
from animals to humans has also been reported. Infection takes
place when the organism is inoculated into the skin—usually on the
hand, arm, or foot, especially during gardening.
The most common form of sporotrichosis begins with a hard,
nontender subcutaneous nodule. This later becomes adherent to the
overlying skin and ulcerates. Within a few days to weeks, similar
nodules develop along the lymphatics draining this area, and these
may ulcerate as well.
Disseminated sporotrichosis is rare in the immuno-competent
person but may present with widespread cutaneous, lung, bone,
joint, 
and 
central 
nervous 
system 
involvement 
in
immunocompromised patients, especially those with AIDS and
alcohol abuse.
Cultures are needed to establish diagnosis. Antibody tests may
be useful for diagnosis of disseminated disease, especially
meningitis.
Itraconazole, 200–400 mg orally daily for several months, is now
the treatment of choice for localized disease and some milder cases
of disseminated disease. Terbinafine, 500 mg twice daily, also
appears to have good efficacy in lymphocutaneous disease.
Amphotericin B intravenously, 1–2 g, is used for severe systemic
infection. Surgery is usually contraindicated except for simple
aspiration of secondary nodules. Joint involvement may require
arthrodesis.
The prognosis is good for lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis;
pulmonary, joint, and disseminated disease respond less favorably.
Francesconi G et al. Comparative study of 250 mg/day terbinafine
and 100 mg/day itraconazole for the treatment of cutaneous
sporotrichosis. Mycopathologia. 2010 Nov 21. [Epub ahead of
print] [PMID: 21103938]
 
PENICILLIUM MARNEFFEI INFECTIONS
Penicillium marneffei is a dimorphic fungus, endemic in southeast
Asia, that causes systemic infection in both healthy and
immunocompromised hosts. There have been reports of travelers
with advanced AIDS returning from southeast Asia with
disseminated infection. Clinical manifestations include fever,
generalized umbilicated papular rash, lymphadenopathy, cough, and
diarrhea. Central nervous system infection has been reported.
Diagnosis is made by identification of the organism on smears or
histopathologic specimens or by culture, where the fungus produces
a characteristic red pigment. The best sites for isolation of the
fungus include the skin, blood, bone marrow, respiratory tract, and
lymph nodes. Antigen and antibody tests have been developed in
endemic regions. Patients with mild to moderate infection can be
treated with itraconazole, 400 mg divided into two doses daily by
mouth for 8 weeks. Amphotericin B, 0.5–0.7 mg/kg/d
intravenously, is the drug of choice for severe disease and should be
continued until patients have had a satisfactory clinical response, at
which time they can be switched to itraconazole. Because the
relapse rate after successful treatment is 30%, maintenance therapy
with itraconazole, 200–400 mg daily orally, is indicated indefinitely,
or until immune reconstitution occurs.
Le T et al. AIDS-associated Penicillium marneffei infection of
the central nervous system. Clin Infect Dis. 2010 Dec 15;
51(12):1458–62. [PMID: 21054180]
 
CHROMOBLASTOMYCOSIS (Chromomycosis)
Chromoblastomycosis is a chronic, principally tropical cutaneous
infection usually affecting young men who are agricultural workers
and caused by several species of closely related black molds;
Cladophialophora carrionii and Fonsecaea pedrosoi are the
most common etiologic agents.
Lesions usually follow puncture wounds and are slowly
progressive, occurring most frequently on a lower extremity. The
lesion begins as a papule or ulcer. Over months to years, papules
enlarge to become vegetating, papillomatous, verrucous elevated
nodules. Satellite lesions may appear along the lymphatics. There
may be secondary bacterial infection. Elephantiasis may result.
The fungus is seen as brown, thick-walled, spherical, sometimes
septate cells in potassium hydroxide preparations of pus or skin
scrapings, which are quite sensitive for diagnosis. The type of
reproduction found in culture determines the species.
Itraconazole, 200–400 mg/d orally for 6–18 months, achieves a
response rate of 65%. Terbinafine at 500 mg/d may have similar
efficacy to itraconazole and may be useful in combination, especially
in difficult to treat cases. Cryosurgery alone for smaller lesions or
combined with itraconazole for larger lesions is beneficial.
Ameen M. Managing chromoblastomycosis. Trop Doct. 2010
Apr;40(2):65–7. [PMID: 20305094]
 
Queiroz-Telles F et al. Chromoblastomycosis: an overview of
clinical manifestations, diagnosis and treatment. Med Mycol. 2009
Feb;47(1):3–15. [PMID: 19085206]
 
MYCETOMA (Maduromycosis & Actinomycetoma)
Mycetoma is a chronic local, slowly progressive destructive
infection, usually involving the foot, that begins in subcutaneous
tissues, frequently after localized trauma, and then spreads to
contiguous 
structures. 
Maduromycosis 
(also 
known 
as
eumycetoma) is the term used to describe mycetoma caused by the
true fungi and by phylogenetically diverse organisms. Actinomycotic
mycetoma is caused by Nocardia and Actinomadura species. The
disease begins as a papule, nodule, or abscess that over months to
years progresses slowly to form multiple abscesses and sinus tracts
ramifying deep into the tissue. Secondary bacterial infection may
result in large open ulcers. Radiographs may show destructive
changes in the underlying bone. Tissue Gram stain reveals fine
branching hyphae with actinomycotic mycetoma. Larger hyphae are
seen with fungal mycetoma; the causative species can often be
identified by the color of the characteristic grains within the infected
tissues.
The prognosis is good for patients with actinomycetoma, since
they usually respond well to sulfonamides and sulfones, especially if
treated early. TMP-SMZ, 160/800 mg orally twice a day, or
dapsone, 100 mg twice daily after meals, has been reported to be
effective. Streptomycin, 14 mg/kg/d intramuscularly, may be useful
during the first month of therapy. All oral medications must be taken
for months and continued for several months after clinical cure to
prevent relapse. Debridement assists healing.
The prognosis for maduromycosis is poor, though surgical
debridement along with prolonged itraconazole therapy may result
in a response rate of 70%. The various etiologic agents may
respond differently to antifungal agents, so culture results are
invaluable. Amputation is necessary in far advanced cases.
Garnica M et al. Difficult mycoses of the skin: advances in the
epidemiology and management of eumycetoma,
phaeohyphomycosis and chromoblastomycosis. Curr Opin Infect
Dis. 2009 Dec;22(6):559–63. [PMID: 19773651]
 
OTHER OPPORTUNISTIC MOLD INFECTIONS
Fungi previously considered to be harmless colonizers, including
Pseudallescheria 
boydii 
(Scedosporium 
apiospermum),
Scedosporium 
prolificans, 
Fusarium, 
Paecilomyces,
Trichoderma longibrachiatium, and Trichosporon, are emerging
as significant pathogens in immunocompromised patients. This
occurs most often in patients being treated for hematopoietic
malignancies and in those receiving broad-spectrum antifungal
prophylaxis. Infection may be localized in the skin, lungs, or sinuses,
or widespread disease may appear with lesions in multiple organs.
Fusariosis should be suspected in severely immunosuppressed
persons in whom multiple, painful skin lesions develop; blood
cultures are often positive. Sinus infection may cause bony erosion.
Infection in subcutaneous tissues following traumatic implantation
may develop as a well-circumscribed cyst or as an ulcer.
Nonpigmented septate hyphae are seen in tissue and are
indistinguishable from those of Aspergillus when infections are due
t o S apiospermum or species of Fusarium, Paecilomyces,
Penicillium, or other hyaline molds. Spores or mycetoma-like
granules are rarely present in tissue. The differentiation of S
apiospermum and Aspergillus is particularly important, since the
former is uniformly resistant to amphotericin B but may be sensitive
to azole antifungals (eg, voriconazole). Infection by any of a number
of black molds is designated as phaeohyphomycosis. These black
molds (eg, Exophiala, Bipolaris, Cladophialophora, Curvularia,
Alternaria) are common in the environment, especially on decaying
vegetation. Human disease due to these agents is rarely encountered
but may result in soft tissue abscesses due to traumatic inoculation
or may occur as a sequela of chronic sinusitis or profound
immunosuppression. In tissues of patients with phaeohyphomycosis,
the mold is seen as black or faintly brown hyphae, yeast cells, or
both. Culture on appropriate medium is needed to identify the
agent. Histologic demonstration of these organisms is definitive
evidence of invasive infection; positive cultures must be interpreted
cautiously 
and 
not 
assumed 
to 
be 
contaminants 
in
immunocompromised hosts. Some isolates are sensitive to antifungal
agents.
Ben-Ami R et al. Phaeohyphomycosis in a tertiary care center.
Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Apr 15;48(8):1033–41. [PMID: 19267655]
 
Campo M et al. Invasive fusariosis in patients with hematologic
malignancies at a cancer center: 1998–2009. J Infect. 2010
May;60(5):331–7. [PMID: 20138081]
 
Revankar SG et al. Melanized fungi in human disease. Clin
Microbiol Rev. 2010 Oct;23(4):884–928. [PMID: 20930077]
 
ANTIFUNGAL THERAPY
Table 36–1 summarizes the major properties of currently available
antifungal agents. Two different lipid-based amphotericin B
formulations are used to treat systemic candidiasis, invasive
aspergillosis and other disseminated mold infections, disseminated
histoplasmosis, and cryptococcal meningitis. Their principal
advantage appears to be substantially reduced nephrotoxicity,
allowing administration of much higher doses. Three agents of the
echinocan-din class, caspofungin acetate, anidulafungin, and
micafungin sodium, are currently approved. The echinocandins have
relatively few adverse effects and are useful for the treatment of
invasive Candida infections. Caspofungin acetate is also approved
for use in refractory cases of invasive aspergillosis. Voriconazole
has excellent activity against a broad range of fungal pathogens and
has been FDA approved for use in invasive Aspergillus cases,
Fusarium and Scedosporium infections, Candida esophagitis,
deep Candida infections, and candidemia. Posaconazole has good
activity against a broad range of filamentous fungi, including the
zygomycetes. Some experts now recommend therapeutic drug
monitoring in individuals with severe invasive fungal infections
receiving these newer azoles because of unreliable serum levels due
to either metabolic alterations as a result of genetic polymorphisms
(voriconazole) or erratic absorption (posaconazole).
 
Table 36–1. Agents for systemic mycoses.
 
1No dosage adjustment required for chronic kidney disease; dosage
adjustment necessary with moderate to severe hepatic dysfunction.
2Use should be monitored with blood levels to prevent this or the dose
adjusted according to creatinine clearance.
3In combination with amphotericin B.
4Administration with drugs that are metabolized by the cytochrome P450
system is contraindicated or requires careful monitoring.
5Some authorities advocate therapeutic drug monitoring in patients who
are not responding to therapy.
Thompson GR 3rd et al. Pharmacology and clinical use of
voriconazole. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2010
Jan;6(1):83–94. [PMID: 19947892]
 
Zoller E et al. Development, clinical utility, and place in therapy of
posaconazole for prevention and treatment of invasive fungal
infections. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2010 Nov 4;4:299–311. [PMID:
21116336]
 
 
 
Disorders Related to
Environmental Factors
Jacqueline A. Nemer, MD, FACEP
COLD & HEAT
 
The human body maintains a steady temperature through the
balance of internal heat production and environmental heat loss. In
extreme temperatures, the body's thermoregulation may fail. This
results in the body's internal temperature moving toward the
temperature of the external environment. Heat exchange between
the body and environment occurs via four common processes:
radiation, evaporation, conduction, and convection. Cold and heat
tolerance vary considerably among individuals, depending on
physiological and environmental factors.
Temperature-related conditions may arise in any individual,
regardless of sex, race, age, or underlying health status. Exposure to
cold or heat may cause a wide spectrum of conditions. Factors that
increase the likelihood and severity of extreme temperature-related
conditions include various underlying medical conditions, such as
cardiopulmonary, 
vascular, 
neurologic, 
musculoskeletal,
immunologic, or infectious diseases; poor physical conditioning;
poor acclimatization; extremes of age; altered mental status;
inappropriate 
clothing; 
concurrent 
injury; 
inadequate
thermoregulation; and pharmacologic effects (ie, medications,
tobacco, alcohol, and recreational drugs).
ACCIDENTAL SYSTEMIC HYPOTHERMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Hypothermia is a reduction of core body temperature below 35
°C.
 To accurately measure hypothermia, an intravascular,
esophageal, rectal, or bladder probe that measures temperatures
as low as 25 °C is required; oral, axillary, and otic temperatures
are inaccurate and unreliable.
 Resuscitative measures must be continued until the core
temperature is over 32 °C.
 
 General Considerations
Systemic hypothermia is defined as core body temperature < 35°
C. This may be primary (from exposure to prolonged ambient
extremely low temperature) or secondary (due to thermoregulatory
dysfunction). Primary and secondary hypothermia may also be
present at the same time. Hypothermia risk factors include diabetes
mellitus and other endocrine dysfunctions (hypothyroidism, adrenal
insufficiency, hypopituitarism), renal or hepatic dysfunction,
psychiatric conditions, poor nutrition, sedentary lifestyle, inadequate
housing, inadequate or wet clothing, occupational or recreational
exposure, prior cold weather injury, pharmacologic effects, sepsis,
infection, hypoglycemia, as well as those factors listed in the Cold &
Heat section. Heat loss occurs more rapidly with high wind velocity
(“windchill factor”), water exposure, or direct contact with a cold
surface.
The human body generates internal heat through muscle activity
(ie, shivering or increased physical exertion) and preserves heat loss
via peripheral vasoconstriction. In prolonged or repetitive cold
exposure, these thermoregulatory responses can become impaired;
hypothermia ensues. Hypothermia diagnosis can be easily
overlooked and delayed in a critically ill or injured patient.
Hypothermia should be considered in any patient with prolonged
exposure to ambient or cold environment, trauma, or inadequate
clothing.
Systemic hypothermia depresses physiologic function. This
results in decreased respiratory drive, oxygen consumption, central
and peripheral nerve conduction, gastrointestinal motility,
myocardial repolarization, and coagulation cascade.
Accidental hypothermia may occur in the hospital setting due to
prolonged postoperative hypothermia or administration of large
amounts of refrigerated stored blood products (without rewarming),
rapid infusion of intravenous fluids, or prolonged exposure of an
undressed patient during resuscitation or operative procedures. This
section does not cover post-resuscitation–induced hypothermia
used by critical care specialists because this is intentional, not
accidental.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms and signs of hypothermia are typically nonspecific and
markedly variable based on the patient's underlying health and
circumstances of hypothermia. In mild cases with core temperature
between 32° C and 35° C, symptoms include tachypnea,
tachycardia, hypertension, shivering, impaired coordination, poor
judgment, and apathy. With core temperature between 28° C and
32° C, the body slows down. Shivering stops; bradycardia, dilated
pupils, slowed reflexes, cold diuresis, and confusion and lethargy
ensue. Electrocardiogram (ECG) may reveal J wave or Osborn
wave (positive deflection in the terminal portion of the QRS
complex, most notable in leads II, V5, and V6) (Figure 37–1).
Below 28 °C, the skin may appear blue or puffy; coma, apnea, loss
of reflexes, asystole, or ventricular fibrillation may lead the clinician
to assume that patient is dead. Prolonged hypothermia may lead to
dysrhythmias 
and 
conduction 
abnormalities, 
acidemia,
hyperkalemia, rhabdomyolysis, pulmonary edema, chronic kidney
disease, pneumonia, pancreatitis, hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia,
and coagulopathy. Death from systemic hypothermia is usually due
to ventricular fibrillation, asystole, or chronic kidney disease.
 
Figure 37–1. Electrocardiogram shows leads ii and V5 in a
patient whose body temperature is 24 °C. Note the bradycardia
and osborn waves. These findings become more prominent as the
body temperature lowers, and gradually resolve with rewarming.
osborn waves have an extra deflection at the end of the QRs
complex. These are best seen in the inferior and lateral precordial
leads.
 
 Treatment
Resuscitation begins with assessment and support of airway,
breathing and circulation, initiation of rewarming, and prevention of
further heat loss. Rewarming is the initial, imperative treatment. All
cold, wet clothing must be removed and replaced with warm, dry
clothing. To accurately measure hypothermia, an intravascular,
esophageal, rectal or bladder probe that measures temperatures as
low as 25 °C is required; oral, axillary, and otic temperatures are
inaccurate and unreliable. The patient should be evaluated for
associated conditions of hypoglycemia, trauma, overdose and
peripheral cold injury. Rewarming methods are determined by the
degree of hypothermia and the resources available.
During rewarming, continuous monitoring of temperature and
other vital signs, cardiac rhythm, and blood sugar must be done.
Common complications of rewarming occur as colder peripheral
blood returns to central circulation. This may result in core
temperature afterdrop, rewarming acidosis from shunting lactate into
the circulation, rewarming shock from peripheral vasodilation and
hypovolemia, ventricular fibrillation and other cardiac arrhythmias.
Extreme caution must be taken when handling the hypothermic
patient to avoid triggering arrhythmias. During the rewarming
process, essential testing includes ECG, chest radiograph, arterial
blood gases, and bedside glucose. Laboratory evaluation should
assess 
for 
potential 
complications 
of 
lactic 
acidosis;
rhabdomyolysis; electrolyte abnormalities; infection; and dysfunction
of the pancreas, liver, kidneys, and coagulation. False laboratory
values will occur if the blood sample is warmed to 37 °C for the
testing. Antibiotics are not routinely given. Comatose patients have
a high risk of aspiration pneumonia.
A. Passive and Active External Rewarming Methods
Patients with mild hypothermia (rectal temperature > 33° C) who
have been otherwise healthy usually respond well to passive and
active external warming. Passive external rewarming involves
removal of cold wet clothing, then drying and covering the patient
with blankets to prevent further heat loss. The patient will rewarm
due to the body's internal heat production through shivering and
increased metabolism. Active external rewarming is highly
effective and safe for mild hypothermia. This is a noninvasive
method of applying external heat to the patient's skin. Examples
include warm bedding, heated blankets, heat packs, and immersion
into a 40 °C bath. Afterdrop can be lessened by active external
rewarming of the trunk but not the extremities and by avoiding any
muscle movement by the patient.
B. Active Internal (Core) Rewarming Methods
Active internal core rewarming methods are required for patients
with core temperatures of < 33° C. Patients with milder degrees of
hypothermia may also benefit from these methods. Warm humidified
oxygen (43–46° C) is an easy, safe, and highly effective method.
Warmed intravenous saline infusions (43° C) should be used instead
of lactated Ringer solution. Volume resuscitation is needed to
prevent shock as vasodilation occurs during rewarming. Other
methods (including warm solution lavage of the stomach, colon,
thoracic cavity, peritoneum, or bladder; esophageal rewarming
tubes; endovascular warming devices; and hemodialysis) are based
on the availability of equipment and skilled personnel.
For patients with core temperature < 30 °C, treatment includes
active rewarming, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), one shock
attempt for dysrhythmia, and withholding of intravenous
medications. Once the core temperature reaches 30 °C, cardiac
medications can be given but at longer than standard intervals
because metabolism is slowed and there is a risk of toxic
accumulation as circulation is restored. Defibrillation may be
performed as needed. Resuscitative efforts should be continued until
the patient's core temperature increases to at least 32 °C.
 Prognosis
Prognosis is directly related to the patient's underlying health and
comorbidities, the severity of associated conditions, circumstances
surrounding the hypothermia, and degree of metabolic acidosis.
Prognosis is poor with low pH (≤ 6.6), elevated potassium (≥ 4.0
mEq/L or ≥ 4.0 mmol/L), serious underlying condition, or treatment
delay. If treated early, most otherwise healthy patients may survive
moderate or severe hypothermia.
HYPOTHERMIA OF THE EXTREMITIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Extremities suffering cold-induced injuries should not be
exercised, rubbed, or massaged during rewarming.
 Rewarming of extremities affected by cold-induced injuries must
be performed as soon as possible after there is no risk of
refreezing.
 
 Clinical Findings
Cold exposure of the extremities produces immediate localized
vasoconstriction followed by generalized vaso- constriction. When
the skin temperature falls to 25 °C, tissue demand for oxygen is
greater than what is supplied by the slowed circulation: the area
becomes cyanotic. At 15 °C, tissue damage occurs due to marked
reduction in tissue metabolism and oxyhemoglobin dissociation. This
gives a deceptive pink, well-oxygenated appearance to the skin.
Tissue death may result from ischemia and thromboses in the
smaller vessels or by actual freezing. Freezing (frost-bite) may occur
when the skin temperature drops below –4 to–10 °C or at higher
temperatures in the presence of wind, immobility, malnutrition, or
vascular disease. Cold-induced injuries to the extremities (ie,
frostnip, chilblain, trench foot, and frostbite) range from mild to
severe.
 Prevention
“Keep warm, keep dry, and keep moving.” Individuals should
wear warm, dry clothing, preferably several layers, with a
windproof outer garment. Arms, legs, fingers, and toes should be
exercised to maintain circulation. Wet clothing, socks, and shoes
should be replaced with dry ones. Extra socks, mittens, and insoles
should always be carried in a pack during travel in cold or icy areas.
Caution must be taken to avoid cramped positions; constrictive
clothing; prolonged dependency of the feet; use of tobacco, alcohol,
and sedative medications; and exposure to wet muddy ground and
windy conditions.
FROSTNIP & CHILBLAIN (ERYTHEMA PERNIO)
Frostnip is a mild temporary form of cold-induced injury. The
involved area has local paresthesias that completely resolve with
passive external rewarming. Rewarming can be done by placing
cold fingers in the armpits and, in the case of the toes or heels, by
removing footwear, drying feet, rewarming, and covering with
adequate dry socks or other protective footwear.
Chilblains or erythema pernio are inflammatory skin changes
caused by exposure to cold without actual freezing of the tissues.
These skin lesions may be red or purple papular lesions, which are
painful or pruritic, with burning or paresthesias. They may be
associated with edema or blistering and aggravated by warmth.
With continued exposure, ulcerative or hemorrhagic lesions may
appear and progress to scarring, fibrosis, and atrophy. This may
resemble vasculitis or peripheral thromboemboli. A detailed history
of cold exposure will differentiate chilblains from these other
conditions, thereby avoiding unnecessary diagnostic testing.
Treatment consists of elevating and passively externally
rewarming the affected part. Caution must be taken to avoid
rubbing or massaging injured tissues and to avoid applying ice or
heat. The area must be protected from trauma, secondary infection,
and further cold exposure.
IMMERSION FOOT OR TRENCH FOOT
Immersion foot (or hand) is caused by prolonged immersion in
cool or cold water or mud, usually < 10 °C. Early symptoms
include cold and anesthesia of the affected area (prehyperemic
stage). This is followed by hot sensation, intense burning, shooting
pains (hyperemic stage). With ongoing cold exposure, the
affected part becomes pale or cyanotic with diminished pulsations
due to vasospasm (posthyperemic stage). This may result in
blistering, swelling, redness, ecchymoses, hemorrhage, necrosis,
peripheral nerve injury, or gangrene and secondary complications
such as lymphangitis, cellulitis, and thrombophlebitis.
Treatment is best instituted during the hyperemic stage.
Treatment consists of air drying, protecting the extremities from
trauma and secondary infection, and gradual rewarming by
exposure to air at room temperature (not ice or heat). Caution must
be taken to avoid massaging or moistening the skin and to avoid
further water immersion. Bed rest is required until all ulcers have
healed. Affected parts are elevated to aid in removal of edema fluid.
Pressure sites (ie, heels) are protected with pillows. Prevention
involves properly fitting footwear, improved foot hygiene, and sock
changes to keep feet clean and dry.
FROSTBITE
Frostbite is injury from tissue freezing and formation of ice crystals
in the tissue. Most tissue destruction follows the reperfusion of the
frozen tissues, with damaged endothelial cells and progressive
microvascular thrombosis resulting in further tissue damage. In mild
cases, only the skin and subcutaneous tissues are involved; the
symptoms are numbness, prickling, itching, and pallor. With
increasing severity, deep frostbite involves deeper structures. The
skin appears white or yellow, loses its elasticity, and becomes
immobile. Edema, hemorrhagic blisters, necrosis, and gangrene may
appear. This may cause paresthesias and stiffness.
 Treatment
A. Immediate Treatment
Evaluate and treat the patient for associated systemic hypothermia
and injury. Avoid secondary exposure to cold. Early use of
systemic analgesics is recommended for nonfrozen injuries. Fluids
and electrolytes should be monitored.
1. Rewarming—Rapid rewarming at temperatures slightly above
body heat may significantly decrease tissue necrosis and reverse the
tissue crystallization. If there is any possibility of refreezing, the
frostbitten part should not be thawed, even if this might mean
prolonged walking on frozen feet. Refreezing results in increased
tissue necrosis. Rewarming is best accomplished by warm bath
immersion. The frozen extremity is immersed for several minutes in a
moving water bath heated to 40–42 °C until the distal tip of the part
being thawed flushes. Dry heat (ie, stove or open fire) is more
difficult to regulate, increases likelihood of accidental burns and is
not recommended. Thawing may cause tenderness and burning
pain. Once the frozen part has thawed and returned to normal
temperature (usually in about 30 minutes), discontinue external heat.
Rewarming by exercise, rubbing, or friction is contraindicated in the
early stage. The patient must be kept at bed rest with the affected
parts elevated and uncovered at room temperature. Casts,
occlusive dressings, or bandages are not applied. Blisters should be
left intact unless signs of infection supervene.
2. Anti-infective measures and wound care—Frostbite
increases susceptibility to tetanus and infection. Tetanus prophylaxis
must be considered. Infection risk may be reduced by aseptic
wound care and protection of skin blebs from physical contact.
Wounds should be kept open and allowed to dry before applying
dressings. Nonadherent sterile gauze and fluffy dressing should be
loosely applied to wounds and cushions used for all areas of
pressure. Antibiotics should not be administered empirically.
Systemic antibiotics are reserved for deep infections not responding
to local wound care. Whirlpool therapy at 37–40 °C twice daily for
15–20 minutes for a period of 3 or more weeks helps cleanse the
skin and debride superficial sloughing tissue.
B. Medical and Surgical Treatment Options
With the availability of telemedicine, specialists are able to provide
advice on early field treatment of cold-injured patients in remote
areas, thereby improving outcome. Eschar formation without
evidence of infection may be conservatively treated. The underlying
skin may heal spontaneously with the eschar acting as a biologic
dressing. Intra-arterial thrombolytic administration within 24 hours
of exposure has resulted in improved tissue perfusion and has
reduced amputation.
C. Follow-Up Care
Gentle, progressive physical therapy to promote circulation should
be instituted as tolerated. Debridement and amputation should be
considered only after it is established that the tissues are necrotic.
 Prognosis
Recovery from frostbite depends on the extent of initial tissue
damage, the rewarming reperfusion injury, the late sequelae, and
underlying comorbidities. There may be increased susceptibility to
discomfort and injury in the involved extremity upon reexposure to
cold. Neuropathic sequelae such as pain, numbness, tingling,
hyperhidrosis, and cold sensitivity of the extremities, and nerve
conduction abnormalities may persist for many years after the cold
injury.
Imray C et al. Cold damage to the extremities: frostbite and non-
freezing cold injuries. Postgrad Med J. 2009 Sep;85(1007): 481–
8. [PMID: 19734516]
 
Laniewicz M et al. Rapid endovascular warming for profound
hypothermia. Ann Emerg Med. 2008 Feb;51(2):160–3. [PMID:
17681640]
 
Mohr WJ et al. Cold injury. Hand Clin. 2009 Nov;25(4):481–96.
[PMID: 19801122]
 
Prakash S et al. Idiopathic chilblains. Am J Med. 2009
Dec;122(12): 1152–5. [PMID: 19958897]
 
DISORDERS DUE TO HEAT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 There is a spectrum of heat-related illnesses: heat cramps, heat
exhaustion, heat syncope, and heat stroke.
 Salt tablets are not recommended for use without medical
supervision.
 Whole-body cooling methods should be instituted early for rapid
cooling.
 Avoid shivering during cooling.
 The best choice of cooling method depends on which can be
instituted the fastest with the least compromise to the overall care
of the patient.
 
 General Considerations
Hyperthermia results from the body's inability to maintain normal
internal temperature through heat loss. The body's heat source is a
result of internal metabolic function and environmental conditions.
Heat loss occurs through sweating and peripheral vasodilation. The
common comorbidities and risk factors leading to heat-related
conditions are listed in the chapter's introduction. Additional risk
factors include skin disorders or other medical conditions that inhibit
sweat production or evaporation, obesity, dehydration, prolonged
seizures, hypotension, reduced cutaneous blood flow, reduced
cardiac output, the use of drugs that increase metabolism or muscle
activity or impair sweating, and withdrawal syndromes. The risk of
heat disorder increases with age, impaired cognition, concurrent
illness, larger body mass index, reduced physical fitness, duration of
exertion, hot environment, and insufficient acclimatization.
Nonexertional heat-related illness can also occur in a hot relaxing
environment (ie, hot bath, steam room, or sauna).
 Prevention
Public education is necessary to improve prevention and early
recognition of heat-related disorders. Individuals should take steps
to reduce personal risk factors (ie, physical inactivity; obesity;
tobacco, alcohol, and drug use) and to acclimatize to the hot
environment. Acclimatization is achieved by scheduled regulated
exposure to hot environments and by gradually increasing the
duration of exposure and the workload until the body adjusts.
Proper acclimatization must be achieved before heavy physical
exertion is performed in hot environments. Heat-related illnesses are
the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in high school sports in
the United States. All children's athletic programs must set
heatacclimatization guidelines. Parents, coaches, athletic trainers and
athletes must be educated about heat-related illness, specifically
about prevention, risks, signs and symptoms, and treatment.
Medical evaluation and monitoring should be used to identify the
individuals and the weather conditions that increase risk of heat-
related disorders. Athletic events should be organized with attention
to thermoregulation. Guidance regarding heat hazard is found in the
National Weather Service's Heat Index, which rates weather
conditions based on humidity and temperature measurements
(www.weather.gov/os/heat/index.shtml).
Those who are physically active in a hot environment should
increase fluid consumption before, during, and after physical
activities. Fluid consumption should include balanced electrolyte
fluids and water. Water consumption alone may lead to electrolyte
imbalance, particularly hyponatremia. It is not recommended to
have salt tablets available for use without medical supervision. Close
monitoring of fluid and electrolyte intake and early intervention are
recommended in situations necessitating exertion or activity in hot
environments. Exertional heat-related disorders are common in
unconditioned participants in strenuous activities in hot humid
conditions.
SPECIFIC SYNDROMES DUE TO HEAT EXPOSURE
1. Heat Syncope or Collapse
Sudden collapse or unconsciousness may result from volume
depletion and cutaneous vasodilation with consequent systemic and
cerebral hypotension. Exerciseassociated postural hypotension is
usually the cause of this: it may occur during or immediately
following exercise. There is usually a history of prolonged vigorous
physical activity. Typically, the skin is cool and moist, the pulse is
weak, and the systolic blood pressure is low.
Treatment consists of rest and recumbency in a cool place and
fluid and electrolyte rehydration by mouth (or intravenously if
necessary).
2. Heat Cramps
Fluid and electrolyte depletion may result in slow, painful skeletal
muscle contractions (“cramps”) and severe muscle spasms lasting
1–3 minutes, usually of the muscles most heavily used. The skin is
moist and cool. The muscles are tender, hard and lumpy, and
muscle twitching may be present. The patient is alert, with stable
vital signs, and may be agitated and complaining of pain. The body
temperature may be normal or slightly increased. There is almost
always a history of vigorous activity just preceding the onset of
symptoms. Laboratory evaluation may show low serum sodium,
hemoconcentration, and elevated urea and creatinine.
The patient should be moved to a cool environment and given
oral saline solution (4 tsp of salt per gallon of water) to replace both
salt and water. Oral salt tablets are not recommended. The
patient may have to rest for 1–3 days with continued dietary salt
supplementation before returning to work or resuming strenuous
activity in the heat.
3. Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion results from prolonged strenuous activity with
inadequate water or salt intake in a hot environment. It is
characterized by dehydration, sodium depletion, or isotonic fluid
loss with accompanying cardiovascular changes.
The diagnosis is based on prolonged symptoms and a rectal
temperature over 37.8 °C, increased pulse (> 150% of the patient's
normal) and moist skin. Symptoms are similar to those associated
with heat syncope and heat cramps. Additional symptoms include
nausea, vomiting, malaise, myalgias, hyperventilation, thirst, and
weakness. Central nervous system symptoms include headache,
dizziness, fatigue, anxiety, paresthesias, impaired judgment, hysteria,
and occasionally psychosis. Hyperventilation secondary to heat
exhaustion can cause respiratory alkalosis; lactic acidosis may also
occur due to poor tissue perfusion. Heat exhaustion may progress
to heat stroke if sweating ceases and mental status declines.
Treatment consists of moving patient to a shaded, cool
environment, providing adequate hydration (1–2 L over 2–4 hours),
oral salt replenishment, and active cooling (ie, fans, cool packs) if
necessary. Physiologic saline or isotonic glucose solution should be
administered intravenously when oral administration is not
appropriate. At least 24 hours of rest and rehydration are
recommended.
4. Heat Stroke
Heat stroke is a life-threatening medical emergency. The hallmarks
of heat stroke are cerebral dysfunction with core temperature
over 40°C and absence of sweating. It presents in one of two
forms: classic and exertional. Classic heat stroke occurs in
patients with impaired thermoregulatory mechanisms; exertional
heat stroke occurs in healthy persons undergoing strenuous
exertion in a hot or humid environment. Persons at greatest risk are
the very young, the elderly, the chronically debilitated, and those
taking medications that interfere with heatdissipating mechanisms
(ie, anticholinergics, antihistamines, phenothiazines).
Heat stroke is associated with high morbidity and mortality from
cerebral, cardiovascular, liver, or kidney damage. Increased
mortality rates are associated with a high Simplified Acute
Physiology Score II, high body temperature, prolonged
prothrombin time, use of vasoactive drugs within the first day in the
intensive care unit (ICU), and an ICU without air conditioning.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Heat stroke may present with dizziness, weakness, emotional
lability, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, confusion, delirium, blurred
vision, convulsions, collapse, and unconsciousness. The skin is hot,
initially covered with perspiration; later it dries. The pulse is strong
initially. Widened pulse pressure is present. Blood pressure may be
slightly elevated at first, but hypotension develops later. Tachycardia
and hyperventilation occur. The core temperature is usually over 40
°C. Exertional heat stroke may present with sudden collapse and
loss of consciousness followed by irrational behavior. Sweating may
not be present. Multiorgan dysfunction or failure is a common and
serious complication.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory evaluation may reveal dehydration; leukocytosis;
elevated 
blood 
urea 
nitrogen 
(BUN); 
hyperuricemia;
hemoconcentration; acid-base abnormalities (lactic acidosis,
respiratory alkalosis); decreased serum potassium, sodium, calcium,
and phosphorus; thrombocytopenia, fibrinolysis, and coagulopathy;
elevated creatine kinase (CK); elevated aminotransferase levels and
liver dysfunction; and elevated cardiac markers. Urine is
concentrated, with proteinuria, hematuria, tubular casts, and
myoglobinuria. ECG findings may include ST–T changes consistent
with myocardial ischemia. Pco2 may be < 20 mm Hg.
 Treatment
Treatment is aimed at rapidly reducing the core temperature (within
1 hour) while supporting circulatory and organ system function to
prevent irreversible tissue damage and death. Circulatory failure in
heat-related illness is mostly due to shock from relative or absolute
hypovolemia. Intravascular volume status should be assessed and
managed early to reduce the risk of hypovolemic shock.
Hypovolemic and cardiogenic shock must be carefully distinguished
and managed. Central venous or pulmonary artery wedge pressure
should be monitored. Oral or intravenous fluid administration must
be provided to ensure a high urinary output (> 50 mL/h). Fluid
output should be monitored through the use of an indwelling urinary
catheter.
Cooling methods are evaporative and conductivebased. Systemic
review of the research found that there are comparable effects of
these cooling methods whether used singly or in combination.
Choice of cooling method depends on which can be instituted the
fastest with the least compromise to the overall care of the patient.
Evaporative cooling is a noninvasive, effective, quick and easy
way to reduce temperature. This method is done by placing the
undressed patient in lateral recumbent position or supported in a
hands-and-knees position to expose maximum skin surface to the
air. Large fans circulate the room air while the entire body is
sprayed with lukewarm water (20 °C) or cold wet sheets are
applied to the undressed body. Inhalation of cool air or oxygen is
also effective.
Conductive-based cooling involves immersion into ice water or
cool water. Ice bath (1–5 °C) is effective but usually an impractical
method due to its limitations (space, patient access and monitoring).
Cold water immersion includes cool baths, localized ice or ice slush
application (groin, axillas, neck), and cool gastric and bladder
lavage, and infusion of cool intravenous fluids. Intravascular heat
exchange catheter systems as well as hemodialysis using cold
dialysate (30–35 °C) have been successful in reducing core
temperature. Research suggests that brain cooling may lessen
cerebrovascular injury from heat stroke.
Shivering must be avoided because it inhibits the effectiveness of
cooling by increasing internal heat production. Medications that can
be used to suppress shivering include magnesium, quick-acting
opioid analgesics, benzodiazepines, and quick-acting anesthetic
agents. Skin massage is recommended to prevent cutaneous
vasoconstriction. Antipyretics (aspirin, acetaminophen) have no
effect on environmentally induced hyperthermia and are
contraindicated. Treatment should be continued until the rectal
temperature drops to 39 °C.
 Prognosis
Multiorgan dysfunction is the usual cause of heat stroke–related
death, and it can be predicted by elevated creatine kinase (CK >
1000 units/L or 20 mckat/L), metabolic acidosis, and elevated liver
enzymes. Multiorgan dysfunction and inflammation may continue
after temperature is normalized. Following heat stroke, immediate
reexposure should be avoided. Sensitivity to high environmental
temperature may persist for prolonged periods.
 When to Admit
 
•    All patients with suspected heat stroke must be
admitted to the hospital for close monitoring.
•    Monitoring includes vital signs, temperature, and
cardiac rhythm, and observation for potential complications
of electrolyte abnormalities, cardiac arrhythmias, acute
kidney injury due to rhabdomyolysis, coagulopathy, hepatic
failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
hypoglycemia, seizures, and infection.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Heat illness
among high school athletes–United States, 2005–2009. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010 Aug 20;59(32): 1009–13. [PMID:
20724966]
 
Lee CW et al. Multiple organ failure caused by non-exertional heat
stroke after bathing in a hot spring. J Chin Med Assoc. 2010
Apr;73(4):212–5. [PMID: 20457444]
 
McDermott BP et al. Acute whole-body cooling for
exerciseinduced hyperthermia: a systematic review. J Athl Train.
2009 Jan–Feb;44(1):84–93. [PMID: 19180223]
 
Noakes TD. A modern classification of the exercise-related heat
illnesses. J Sci Med Sport. 2008 Feb;11(1):33–9. [PMID:
17524793]
 
BURNS
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The first 48 hours of burn care offers the greatest impact on
morbidity and mortality of a burn victim.
 Estimates of the burn location, size and depth greatly determine
treatment plan.
 
Epidemiologic data on burn injury show that the incidence and
severity have been declining over recent years Scald, direct thermal,
and flame burns account for the majority of such injuries. Over
three-fourths of burns involve < 10% of total body surface area.
Related injuries include smoke inhalation, fractures, and blast
injuries. Subsequent problems include bacterial superinfection,
sepsis, respiratory damage, and multiorgan failure.
Telemedicine evaluation of acute burns offers accurate, cost-
effective access to a burn specialist during the crucial 48 hours after
the burn injury. The first 48 hours after the burn injury offer the
greatest opportunity to impact the survival of the patient. Early
surgical intervention, wound care, enteral feeding, glucose control
and metabolic management, infection control, and prevention of
hypothermia and compartment syndrome have contributed to
significantly lower mortality rates and shorter hospitalizations.
 General Considerations
A. Classification
Burns are classified by extent, depth, patient age, and associated
illness or injury. Accurate estimation of burn size and depth is
important since this figure will quantify the parameters of
resuscitation.
1. Extent—The “rule of nines” (Figure 37–2) is useful for rapidly
assessing the extent of a burn. After the soot has been cleaned off, it
is important to view the entire patient to make an accurate
assessment of skin findings on initially and on subsequent
examinations. One rule of thumb is that the palm of an open hand
constitutes 1% total body surface area in adults. Only secondand
third-degree burns are included in calculating the total burn surface
area, since first-degree burns usually do not represent significant
injury in terms of prognosis or fluid and electrolyte management.
However, first- or second-degree burns may convert to deeper
burns, especially if treatment is delayed or bacterial colonization or
superinfection occurs.
2. Depth—Judgment of depth of injury is difficult. The first-
degree burn may be red or gray but will demonstrate excellent
capillary refill. First-degree burns are not blistered initially. If the
wound is blistered, this represents a partial-thickness injury to the
dermis, which is referred to as a second-degree burn. As the
degree of burn is progressively deeper, there is a progressive loss of
adnexal structures, referred to as a third-degree burn. Hairs can
be easily extracted or are absent, sweat glands become less visible,
and the skin appears smoother.
 
Figure 37–2. Estimation of body surface area in burns.
 
Deep second- and third-degree burns are treated in a similar
fashion, since neither will heal appropriately without early
debridement and grafting; the resultant skin is thin and scarred.
B. Survival after Burn Injury
The Prognostic Burn Index is the sum of the patient's age and
percentage of full thickness or deep partial thickness burn. An
additional 20% mortality is added if inhalation injury is present. The
Prognostic Burn Index is most useful at the extremes of age.
Transfer to a burn unit is indicated for large burn size,
circumferential burn, or burn involving a joint or high-risk body part,
and patients with comorbidities. Mortality rates have been
significantly reduced due to treatment advances including
improvements in wound care, treatment of infection, early burn
excision, skin substitute usage, and early nutritional support through
parenteral or enteral feeding. Telemedicine consultation with a burn
center is an alternative, cost-effective way to access burn specialists
when there are barriers that prevent transfer (distance, bed
unavailability, travel risks, etc).
C. Associated Injuries or Illnesses
Smoke inhalation, associated trauma, and electrical injuries are
commonly associated with burns. Smoke inhalation injury (see
Chapter 9) must be suspected when a burn victim is found in an
enclosed space, or in close proximity to the fire. Clinical findings
include singed nasal or facial hairs, carbonaceous sputum, or an
elevated carboxyhemoglobin level. Electrical injury (see following
section of this chapter) may cause deep tissue burns without
significant superficial skin findings and may also produce cardiac
arrhythmias that require immediate attention. Severe burns from any
source may cause gastrointestinal complications including
pancreatitis and stress ulcers.
D. Systemic Reactions to Burn Injury
The actual burn injury is only the incipient event leading to cascade
of deleterious local tissue and systemic inflammatory reactions
leading to multiorgan system failure in the severely burned patient.
When burns greater than approximately 20% of total body surface
area are present, systemic metabolic alterations occur and require
intensive support. The inflammatory cascade can result in shock.
 Treatment
A. Initial Resuscitation
1. Airway—The healthcare provider must proceed with a full
trauma assessment, starting with “ABCDE” (airway, breathing,
circulation, 
disability, 
exposure). Airway assessment and
management is the first priority. A patient with an inhalation injury
needs to be intubated early to maintain airway patency even though
he or she may appear to be breathing normally. To assess and
support breathing and circulation, the clinician should administer
supplemental oxygen and start fluid resuscitation using the Parkland
formula (see below) simultaneously with initial resuscitation.
Disability assessment is next followed by complete patient
exposure to assess for other injuries. Serial assessments of airway
and breathing are necessary since endotracheal intubation or
tracheotomy may be needed for major burn victims, particularly
those with possible inhalation injury. Generalized edema develops
during fluid resuscitation, including edema of the soft tissues of the
upper airway and perhaps the lungs as well. Chest radiographs are
typically normal initially but may develop an ARDS picture in 24–48
hours with severe inhalation injury. Inhalation injuries should be
monitored with serial blood gas determination and bronchoscopy.
The use of corticosteroids or routine use of antibiotic therapy is not
indicated.
2. Vascular access—A thorough examination must be performed
to assess the extent of burn and associated injuries. Large bore
peripheral venous catheter access should be established. Subclavian
lines must be avoided in the emergency setting because of the risk
of pneumothorax and noncompressible vessel laceration. Femoral
lines provide good temporary access during resuscitation if central
venous access is needed. Intraosseous access can be obtained if
venous access is unsuccessful or contraindicated. Venous access
catheters placed in the emergency department should be
changed within 24 hours because of the high risk of non-sterile
placement. An arterial line is useful for monitoring mean arterial
pressure and for drawing serial blood gases and other laboratory
tests in critically ill patients.
B. Fluid Resuscitation
1. Crystalloids—Generalized capillary leak results from burn injury
over more than 20% of total body surface area. This often
necessitates replacement of a large volume of fluid.
There are many guidelines for fluid resuscitation. The Parkland
formula relies on the use of lactated Ringer injection. The fluid
requirement in the first 24 hours is estimated as 4 mL/kg body
weight per percent of body surface area burned. Half the calculated
fluid is given in the first 8-hour period. The remaining fluid, divided
into two equal parts, is delivered over the next 16 hours. An
extremely large volume of fluid may be required. For example, an
injury over 40% of the total body surface area in a 70-kg victim
may require 11.2 L in the first 24 hours [4 mL × 40(%) × 70 (kg) =
11,200 mL]. The first 8-hour period is measured from the hour of
injury. These guidelines may be inadequate, since crystalloid
solutions alone may be insufficient to restore cardiac preload during
the period of burn shock.
Deep electrical burns and inhalation injury increase the fluid
requirement. Adequacy of resuscitation is determined by clinical
parameters, including urinary output and specific gravity, blood
pressure, pulse, temperature, and central venous pressure. The
need for fluid replacement of more than 150% of calculated values
indicates possible unrecognized injury, possible comorbidities, and a
worse prognosis.
2. Colloids—Overly aggressive crystalloid administration must be
avoided in patients with pulmonary injury or cardiac dysfunction,
since significant pulmonary edema can develop in patients with
normal pulmonary capillary wedge and central venous pressures.
Colloid administration is not warranted in routine burn resuscitation
in view of its deleterious effect on glomerular filtration and its
association with pulmonary edema.
3. Monitoring fluid resuscitation—A Foley catheter is essential
for monitoring urinary output. Diuretics have no role in this phase of
patient management unless fluid overload has occurred.
C. Surgical Management
1. 
Abdominal 
compartment 
syndrome—Abdominal
compartment syndrome is emerging as a potentially lethal condition
in severely burned patients, even if abdominal decompression is
performed. Markedly increased intraabdominal pressures can cause
pulmonary damage and multisystem organ failure. Only 40% of
patients with this complication survive. Bladder pressures over 30
mm Hg establish the diagnosis in at-risk patients. Surgical
abdominal decompression may be indicated to improve ventilation
and oxygen delivery, but even after this surgery, survival remains
low.
2. Escharotomy—As edema fluid accumulates, ischemia may
develop under any constricting eschar of an extremity, neck, chest,
or trunk if the full-thickness burn is circumferential. Escharotomy
incisions through the anesthetic eschar can save life and limb and
can be performed in the emergency department or operating room.
3. Fasciotomy in electrical burns—Electrical burn injury remains
the most underrecognized and devastating burn injury, causing
amputations 
(often 
because 
of 
unrecognized compartment
syndromes) and acute kidney injury, resulting in part from
rhabdomyolysis.
When high-voltage electrical injury occurs, extensive deep tissue
necrosis should be suspected. Deep tissue necrosis leads to
profound tissue swelling and high risk of compartment syndrome.
Superficial skin may appear deceivingly benign, leading to a delayed
or completely overlooked diagnosis of deep tissue injury. Surgical
fasciotomy is indicated to prevent further soft tissue, vascular, and
nerve damage in the deep tissue compartments in the arms and legs
since these compartments are divided by unyielding fascia.
4. Debridement, dressings and topical and systemic antibiotic
therapy—Minor burn wounds should be debrided at the bedside
to determine the depth of the burn and then thoroughly cleansed.
Thereafter, the wound should be debrided daily and dressed with a
topical antibiotic and a wound dressing. Acute chemical burns are
managed differently than thermal and electrical burns. Chemical
burns are treated by immediate removal and copious rinsing off of
the offending chemical. Specific wound treatment is based on the
chemical involved. Consultation with a Poison Control Center
specialist can be helpful. Patient compliance and adequate pain
treatment is essential for successful outpatient treatment. The wound
should be reevaluated by the treating health care provider within
24–72 hours to evaluate for signs of infection.
The goal of burn wound management is to protect the wound
from desiccation and avoid further injury or infection. Regular and
thorough cleansing of burned areas is a critically important
intervention in burn units. Minor burn wounds (first- and superficial
second-degree types, partial thickness) will spontaneously
reepithelialize in 7–10 days. Topical wound agents should be
applied. Topical antibiotic wound agents are painless, easy to apply,
and effective against most skin pathogens. Research has shown
benefits from framycetin, aloe vera cream, and moist exposed burn
ointment (MEBO) as more cost-effective topical alternatives to
silver sulfadiazine. Framycetin is also painless and has similar wound
results as silver sulfadiazine and it does not discolor the wound.
Aloe vera has shown greater efficacy than silver sulfadiazine on
second-degree burns.
For severely burned patients, early excision and grafting of
burned areas may be performed as soon as 24 hours after burn
injury or when the patient can hemodynamically tolerate the excision
and grafting procedure. Meticulous prevention of infections,
seromas, hypergranulation tissue formation, and malnutrition all
decrease the time to complete wound healing in skin-grafted
patients. Skin autograft is the most definitive treatment. Prevention
of autograft infection is paramount since autograft loss is most
commonly due to autograft infection. Studies have shown that
perioperative antibiotics reduce this risk but may increase the
patient's risks of other antibiotic-associated complications
(colonization and multidrug resistance).
Systemic infection remains a leading cause of morbidity among
patients with major burn injuries, with nearly all severely burned
patients having one or more septicemic episodes during the hospital
course. Antibiotic usage should be targeted to specific organisms
obtained by culture. Healthcare-associated infections are
increasingly common. Staphylococcus ( coagulase-negative, and
methicillin-resistant and methicillin-sensitive S aureus), vancomycin-
resistant Enterococcus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are also
commonly cultured from burn wounds. P aeruginosa bacterial
infections and fungal infection (cutaneous zygomycosis) have
particularly high morbidity and mortality. Routine use of blood
culture in the severely burned population is indicated to elucidate
systemic blood infections that do not manifest these clinical
predictors of sepsis.
5. Wound closure—The goal of therapy after fluid resuscitation is
rapid and stable closure of the wound. Wounds that will not heal
spontaneously in 7–10 days (ie, deep second-degree or third-
degree burns) are best treated by excision and autograft.
With severe burns, skin substitution with cultured grafts can be
lifesaving. However, although the replaced dermis does have nearly
normal histologic dermal elements, there are no adnexal structures
present and very few, if any, elastic fibers. Wound infection is the
top cause of skin graft rejection and failure.
D. Patient Support
Burn patients require extensive supportive care, both physiologically
and psychologically. It is important to maintain normal core body
temperature and avoid hypothermia (by maintaining environmental
temperature at or above 30 °C) in patients with burns over more
than 20% of total body surface area. Respiratory injury, sepsis, and
multiorgan failure are common. Burn patients require careful
assessment and provision of optimal nutritional needs since their
metabolism is higher and they require more energy, nutrients, and
antioxidants for wound healing. Enteral feedings may be started
once the ileus of the resuscitation period has resolved, usually the
day after the injury. There is often a markedly increased metabolic
rate after burn injury, due in large part to whole body synthesis and
increased fatty acid substrate cycles. If the patient does not tolerate
low-residue tube feedings, total parenteral nutrition should be
started without delay through a central venous catheter. Early
aggressive nutrition (by parenteral or enteral routes) reduces
infections, recovery time, noninfectious complications, length of
hospital stay, long-term sequelae, and mortality.
Careful control of the postinjury blood glucose has been
associated with improved hepatic function and better survival after
severe burns. Occasionally, ARDS or respiratory failure
unresponsive to maximal ventilatory support may develop in burn
patients. In addition, the incidence of venous thromboembolism is
high among burn patients. Duplex ultrasonography is the best
method for identifying proximal venous thromboembolism.
Prevention of long-term scars remains a formidable problem in
seriously burned patients. Long-term sequelae can be reduced by
burn specialist consultation either directly or via telemedicine,
prevention of infection, early nutrition, early aggressive
rehabilitation, compressive garments, and early and continual
psychological support.
Ahuja RB et al. A prospective double-blinded comparative
analysis of framycetin and silver sulphadiazine as topical agents for
burns: a pilot study. Burns. 2009 Aug;35(5):672–6. [PMID:
19443125]
 
Avni T et al. Prophylactic antibiotics for burns patients: systematic
review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2010 Feb 15;340:c241. [PMID:
20156911]
 
Blakeney PE et al. Psychosocial care of persons with severe
burns. Burns. 2008 Jun;34(4):433–40. [PMID: 18207643]
 
Chan MM et al. Nutritional therapy for burns in children and
adults. Nutrition. 2009 Mar;25(3):261–9. [PMID: 19097858]
 
Grunwald TB et al. Acute burns. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008
May;121(5):311e–319e. [PMID: 18453944]
 
Khorasani G et al. Aloe versus silver sulfadiazine creams for
second-degree burns: a randomized controlled study. Surg Today.
2009;39(7):587–91. [PMID: 19562446]
 
Latenser BA. Critical care of the burn patient: the first 48 hours.
Crit Care Med. 2009 Oct;37(10):2819–26. [PMID: 19707133]
 
Saffle JR et al. Telemedicine evaluation of acute burns is accurate
and cost-effective. J Trauma. 2009 Aug;67(2):358–65. [PMID:
19667890]
 
ELECTRICAL INJURY
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Extent of injury is determined by the type, amount, duration, and
pathway of electrical current.
 Resuscitation must be attempted before assuming the electrical
injury victim is dead; clinical findings are unreliable.
 Skin findings may be misleading and are not indicative of the
degree of deeper tissue injury.
 
 General Considerations
Electricity-induced injury occurs by exposure to electrical current of
low voltage, high voltage, or lightning. The extent of damage
depends on the following factors: voltage (high or low, whether
greater or lesser than 1000 volts), current type, tissue resistance,
moisture, pathway; duration of exposure; associated trauma and
comorbidities. Current is the most important determinant of tissue
damage. Current passes through the tissues of least resistance, and
this energy produces heat causing direct thermal injury. The most
susceptible tissues are those with least resistance (nerves). The
entrance and exit points are the most damaged. Direct current
(DC) is unidirectional electrical flow. It is more likely to cause a
single intense muscle contraction and asystole. Alternating current
(AC) is bidirectional electrical flow that reverses direction in a sine
wave pattern. This may cause muscle tetany, which prolongs the
duration and amount of current exposure. If AC current passes
through the thoracic area, it may lead to respiratory arrest or
ventricular fibrillation. High voltage is most often related to
occupational exposure and associated with deep tissue damage and
higher morbidity and mortality. Low voltage household AC current
also causes fatal injury and significant damage. Lightning differs from
high-voltage electrical shock in that lightning is massive high voltage
(millions of volts) lasting a very brief duration (a small fraction of a
second).
 Clinical Findings
Electrical burns are of three distinct types: flash (arcing) burns, flame
(clothing) burns, and the direct heating effect of tissues by the
electrical current. The latter lesions are usually sharply demarcated,
round or oval, painless yellowbrown areas (Joule burn) with
inflammatory reaction.
Skin damage does not correlate with the degree of injury.
Significant subcutaneous damage can be accompanied by little skin
injury, particularly with larger skin surface area electrical contact.
Symptoms and signs may range from tingling, superficial skin burns,
and myalgias to coma, paralysis, massive tissue damage, or death.
Not all electrical injuries cause skin damage; only very minor skin
damage may be present with massive internal injuries. The presence
of entrance and exit burns signifies an increased risk of deep tissue
damage.
Resuscitation must be initiated on all victims of electrical injury
since clinical findings are deceptive and unreliable. A victim of
electrical current injury may appear dead due to dysrhythmia,
respiratory arrest, or autonomic dysfunction resulting in pupils that
are fixed, dilated, or asymmetric.
 Complications
Complications include dysrhythmias, altered mental status, seizures,
paralysis, headache, pneumothorax, vascular injury, tissue edema
and necrosis, compartment syndrome, associated traumatic injuries,
rhabdomyolysis, acute kidney injury, hypovolemia from third
spacing, infections (with special risk of clostridial infections causing
gas gangrene and tetanus), and acute or delayed cataract formation.
 Treatment
A. Emergency Measures
The patient must be assessed and treated as a trauma victim since
associated traumatic injuries are common. The victim must be safely
separated from the electrical current prior to initiation of CPR or
other treatment. The rescuer must be protected. Turn off the power,
sever the wire with a dry wooden-handled ax, and make a proper
ground to divert the current. Separate the victim using
nonconductive implements, such as dry clothing. Resuscitation must
then be initiated since clinical findings of death are unreliable.
B. Hospital Measures
The initial assessment involves airway, breathing, and circulation
followed by a full trauma protocol. Fluid resuscitation is important.
Initial evaluation includes cardiac monitoring and ECG, complete
blood count, electrolytes, renal function tests, liver biochemical
tests, urinalysis, urine myoglobin, serum creatine kinase, and cardiac
enzymes. ECG does not show typical patterns of ischemia since the
electrical damage is epicardial. Early debridement of devitalized
tissues and tetanus prophylaxis may reduce the risks of infection. In
pregnant patients exposed to high voltage injury, the fetus may
sustain intrauterine growth retardation, fetal distress, and fetal
demise. Fetal monitoring is recommended.
Pain management is important before, during, and after initial
treatment and rehabilitation. Multimodal approach to pain is the
most effective. Interventions include medications (opioids,
acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), heat therapy,
massage, and cognitive-behavioral therapy.
 Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the degree and location of electrical injury,
initial tissue damage, associated injuries, comorbidities, and
complications. Psychiatric support may be necessary following
lightning or severe electroshock exposures.
 When to Refer
Surgical specialists may be needed to perform fasciotomy for
compartment syndrome or devitalized tissue debridement or
microvascular reconstruction.
 When to Admit
Indications for hospitalization include dysrhythmia or ECG changes;
high voltage exposure; large burn; neurologic, pulmonary, or cardiac
symptoms; suspicion of significant deep tissue or organ damage;
transthoracic current pathway; history of cardiac disease or other
significant comorbidities; and need for surgery.
Li AL et al. Effectiveness of pain management following electrical
injury. J Burn Care Res. 2010 Jan–Feb;31(1):73–82. [PMID:
20061840]
 
Primavesi R. A shocking episode: care of electrical injuries. Can
Fam Physician. 2009 Jul;55(7):707–9. [PMID: 19602655]
 
RADIATION EXPOSURE
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Damage from radiation is determined by the source, type,
quantity, duration, bodily location, and accumulation of exposure
and the susceptibility of the person.
 Because radiation exposure from medical diagnostic imaging has
dramatically risen over the past few decades, radiation dosing
needs to be standardized and regulated.
 Healthcare providers and patients should be educated regarding
the risks of medical diagnostic radiation. These radiation risks
must be weighed against the benefits of the medical imaging
needed.
 All patients should keep records of their medical imaging
radiation exposures, and copies of the medical images and
interpretations.
 
Radiation exposure occurs from both nonionizing and ionizing
radiation sources. Nonionizing radiation is low energy, resulting in
injuries related to local thermal damage (ie, microwave and
radiowave). Ionizing radiation is high energy, causing cellular
disruption, DNA damage, and mutations. Ionizing radiation is either
electromagnetic (ie, x-rays and gamma rays) or particulate, (ie,
alpha or beta particles, neutrons, and protons). The radiation
exposure may be external, internal, or both.
Exposure to radiation may occur from environmental,
occupational, medical care, accidental, or intentional (ie, terrorism)
exposure. With advancements in nuclear technology in the fields of
medicine, energy, and industry, there is a growing risk of radiation
exposure to patients, occupational workers, and the public. The
extent of damage due to radiation exposure depends on the type,
quantity, and duration of radiation exposure, the organs exposed,
the degree of disruption to DNA, metabolic and cellular function,
and the age and underlying condition of the victim.
I n acute radiation exposure, medical care includes close
monitoring of the gastrointestinal, cutaneous, hematologic, and
cerebrovascular symptoms and signs from initial exposure and over
time.
Radiation exposure results in early and delayed effects. Early
effects involve damage of the rapidly dividing cells (ie, the mucosa,
skin, and bone marrow). This may be manifested as nausea,
vomiting, and decreased lymphocyte count over hours to days after
exposure. Delayed effects include malignancy, reproduction
abnormalities, liver, kidney, and central nervous system and immune
system dysfunction.
ACUTE & DELAYED EFFECTS OF RADIATION
EXPOSURE ON NORMAL TISSUES
 Clinical Findings
A. Injury to Superficial Structures
Acute radiation exposure to the skin and mucous membranes may
cause erythema, epilation, destruction of fingernails, or
epidermolysis, and burns that appear similar to thermal burns usually
have a slower onset and course. Chronic damage includes skin
scarring, atrophy, telangiectasis, and xerostomia. Radiation effects
on the eyes include cataracts, dry eye syndrome, and retinopathy.
B. Injury to Deep Structures
Hematopoietic system radiation exposure causes injury to the
bone marrow that may vary from transient decreases to complete
destruction of blood elements. Lymphocytes are most sensitive,
followed by polymorphonuclear leukocytes; erythrocytes are the
least sensitive. Hematopoietic effects consisting of anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and bone marrow suppression can occur 1–3
weeks after radiation exposures. Bone marrow failure is the main
cause of death within the first few months following exposure.
Nervous system structures are sensitive to radiation. The brain
and spinal cord are much more sensitive than the peripheral nerves
to the acute and delayed effects of radiation.
Cardiovascular system effects of ionizing radiation result in
damage to the heart and coronary arteries. Smaller vessels (the
capillaries and arterioles) are more susceptible to damage than
larger blood vessels. Delayed effects from radiation include
g
y
obliterative endarteritis; coronary artery disease; pericarditis with
effusion; or constrictive pericarditis, which may occur months or
years later. Myocarditis is less common.
Pulmonary system radiation with high or repeated moderate
doses of radiation may cause pneumonitis or pulmonary fibrosis,
which is often delayed for weeks or months.
Gastrointestinal system radiation results in mucositis and
mucosal edema within hours or days after exposure. Symptoms
include odynophagia, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, dehydration, and
weakness. High doses of radiation inhibit gastric secretion and
cause inflammation and ulceration of the bowels. Delayed effects
include hepatitis, liver dysfunction, and intestinal stenosis. The
stomach and colon are the gastrointestinal organs most at risk for
cancer induction due to internal radiation.
Urogenital system radiation effects are dose-dependent,
varying from transient decrease in fertility to permanent sterility,
chromosomal aberrations, fetal damage, or demise. Moderate to
heavy irradiation of the embryo results in injury to the fetus or in
embryonic death and spontaneous abortion. Microcephaly and
other congenital abnormalities may occur in children exposed in
utero, especially if the fetus was exposed during early pregnancy.
Nephritis and kidney dysfunction may occur as immediate or
delayed effects.
Endocrine system organs are relatively resistant to low or
moderate doses of radiation. The thyroid gland is the endocrine
gland at highest risk for cancer induction from internal radiation
exposure. Delayed effects of radiation include thyroid dysfunction
(hypothyroidism).
C. Systemic Reaction (Acute Radiation Syndrome)
Healthcare providers must be educated to recognize and treat acute
radiation sickness also referred to as acute radiation syndrome
(ARS). The symptom onset is within hours to days following an
exposure to high doses of ionizing radiation over a brief time course.
Symptoms include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, weakness,
exhaustion, lassitude and, in some cases, prostration; these
symptoms may occur singly or in combination. Dehydration,
anemia, and infection may follow. The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention offers web-based information for clinicians
regarding 
ARS
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/arsphysicianfactsheet.asp.
 Medical Imaging Radiation Exposure
Medical imaging with ionizing radiation exposure (eg, computed
tomography [CT] and nuclear medicine studies) has dramatically
increased over the past two decades. In addition, researchers have
found that the radiation dose for the same study varies significantly
among different machines and different providers, within and across
institutions, with radiation doses varying by as much as a factor of
10. This finding highlights the urgent safety need for standardization
and regulation of radiation dosing for medical diagnostics.
Healthcare providers and patients must be aware of the dangers
of radiation when deciding on an imaging test. The risks and benefits
must be carefully weighed. All patients should keep records of their
cumulative medical imaging radiation exposures, as well as copies of
the medical images and their interpretations. The American College
of Radiology website offers additional safety information,
http://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/safety/.
 Occupational and Environmental
Radiation Exposure
Prevention of occupational radiation exposure involves adequate
training of all persons handling radiation as well as creating safety
policies and procedures. This will reduce occupational risk of
radiation exposure and improve the emergency response to
accidental exposure. Prehospital and hospital disaster plans are
required for optimal management of radiation exposure. The
Radiation Assistance Center (1-865-576-1005) provides 24-hour
access to expert information. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 
“Radiation 
Emergency” 
website
(www.bt.cdc.gov/radiation/index.asp) is a useful resource for
professionals.
 Treatment
Treatment is focused on decontamination, symptomatic relief,
supportive care, and psychosocial support. Specific treatments
focus on the dose, route, and effects of exposure.
 Prognosis
Prognosis is determined by the radiation dose, duration, and
frequency as well as by the underlying condition of the victim.
Approximate dose of exposure correlates with the early onset and
severity of symptoms (ie, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, abdominal
pain, bloody diarrhea, weight loss) and laboratory findings,
particularly the decline in lymphocyte count on the complete blood
count. Death is usually due to hematopoietic failure (ie, hemorrhage,
anemia, and immunosuppression), gastrointestinal mucosal damage,
central nervous system damage, widespread vascular injury, or
secondary infection.
Carcinogenesis is related to the total dose, duration,
accumulation of exposure, and to the susceptibility of the victim.
The younger the victim's age at the time of exposure, the greater the
risk of acute and long-term damage from radiation. Radiation-
related cancer risks persist throughout the exposed person's
lifespan. Cancer risk is particularly increased for persons exposed
to nuclear radiation (eg, those exposed at Chernobyl, Hiroshima,
Nagasaki, and Marshall Island nuclear test detonations). X-rays are
classified as carcinogens since exposure causes leukemia and
cancers of the thyroid, breast and lung.
With the increased use of ionizing radiation for medical
diagnostics and treatments, there is a growing concern for the
iatrogenic increase in radiation-induced cancer risks, especially in
children. There are age-related sensitivities to radiation; prenatal
and younger age victims are more susceptible to carcinogenesis.
 When to Admit
Most patients with significant ionizing radiation exposure require
admission for close monitoring and supportive treatment.
Donnelly EH et al. Acute radiation syndrome: assessment and
management. South Med J. 2010 Jun;103(6):541–6. [PMID:
20710137]
 
Gilbert ES. Ionising radiation and cancer risks: what have we
learned from epidemiology? Int J Radiat Biol. 2009
Jun;85(6):467–82. [PMID: 19401906]
 
Little MP. Cancer and non-cancer effects in Japanese atomic
bomb survivors. J Radiol Prot. 2009 Jun;29(2A):A43–59. [PMID:
19454804]
 
Smith-Bindman R et al. Radiation dose associated with common
computed tomography examinations and the associated lifetime
attributable risk of cancer. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Dec
14;169(22):2078–86. [PMID: 20008690]
 
Wrixon AD. New recommendations from the International
Commission on Radiological Protection—a review. Phys Med
Biol. 2008 Apr 21;53(8):R41–60. [PMID: 18364557]
 
NEAR DROWNING
 
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The first requirement of rescue is immediate CPR.
 Clinical manifestations are hypoxemia, pulmonary edema, and
hypoventilation.
 
 General Considerations
Near drowning describes a submersion event leading to injury.
Submersion injury may result in aspiration, laryngospasm,
hypoxemia, and acidemia. Drowning describes submersion resulting
in death. “Wet” drowning is due to aspiration of fluid or foreign
material. “Dry” drowning is due to laryngospasm or airway
obstruction. The primary effect is hypoxemia due to perfusion of
poorly ventilated alveoli, intrapulmonary shunting, and decreased
compliance.
Conditions that increase risk of submersion injury include the
following: (1) use of alcohol or other drugs, (2) extreme fatigue, (3)
poor physical health, (4) hyperventilation, (5) sudden acute illness
(eg, hypoglycemia, seizure, dysrhythmia, myocardial infarction,
asthma flare), (6) acute trauma (particularly brain or spinal cord
injury, or both), (7) venomous stings or bites, (8) decompression
sickness, (9) dangerous water conditions (temperature and
turbulence), and (10) carbon monoxide exposure from boat motors.
A patient may be deceptively asymptomatic during the initial
recovery period only to deteriorate or die as a result of acute
respiratory failure within the following 12–24 hours.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The patient's appearance may vary from asymptomatic, to abnormal
vital signs, anxiety, dyspnea, cough, wheezing, trismus, cyanosis,
chest pain, dysrhythmia, hypotension, vomiting, diarrhea, headache,
altered level of consciousness, neurologic deficit, and apnea. A pink
froth from the mouth and nose indicates pulmonary edema. With
cold water or prolonged submersion, hypothermia is likely.
B. Laboratory Findings
Arterial blood gas results are helpful in determining the degree of
injury since initial clinical findings may appear benign. Pao2 is usually
decreased; Paco2 may be increased or decreased; pH is
decreased. Bedside blood sugar must be checked rapidly. Other
testing is based on clinical scenario and may include kidney function,
electrolytes, urinalysis, blood count, lactate, cardiac markers,
coagulation studies, and alcohol and toxicology levels. Metabolic
acidosis is common.
 Prevention
Prevention is multi-faceted. Physical barriers (ie, fences) should be
placed around pools and other accessible bodies of water. Safety
flotation devices and rescue supplies must be immediately available.
Use of alcohol or sedative drugs must be avoided during swimming,
boating, or other waterbased activities. There must be close
supervision of those who cannot swim, and personal flotation
devices must be worn when boating or water skiing. Swimming
lessons, water and boat safety, and basic life support education is
necessary for anyone involved in water-based activities.
 Treatment
A. First Aid
The first requirement of rescue is immediate basic life support
(BLS) treatment and CPR. At the scene, immediate measures to
combat hypoxemia are critical to improve outcome. BLS care
includes sustained ventilation, oxygenation, and circulatory support.
Hypothermia and associated trauma, especially brain and cervical
spine injury, should always be suspected.
 
1. Standard BLS is initiated. CPR is provided if pulse and
respirations are absent.
2. Rescuer should not attempt to drain water from the
victim's lungs. The Heimlich maneuver (subdiaphragmatic
pressure) should be used only if foreign material airway
obstruction is suspected. The cervical spine must be
immobilized if neck injury is possible.
3. Resuscitation and BLS efforts must be continued until
core temperature reaches 32°C even for seemingly
“hopeless” patients. Complete recovery has been reported
after prolonged resuscitation of hypothermic patients.
B. Subsequent Management
Full trauma assessment should be performed for associated injuries.
Inpatient monitoring must occur for 24 hours following near
drowning. This includes continuous monitoring of cardiorespiratory,
neurologic, renal and metabolic function. Pulmonary edema may not
appear for 24 hours.
1. Ensure optimal ventilation and oxygenation—The onset of
hypoxemia exists even in the alert, conscious patient who appears
to be breathing normally. Oxygen should be administered
immediately at the highest available concentration. Oxygen
saturation should be maintained at 90% or higher. Endotracheal
intubation and mechanical ventilation are necessary for patients
unable to maintain an open airway, adequate oxygenation, or
ventilation. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is an
effective noninvasive way of reversing hypoxia and hypercarbia in
patients with spontaneous respirations and a patent airway. Positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is also effective for treating
respiratory insufficiency. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation has
been used in acute respiratory distress syndrome following
neardrowning. Serial physical examinations and chest radiographs
should be carried out to detect possible pneumonitis, atelectasis,
and pulmonary edema. Bronchodilators may be used to treat
wheezing and bronchospasms due to aspiration. Nasogastric
suctioning can decompress the stomach, aid in removal of
swallowed water, and reduce the risk of aspiration. Antibiotics are
reserved for clinical evidence of infection and should not be given
prophylactically.
2. Cardiovascular support—Intravascular volume status must be
monitored to determine whether vascular fluid replacement and
vasopressors or diuretics are needed. Standard therapy for
hypotension and pulmonary edema is administered.
3. Correction of blood pH and electrolyte abnormalities
—Metabolic acidosis is present in 70% of near-drowning victims,
but it is usually corrected through adequate ventilation and
oxygenation. Glycemic control improves outcome.
4. Cerebral injury—Central nervous system damage may
progress despite apparently adequate treatment of hypoxia and
shock. Standard treatment for brain and spinal cord injury must be
followed.
5. Hypothermia—Core temperature should be measured and
managed as appropriate (see Systemic Hypothermia, above).
 Course & Prognosis
Respiratory damage is often severe in the minutes to hours following
a near drowning. With respiratory supportive treatment,
improvements typically occur quickly over the first few days
following the near drowning. Long-term complications of near
drowning may include neurologic impairment, seizure disorder, and
pulmonary or cardiac damage. Research suggests that recovery
from near drowning-related out-of-hospital cardiac arrest is
improved when there is witnessed event, short submersion duration,
early prehospital resuscitation, and rapid transport to a medical
facility. There is a direct correlation between prognosis and the
patient's age, submersion time, clinical status at time of arrival to
hospital, Glasgow Coma Scale score, pupillary reactivity, and
overall health assessment (APACHE II score).
Ballesteros MA et al. Prognostic factors and outcome after
drowning in an adult population. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2009
Aug;53(7):935–40. [PMID: 19496759]
 
Gregorakos L et al. Near-drowning: clinical course of lung injury in
adults. Lung. 2009 Mar–Apr;187(2):93–7. [PMID: 19132444]
 
Youn CS et al. Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest due to drowning: an
Utstein Style report of 10 years of experience from St. Mary's
Hospital. Resuscitation. 2009 Jul;80(7):778–83. [PMID:
19443097]
 
OTHER DISORDERS RELATED
TO ENVIRONMENTAL
FACTORS
 
DYSBARISM & DECOMPRESSION SICKNESS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms temporally related to recent diving, altitude or
pressure changes.
 Early recognition and prompt treatment of decompression
sickness are extremely important.
 Consultation with diving medicine or hyperbaric oxygen specialist
is indicated.
 
 General Considerations
Dysbarism and decompression sickness (DCS) are physiologic
problems that result from the environmental pressure effects on
gases in the body during underwater descent and ascent. These are
hazards for fliers and for divers. These may also occur in an air
traveler when the aircraft cabin in not adequately pressurized during
rapid ascent or descent between sea level and high altitudes.
Physics laws describe the mechanisms involved in dysbarism and
DCS. As a diver descends, the gases in the body compress; gases
dissolve in blood and tissues. During the ascent, gases in the body
expand. If the ascent is too rapid, gas bubbles will form and cause
damage depending on their location. DCS symptoms depends on
the size and number and location of gas bubbles released (notably
nitrogen). This may occur if airplane travel is taken too soon after
diving.
Risk of DCS depends on the dive details (depth, duration,
number of dives, and interval surface time between dives, water
conditions) as well as the diver's age, weight, physical condition,
physical exertion, and the rate of ascent. Predisposing factors for
DCS include obesity, injury, hypoxia, lung or cardiac disease, right
to left cardiac shunt, diver's overall health, dehydration, alcohol and
medication effects, and panic attacks. DCS also occurs in those
who take hot showers after cold dives, or take air travel too soon.
 Clinical Findings
The range of clinical manifestations varies depending on the location
of the gas bubble formation or the compressibility of gases in the
body. Symptom onset may be immediate, within minutes or hours
(in the majority), or present up to 36 hours later. DCS symptoms
include pain in the joints (“the bends”); skin pruritus or burning (skin
bends); rashes; spinal cord or cerebral symptoms (“dissociation”
symptoms that do not follow typical distribution patterns);
labyrinthine DCS (“the staggers,” central vertigo); pulmonary DCS
(“the chokes,” inspiratory pain, cough, and respiratory distress);
arterial gas embolism (cerebral, pulmonary); barotrauma of the
lungs, ear and sinus; dysbaric osteonecrosis; and coma. The health
care provider must assess for associated conditions of hypothermia,
near drowning, trauma, or envenomations.
 Treatment
Early recognition and prompt treatment are extremely important.
DCS must be considered if symptoms are temporally related to
recent diving or altitude or pressure changes within the past 48
hours. Immediate consultation with a diving medicine or hyperbaric
oxygen specialist is indicated even if mild symptoms resolved, since
relapses with worse outcomes have occurred. Continuous
administration of 100% oxygen is indicated and beneficial for all
patients. Aspirin may be given for pain. Opioids should be used
very cautiously, since these may obscure the response to
recompression. Rapid transportation to a hyperbaric treatment
facility for recompression is imperative for DCS. If air
transportation is chosen, the aircraft must maintain pressurization
near sea level to avoid worsening DCS. The clinician should be
familiar with the nearest hyperbaric facility. The Divers Alert
Network is an excellent worldwide resource for emergency advice
24 hours daily for the management of diving-related conditions
(www.diversalert-network.org). For diving emergencies, call local
emergency responder first, then the Divers Alert Network.
Levett DZ et al. Bubble trouble: a review of diving physiology and
disease. Postgrad Med J. 2008 Nov;84(997):571–8. [PMID:
19103814]
 
HIGH-ALTITUDE–RELATED ILLNESS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The severity of the high-altitude illness correlates with the rate
and height of ascent, and the individual's susceptibility.
 Prompt recognition and medical attention of early symptoms of
high-altitude illness should prevent progression.
 Immediate descent is the definitive treatment for high-altitude
cerebral edema and high-altitude pulmonary edema.
 
 General Considerations
As altitude increases, there is a decrease in both barometric
pressure and oxygen partial pressure, resulting in hypobaric
hypoxia. High-altitude medical problems are due to hypobaric
hypoxia at high altitudes (usually > 2000 meters or 6560 feet).
Acclimatization refers to the physiologic response to the rise in
altitude and increasing hypobaric hypoxia. Physiologic changes
include increases in alveolar ventilation and oxygen extraction by the
tissues and increased hemoglobin level and oxygen binding.
High altitude illness results when the hypoxic stress is greater than
the individual's ability to acclimatize. Risk factors include increased
physical activity with insufficient acclimatization, inadequate
education and preparation, and individual susceptibility (preexisting
medical conditions and medication use). The key determinants of
highaltitude illness risk and severity include both individual
susceptibility factors and altitudinal factors (rapid rate and height of
ascent and total change in altitude). Presentations may be acute,
subacute, or chronic disturbances that result from hypobaric
hypoxia. Acclimatization to altitudes above 5500 m (18,045 ft) is
incomplete or physiologically impossible, although individual
differences in tolerance to hypoxia exist.
Individual susceptibility factors include underlying conditions such
as cardiac and pulmonary dysfunction, patent foramen ovale, blood
disorders (ie, sickle cell disease), pregnancy, neurologic condition,
recent surgery, and many other chronic medical conditions. Those
with symptomatic cardiac or pulmonary disease should avoid high
altitudes.
High-altitude illness comprises a spectrum of conditions based on
end-organ effects, mostly cerebral and pulmonary. Such illness
results from fluid shifts from intravascular to extravascular spaces,
especially in the brain and lungs. Manifestations of altitude illness
include acute and long-term disorders. Acute high-altitude disorders
are high-altitude neurologic conditions (acute mountain sickness
[AMS] and high-altitude cerebral edema [HACE]) and high-altitude
pulmonary edema (HAPE). Long-term exposure to high altitude
over months or years with inadequate acclimatization can result in
subacute mountain sickness and chronic mountain sickness (Monge
disease). (While subacute mountain sickness and Monge disease
are mentioned briefly below, a more detailed discussion can be
found in the online version of Current Medical Diagnosis &
Treatment.)
1. High-Altitude–Associated Neurologic Conditions (Acute
Mountain Sickness & High-Altitude Cerebral Edema)
AMS includes both neurologic and pulmonary symptoms, such as
headache (most severe and persistent symptom), lassitude,
drowsiness, dizziness, chilliness, nausea and vomiting, facial pallor,
dyspnea, and cyanosis. Later symptoms include facial flushing,
irritability, difficulty concentrating, vertigo, tinnitus, visual and
auditory disturbances, anorexia, insomnia, increased dyspnea and
weakness on exertion, increased headaches (due to cerebral
edema), palpitations, tachycardia, Cheyne-Stokes breathing, and
weight loss. More severe manifestations include cerebral and
pulmonary edema (HACE and HAPE; see below).
HACE appears to be an extension of the central nervous system
symptoms of AMS and results from cerebral vasogenic edema and
cerebral cellular hypoxia. It usually occurs at elevations above 2500
meters (8250 feet) and is more common in unacclimatized
individuals. Hallmarks are altered consciousness and ataxic gait.
Severe headaches, confusion, truncal ataxia, urinary retention or
incontinence, focal deficits, papilledema, nausea, vomiting, and
seizures may also occur. Symptoms may progress to obtundation
and coma.
Initial treatment involves oxygen administration by mask.
Voluntary periodic hyperventilation will often relieve acute
symptoms. Definitive treatment is immediate descent. Descent
should be at least 610 meters (2000 feet) and should continue until
symptoms improve. Descent is essential if the symptoms are
persistent, severe, or worsening or if HAPE or HACE are present.
If immediate descent is not possible, portable hyperbaric chambers
can provide symptomatic relief.
Acetazolamide (250 mg orally every 8–12 hours) remains the
most effective medication for prevention and treatment of AMS and
for more severe forms of altituderelated conditions. Dexamethasone
(8 mg orally initially followed by 4–8 mg every 6 hours) is effective
for treatment of AMS and acute cerebral edema. Both are
recommended therapy for as long as symptoms persist and may be
used together in severe cases. In most individuals, symptoms clear
within 24–48 hours.
2. Acute High-Altitude Pulmonary Edema
HAPE is a serious complication of hypoxia induced pulmonary
hypertension. It is the leading cause of death from high altitude
illness. The hallmark is markedly elevated pulmonary artery
pressure followed by pulmonary edema. It usually occurs at levels
above 3000 meters (9840 feet). High altitude increases pulmonary
arterial pressure and decreases the oxygen uptake and saturation
and alters oxygen kinetics. Early symptoms may appear within 6–36
hours after arrival at a high-altitude area. These include incessant
dry cough, shortness of breath disproportionate to exertion,
headache, decreased exercise performance, fatigue, dyspnea at
rest, and chest tightness. Recognition of the early symptoms may
enable the patient to descend before incapacitating pulmonary
edema develops. Strenuous exertion should be avoided. An early
descent of even 500 or 1000 meters may result in improvement of
symptoms. Later, wheezing, orthopnea, and hemoptysis may occur
as pulmonary edema worsens. Physical findings include tachycardia,
mild fever, tachypnea, cyanosis, prolonged respiration, and rales
and rhonchi. The clinical picture may resemble severe pneumonia.
The patient may become confused or comatose. Diagnosis is usually
clinical; ancillary tests are nonspecific or unavailable on site.
Treatment must often be initiated under field conditions. Prompt
recognition and medical attention of early symptoms prevent
progression. The patient must rest in the semi-Fowler position (head
raised), and 100% oxygen must be administered. Immediate
descent (at least 610 meters [2000 feet]) is essential.
Recompression in a portable hyperbaric bag will temporarily reduce
symptoms if rapid or immediate descent is not possible. To
conserve oxygen, lower flow rates (2–4 L/min) may be used until
the victim recovers or is evacuated to a lower altitude and Sao2 ≥
90%. Treatment for ARDS (see Chapter 9) may be is required for
some patients. Calcium channel blockers and selective
phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors are effective for
symptomatic relief. Nifedipine, 10 mg initially followed by 30 mg
slow-release tablets every 12 hours is recommended.
Dexamethasone, 4 mg every 6 hours, has been recommended if
central nervous system symptoms are present.
3. Subacute Mountain Sickness
This occurs most frequently in unacclimatized individuals and at high
altitudes for a prolonged period of time. The hypobaric hypoxia
results in pulmonary hypertension.
4. Chronic Mountain Sickness (Monge Disease)
This uncommon condition is seen in residents of highaltitude
communities who have lost their acclimatization to such a hypobaric
hypoxic environment. It is difficult to differentiate from chronic
pulmonary disease.
 Prevention of High-Altitude Disorders
Pre-trip preventive measures include participant education, medical
prescreening, pre-trip planning, optimal physical conditioning before
travel, and adequate rest and sleep the day before travel. Preventive
efforts during ascent include reduced food intake; avoidance of
alcohol, tobacco, and unnecessary physical activity during travel;
slow ascent to allow acclimatization (300 meters per day); and a
period of rest and inactivity for 1–2 days after arrival at high
altitudes. Mountaineering parties at altitudes of ≥ 3000 meters or
higher should carry a supply of oxygen and medical equipment
sufficient for several days. Prophylactic medications may be
prescribed if no contraindications exist. Prophylactic low-dose
acetazolamide (eg, 250–500 mg every 12 hours orally or 500 mg
extended-release once to twice daily orally) has been shown to
reduce the incidence and severity of AMS when started 3 days
prior to ascent and continued for 48–72 hours at high altitude.
Dexamethasone, 4 mg every 12 hours orally beginning on the day of
ascent, continuing for 3 days at the higher altitude, and then tapering
over 5 days, is an alternative prophylactic medication.
 When to Admit
 
•    All patients with HAPE or HACE must be hospitalized
for further observation.
•    Hospitalization must also be considered for any patient
who remains symptomatic after treatment and descent.
Pulmonary symptoms and hypoxia may be worsened by
pulmonary embolism, bacterial pneumonia, or bronchitis.
Fischler M et al. Dexamethasone but not tadalafil improves
exercise capacity in adults prone to high-altitude pulmonary
edema. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Aug 15;180(4): 346–
52. [PMID: 19520908]
 
Imray C et al. Acute mountain sickness: pathophysiology,
prevention, and treatment. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010 May–
Jun;52(6):467–84. [PMID: 20417340]
 
Maggiorini M. Prevention and treatment of high-altitude pulmonary
edema. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2010 May–Jun; 52(6):500–6.
[PMID: 20417343]
 
Palmer BF. Physiology and pathophysiology with ascent to
altitude. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Jul;340(1):69–77. [PMID:
20442648]
 
Pasha MA et al. High-altitude disorders: pulmonary hypertension:
pulmonary vascular disease: the global perspective. Chest. 2010
Jun;137(6 Suppl):13S–19S. [PMID: 20522576]
 
Plant T et al. Travelling to new heights: practical high altitude
medicine. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2008 Jun;69(6):348–52.
[PMID: 18646420]
 
Wilson MH. The cerebral effects of ascent to high altitudes. Lancet
Neurol. 2009 Feb;8(2):175–91. [PMID: 19161909]
 
SAFETY OF AIR TRAVEL & SELECTION OF PATIENTS
FOR AIR TRAVEL
The medical safety of air travel depends on the nature and severity
of the traveler's preflight condition and factors such as travel
duration, frequency and use of inflight exercise, cabin pressurization,
availability of medical supplies, and presence of health care
professionals on board. Air travel passengers are susceptible to a
wide range of problems: infectious, pulmonary (eg, hypoxia, gas
expansion), 
vascular 
(venous 
thromboembolism, 
VTE),
cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, ocular, immunologic, syncope,
neuropsychiatric, metabolic, and substance-related. Occupational
and frequent flyers are at risk for these as well as cosmic radiation
exposure, cabin air quality, circadian disturbance, and pressurization
problems.
Hypobaric hypoxia is the underlying etiology of most serious
medical emergencies in flight. Despite commercial aircraft
pressurization requirements, there is significant hypoxemia, dyspnea,
gas expansion, and stress in travelers with underlying serious
cardiopulmonary and other conditions.
Research also demonstrates an association between VTE and air
travel. Air travel has a threefold higher risk of VTE, especially
severe pulmonary embolism. The VTE risk increases proportionally
with the flight duration. The absolute risk of a symptomatic venous
thrombosis within 4 weeks of travel is 1/4600 flights longer than 4
hours. Travelers can take preventive measures by wearing support
hose and engaging in frequent in-flight leg exercises and walking.
Low-molecular-weight heparin may be prescribed in travelers at
high risk for VTE. Higher risk of VTE is seen in travelers with
thrombophilia, those receiving hormonal therapy, and pregnant
travelers. Air travel complications may be reduced by the following
preventive measures: passenger education, passenger prescreening
(especially those who have had recent surgery or an emergency
condition, and those with chronic serious medical conditions).
Travelers with pulmonary disease must have preflight medical
assessment to determine whether supplemental oxygen is required.
Oxygen is required if the arterial oxygen tension is < 70 mm Hg or
pulse oximetry < 92%.
In-flight medical emergencies are increasing because there are an
increasing number of travelers with preexisting medical conditions.
Air travel is not advised for anyone who is incapacitated, or who
has an active pneumothorax, class III and IV pulmonary
hypertension, acute worsening of an underlying lung disease, or any
unstable conditions. The Air Transport Association of America
defines an incapacitated passenger as “one who is suffering from
a physical or mental disability and who, because of such disability or
the effect of the flight on the disability, is incapable of self-care;
would endanger the health or safety of such person or other
passengers or airline employees; or would cause discomfort or
annoyance of other passengers.” Unstable conditions include
poorly controlled hypertension, dysrhythmias, angina, valvular
disease, congestive heart failure, or psychiatric condition; severe
anemia or sickle cell disease; recent myocardial infarction,
cerebrovascular accident, or deep venous thrombosis; postsurgery,
especially heart surgery (unless approved by surgeon); and any
active communicable disease (influenza, tuberculosis, measles,
chickenpox, or other communicable virulent infections). Risk of
transmission increases when there is close contact to infected
passengers.
Pregnancy and Infancy
Pregnancy is a hypercoagulable state with fivefold to tenfold
increase in VTE risk. Air travel increases this risk of VTE. Pregnant
women may be permitted to fly during the first 8 months of
pregnancy unless there is a history of pregnancy complications or
premature birth. Infants younger than 1 week old should not be
flown at high altitudes or for long distances. There is a higher risk of
transmission of infection in-flight for pregnant women and infants
due to their weaker immune response.
Brenner B. Prophylaxis of travel-related thrombosis in women.
Thromb Res. 2009;123(Suppl 3):S26-9. [PMID: 19203643]
 
Chandra D et al. Meta-analysis: travel and risk for venous
thromboembolism. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Aug 4;151(3): 180–90.
[PMID: 19581633]
 
Silverman D et al. Medical issues associated with commercial
flights. Lancet. 2009 Jun 13;373(9680):2067–77. [PMID:
19232708]
 
 
 
Poisoning
Kent R. Olson, MD
INITIAL EVALUATION:
POISONING OR OVERDOSE
 
Patients with drug overdoses or poisoning may initially have no
symptoms or they may have varying degrees of overt intoxication.
The asymptomatic patient may have been exposed to or may have
ingested a lethal dose but not yet exhibit any manifestations of
toxicity. It is important to: (1) quickly assess the potential danger,
(2) consider gut decontamination to prevent absorption, (3) treat
complications if they occur, and (4) observe the asymptomatic
patient for an appropriate interval.
 Assess the Danger
If the drug or poison is known, its danger can be assessed by
consulting a text or computerized information resource or by calling
a regional poison control center. (In the United States, dialing 800-
222-1222 will direct the call to the regional poison control center.)
Assessment will usually take into account the dose ingested; the
time since ingestion; the presence of any symptoms or clinical signs;
preexisting cardiac, respiratory, kidney, or liver disease; and,
occasionally, specific serum drug or toxin levels. Be aware that the
history given by the patient or family may be incomplete or
unreliable.
IMMEDIATE 24-HOUR TOXICOLOGY
CONSULTATION
Call your regional poison control center
U.S. toll-free 1-800-222-1222
 
 Observation of the Patient
Asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients should be observed
for at least 4–6 hours. Longer observation is indicated if the
ingested substance is a sustained-release preparation or is known to
slow gastrointestinal motility or may cause a delayed onset of
symptoms (such as acetaminophen, colchicine, or hepatotoxic
mushrooms). After that time, the patient may be discharged if no
symptoms have developed. Before discharge, psychiatric evaluation
should be performed to assess suicidal risk. Intentional ingestions in
adolescents should raise the possibility of unwanted pregnancy or
sexual abuse.
THE SYMPTOMATIC PATIENT
 
In symptomatic patients, treatment of life-threatening complications
takes precedence over in-depth diagnostic evaluation. Patients with
mild symptoms may deteriorate rapidly, which is why all potentially
significant exposures should be observed in an acute care facility.
The following complications may occur, depending on the type of
poisoning.
COMA
 Assessment & Complications
Coma is commonly associated with ingestion of large doses of
antihistamines (eg, diphenhydramine), benzodiazepines and other
sedative-hypnotic drugs, ethanol, opioids, antipsychotic drugs, or
antidepressants. The most common cause of death in comatose
patients is respiratory failure, which may occur abruptly. Pulmonary
aspiration of gastric contents may also occur, especially in victims
who are deeply obtunded or convulsing. Hypoxia and
hypoventilation may cause or aggravate hypotension, arrhythmias,
and seizures. Thus, protection of the airway and assisted ventilation
are the most important treatment measures for any poisoned patient.
 Treatment
A. Emergency Management
The initial emergency management of coma can be remembered by
the mnemonic ABCD, for Airway, Breathing, Circulation, and Drugs
(dextrose, thiamine, and naloxone or flumazenil), respectively.
1. Airway—Establish a patent airway by positioning, suction, or
insertion of an artificial nasal or oropharyngeal airway. If the patient
is deeply comatose or if airway reflexes are depressed, perform
endotracheal intubation. These airway interventions may not be
necessary if the patient is intoxicated by an opioid or a
benzodiazepine and responds to intravenous naloxone or flumazenil
(see below).
2. Breathing—Clinically assess the quality and depth of
respiration, and provide assistance if necessary with a bag-valve-
mask device or mechanical ventilator. Administer supplemental
oxygen, if needed. The arterial blood CO2 tension is useful in
determining the adequacy of ventilation. The arterial blood Po2
determination may reveal hypoxemia, which may be caused by
respiratory arrest, bronchospasm, pulmonary aspiration, or
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. Pulse oximetry provides an
assessment of oxygenation but is not reliable in patients with
methemoglobinemia or carbon monoxide poisoning, unless a newer
pulse oximetry device capable of detecting these forms of
hemoglobin is used (eg, the Masimo Rad-57 pulse CO-oximeter).
3. Circulation—Measure the pulse and blood pressure and
estimate tissue perfusion (eg, by measurement of urinary output,
skin signs, arterial blood pH). Place the patient on continuous ECG
monitoring. Insert an intravenous line, and draw blood for glucose,
electrolytes, serum creatinine and liver tests, and possible
quantitative toxicologic testing.
4. Drugs
A. DEXTROSE AND THIAMINE— Unless promptly treated, severe
hypoglycemia can cause irreversible brain damage. Therefore, in all
comatose or convulsing patients, give 50% dextrose, 50–100 mL
by intravenous bolus, unless a rapid bedside blood sugar test is
available and rules out hypoglycemia. In alcoholic or very
malnourished patients who may have marginal thiamine stores, give
thiamine, 100 mg intramuscularly or in the intravenous fluids.
B. OPIOID ANTAGONISTS— Naloxone, 0.4–2 mg intravenously,
may reverse opioid-induced respiratory depression and coma. It is
often given empirically to any comatose patient with depressed
respirations. If opioid overdose is strongly suspected, give
additional doses of naloxone (up to 5–10 mg may be required to
reverse the effects of potent opioids). Note: Naloxone has a
shorter duration of action (2–3 hours) than most common opioids;
repeated doses may be required, and continuous observation for at
least 3–4 hours after the last dose is mandatory. Nalmefene, a
newer opioid antagonist, has a duration of effect longer than that of
naloxone but still shorter than that of the opioid methadone.
C. FLUMAZENIL— Flumazenil, 0.2–0.5 mg intravenously, repeated
as needed up to a maximum of 3 mg, may reverse benzodiazepine-
induced coma. Caution: Flumazenil should not be given if the
patient has coingested a tricyclic antidepressant, is a user of high-
dose benzodiazepines, or has a seizure disorder because its use in
these 
circumstances 
may 
precipitate 
seizures. In most
circumstances, use of flumazenil is not advised as the potential
risks outweigh its benefits. Note: Flumazenil has a short duration
of effect (2–3 hours), and resedation requiring additional doses may
occur.
HYPOTENSION
 Assessment & Complications
Hypothermia commonly accompanies coma due to opioids, ethanol,
hypoglycemic agents, phenothiazines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
and other sedative-hypnotics and central nervous system
depressants. Hypothermic patients may have a barely perceptible
pulse and blood pressure. Hypothermia may cause or aggravate
hypotension, which will not reverse until the temperature is
normalized.
 Treatment
Treatment of hypothermia is discussed in Chapter 37. Gradual
rewarming is preferred unless the patient is in cardiac arrest.
HYPOTENSION
 Assessment & Complications
Hypotension may be due to poisoning by many different drugs and
poisons, including antihypertensive drugs, β-blockers, calcium
channel blockers, disulfiram (ethanol interaction), iron, trazodone,
quetiapine, and other antipsychotic agents and antidepressants.
Poisons causing hypotension include cyanide, carbon monoxide,
hydrogen sulfide, aluminum phosphide, arsenic, and certain
mushrooms.
Hypotension in the poisoned or drug-overdosed patient may be
caused by venous or arteriolar vasodilation, hypovolemia,
depressed cardiac contractility, or a combination of these effects.
 Treatment
Most hypotensive patients respond to empiric treatment with
repeated 200 mL intravenous boluses of 0.9% saline or other
isotonic crystalloid up to a total of 1–2 L; much larger amounts may
be needed if the victim is profoundly volume depleted (eg, as with
Amanita phalloides mushroom poisoning). Monitoring the central
venous pressure (CVP) can help determine whether further fluid
therapy is needed. If fluid therapy is not successful, give dopamine
or norepinephrine by intravenous infusion. Consider bedside cardiac
ultrasound or pulmonary artery catheterization (or both) if
hypotension persists.
Hypotension caused by certain toxins may respond to specific
treatment. For hypotension caused by overdoses of tricyclic
antidepressants or other sodium channel blockers, administer
sodium bicarbonate, 50–100 mEq by intravenous bolus injection.
Norepinephrine 4–8 mcg/min by intravenous infusion is more
effective than dopamine in some patients with overdoses of tricyclic
antidepressants or of drugs with predominantly vasodilating effects.
For β-blocker overdose, glucagon (5–10 mg intravenously) may be
of value. For calcium channel blocker overdose, administer calcium
chloride, 1–2 g intravenously (repeated doses may be necessary;
doses of 5–10 g and more have been given in some cases). High-
dose insulin (0.5-1 units/kg/h intravenously) euglycemic therapy may
also be used (see the sections on β-Adrenergic Blockers and
Calcium Channel Blockers, below). Intralipid 20% lipid emulsion
has been reported to improve hemodynamics in human case reports
or animal studies of intoxication by highly lipid-soluble drugs such as
bupivacaine, bupropion, clomipramine, and verapamil.
Jamaty C et al. Lipid emulsions in the treatment of acute poisoning:
a systematic review of human and animal studies. Clin Toxicol
(Phila). 2010 Jan;48(1):1–27. [PMID: 20095812]
 
HYPERTENSION
 Assessment & Complications
Hypertension may be due to poisoning with amphetamines,
anticholinergics, 
cocaine, 
performance-enhancing 
products
(containing caffeine, phenylephrine, ephedrine, or yohimbine),
monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, and other drugs.
Severe hypertension (eg, diastolic blood pressure > 105–110
mm Hg in a person who does not have chronic hypertension) can
result in acute intracranial hemorrhage, myocardial infarction, or
aortic dissection.
 Treatment
Treat hypertension if the patient is symptomatic or if the diastolic
pressure is > 105–110 mm Hg—especially if there is no prior
history of hypertension.
Hypertensive patients who are agitated or anxious may benefit
from a sedative such as lorazepam, 2–3 mg intravenously. For
persistent hypertension, administer phentolamine, 2–5 mg
intravenously, or nitroprusside sodium, 0.25–8 mcg/kg/min
intravenously. If excessive tachycardia is present, add propranolol,
1–5 mg intravenously, or esmolol, 25–100 mcg/kg/min
intravenously, or labetalol 0.2–0.3 mg/kg intravenously. Caution:
Do not give β-blockers alone, since doing so may paradoxically
worsen hypertension as a result of unopposed α-adrenergic
stimulation.
Wang NE et al. Hypertensive crisis and NSTEMI after accidental
overdose of sustained release pseudoephedrine: a case report. Clin
Toxicol (Phila). 2008 Nov;46(9):922–3. [PMID: 18608273]
 
ARRHYTHMIAS
 Assessment & Complications
Arrhythmias may occur with a variety of drugs or toxins (Table 38–
1). They may also occur as a result of hypoxia, metabolic acidosis,
or electrolyte imbalance (eg, hyper-kalemia, hypokalemia,
hypomagnesemia or hypocalcemia), or following exposure to
chlorinated solvents or chloral hydrate overdose. Atypical
ventricular tachycardia (torsades de pointes) is often associated
with drugs that prolong the QT interval.
 Treatment
Arrhythmias may be caused by hypoxia or electrolyte imbalance,
and these conditions should be sought and treated. If ventricular
arrhythmias persist, administer lido-caine or amiodarone at usual
antiarrhythmic doses. Note: Wide QRS complex tachycardia in the
setting of tri-cyclic antidepressant overdose (or quinidine and other
class Ia drugs) should be treated with sodium bicarbonate, 50–100
mEq intravenously by bolus injection. (See discussion of tricyclic
antidepressant 
poisoning.) Caution: Avoid class Ia agents
(quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide), which may aggravate
arrhythmias caused by tricyclic antidepressants. Torsades de
pointes associated with prolonged QT interval may respond to
intravenous magnesium (2 g intravenously over 2 minutes) or
overdrive pacing. Treat digitalis-induced arrhythmias with digoxin-
specific antibodies (see discussion of cardiac glycoside poisoning).
 
Table 38–1. Common toxins or drugs causing arrhythmias.1
 
 
 
Arrhythmia
Common Causes
Sinus
bradycardia
β-Blockers, calcium channel blockers,
clonidine, digitalis glycosides,
organophosphates
Atrioventricular
block
β-Blockers, calcium channel blockers,
class Ia antiarrhythmics (including
quinidine), carbamazepine, clonidine,
digitalis glycosides, lithium
Sinus
tachycardia
β-Agonists (eg, albuterol), amphetamines,
anticholinergics, antihistamines, caffeine,
cocaine, pseudoephedrine, tricyclic and
other antidepressants
Wide QRS
complex
Class Ia and class Ic antiarrhythmics,
phenothiazines (eg, thioridazine),
potassium (hyperkalemia), propranolol,
tricyclic antidepressants, bupropion,
lamotrigine, diphenhydramine (severe
overdose)
QT interval
prolongation
and torsades
de pointes
Arsenic, class Ia and class III
antiarrhythmics, droperidol, lithium,
methadone, pentamidine, sotalol,
thioridazine, venlafaxine, and many other
drugs (see http://www.azcert.org/medical-
pros /drug-lists/drug-lists.cfm)
Ventricular
premature
beats and
ventricular
tachycardia
Amphetamines, cocaine, ephedrine,
caffeine, chlorinated or fluorinated
hydrocarbons, digoxin, aconite (found in
some Chinese herbal preparations),
fluoride, theophylline. QT prolongation can
lead to atypical ventricular tachycardia
(torsades de pointes)
1Arrhythmias may also occur as a result of hypoxia, metabolic acidosis, or
electrolyte imbalance (eg, hyperkalemia or hypokalemia, hypocalcemia
hypomagnesemia).
 
For tachyarrhythmias induced by chlorinated solvents, chloral
hydrate, Freons, or sympathomimetic agents, use propranolol or
esmolol (see doses given above in Hyper-tension section).
Barnes BJ et al. Drug-induced arrhythmias. Crit Care Med. 2010
Jun;38(6 Suppl):S188–97. [PMID: 20502173]
 
SEIZURES
 Assessment & Complications
Seizures may be due to poisoning with many poisons and drugs,
including amphetamines, antidepressants (especially tricyclic
antidepressants, bupropion, and venlafaxine), anti-histamines
(especially diphenhydramine), antipsychotics, camphor, cocaine,
isoniazid (INH), chlorinated insectides, and theophylline.
Seizures may also be caused by hypoxia, hypoglycemia,
hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, withdrawal from alcohol or sedative-
hypnotics, head trauma, central nervous system infection, or
idiopathic epilepsy.
Prolonged or repeated seizures may lead to hypoxia, metabolic
acidosis, hyperthermia, and rhabdomyolysis.
 Treatment
Administer lorazepam, 2–3 mg, or diazepam, 5–10 mg,
intravenously over 1–2 minutes, or—if intravenous access is not
immediately available—midazolam, 5–10 mg intramuscularly. If
convulsions continue, administer phenobarbital, 15–20 mg/kg
slowly intravenously over no less than 30 minutes; or phenytoin, 15
mg/kg intravenously over no less than 30 minutes (maximum infusion
rate, 50 mg/min). For drug-induced seizures, phenobarbital is
generally preferred over phenytoin. Propofol infusion has also been
reported effective for some resistant drug-induced seizures.
Seizures due to a few drugs and toxins may require antidotes or
other specific therapies (as listed in Table 38–2).
 
Table 38–2. Seizures related to toxins or drugs requiring special
consideration.1
 
 
 
Toxin or Drug
Comments
Methylenedioxymeth-
amphetamine
(MDMA; “Ecstasy”)
Seizures may be due to
hyponatremia or hyperthermia.
Isoniazid
Administer pyridoxine.
Lithium
May indicate need for
hemodialysis.
Organophosphates
Administer pralidoxime (2-PAM)
and atropine and mechanical
ventilation.
Strychnine
“Seizures” are actually spinally
mediated muscle spasms and
usually require neuromuscular
paralysis and mechanical
ventilation.
Theophylline
Seizures indicate need for
hemodialysis.
Tricyclic
antidepressants
Hyperthermia and cardiotoxicity are
common complications of repeated
seizures; paralyze early with neuro-
muscular blockers to reduce
muscular hyperactivity.
1See text for dosages.
Young AC et al. Late-onset seizures associated with quetiapine
poisoning. J Med Toxicol. 2009 Mar;5(1):24 6. [PMID:
19191211]
 
HYPERTHERMIA
 Assessment & Complications
Hyperthermia may be associated with poisoning by amphetamines
(especially methylenedioxymethamphetamine [MDMA; “Ecstasy”]),
atropine and other anti-cholinergic drugs, cocaine, salicylates,
strychnine, tricyclic antidepressants, and various other medications.
Overdoses of serotonin reuptake inhibitors (eg, fluoxetine,
paroxetine, sertraline) or their use in a patient taking an MAO
inhibitor may cause agitation, hyperactivity, myoclonus, and
hyperthermia (“serotonin syndrome”). Antipsychotic agents can
cause rigidity and hyperthermia (neuroleptic malignant syndrome
[NMS]). (See section on schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders in Chapter 25.) Malignant hyperthermia is a rare disorder
associated with general anesthetic agents.
Hyperthermia is a rapidly life-threatening complication. Severe
hyperthermia (temperature > 40–41 °C) can rapidly cause brain
damage and multiorgan failure, including rhabdomyolysis, acute
renal failure and coagulopathy (see Chapter 37).
 Treatment
Treat hyperthermia aggressively by removing all clothing, spraying
the patient with tepid water, and fanning the patient. If this is not
rapidly effective, as shown by a normal rectal temperature within
30–60 minutes, or if there is significant muscle rigidity or
hyperactivity, 
induce 
neuro-muscular 
paralysis 
with 
a
nondepolarizing 
neuromuscular 
blocker 
(eg, 
rocuronium,
vecuronium). Once paralyzed, the patient must be intubated and
mechanically ventilated. Once the patient is paralyzed, the absence
of visible muscular convulsive movements may give the false
impression that brain seizure activity has ceased; bedside
electroencephalography may be useful in recognizing continued
nonconvulsive seizures.
Dantrolene (2–5 mg/kg intravenously) may be effective for
hyperthermia associated with muscle rigidity that does not respond
to neuromuscular blockade (ie, malignant hyperthermia).
Bromocriptine, 2.5–7.5 mg orally daily, has been recommended for
neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Cyproheptadine, 4 mg orally every
hour for three or four doses, or chlorpromazine, 25 mg
intravenously or 50 mg intramuscularly, has been used to treat
serotonin syndrome.
Ables AZ et al. Prevention, recognition, and management of
serotonin syndrome. Am Fam Physician. 2010 May
1;81(9):1139–42. [PMID: 20433130]
 
Gallelli L et al. A case of neuroleptic malignant syndrome induced
by risperidone in a schizophrenic woman. Curr Drug Saf. 2009
May;4(2):119–20. [PMID: 19442104]
 
ANTIDOTES & OTHER
TREATMENT
 
ANTIDOTES
Give an antidote (if available) when there is reasonable certainty of
a specific diagnosis (Table 38–3). Be aware that some antidotes
themselves may have serious side effects. The indications and
dosages for specific antidotes are discussed in the respective
sections for specific toxins.
Dart RC et al; Antidote Summit Authorship Group. Expert
consensus guidelines for stocking of antidotes in hospitals that
provide emergency care. Ann Emerg Med. 2009;54(3):386–94.
[PMID: 19406507]
 
DECONTAMINATION OF THE SKIN
Corrosive agents rapidly injure the skin and eyes and must be
removed immediately. In addition, many toxins are readily absorbed
through the skin, and systemic absorption can be prevented only by
rapid action.
Wash the affected areas with copious quantities of lukewarm
water or saline. Wash carefully behind the ears, under the nails, and
in skin folds. For oily substances (eg, pesticides), wash the skin at
least twice with plain soap and shampoo the hair. Specific
decontaminating solutions or solvents (eg, alcohol) are rarely
indicated and in some cases may paradoxically enhance absorption.
For exposure to chemical warfare poisons such as nerve agents or
vesicants, some authorities recommend use of a dilute hypochlorite
solution (household bleach diluted 1:10 with water).
 
Table 38–3. Some toxic agents for which there are specific
antidotes.1
 
 
 
Toxic Agent
Specific Antidote
Acetaminophen
N-Acetylcysteine
Anticholinergics (eg,
atropine)
Physostigmine
Anticholinesterases (eg,
organophosphate
pesticides)
Atropine and pralidoxime (2-
PAM)
Benzodiazepines
Flumazenil (rarely used; see
warning in text)
Carbon monoxide
Oxygen, hyperbaric oxygen
Cyanide
Sodium nitrite, sodium
thiosulfate;
hydroxocobalamin
Digitalis glycosides
Digoxin-specific Fab
antibodies
Heavy metals (eg, lead,
mercury, iron) and arsenic
Specific chelating agents
Isoniazid
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
Methanol, ethylene glycol
Ethanol (ethyl alcohol) or
fomepizole (4-
methylpyrazole)
Opioids
Naloxone, nalmefene
Snake venom
Specific antivenin
Sulfonylurea oral
hypoglycemic drugs
Octreotide
1See text for indications and dosages.
DECONTAMINATION OF THE EYES
Act quickly to prevent serious damage. Flush the eyes with copious
amounts of saline (preferred) or water. (If available, instill local
anesthetic drops in the eye before beginning irrigation.) Remove
contact lenses if present. Direct the irrigating stream so that it will
flow across the eyes after running off the nasal bridge. Lift the tarsal
conjunctiva to look for undissolved particles and to facilitate
irrigation. Continue irrigation for 15 minutes or until each eye has
been irrigated with at least 1 L of solution. If the toxin is an acid or a
base, check the pH of the tears after irrigation, and continue
irrigation until the pH is between 6 and 8.
After irrigation is complete, perform a careful examination of the
eye, using fluorescein and a slit lamp or Wood lamp to identify
areas of corneal injury. Patients with serious conjunctival or corneal
injury should be immediately referred to an ophthalmologist.
GASTROINTESTINAL DECONTAMINATION
Removal of ingested poisons was a routine part of emergency
treatment for decades. However, prospective studies have failed to
demonstrate improved clinical outcome after gastric emptying. For
small or moderate ingestions of most substances, toxicologists
generally recommend oral activated charcoal alone without prior
gastric emptying; in some cases, when the interval after ingestion has
been more than 1-2 hours and the ingestant is non–life-threatening,
even charcoal is withheld. Exceptions are large ingestions of
anticholinergic compounds and salicylates, which often delay gastric
emptying, and ingestion of sustained-release or enteric-coated
tablets, which may remain intact for several hours.
Gastric emptying is not generally used for ingestion of corrosive
agents or petroleum distillates, because further esophageal injury or
pulmonary aspiration may result. However, in certain cases,
removal of the toxin may be more important than concern over
possible complications. Consult a medical toxicologist or regional
poison control center (800-222-1222) for advice.
A. Emesis
Emesis using syrup of ipecac can partially evacuate gastric contents
if given very soon after ingestion (eg, at work or at home).
However, it may increase the risk of pulmonary aspiration and delay
or prevent the use of oral activated charcoal. Therefore, it is no
longer used in the routine management of ingestions.
B. Gastric Lavage
Gastric lavage is more effective for liquid poisons or small pill
fragments than for intact tablets or pieces of mushroom. It is most
useful when started within 60 minutes after ingestion. However, the
lavage procedure may delay administration of activated charcoal
and may stimulate vomiting and pulmonary aspiration in an
obtunded patient.
1. Indications—Gastric lavage is sometimes used after very large
ingestions (eg, massive aspirin overdose), for collection and
examination of gastric contents for identification of the poison, and
make it easier to administer charcoal and oral antidotes.
2. Contraindications—D o not use lavage for stuporous or
comatose patients with absent gag reflexes unless they are
endotracheally intubated beforehand. Some authorities advise
against lavage when caustic material has been ingested; others
regard it as essential to remove liquid corrosives from the stomach.
3. Technique—In obtunded or comatose patients, the danger of
aspiration pneumonia is reduced by performing endotracheal
intubation with a cuffed tube before the procedure. Gently insert a
lubricated, soft but noncollapsible stomach tube (at least 37–40 F)
through the mouth or nose into the stomach. Aspirate and save the
contents, and then lavage repeatedly with 50- to 100-mL aliquots
of fluid until the return fluid is clear. Use lukewarm tap water or
saline.
C. Activated Charcoal
Activated charcoal effectively adsorbs almost all drugs and poisons.
Poorly adsorbed substances include iron, lithium, potassium,
sodium, mineral acids, and alcohols.
1. Indications—Activated charcoal can be used for prompt
adsorption of drugs or toxins in the stomach and intestine. Studies in
volunteers show that activated charcoal given alone may be as
effective as, or more effective, than ipecac-induced emesis or
gastric lavage. However, evidence of benefit in clinical studies is
lacking. Administration of charcoal, especially if mixed with sorbitol,
can provoke vomiting, which could lead to pulmonary aspiration in
an obtunded patient.
2. Contraindications—Activated charcoal should not be used for
comatose or convulsing patients unless it can be given by gastric
tube and the airway is first protected by a cuffed endotracheal tube.
It is also contraindicated for patients with ileus or intestinal
obstruction or those who have ingested corrosives for whom
endoscopy is planned.
3. Technique—Administer activated charcoal, 60–100 g orally or
via gastric tube, mixed in aqueous slurry. Repeated doses may be
given to ensure gastrointestinal adsorption or to enhance elimination
of some drugs (see below).
D. Catharsis
1. Indications—Cathartics are used by some toxicologists for
stimulation of peristalsis to hasten the elimination of unabsorbed
drugs and poisons and the activated charcoal slurry. There is no
clinical evidence to support their use, and some agents (eg, sorbitol)
can provoke vomiting, increasing the risk of pulmonary aspiration.
2. Contraindications and cautions—Do not give a cathartic to
patients with suspected intestinal obstruction. Avoid sodium-based
cathartics in patients with hypertension, advanced chronic kidney
disease, and congestive heart failure and avoid magnesium-based
cathartics in patients with advanced chronic kidney disease. Sorbitol
(an osmotic cathartic found in some prepackaged activated
charcoal slurry products) can cause hypotension and de hydration
due to third-spacing and also causes intestinal cramping and
vomiting.
E. Whole Bowel Irrigation
Whole bowel irrigation uses large volumes of a balanced
polyethylene glycol-electrolyte solution to mechanically cleanse the
entire intestinal tract. Because of the composition of the irrigating
solution, there is no significant gain or loss of systemic fluids or
electrolytes.
1. Indications—Whole bowel irrigation is particularly effective for
massive iron ingestion in which intact tablets are visible on
abdominal radiographs. It has also been used for ingestions of
lithium, sustained-release and enteric-coated tablets, and swallowed
drug-filled packets.
2. Contraindications—Do not use in patients with suspected
intestinal obstruction. Use with caution in patients who are obtunded
or have depressed airway protective reflexes.
3. Technique—Administer a balanced polyethylene glycol-
electrolyte solution (CoLyte, GoLYTELY) into the stomach via
gastric tube at a rate of 1–2 L/h until the rectal effluent is clear. This
may take several hours. It is most effective when patients are able
to sit on a commode to pass the intestinal contents.
F. Increased Drug Removal
1. Urinary manipulation—Forced diuresis is hazardous; the risk
of complications (pulmonary edema, electrolyte imbalance) usually
outweighs its benefits. Acidic drugs (eg, salicylates, phenobarbital)
are more rapidly excreted with an alkaline urine. Acidification
(sometimes promoted for amphetamines, phencyclidine) is not very
effective and is contraindicated in the presence of rhabdomyolysis
or myoglobinuria.
2. Hemodialysis—The indications for dialysis are as follows: (1)
Known or suspected potentially lethal amounts of a dialyzable drug
(Table 38–4); (2) Poisoning with deep coma, apnea, severe
hypotension, fluid and electrolyte or acid-base disturbance, or
extreme body temperature changes that cannot be corrected by
conventional measures; or (3) Poisoning in patients with severe
kidney, cardiac, pulmonary, or hepatic disease who will not be able
to eliminate toxin by the usual mechanisms.
Continuous renal replacement therapy (also known as continuous
venovenous hemodiafiltration or venovenous hemodiafiltration) is of
uncertain benefit for elimination of most poisons but has the
advantage of slow removal of the toxin and any accompanying
acidosis, and its use has been reported in the management of lithium
intoxication.
 
Table 38–4. Recommended use of hemodialysis in poisoning.
 
 
 
Poison
Common Indications 1
Carbamazepine Seizures, severe cardiotoxicity; serum
level > 60 mg/L
Ethylene glycol
Acidosis, serum level > 50 mg/dL
Lithium
Severe symptoms; level > 4 mEq/L more
than 12 hours after last dose. Note:
dialysis of uncertain value; CVVHD may
be preferable; consult with medical
toxicologist.
Methanol
Acidosis, serum level > 50 mg/dL
Phenobarbital
Intractable hypotension, acidosis
despite maximal supportive care
Salicylate
Severe acidosis, CNS symptoms, level
> 100 mg/dL (acute overdose) or > 60
mg/dL (chronic intoxication)
Theophylline
Serum level > 90–100 mg/L (acute) or
seizures and serum level > 40–60 mg/L
(chronic)
Valproic acid
Serum level > 900–1000 mg/L or deep
coma, severe acidosis
1See text for further discussion of indications.
CNS, central nervous system; CVVHD, continuous venovenous
hemodialysis.
3. Repeat-dose charcoal—Repeated doses of activated charcoal,
20–30 g orally or via gastric tube every 3–4 hours, may hasten
elimination of some drugs (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, dapsone)
by absorbing drugs excreted into the gut lumen (“gut dialysis”).
However, clinical studies have failed to prove better outcome using
multiple-dose charcoal. Sorbitol or other cathartics should not be
used with each dose, or resulting large stool volumes may lead to
dehydration or hypernatremia.
Kumar VV et al. The effect of decontamination procedures on the
pharmacokinetics of venlafaxine in overdose. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
2009 Oct;86(4):403–10. [PMID: 19606091]
 
Olson KR. Activated charcoal for acute poisoning: one
toxicologist's journey. J Med Toxicol. 2010 Jun;6(2):190–8.
[PMID: 20490748]
 
Thanacoody RH. Extracorporeal elimination in acute valproic acid
poisoning. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2009 Aug;47(7):609–16. [PMID:
19656009]
 
DIAGNOSIS OF POISONING
 
The identity of the ingested substance or substances is usually
known, but occasionally a comatose patient is found with an
unlabeled container or the patient is unable or unwilling to give a
coherent history. By performing a directed physical examination and
ordering common clinical laboratory tests, the clinician can often
make a tentative diagnosis that may allow empiric interventions or
may suggest specific toxicologic tests.
 Physical Examination
Important diagnostic variables in the physical examination include
blood pressure, pulse rate, temperature, pupil size, sweating, and
the presence or absence of peristaltic activity. Poisonings may
present with one or more of the following common syndromes.
A. Sympathomimetic Syndrome
The blood pressure and pulse rate are elevated, though with severe
hypertension reflex bradycardia may occur. The temperature is
often elevated, pupils are dilated, and the skin is sweaty, though
mucous membranes are dry. Patients are usually agitated, anxious,
or frankly psychotic.
Examples 
Amphetamines, 
cocaine, 
ephedrine 
and
pseudoephedrine.
B. Sympatholytic Syndrome
The blood pressure and pulse rate are decreased and body
temperature is low. The pupils are small or even pinpoint. Patients
are usually obtunded or comatose.
Examples Barbiturates, benzodiazepines and other sedative
hypnotics, γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), clonidine and related
antihypertensives, ethanol, opioids.
C. Cholinergic Syndrome
Stimulation of muscarinic receptors causes bradycardia, miosis,
sweating, and hyperperistalsis as well as bronchorrhea, wheezing,
excessive salivation, and urinary incontinence. Nicotinic receptor
stimulation may produce initial hypertension and tachycardia as well
as fasciculations and muscle weakness. Patients are usually agitated
and anxious.
Examples Carbamates, nicotine, organophosphates (including
nerve agents), physostigmine.
D. Anticholinergic Syndrome
Tachycardia with mild hypertension is common, and the body
temperature is often elevated. Pupils are widely dilated. The skin is
flushed, hot, and dry. Peristalsis is decreased, and urinary retention
is common. Patients may have myoclonic jerking or choreoathetoid
movements. Agitated delirium is frequently seen, and severe
hyperthermia may occur.
Examples Atropine, scopolamine, other naturally occurring and
pharmaceutical 
anticholinergics, 
antihistamines, 
tricyclic
antidepressants.
 Laboratory Tests
The following clinical laboratory tests are recommended for
screening of the overdosed patient: measured serum osmolality and
osmol gap, electrolytes and anion gap, glucose, creatinine, blood
urea nitrogen (BUN), urinalysis (eg, oxalate crystals with ethylene
glycol poisoning, myoglobinuria with rhabdomyolysis), and
electrocardiography. Serum acetaminophen and ethanol quantitative
levels should be determined in all patients with drug overdoses.
A. Osmol Gap
The osmol gap (see Table 38–5) is increased in the presence of
large quantities of low-molecular-weight substances, most
commonly ethanol. Common poisons associated with increased
osmol gap are acetone, ethanol, ethylene glycol, isopropyl alcohol,
methanol, 
and 
propylene 
glycol. Note: Severe alcoholic
ketoacidosis and diabetic ketoacidosis can also cause an elevated
osmol gap resulting from the production of ketones and other low-
molecular-weight substances.
B. Anion Gap
Metabolic acidosis associated with an elevated anion gap is usually
due to an accumulation of lactic acid or other acids (see Chapter
21). Common causes of elevated anion gap in poisoning include
carbon monoxide, cyanide, ethylene glycol, medicinal iron, INH,
methanol, metformin, ibuprofen and salicylates.
The osmol gap should also be checked; combined elevated anion
and osmol gaps suggests poisoning by methanol or ethylene glycol,
though this may also occur in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis and
alcoholic ketoacidosis.
 
Table 38–5. Use of the osmol gap in toxicology.
 
Note: The normal osmol gap may vary by as much as ± 10 mosm/L; thus,
small osmol gaps may be unreliable in the diagnosis of poisoning.
Adapted, with permission, from Stone CK, Humphries RL (editors): Current
Emergency Diagnosis & Treatment, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2004.
C. Toxicology Laboratory Testing
A comprehensive toxicology screen is of little value in the initial care
of the poisoned patient because results do not return in time to
influence clinical management. Specific quantitative levels of certain
drugs may be extremely helpful (Table 38–6) however, especially if
specific antidotes or interventions (eg, dialysis) would be indicated
based on the results.
If a toxicology screen is required, urine is the best specimen.
Many hospitals can perform a quick but limited screen for “drugs of
abuse” (typically these screens include only opiates, amphetamines,
and cocaine, and some add benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and
tetrahydrocannabinol [marijuana]). There are numerous false-
positive and false-negative results. For example, synthetic opioids,
such as fentanyl, oxycodone, and methadone are usually not
detected by routine opiate screening. Blood samples may be saved
for possible quantitative testing, but blood is not generally used for
screening purposes since it is relatively insensitive for many common
drugs, including psychotropic agents, opioids, and stimulants.
 
Table 38–6. Specific quantitative levels and potential therapeutic
interventions.1
 
 
 
Drug or Toxin
Treatment
Acetaminophen Specific antidote (N-acetylcysteine)
based on serum level
Carbon
monoxide
High carboxyhemoglobin level indicates
need for 100% oxygen, consideration of
hyperbaric oxygen
Carbamazepine High level may indicate need for
hemodialysis
Digoxin
On basis of serum digoxin level and
severity of clinical presentation,
treatment with Fab antibody fragments
(Digibind) may be indicated
Ethanol
Low serum level may suggest
nonalcoholic cause of coma (eg, trauma,
other drugs, other alcohols). Serum
ethanol may also be useful in monitoring
ethanol therapy for methanol or ethylene
glycol poisoning.
Iron
Level may indicate need for chelation
with deferoxamine
Lithium
Serum levels can guide decision to
institute hemodialysis
Methanol,
ethylene glycol
Acidosis, high levels indicate need for
hemodialysis, therapy with ethanol or
fomepizole
Methemoglobin Methemoglobinemia can be treated with
methylene blue intravenously
Salicylates
High level may indicate need for
hemodialysis, alkaline diuresis
Theophylline
Immediate hemodialysis or
hemoperfusion may be indicated based
on serum level
Valproic acid
Elevated levels may indicate need to
consider hemodialysis or L-carnitine
therapy, or both
1Some drugs or toxins may have profound and irreversible toxicity unless
rapid and specific management is provided outside of routine supportive
care. For these agents, laboratory testing may provide the serum level or
other evidence required for administering a specific antidote or arranging
for hemodialysis.
 Abdominal Radiographs
A plain film of the abdomen may reveal radiopaque iron tablets,
drug-filled condoms, or other toxic material. Studies suggest that
few tablets are predictably visible (eg, ferrous sulfate, sodium
chloride, calcium carbonate, and potassium chloride). Thus, the
radiograph is useful only if abnormal.
 When to Refer
Consultation with a regional poison control center (1-800-222-
1222) or a medical toxicologist is recommended when the diagnosis
is uncertain; there are questions about what laboratory tests to
order; when dialysis is being considered to remove the drug or
poison; or when advice is needed regarding the indications, dose,
and side effects of antidotes.
 When to Admit
 
•    The patient has symptoms and signs of intoxication that
are not expected to clear within a 6–8 hour observation
period.
•    Delayed absorption of the drug might be predicted to
cause a later onset of serious symptoms (eg, after
ingestion of a sustained-release product).
•    Continued administration of an antidote is required (eg,
N-acetylcysteine for acetaminophen overdose).
•    Psychiatric or social services evaluation is needed for
suicide attempt or suspected drug abuse.
Goldfrank LR (editor). Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies,
10th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2010.
 
Lynd LD et al. An evaluation of the osmole gap as a screening test
for toxic alcohol poisoning. BMC Emerg Med. 2008 Apr 28;8:5.
[PMID: 18442409]
 
Olson KR (editor). Poisoning & Drug Overdose, 6th ed.
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
 
SELECTED POISONINGS
 
ACETAMINOPHEN
Acetaminophen (paracetamol in the United Kingdom, Europe) is a
common analgesic found in many nonprescription and prescription
products. After absorption, it is metabolized mainly by
glucuronidation and sulfation, with a small fraction metabolized via
the P450 mixed-function oxidase system (2E1) to a highly toxic
reactive intermediate. This toxic intermediate is normally detoxified
by cellular glutathione. With acute acetaminophen overdose (>
150–200 mg/kg, or 8–10 g in an average adult), hepatocellular
glutathione is depleted and the reactive intermediate attacks other
cell proteins, causing necrosis. Patients with enhanced P450 2E1
activity, such as chronic alcoholics and patients taking INH, are at
increased risk of developing hepatotoxicity. Hepatic toxicity may
also occur after long-term overuse of acetaminophen—eg, as a
result of taking two or three acetaminophen-containing products
concurrently or exceeding the recommended maximum dose of 4
g/d for several days.
 Clinical Findings
Shortly after ingestion, patients may have nausea or vomiting, but
there are usually no other signs of toxicity until 24–48 hours after
ingestion, when hepatic aminotransferase levels begin to increase.
With severe poisoning, fulminant hepatic necrosis may occur,
resulting in jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, advanced chronic
kidney disease, and death. Rarely, massive ingestion (eg, serum
levels > 500–1000 mg/L [33–66 mmol/L]) can cause early onset of
acute coma, hypotension, and metabolic acidosis unrelated to
hepatic injury.
The diagnosis after acute overdose is based on measurement of
the serum acetaminophen level. Plot the serum level versus the time
since ingestion on the acetaminophen nomo-gram shown in Figure
38–1. Ingestion of sustained-release products or coingestion of an
anticholinergic agent, salicy-late, or opioid drug may cause delayed
elevation of serum levels and may render the nomogram useless.
The nomo-gram is also not useful after chronic overdose.
 
Figure 38–1. Nomogram for prediction of acetaminophen
hepatotoxicity following acute overdosage. The upper line defines
serum acetaminophen concentrations associated with a risk of
hepatotoxicity; the lower line defines serum levels 25% below those
expected to cause hepatotoxicity. In uncomplicated cases, the
upper line can be used as an indication for therapy with N-
acetylcysteine. However, to provide a margin for error in the
estimation of the time of ingestion and for patients at higher risk for
hepatotoxicity, the lower line is usually used as a guide to treatment.
(Adapted, with permission, from Rumack BH et al. Acetaminophen
poisoning and toxicity. Pediatrics. 1975 Jun;55(6):871–6.)
 
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523) if it can be given within
1–2 hours of the ingestion. Although charcoal may interfere with
absorption of the oral antidote acetylcysteine, this is not considered
clinically significant.
B. Specific Treatment
Although the risk is greatest if the serum acetaminophen level is
above the upper line on the nomogram (Figure 38–1), many
clinicians and published guidelines prefer to use the lower line as a
guide to treatment, as it provides an added safety margin. If the
precise time of ingestion is unknown or if the patient is at higher risk
for hepatotoxicity (eg, alcoholic, liver disease, long-term use of
P450-inducing drugs), then some clinicians use a lower threshold
for initiation of N-acetylcysteine (in some case reports, a level of
100 mg/L (66 mmol/L) at 4 hours was suggested in very high-risk
patients).
The 
antidote N-acetylcysteine can be given orally or
intravenously. Oral treatment begins with a loading dose of N-
acetylcysteine, 140 mg/kg, followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours.
Dilute the solution to about 5% with water, juice, or soda. If
vomiting interferes with oral N-acetylcysteine administration,
consider giving the antidote intravenously (see below). The
conventional oral N-acetylcysteine protocol in the United States
calls for 72 hours of treatment. However, other regimens have
demonstrated equivalent success with 20–48 hours of treatment.
The 
FDA-approved 
21-hour 
intravenous 
regimen 
of
acetylcysteine (Acetadote) calls for a loading dose of 150 mg/kg
given intravenously over 60 minutes, followed by a 4-hour infusion
of 50 mg/kg, and a 16-hour infusion of 100 mg/kg. (If Acetadote is
not available, the conventional oral formulation may also be given
intravenously using a micropore filter and a slow rate of infusion.
Call a regional poison control center or medical toxicologist for
assistance.)
Treatment with N-acetylcysteine is most effective if it is started
within 8–10 hours after ingestion.
Chun LJ et al. Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity and acute liver
failure. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2009 Apr;43(4):342–9. [PMID:
19169150]
Heard KJ. Acetylcysteine for acetaminophen poisoning. N Engl J
Med. 2008 Jul 17;359(3):285–92. [PMID: 18635433]
 
ACIDS, CORROSIVE
The strong mineral acids exert primarily a local corrosive effect on
the skin and mucous membranes. Symptoms include severe pain in
the throat and upper gastrointestinal tract; bloody vomitus; difficulty
in swallowing, breathing, and speaking; discoloration and
destruction of skin and mucous membranes in and around the
mouth; and shock. Severe systemic metabolic acidosis may occur
both as a result of cellular injury and from systemic absorption of
the acid.
Severe deep destructive tissue damage may occur after exposure
to hydrofluoric acid because of the penetrating and highly toxic
fluoride ion. Systemic hypocalcemia and hyperkalemia may also
occur after fluoride absorption, even following skin exposure.
Inhalation of volatile acids, fumes, or gases such as chlorine,
fluorine, bromine, or iodine causes severe irritation of the throat and
larynx and may cause upper airway obstruction and noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema.
 Treatment
A. Ingestion
Dilute immediately by giving a glass (4–8 oz) of water to drink. Do
not give bicarbonate or other neutralizing agents, and do not induce
vomiting. Some experts recommend immediate cautious placement
of a small flexible gastric tube and removal of stomach contents
followed by lavage, particularly if the corrosive is a liquid or has
important systemic toxicity.
In symptomatic patients, perform flexible endoscopic
esophagoscopy to determine the presence and extent of injury. CT
scan or plain radiographs of the chest and abdomen may also reveal
the extent of injury. Perforation, peritonitis, and major bleeding are
indications for surgery.
B. Skin Contact
Flood with water for 15 minutes. Use no chemical antidotes; the
heat of the reaction may cause additional injury.
For hydrofluoric acid burns, soak the affected area in
benzalkonium chloride solution or apply 2.5% calcium gluconate gel
(prepared by adding 3.5 g calcium gluconate to 5 oz of water-
soluble surgical lubricant, eg, K-Y Jelly); then arrange immediate
consultation with a plastic surgeon or other specialist. Binding of the
fluoride ion may be achieved by injecting 0.5 mL of 5% calcium
gluconate per square centimeter under the burned area. (Caution:
Do not use calcium chloride.) Use of a Bier-block technique or
intra-arterial infusion of calcium is sometimes required for extensive
burns or those involving the nail bed; consult with a hand surgeon or
poison control center (1-800-222-1222).
C. Eye Contact
Anesthetize the conjunctiva and corneal surfaces with topical local
anesthetic drops (eg, proparacaine). Flood with water for 15
minutes, holding the eyelids open. Check pH with pH 6.0–8.0 test
paper, and repeat irrigation, using 0.9% saline, until pH is near 7.0.
Check for corneal damage with fluorescein and slit lamp
examination; consult an ophthalmologist about further treatment.
D. Inhalation
Remove from further exposure to fumes or gas. Check skin and
clothing. Treat pulmonary edema.
Rauber-Lüthy C et al. Household chemicals: management of
intoxication and antidotes. EXS. 2010;100:339–63. [PMID:
20358689]
 
Vohra R et al. Recurrent life-threatening ventricular dysrhythmias
associated with acute hydrofluoric acid ingestion: observations in
one case and implications for mechanism of toxicity. Clin Toxicol
(Phila). 2008 Jan;46(1):79–84. [PMID: 17906993]
 
ALKALIES
The strong alkalies are common ingredients of some household
cleaning compounds and may be suspected by their “soapy”
texture. Those with alkalinity above pH 12.0 are particularly
corrosive. Disk (or “button”) batteries are also a source. Alkalies
cause liquefactive necrosis, which is deeply penetrating. Symptoms
include burning pain in the upper gastrointestinal tract, nausea,
vomiting, and difficulty in swallowing and breathing. Examination
reveals destruction and edema of the affected skin and mucous
membranes and bloody vomitus and stools. Radiographs may
reveal evidence of perforation or the presence of radiopaque disk
batteries in the esophagus or lower gastrointestinal tract.
 Treatment
A. Ingestion
Dilute immediately with a glass of water. Do not induce emesis.
Some 
gastroenterologists 
recommend 
immediate 
cautious
placement of a small flexible gastric tube and removal of stomach
contents followed by gastric lavage after ingestion of liquid caustic
substances to remove residual material.
Prompt endoscopy is recommended in symptomatic patients to
evaluate the extent of damage; CT scanning may also aid in
assessment. If a radiograph reveals the location of ingested disk
batteries in the esophagus, immediate endoscopic removal is
mandatory.
The use of corticosteroids to prevent stricture formation is of no
proved benefit and is definitely contraindicated if there is evidence
of esophageal perforation.
B. Skin Contact
Wash with running water until the skin no longer feels soapy.
Relieve pain and treat shock.
C. Eye Contact
Anesthetize the conjunctival and corneal surfaces with topical
anesthetic (eg, proparacaine). Irrigate with water or saline
continuously for 20–30 minutes, holding the lids open. Check pH
with pH test paper, and repeat irrigation, using 0.9% saline, for
additional 30-minute periods until the pH is near 7.0. Check for
corneal damage with fluorescein and slit lamp examination; consult
an ophthalmologist for further treatment.
Pace F et al. What is new in esophageal injury (infection, drug-
induced, caustic, stricture, perforation)? Curr Opin Gastroenterol.
2009 Jul;25(4):372–9. [PMID: 19530274]
 
Schmidt SM et al. Corneal injury due to a calcium hydroxide
containing food preparation product (“cal”). Pediatr Emerg Care.
2008 Jul;24(7):468–70. [PMID: 18633308]
 
AMPHETAMINES & COCAINE
Amphetamines and cocaine are widely abused for their
euphorigenic and stimulant properties. Both drugs may be smoked,
snorted, ingested, or injected. Amphetamines and cocaine produce
central nervous system stimulation and a generalized increase in
central and peripheral sympathetic activity. The toxic dose of each
drug is highly variable and depends on the route of administration
and individual tolerance. The onset of effects is most rapid after
intravenous injection or smoking. Amphetamine derivatives and
related drugs include methamphetamine (“crystal meth,” “crank”),
MDMA 
(“Ecstasy”), 
ephedrine 
(“herbal 
ecstasy”), 
and
methcathinone (“cat” or “khat”). Nonprescription medications and
nutritional supplements may contain stimulant or sympathomimetic
drugs such as ephedrine, yohimbine, or caffeine (see also
Theophylline section).
 Clinical Findings
Presenting symptoms may include anxiety, tremulousness,
tachycardia, hypertension, diaphoresis, dilated pupils, agitation,
muscular hyperactivity, and psychosis. Muscle hyper-activity may
lead to metabolic acidosis and rhabdomyolysis. In severe
intoxication, seizures and hyperthermia may occur. Sustained or
severe hypertension may result in intracranial hemorrhage, aortic
dissection, or myocardial infarction. Ischemic colitis has been
reported. Hyponatremia has been reported after MDMA use; the
mechanism is not known but may involve excessive water intake,
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), or both.
The diagnosis is supported by finding amphetamines or the
cocaine metabolite benzoylecgonine in the urine. Note that many
drugs can give a false-positive result on the immunoassay for
amphetamines.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Maintain a patent airway and assist ventilation, if necessary. Treat
seizures as described at the beginning of this chapter. Rapidly lower
the body temperature (see hyperthermia, p 1521) in patients who
are hyperthermic (temperature > 39–40 °C).
B. Specific Treatment
Treat agitation, psychosis, or seizures with a benzodiazepine such as
diazepam, 5-10 mg, or lorazepam, 2–3 mg intravenously. Add
phenobarbital 15 mg/kg intravenously for persistent seizures. Treat
hypertension with a vasodilator drug such as phentolamine (1–5 mg
intravenously) or a combined α- and β-adrenergic blocker such as
labetalol (10–20 mg intravenously). Do not administer a pure β-
blocker such as propranolol alone, as this may result in paradoxic
worsening of the hypertension as a result of unopposed α-
adrenergic effects.
Treat tachycardia or tachyarrhythmias with a short-acting β-
blocker such as esmolol (25–100 mcg/kg/min by intravenous
infusion). Treat hyperthermia as described above. Treat
hyponatremia as outlined in Chapter 21.
Holubar SD et al. Methamphetamine colitis: a rare case of
ischemic colitis in a young patient. Arch Surg. 2009 Aug;144(8):
780–2. [PMID: 19687384]
 
Kiely E et al. A fatality from an oral ingestion of methamphetamine.
J Anal Toxicol. 2009 Oct;33(8):557–60. [PMID: 19874669]
 
ANTICOAGULANTS
Warfarin and related compounds (including ingredients of many
commercial rodenticides) inhibit the clotting mechanism by blocking
hepatic synthesis of vitamin K–dependent clotting factors.
Anticoagulants may cause hemoptysis, gross hematuria, bloody
stools, hemorrhages into organs, widespread bruising, and bleeding
into joint spaces. The prothrombin time is increased within 12–24
hours (peak 36–48 hours) after a single overdose. After ingestion of
brodifacoum, difenacoum, and related rodenticides (so-called
“superwarfarins”), inhibition of clotting factor synthesis may persist
for several weeks or even months after a single dose.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Discontinue the drug at the first sign of gross bleeding, and
determine the prothrombin time (international normalized ratio,
INR). If the patient has ingested an acute overdose, administer
activated charcoal (see p 1523).
B. Specific Treatment
Do not treat prophylactically with vitamin K—wait for evidence of
anticoagulation (elevated prothrombin time). If the INR is elevated,
give phytonadione (vitamin K1), 10–25 mg orally, and increase the
dose as needed to restore the prothrombin time to normal. Doses
as high as 200 mg/d have been required after ingestion of
“superwarfarins.” Give fresh-frozen plasma or activated Factor VII
as needed to rapidly correct the coagulation factor deficit if there is
serious bleeding. If the patient is chronically anticoagulated and has
strong medical indications for being maintained in that status (eg,
prosthetic heart valve), give much smaller doses of vitamin K (1 mg
orally) and fresh-frozen plasma (or both) to titrate to the desired
prothrombin time.
If the patient has ingested brodifacoum or a related
superwarfarin, prolonged observation (over weeks) and repeated
administration of large doses of vitamin K may be required.
Wiedermann CJ et al. Warfarin-induced bleeding complications—
clinical presentation and therapeutic options. Thromb Res.
2008;122(Suppl 2):S13–8. [PMID: 18549907]
 
Wu YF et al. Superwarfarin intoxication: hematuria is a major
clinical manifestation. Int J Hematol. 2009 Sep;90(2):170–3.
[PMID: 19588218]
 
ANTICONVULSANTS
Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproic acid, and
many newer agents) are widely used in the management of seizure
disorders and many are also used for treatment of mood disorders.
Phenytoin can be given orally or intravenously. Rapid
intravenous injection of phenytoin can cause acute myocardial
depression and cardiac arrest owing to the solvent propylene glycol
(fosphenytoin does not contain this diluent). Chronic phenytoin
intoxication can occur following only slightly increased doses
because of zero-order kinetics and a small toxic-therapeutic
window. Phenytoin intoxication can also occur following acute
intentional or accidental overdose. The overdose syndrome is
usually mild even with high serum levels. The most common
manifestations 
are 
ataxia, 
nystagmus, 
and 
drowsiness.
Choreoathetoid movements have been described.
Carbamazepine is used for treatment of trigeminal neuralgia,
temporal lobe epilepsy, and other seizure disorders. Intoxication
causes drowsiness, stupor and, with high levels, coma and seizures.
Dilated pupils and tachycardia are common. Toxicity may be seen
with serum levels > 20 mg/L (85 mcmol/L), though severe
poisoning is usually associated with concentrations > 30–40 mg/L
(127–169 mcmol/L). Because of erratic and slow absorption,
intoxication may progress over several hours to days.
Valproic acid intoxication produces a unique syndrome
consisting of hypernatremia (from the sodium component of the
salt), metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, elevated serum ammonia,
and mild liver aminotransferase elevation. Hypoglycemia may occur
as a result of hepatic metabolic dysfunction. Coma with small pupils
may be seen and can mimic opioid poisoning. Encephalopathy and
cerebral edema can occur.
The 
newer 
anticonvulsants gabapentin, levetiracetam,
vigabatrin, 
and zonisamide generally cause somnolence,
confusion and dizziness; felbamate can cause crystalluria and
kidney dysfunction after overdose, and may cause idiosyncratic
aplastic anemia with therapeutic use; lamotrigine, topiramate, and
tiagabine have been reported to cause seizures after overdose.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
For recent ingestions, give activated charcoal orally or by gastric
tube. For large ingestions of carbamazepine or valproic acid—
especially of sustained-release formulations—consider whole bowel
irrigation (see p 1523). Multiple-dose activated charcoal and
whole-bowel irrigation may be beneficial in ensuring gut
decontamination for selected large ingestions.
B. Specific Treatment
There are no specific antidotes. Naloxone was reported to have
reversed valproic acid overdose in one anecdotal case. Carnitine
may be useful in patients with valproic acid–induced
hyperammonemia. Consider hemodialysis for massive intoxication
with valproic acid or carbamazepine (eg, carbamazepine levels > 60
mg/L [254 mcmol/L] or valproic acid levels > 800 mg/L [5544
mcmol/L]).
Thanacoody RH. Extracorporeal elimination in acute valproic acid
poisoning. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2009 Aug;47(7):609–16. [PMID:
19656009]
 
Wade JF et al. Emergent complications of the newer
anticonvulsants. J Emerg Med. 2010 Feb;38(2):231–7. [PMID:
18762404]
 
ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS
Promethazine, prochlorperazine, chlorpromazine, haloperidol,
droperidol, risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone, quetiapine, and
aripiprazole are used as antipsychotic agents, and sometimes as
antiemetics and potentiators of analgesic and hypnotic drugs.
Phenothiazines (particularly chlorpromazine) induce drowsiness
and mild orthostatic hypotension in as many as 50% of patients.
Larger doses can cause obtundation, miosis, severe hypotension,
tachycardia, convulsions, and coma. Abnormal cardiac conduction
may occur, resulting in prolongation of QRS or QT intervals (or
both) and ventricular arrhythmias. Among the newer agents,
quetiapine is more likely to cause coma and hypotension.
With therapeutic or toxic doses, an acute extrapyramidal
dystonic reaction may develop in some patients, with spasmodic
contractions of the face and neck muscles, extensor rigidity of the
back muscles, carpopedal spasm, and motor restlessness. This
reaction is more common with haloperidol and the butyrophenones
and less common with newer atypical antipsychotics such as
ziprasidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole, and quetiapine. Severe rigidity
accompanied by hyperthermia and metabolic acidosis (“neuroleptic
malignant syndrome”) may occasionally occur and is life-threatening
(see Chapter 25).
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523) for large or recent
ingestions. For severe hypotension, treatment with intravenous fluids
and vasopressor agents may be necessary. Treat hyperthermia as
outlined on p 1521. Maintain cardiac monitoring.
B. Specific Treatment
Hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias associated with widened
QRS intervals on the ECG in a patient with thioridazine poisoning
may respond to intravenous sodium bicarbonate as used for tricyclic
antidepressants. Prolongation of the QT interval and torsades de
pointes is usually treated with intravenous magnesium or overdrive
pacing.
For extrapyramidal signs, give diphenhydramine, 0.5–1 mg/kg
intravenously, or benztropine mesylate, 0.01–0.02 mg/kg
intramuscularly. Treatment with oral doses of these agents should be
continued for 24–48 hours.
Bromocriptine (2.5–7.5 mg orally daily) may be effective for mild
or moderate neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Dantrolene (2–5
mg/kg intravenously) has also been used for muscle rigidity but is
not a true antidote. For severe hyperthermia, rapid neuromuscular
paralysis (see p 1521) is preferred.
Flanagan RJ. Fatal toxicity of drugs used in psychiatry. Hum
Psychopharmacol. 2008 Jan;23(Suppl 1):43–51. [PMID:
18098225]
 
Morris E et al. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome developing after
acute overdose with olanzapine and chlorpromazine. J Med
Toxicol. 2009 Mar;5(1):27–31. [PMID: 19191213]
 
Page CB et al. Promethazine overdose: clinical effects, predicting
delirium and the effect of charcoal. QJM. 2009 Feb;102(2): 123–
31. [PMID: 19042969]
 
ARSENIC
Arsenic is found in some pesticides and industrial chemicals, and
arsenic trioxide has recently been reintroduced as a
chemotherapeutic agent. A massive epidemic of chronic arsenic
poisoning has occurred in Bangladesh due to naturally occurring
arsenic in deep aquifers used for drinking water. Symptoms of acute
poisoning usually appear within 1 hour after ingestion but may be
delayed as long as 12 hours. They include abdominal pain, vomiting,
watery diarrhea, and skeletal muscle cramps. Profound dehydration
and shock may occur. In chronic poisoning, symptoms can be
vague but often include pancytopenia, painful peripheral sensory
neuropathy, and skin changes including melanosis, keratosis, and
desquamating rash. Urinary arsenic levels may be falsely elevated
after certain meals (eg, seafood) that contain large quantities of a
nontoxic form of organic arsenic.
 Treatment
A. Emergency Measures
After recent ingestion (within 1–2 hours), perform gastric lavage.
Activated charcoal is of uncertain benefit because it binds arsenic
poorly. Administer intravenous fluids to replace losses due to
vomiting and diarrhea.
B. Antidote
For patients with severe acute intoxication, give dimercaprol
injection (British anti-Lewisite, BAL), 10% solution in oil, 3–5
mg/kg intramuscularly every 4–6 hours for 2 days. The side effects
include nausea, vomiting, headache, and hyper-tension. Follow
dimercaprol with oral succimer (dimercaptosuccinic acid, DMSA),
10 mg/kg every 8 hours, for 1 week. Consult a medical toxicologist
or regional poison control center (800-222-1222) for advice
regarding chelation.
Balakumar P et al. Arsenic exposure and cardiovascular disorders:
an overview. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2009 Dec;9(4):169–76.
[PMID: 19787300]
 
Rahman MM et al. Chronic exposure of arsenic via drinking water
and its adverse health impacts on humans. Environ Geochem
Health. 2009 Apr;31(Suppl 1):189–200. [PMID: 19190988]
 
States JC et al. Arsenic and cardiovascular disease. Toxicol Sci.
2009 Feb;107(2):312–23. [PMID: 19015167]
 
ATROPINE & ANTICHOLINERGICS
Atropine, scopolamine, belladonna, diphenoxylate with atropine,
Datura stramonium, Hyoscyamus niger, some mushrooms,
tricyclic antidepressants, and antihistamines are antimuscarinic
agents with variable central nervous system effects. The patient
complains of dryness of the mouth, thirst, difficulty in swallowing,
and blurring of vision. The physical signs include dilated pupils,
flushed skin, tachycardia, fever, delirium, myoclonus, ileus, and
flushed appearance. Antidepressants and antihistamines may induce
convulsions.
Antihistamines are commonly available with or without
prescription. Diphenhydramine commonly causes delirium,
tachycardia, and seizures. Massive overdose may mimic tricyclic
antidepressant poisoning.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523). Tepid sponge baths
and sedation, or neuromuscular paralysis in rare cases, are indicated
to control high temperatures (see p 1521).
B. Specific Treatment
For severe anticholinergic syndrome (eg, agitated delirium), give
physostigmine salicylate, 0.5–1 mg slowly intravenously over 5
minutes, with ECG monitoring; repeat as needed to a total dose of
no more than 2 mg. Bradyarrhythmias and convulsions are a hazard
with physostigmine administration, and it should be avoided in
patients with cardiotoxic effects from tricyclic antidepressants or
other sodium channel blockers.
Irioka T et al. Opsoclonus caused by diphenhydramine self-
poisoning. J Neuroophthalmol. 2009 Mar;29(1):72–3. [PMID:
19458581]
 
Mateo Montoya A et al. Acute anticholinergic syndrome from
Atropa belladonna mistaken for blueberries. Eur J Ophthalmol.
2009 Jan–Feb;19(1):170–2. [PMID: 19123171]
 
β-ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS
There are a wide variety of β-adrenergic blocking drugs, with
varying pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic properties (see Table
11–7). The most toxic β-blocker is propranolol. Propranolol
competitively blocks β1 and β2 adrenoceptors and also has direct
membrane-depressant and central nervous system effects.
 Clinical Findings
The most common findings with mild or moderate intoxication are
hypotension and bradycardia. Cardiac depression from more
severe poisoning is often unresponsive to conventional therapy with
β-adrenergic stimulants such as dopamine and norepinephrine. In
addition, with propranolol and other lipid-soluble drugs, seizures
and coma may occur. Propranolol, oxprenolol, acebutolol, and
alprenolol also have membrane-depressant effects and can cause
conduction disturbance (wide QRS interval) similar to tricyclic
antidepressant overdose.
The diagnosis is based on typical clinical findings. Routine
toxicology screening does not usually include β-blockers.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Initially, attempt to treat bradycardia or heart block with atropine
(0.5–2 mg intravenously), isoproterenol (2–20 mcg/min by
intravenous infusion, titrated to the desired heart rate), or an
external transcutaneous cardiac pacemaker. However, these
measures are often ineffective, and specific antidotal treatment may
be necessary (see below).
For ingested drugs, administer activated charcoal (see p 1523).
B. Specific Treatment
For persistent bradycardia and hypotension, give glucagon, 5–10
mg intravenously, followed by an infusion of 1–5 mg/h. Glucagon is
an inotropic agent that acts at a different receptor site and is
therefore not affected by β-blockade. High-dose insulin (0.5-1
units/kg/h intravenously) along with glucose supplementation has
been used to reverse severe cardiotoxicity. Membrane-depressant
effects (wide QRS interval) may respond to boluses of sodium
bicarbonate (50–100 mEq intravenously) as for tricyclic
antidepressant poisoning. Intravenous lipid emulsion (Intralipid
20%) has been used successfully in severe propranolol overdose.
Dean P et al. Intravenous lipid emulsion in propranolol [corrected]
overdose. Anaesthesia. 2010 Nov;65(11):1148–50. [PMID:
20946403]
 
Page C et al. The use of high-dose insulin-glucose euglycemia in
beta-blocker overdose: a case report. J Med Toxicol. 2009
Sep;5(3):139–43. [PMID: 19655287]
 
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Calcium channel blockers are used to treat angina pectoris,
hypertension, supraventricular tachycardia, migraine, and other
disorders. In therapeutic doses, nifedipine, nicardipine, amlodipine,
felodipine, isradipine, nisoldipine, and nimodipine act mainly on
blood vessels, while verapamil and diltiazem act mainly on cardiac
contractility and conduction. However, these selective effects can
be lost after acute overdose. Patients may present with brady-
cardia, atrioventricular (AV) nodal block, hypotension, or a
combination of these effects. Hyperglycemia is common due to
blockade of insulin release. With severe poisoning, cardiac arrest
may occur.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
For ingested drugs, administer activated charcoal (see p 1523). In
addition, whole bowel irrigation should be initiated as soon as
possible if the patient has ingested a sustained-release product.
B. Specific Treatment
If bradycardia and hypotension are not reversed with atropine (0.5–
2 mg intravenously), isoproterenol (2–20 mcg/min by intravenous
infusion), or a transcutaneous cardiac pacemaker, administer
calcium intravenously. Start with calcium chloride 10%, 10 mL, or
calcium gluconate 10%, 20 mL. Repeat the dose every 3–5
minutes. The optimum (or maximum) dose has not been established,
but many toxicologists recommend raising the ionized serum calcium
level to as much as twice the normal level. Calcium is most useful in
reversing negative inotropic effects and is less effective for AV
nodal blockade and bradycardia. Epinephrine infusion (1–4
mcg/min initially) and glucagon (5–10 mg intravenously) have also
been recommended. In addition, high doses of insulin (0.5–1
units/kg intravenous bolus followed by 0.5–1 units/kg/h infusion)
along with sufficient dextrose to maintain euglycemia have been
reported to be beneficial but there are no controlled studies.
Infusion of Intralipid 20% lipid emulsion has been reported to
improve hemodynamics in an animal model of verapamil poisoning.
Abeysinghe N et al. Diltiazem overdose: a role for high-dose
insulin. Emerg Med J. 2010 Oct;27(10):802–3. [PMID:
20660906]
 
Young AC et al. Intravenous fat emulsion therapy for intentional
sustained-release verapamil overdose. Resuscitation. 2009
May;80(5):591–3. [PMID: 19282085]
 
CARBON MONOXIDE
Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless gas produced by the
combustion of carbon-containing materials. Poisoning may occur as
a result of suicidal or accidental exposure to automobile exhaust,
smoke inhalation in a fire, or accidental exposure to an improperly
vented gas heater, generator, or other appliance. Carbon monoxide
avidly binds to hemoglobin, with an affinity approximately 250 times
that of oxygen. This results in reduced oxygen-carrying capacity and
altered delivery of oxygen to cells (see also Smoke Inhalation in
Chapter 9).
 Clinical Findings
At low carbon monoxide levels (carboxyhemoglobin saturation 10–
20%), victims may have headache, dizziness, abdominal pain, and
nausea. With higher levels, confusion, dyspnea, and syncope may
occur. Hypotension, coma, and seizures are common with levels >
50–60%. Survivors of acute severe poisoning may develop
permanent obvious or subtle neurologic and neuropsychiatric
deficits. The fetus and newborn may be more susceptible because
of high carbon monoxide affinity for fetal hemoglobin.
Carbon monoxide poisoning should be suspected in any person
with severe headache or acutely altered mental status, especially
during cold weather, when improperly vented heating systems may
have been used. Diagnosis depends on specific measurement of the
arterial or venous carboxyhemoglobin saturation, although the level
may have declined if high-flow oxygen therapy has already been
administered, and levels do not always correlate with clinical
symptoms. Routine arterial blood gas testing and pulse oximetry are
not useful because they give falsely normal Pao2 and oxyhemoglobin
saturation determinations, respectively. (A newer pulse oximetry
device, the pulse CO-oximeter [Masimo Rad-57] is capable of
distinguishing oxyhemoglobin from carboxyhemoglobin.)
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Maintain a patent airway and assist ventilation, if necessary.
Remove the victim from exposure. Treat patients with coma,
hypotension, or seizures as described at the beginning of this
chapter.
B. Specific Treatment
The half-life of the carboxyhemoglobin (CoHb) complex is about
4–5 hours in room air but is reduced dramatically by high
concentrations of oxygen. Administer 100% oxygen by tight-fitting
high-flow reservoir face mask or endotracheal tube. Hyperbaric
oxygen (HBO) can provide 100% oxygen under higher than
atmospheric pressures, further shortening the half-life; it may also
reduce the incidence of subtle neuropsychiatric sequelae.
Randomized controlled studies disagree about the benefit of HBO,
but commonly recommended indications for HBO in patients with
carbon monoxide poisoning include a history of loss of
consciousness, CoHb > 25%, metabolic acidosis, age over 50
years, and cerebellar findings on neurologic examination.
Annane D et al. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for acute domestic
carbon monoxide poisoning: two randomized controlled trials.
Intensive Care Med. 2010 Mar;37(3):486–9. [PMID: 21125215]
 
Wolf SJ et al; American College of Emergency Physicians. Clinical
policy: Critical issues in the management of adult patients
presenting to the emergency department with acute carbon
monoxide poisoning. Ann Emerg Med. 2008 Feb;51(2):138–52.
[PMID: 18206551]
 
CLONIDINE & OTHER SYMPATHOLYTIC
ANTIHYPERTENSIVES
Overdosage with these agents (clonidine, guanabenz, guanfacine,
methyldopa) causes bradycardia, hypotension, miosis, respiratory
depression, and coma. (Transient hypertension occasionally occurs
after acute overdosage, a result of peripheral α-adrenergic effects in
high doses.) Symptoms are usually resolved in < 24 hours, and
deaths are rare. Similar symptoms may occur after ingestion of
topical nasal decongestants chemically similar to clonidine
(oxymetazoline, tetrahydrozoline, naphazoline). Brimonidine is used
as an ophthalmic preparation for glaucoma. Tizanidine is a centrally
acting muscle relaxant structurally related to clonidine; it produces
similar toxicity in overdose.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Give activated charcoal (see p 1523). Maintain the airway and
support respiration if necessary. Symptomatic treatment is usually
sufficient even in massive overdose. Maintain blood pressure with
intravenous fluids. Dopamine can also be used. Atropine is usually
effective for bradycardia.
B. Specific Treatment
There is no specific antidote. Although tolazoline has been
recommended for clonidine overdose, its effects are unpredictable
and it should not be used. Naloxone has been reported to be
successful in a few anecdotal and poorly substantiated cases.
Farooqi M et al. Toxicity from a clonidine suspension. J Med
Toxicol. 2009 Sep;5(3):130–3. [PMID: 19655285]
 
COCAINE
See Amphetamines & Cocaine.
CYANIDE
Cyanide is a highly toxic chemical used widely in research and
commercial laboratories and many industries. Its gaseous form,
hydrogen cyanide, is an important component of smoke in fires.
Cyanide-generating glycosides are also found in the pits of apricots
and other related plants. Cyanide is generated by the breakdown of
nitroprusside, and poisoning can result from rapid high-dose
infusions. Cyanide is also formed by metabolism of acetonitrile, a
solvent found in some over-the-counter fingernail glue removers.
Cyanide is rapidly absorbed by inhalation, skin absorption, or
ingestion. It disrupts cellular function by inhibiting cytochrome
oxidase and preventing cellular oxygen utilization.
 Clinical Findings
The onset of toxicity is nearly instantaneous after inhalation of
hydrogen cyanide gas but may be delayed for minutes to hours after
ingestion of cyanide salts or cyanogenic plants or chemicals. Effects
include headache, dizziness, nausea, abdominal pain, and anxiety,
followed by confusion, syncope, shock, seizures, coma, and death.
The odor of “bitter almonds” may be detected on the victim's breath
or in vomitus, though this is not a reliable finding. The venous
oxygen saturation may be elevated (> 90%) in severe poisonings
because tissues have failed to take up arterial oxygen.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Remove the victim from exposure, taking care to avoid exposure to
rescuers. For suspected cyanide poisoning due to nitroprusside
infusion, stop or slow the rate of infusion. (Metabolic acidosis and
other signs of cyanide poisoning usually clear rapidly.)
For cyanide ingestion, administer activated charcoal (see p
1523). Although charcoal has a low affinity for cyanide, the usual
doses of 60–100 g are adequate to bind typically ingested lethal
doses (100–200 mg).
B. Specific Treatment
In the United States, there are two available cyanide antidote
regimens. The conventional cyanide antidote package (Taylor
Pharmaceuticals) (Table 38–7) contains nitrites (to induce
methemoglobinemia, which binds free cyanide) and thiosulfate (to
promote conversion of cyanide to the less toxic thiocyanate).
Administer amyl nitrite by crushing an ampule under the victim's
nose or at the end of the endotracheal tube, and administer 3%
sodium nitrite solution, 10 mL intravenously. Caution: Nitrites may
induce hypotension and dangerous levels of methemoglobin. Also
administer 25% sodium thiosulfate solution, 50 mL intravenously
(12.5 g).
The other approved cyanide treatment in the United States is
hydroxocobalamin (Cyanokit, EMD Pharmaceuticals), a newer and
potentially safer antidote. The dose of hydroxocobalamin is 5 g
intravenously (children, 70 mg/kg).
Barillo DJ. Diagnosis and treatment of cyanide toxicity. J Burn
Care Res. 2009 Jan–Feb;30(1):148–52. [PMID: 19060738]
 
Eckstein M. Enhancing public health preparedness for a terrorist
attack involving cyanide. J Emerg Med. 2008 Jul;35(1):59–65.
[PMID: 17976798]
 
Shepherd G et al. Role of hydroxocobalamin in acute cyanide
poisoning. Ann Pharmacother. 2008 May;42(5):661–9. [PMID:
18397973]
 
DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS & HERBAL PRODUCTS
Following passage of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education
Act (DSHEA) in 1994, there has been an increase in the use of
dietary supplements and herbal medicines in the United States.
Unlike prescription and over-the-counter pharmaceuticals, dietary
supplements do not require FDA approval, do not undergo the
same pre-marketing evaluation of safety and efficacy as drugs, and
purveyors may or may not adhere to good manufacturing practices
and quality control standards. Supplements may cause illness as a
result of intrinsic toxicity, misidentification or mislabeling, drug-herb
reactions, or adulteration with pharmaceuticals. If you suspect a
dietary supplement or herbal product may be the cause of an
otherwise unexplained illness, contact the FDA (1-888-463-6332)
or the regional poison control center (1-800-222-1222), or consult
one 
of 
the 
following 
online 
databases:
http://www.naturaldatabase.com, 
http://www.herbmed.org,
http://www.fda.gov/food/dietarysupplements/default.htm.
 
Table 38–7. Currently available cyanide (CN) antidote kits.
 
1 In the United States, manufactured by Taylor Pharmaceuticals.
2 Manufactured by EMD Pharmaceuticals.
 
Table 38–8. Examples of potential toxicity associated with some
dietary supplements and herbal medicines.
 
Adapted, with permission, from Table II-30 by Haller C in “Herbal and
Alternative Products,” In: Olson KR (ed.) Poisoning & Drug Overdose, 5th
edition, McGraw Hill, 2007.
Table 38–8 lists selected examples of clinical toxicity from some
these products.
Ashar BH. The dietary supplement health and education act: time
for a reassessment: comment on “acute selenium toxicity
associated with a dietary supplement”. Arch Intern Med. 2010
Feb 8;170(3):261–3. [PMID: 20142571]
 
DIGITALIS & OTHER CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES
Cardiac glycosides are derived from a variety of plants and are
widely used to treat heart failure and supraventricular arrhythmias.
These drugs paralyze the Na+-K+-ATPase pump and have potent
vagotonic effects. Intracellular effects include enhancement of
calcium-dependent contractility and shortening of the action
potential duration. A number of plants (eg, oleander, foxglove, lily-
of-the-valley) contain cardiac glycosides. Bufotenin, a cardiotoxic
steroid found in certain toad secretions and used as an herbal
medicine and a purported aphrodisiac, has pharmacologic
properties similar to cardiac glycosides.
 Clinical Findings
Intoxication may result from acute single exposure or chronic
accidental overmedication. After acute overdosage, nausea and
vomiting, bradycardia, hyperkalemia, and AV block frequently
occur. Patients in whom toxicity develops gradually during long-
term therapy may be hypokalemic and hypomagnesemic owing to
concurrent diuretic treatment and more commonly present with
ventricular arrhythmias (eg, ectopy, bidirectional ventricular
tachycardia, or ventricular fibrillation). Digoxin levels may be only
slightly elevated in patients with intoxication from cardiac glycosides
other than digoxin because of limited cross- reactivity of
immunologic tests.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
After acute ingestion, administer activated charcoal (see p 1523).
Monitor potassium levels and cardiac rhythm closely. Treat
bradycardia initially with atropine (0.5–2 mg intravenously) or a
transcutaneous external cardiac pacemaker.
B. Specific Treatment
For patients with significant intoxication, administer digoxin-specific
antibodies (digoxin immune Fab [ovine]; Digibind or DigiFab).
Estimation of the Digibind dose is based on the body burden of
digoxin calculated from the ingested dose or the steady-state serum
digoxin concentration, as described below. More effective binding
of digoxin may occur if the dose is given partly as a bolus and the
remainder as an infusion over a few hours.
1. From the ingested dose—Number of vials = approximately
1.5–2 × ingested dose (mg).
2. From the serum concentration—Number of vials = serum
digoxin (ng/mL) × body weight (kg) × 10–2. Note: This is based on
the equilibrium digoxin level; after acute overdose, serum levels may
be falsely high before tissue distribution is complete, and
overestimation of the Digibind or DigiFab dose is likely.
3. Empiric dosing—Empiric titration of Digibind or DigiFab may
be used if the patient's condition is relatively stable and an
underlying condition (eg, atrial fibrillation) favors retaining a residual
level of digitalis activity. Start with one or two vials and reassess the
patient's clinical condition after 20–30 minutes. For cardiac
glycosides other than digoxin or digitoxin, there is no formula for
estimation of vials needed and treatment is entirely based on
response to empiric dosing.
Note After administration of digoxin-specific Fab antibody
fragments, serum digoxin levels may be falsely elevated depending
on the assay technique.
Eyer F et al. Free and total digoxin in serum during treatment of
acute digoxin poisoning with Fab fragments: case study. Am J Crit
Care. 2010 Jul;19(4):391–87. [PMID: 19875723]
 
Lapostolle F et al. Digoxin-specific Fab fragments as single first-
line therapy in digitalis poisoning. Crit Care Med. 2008
Nov;36(11):3014–8. [PMID: 18824911]
 
Rajapakse S. Management of yellow oleander poisoning. Clin
Toxicol (Phila). 2009 Mar;47(3):206–12. [PMID: 19306191]
 
ETHANOL, BENZODIAZEPINES, & OTHER SEDATIVE-
HYPNOTIC AGENTS
The group of agents known as sedative-hypnotic drugs includes a
variety of products used for the treatment of anxiety, depression,
insomnia, and epilepsy. Besides common benzodiazepines, such as
lorazepam, alprazolam, diazepam, oxazepam, chlordiazepoxide,
and triazolam, this group includes the newer benzodiazepine-like
hypnotics zolpidem and zaleplon, and the muscle relaxant
carisoprodol. Ethanol and other selected agents are also popular
recreational drugs. All of these drugs depress the central nervous
system reticular activating system, cerebral cortex, and cerebellum.
 Clinical Findings
Mild intoxication produces euphoria, slurred speech, and ataxia.
Ethanol intoxication may produce hypoglycemia, even at relatively
low concentrations. With more severe intoxication, stupor, coma,
and respiratory arrest may occur. Carisoprodol (Soma) commonly
causes muscle jerking or myoclonus. Death or serious morbidity is
usually the result of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents.
Bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia are common. Patients
with massive intoxication may appear to be dead, with no reflex
responses and even absent electroencephalographic activity.
Diagnosis and assessment of severity of intoxication are usually
based on clinical findings. Ethanol serum levels > 300 mg/dL (0.3
g/dL; 65 mmol/L) can produce coma in persons who are not
chronically abusing the drug, but regular users may remain awake at
much higher levels.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer activated charcoal if the patient has ingested a massive
dose and the airway is protected (see p 1523). Repeat-dose
charcoal may enhance elimination of pheno-barbital, but it has not
been proved to improve clinical outcome. Hemodialysis may be
necessary for patients with severe phenobarbital intoxication.
B. Specific Treatment
Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine receptor-specific antagonist; it has
no effect on ethanol, barbiturates, or other sedative-hypnotic
agents. If used, flumazenil is given slowly intravenously, 0.2 mg over
30–60 seconds, and repeated in 0.2-0.5 mg increments as needed
up to a total dose of 3–5 mg. Caution: Flumazenil may induce
seizures in patients with preexisting seizure disorder, benzodiazepine
addiction, or concomitant tricyclic antidepressant overdose. If
seizures occur, diazepam and other benzodiazepine anticonvulsants
will not be effective. As with naloxone, the duration of action of
flumazenil is short (2–3 hours) and resedation may occur, requiring
repeated doses.
Cantrell FL et al. Death on the doorstep of a border community—
intentional self-poisoning with veterinary pentobarbital. Clin
Toxicol (Phila). 2010 Oct;48(8):849–50. [PMID: 20738183]
 
Charlson F et al. A systematic review of research examining
benzodiazepine-related mortality. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf.
2009 Feb;18(2):93–103. [PMID: 19125401]
 
Ngo AS et al. Should a benzodiazepine antagonist be used in
unconscious patients presenting to the emergency department?
Resuscitation. 2007 Jul;74(1):27–37. [PMID: 17306436]
 
γ-HYDROXYBUTYRATE (GHB)
GHB has become a popular drug of abuse. It originated as a short-
acting general anesthetic and is occasionally used in the treatment of
narcolepsy. It gained popularity among bodybuilders for its alleged
growth hormone stimulation and found its way into social settings,
where it is consumed as a liquid. It has been used to facilitate sexual
assault (“date-rape” drug). Symptoms after ingestion include
drowsiness and lethargy followed by coma with respiratory
depression. Muscle twitching and seizures are sometimes observed.
Recovery is usually rapid, with patients awakening within a few
hours. Other related chemicals with similar effects include
butanediol and γ-butyrolactone (GBL). A prolonged withdrawal
syndrome has been described in some heavy users.
 Treatment
Monitor the airway and assist breathing if needed. There is no
specific treatment. Most patients recover rapidly with supportive
care. GHB withdrawal syndrome may require very large doses of
benzodiazepines.
Carter LP et al. Illicit gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB) and
pharmaceutical sodium oxybate (Xyrem): differences in
characteristics and misuse. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009 Sep
1;104(1–2):1–10. [PMID: 19493637]
 
Zvosec DL et al. Case series of 226 γ-hydroxybutyrate-associated
deaths: lethal toxicity and trauma. Am J Emerg Med. 2011
Mar;29(3):319–32. [PMID: 20825811]
 
HYPOGLYCEMIC DRUGS
Medications used for diabetes mellitus include insulin, sulfonylureas
and other insulin secretagogues, α-glucosidase inhibitors (acarbose,
miglitol), biguanides (metformin), thiazolidinediones (pioglitazone,
rosiglitazone), and newer peptide analogs (pramlintide, exenatide)
or enhancers (sitagliptin) (see Chapter 27). Of these, insulin and the
insulin secretagogues are the most likely to cause hypoglycemia.
Metformin can cause lactic acidosis, especially in patients with renal
insufficiency or after intentional drug overdose. Table 27–8 lists the
duration of hypoglycemic effect of oral hypoglycemic agents and
Figure 27–1 the extent and duration of various types of insulins.
 Clinical Findings
Hypoglycemia may occur quickly after injection of short-acting
insulins or may be delayed and prolonged, especially if a large
amount has been injected into a single area, creating a “depot”
effect. Hypoglycemia after sulfonylurea ingestion is usually apparent
within a few hours but may be delayed several hours, especially if
food or glucose-containing fluids have been given.
 Treatment
Give sugar and carbohydrate-containing food or liquids by mouth,
or intravenous dextrose if the patient is unable to swallow safely.
For severe hypoglycemia, start with D50W, 50 mL intravenously
(25 g dextrose); repeat, if needed. Follow up with dextrose-
containing intravenous fluids (D5W or D10W) to maintain a blood
glucose > 70–80 mg/dL.
For hypoglycemia caused by sulfonylureas and related insulin
secretagogues, consider use of octreotide, a synthetic somatostatin
analog that blocks pancreatic insulin release. A dose of 50–100
mcg octreotide subcutaneously every 6–12 hours can reduce the
need for exogenous dextrose and prevent rebound hypoglycemia
from excessive dextrose dosing.
Admit all patients with symptomatic hypoglycemia after
sulfonylurea overdose. Observe asymptomatic overdose patients
for at least 12 hours.
Dougherty PP et al. Octreotide's role in the management of
sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia. J Med Toxicol. 2010
Jun;6(2):199–206. [PMID: 20352540]
 
Fasano CJ et al. Quantitative insulin and C-peptide levels among
ED patients with sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia-a prospective
case series. Am J Emerg Med. 2010 Oct;28(8):952–5. [PMID:
20887914]
 
IRON
Iron is widely used therapeutically for the treatment of anemia and
as a daily supplement in multiple vitamin preparations. Most
children's preparations contain about 12–15 mg of elemental iron
(as sulfate, gluconate, or fumarate salt) per dose, compared with
60–90 mg in most adult-strength preparations. Iron is corrosive to
the gastrointestinal tract and, once absorbed, has depressant effects
on the myocardium and on peripheral vascular resistance.
Intracellular toxic effects of iron include disruption of Krebs cycle
enzymes.
 Clinical Findings
Ingestion of < 30 mg/kg of elemental iron usually produces only
mild gastrointestinal upset. Ingestion of > 40–60 mg/kg may cause
vomiting (sometimes with hematemesis), diarrhea, hypotension, and
acidosis. Death may occur as a result of profound hypotension due
to massive fluid losses and bleeding, metabolic acidosis, peritonitis
from intestinal perforation, or sepsis. Fulminant hepatic failure may
occur. Survivors of the acute ingestion may suffer permanent
gastrointestinal scarring.
Serum iron levels > 350–500 mcg/dL are considered potentially
toxic, and levels > 1000 mcg/dL are usually associated with severe
poisoning. A plain abdominal radio-graph may reveal radiopaque
tablets.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Treat hypotension aggressively with intravenous crystalloid solutions
(0.9% saline or lactated Ringer solution). Fluid losses may be
massive owing to vomiting and diarrhea as well as third-spacing into
injured intestine.
Perform whole bowel irrigation to remove unabsorbed pills from
the intestinal tract (see p 1523). Activated charcoal is not effective
but may be appropriate if other ingestants are suspected.
B. Specific Treatment
Deferoxamine is a selective iron chelator. It is not useful as an oral
binding agent. For patients with established manifestations of
toxicity—and particularly those with markedly elevated serum iron
levels (eg, > 800–1000 mcg/dL)—administer 10–15 mg/kg/h by
constant intravenous infusion; higher doses (up to 40–50 mg/kg/h)
have been used in massive poisonings. Hypotension may occur. The
presence of an iron-deferoxamine complex in the urine may give it a
“vin rosé” appearance. Deferoxamine is safe for use in pregnant
women with acute iron overdose. Caution: Prolonged infusion of
deferoxamine (> 36–48 hours) has been associated with
development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)—the
mechanism is not known.
Ng HW et al. Endoscopic removal of iron bezoar following acute
overdose. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2008 Nov;46(9):913–5. [PMID:
18608283]
 
ISONIAZID
INH is an antibacterial drug used mainly in the treatment and
prevention of tuberculosis. It may cause hepatitis with long-term
use, especially in alcoholic patients and elderly persons. It produces
acute toxic effects by competing with pyridoxal 5-phosphate,
resulting in lowered brain γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels.
Acute ingestion of as little as 1.5–2 g of INH can cause toxicity,
and severe poisoning is likely to occur after ingestion of more than
80–100 mg/kg.
 Clinical Findings
Confusion, slurred speech, and seizures may occur abruptly after
acute overdose. Severe lactic acidosis—out of proportion to the
severity of seizures—is probably due to inhibited metabolism of
lactate. Peripheral neuropathy and acute hepatitis may occur with
long-term use.
Diagnosis is based on a history of ingestion and the presence of
severe acidosis associated with seizures. INH is not usually included
in routine toxicologic screening, and serum levels are not readily
available.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Seizures may require higher than usual doses of benzodiazepines
(eg, lorazepam, 3–5 mg intravenously) or administration of
pyridoxine as an antidote (see below).
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523) after large recent
ingestion, but with caution because of the risk of abrupt onset of
seizures.
B. Specific Treatment
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) is a specific antagonist of the acute toxic
effects of INH and is usually successful in controlling convulsions
that do not respond to benzodiazepines. Give 5 g intravenously over
1–2 minutes or, if the amount ingested is known, give a gram-for-
gram equivalent amount of pyridoxine. Patients taking INH are
usually given 25–50 mg of pyridoxine orally daily to help prevent
neuropathy.
Gokhale YA et al. Isoniazid toxicity presenting as status epilepticus
and severe metabolic acidosis. J Assoc Physicians India. 2009
Jan;57:70–1. [PMID: 19753763]
 
Tai WP et al. Coma caused by isoniazid poisoning in a patient
treated with pyridoxine and hemodialysis. Adv Ther. 2008
Oct;25(10):1085–8. [PMID: 18807228]
 
LEAD
Lead is used in a variety of industrial and commercial products,
such as storage batteries, solders, paints, pottery, plumbing, and
gasoline and is found in some traditional Hispanic and Ayurvedic
ethnic medicines. Lead toxicity usually results from chronic repeated
exposure and is rare after a single ingestion. Lead produces a
variety of adverse effects on cellular function and primarily affects
the nervous system, gastrointestinal tract, and hematopoietic system.
 Clinical Findings
Lead poisoning often goes undiagnosed initially because presenting
symptoms and signs are nonspecific and exposure is not suspected.
Common symptoms include colicky abdominal pain, constipation,
headache, and irritability. Severe poisoning may cause coma and
convulsions. Chronic intoxication can cause learning disorders (in
children) and motor neuropathy (eg, wrist drop). Lead-containing
bullet fragments in or near joint spaces can result in chronic lead
toxicity.
Diagnosis is based on measurement of the blood lead level.
Whole blood lead levels < 10 mcg/dL are usually considered
nontoxic. Levels between 10 and 25 mcg/dL have been associated
with impaired neurobehavioral development in children. Levels of
25–50 mcg/dL may be associated with headache, irritability, and
subclinical neuropathy. Levels of 50–70 mcg/dL are associated with
moderate toxicity, and levels > 70–100 mcg/dL are often
associated with severe poisoning. Other laboratory findings of lead
poisoning include microcytic anemia with basophilic stippling and
elevated free erythrocyte protoporphyrin.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
For patients with encephalopathy, maintain a patent airway and
treat coma and convulsions as described at the beginning of this
chapter.
For recent acute ingestion, if a large lead-containing object (eg,
fishing weight) is still visible in the stomach on abdominal
radiograph, whole bowel irrigation (see p 1523), endoscopy, or
even surgical removal may be necessary to prevent subacute lead
poisoning. (The acidic gastric contents may corrode the metal
surface, enhancing lead absorption. Once the object passes into the
small intestine, the risk of toxicity declines.)
Conduct an investigation into the source of the lead exposure.
Workers with a single lead level > 60 mcg/dL (or three
successive monthly levels > 50 mcg/dL) or construction workers
with any single blood lead level > 50 mcg/dL must by federal law
be removed from the site of exposure. Contact the regional office of
the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) for more information. Several states mandate reporting of
cases of confirmed lead poisoning.
B. Specific Treatment
The indications for chelation depend on the blood lead level and the
patient's clinical state. A medical toxicologist or regional poison
control center (800-222-1222) should be consulted for advice
about selection and use of these antidotes.
Note It is impermissible under the law to treat asymptomatic
workers with elevated blood lead levels in order to keep their levels
< 50 mcg/dL rather than remove them from the exposure.
1. 
Severe 
toxicity—Patients 
with 
severe 
intoxication
(encephalopathy or levels > 70–100 mcg/dL) should receive
edetate calcium disodium (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, EDTA),
1500 mg/m2/kg/d (approximately 50 mg/kg/d) in four to six divided
doses or as a continuous intravenous infusion. Most clinicians also
add dimercaprol (BAL), 4–5 mg/kg intramuscularly every 4 hours
for 5 days, for patients with encephalopathy.
2. Less severe toxicity—Patients with less severe symptoms and
asymptomatic patients with blood lead levels between 55 and 69
mcg/dL may be treated with edetate calcium disodium alone in
dosages as above. An oral chelator, succimer (DMSA), is available
for use in patients with mild to moderate intoxication. The usual
dose is 10 mg/kg orally every 8 hours for 5 days, then every 12
hours for 2 weeks.
Bradberry S et al. Dimercaptosuccinic acid (succimer; DMSA) in
inorganic lead poisoning. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2009
Aug;47(7):617–31. [PMID: 19663612]
 
Rehani B et al. Lead poisoning from a gunshot wound. South Med
J. 2011 Jan;104(1):57–8. [PMID: 21079537]
 
Saper RB et al. Lead, mercury, and arsenic in US- and Indian-
manufactured Ayurvedic medicines sold via the Internet. JAMA.
2008 Aug 27;300(8):915–23. [PMID: 18728265]
 
LSD & OTHER HALLUCINOGENS
A variety of substances—ranging from naturally occurring plants
and mushrooms to synthetic substances such as phencyclidine
(PCP), toluene and other solvents, dextromethorphan, and lysergic
acid diethylamide (LSD)—are abused for their hallucinogenic
properties. The mechanism of toxicity and the clinical effects vary
for each substance.
Many 
hallucinogenic 
plants 
and 
mushrooms 
produce
anticholinergic delirium, characterized by flushed skin, dry mucous
membranes, dilated pupils, tachycardia, and urinary retention. Other
plants and mushrooms may contain hallucinogenic indoles such as
mescaline and LSD, which typically cause marked visual
hallucinations and perceptual distortion, widely dilated pupils, and
mild tachycardia. PCP, a dissociative anesthetic agent similar to
ketamine, can produce fluctuating delirium and coma, often
associated with vertical and horizontal nystagmus. Toluene and
other hydrocarbon solvents (butane, trichloroethylene, “chemo,”
etc) cause euphoria and delirium and may sensitize the myocardium
to the effects of catecholamines, leading to fatal dysrhythmias.
Newer drugs used for their psychostimulant effects include synthetic
cannabinoid receptor agonists (street names include “spice” and
“K2”), Salvia divinorum, and mephedrone. See www.erowid.org
for very thorough descriptions of hundreds of hallucinogenic
substances.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Maintain a patent airway and assist respirations if necessary. Treat
coma, hyperthermia, hypertension, and seizures as outlined at the
beginning of this chapter. For recent large ingestions, consider giving
activated charcoal orally or by gastric tube.
B. Chronic Poisoning
Patients with anticholinergic delirium may benefit from a dose of
physostigmine, 0.5–1 mg intravenously, not to exceed 1 mg/min.
Dysphoria, agitation, and psychosis associated with LSD or
mescaline intoxication may respond to benzodiazepines (eg,
lorazepam, 1–2 mg orally or intravenously) or haloperidol (2–5 mg
intramuscularly or intravenously) or another antipsychotic drug (eg,
olanzapine or ziprasidone). Monitor patients who have sniffed
solvents for cardiac dysrhythmias (most commonly premature
ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular
fibrillation); treatment with β-blockers such as propranolol (1–5 mg
intravenously) or esmolol (250–500 mcg/kg intravenously, then 50
mcg/kg/min by infusion) may be more effective than lidocaine.
Atwood BK et al. JWH018, a common constituent of ‘Spice’
herbal blends, is a potent and efficacious cannabinoid CB receptor
agonist. Br J Pharmacol. 2010 Jun;160(3):585–93. [PMID:
20100276]
 
Björnstad K et al. Bioanalytical and clinical evaluation of 103
suspected cases of intoxications with psychoactive plant materials.
Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2009 Jul;47(6):566–72. [PMID: 19586355]
 
Jamison SC et al. A 60-year-old woman with agitation and
psychosis following ingestion of dextromethorphan and opioid
analgesics. J Psychopharmacol. 2009 Nov;23(8): 989–91.
[PMID: 18583439]
 
MERCURY
Acute mercury poisoning usually occurs by ingestion of inorganic
mercuric salts or inhalation of metallic mercury vapor. Ingestion of
the mercuric salts causes a burning sensation in the throat,
discoloration and edema of oral mucous membranes, abdominal
pain, vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and shock. Direct nephrotoxicity
causes acute kidney injury. Inhalation of high concentrations of
metallic mercury vapor may cause acute fulminant chemical
pneumonia. Chronic mercury poisoning causes weakness, ataxia,
intention tremors, irritability, and depression. Exposure to alkyl
(organic) mercury derivatives from highly contaminated fish or
fungicides used on seeds has caused ataxia, tremors, convulsions,
and catastrophic birth defects. Nearly all fish have some traces of
mercury contamination; the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) advises consumers to avoid swordfish, shark, king mackerel,
and tilefish because they contain higher levels. Fish that are generally
low in mercury content include shrimp, canned light tuna (not
albacore “white” tuna), salmon, pollock, and catfish. Dental fillings
composed of mercury amalgam pose a very small risk of chronic
mercury poisoning and their removal is rarely justified.
 Treatment
A. Acute Poisoning
There is no effective specific treatment for mercury vapor
pneumonitis. Remove ingested mercuric salts by lavage, and
administer activated charcoal (see p 1523). For acute ingestion of
mercuric salts, give dimercaprol (BAL) at once, as for arsenic
poisoning. Unless the patient has severe gastroenteritis, consider
succimer (DMSA), 10 mg/kg orally every 8 hours for 5 days and
then every 12 hours for 2 weeks. Unithiol (DMPS) is a chelator that
can be given orally or parenterally, but is not commonly available in
the United States. Maintain urinary output. Treat oliguria and anuria
if they occur.
B. Chronic Poisoning
Remove from exposure. Neurologic toxicity is not considered
reversible with chelation, although some authors recommend a trial
of succimer or unithiol (contact a regional poison center or medical
toxicologist for advice).
Bradberry SM et al. DMPS can reverse the features of severe
mercury vapor-induced neurological damage. Clin Toxicol (Phila).
2009 Nov;47(9):894–8. [PMID: 19852623]
 
Vearrier D et al. Care of patients who are worried about mercury
poisoning from dental fillings. J Am Board Fam Med. 2010 Nov–
Dec;23(6):797–8. [PMID: 21057078]
 
METHANOL & ETHYLENE GLYCOL
Methanol (wood alcohol) is commonly found in a variety of
products, including solvents, duplicating fluids, record cleaning
solutions, and paint removers. It is sometimes ingested intentionally
by alcoholic patients as a substitute for ethanol and may also be
found as a contaminant in bootleg whiskey. Ethylene glycol is the
major constituent in most antifreeze compounds. The toxicity of
both agents is caused by metabolism to highly toxic organic acids—
methanol to formic acid; ethylene glycol to glycolic and oxalic acids.
Diethylene glycol is a nephrotoxic solvent that has been improperly
substituted for glycerine in various liquid medications (cough syrup,
teething medicine, acetaminophen) causing numerous deaths in
Haiti, Panama, and Nigeria.
 Clinical Findings
Shortly after ingestion of methanol or ethylene glycol, patients
usually appear “drunk.” The serum osmolality (measured with the
freezing point device) is usually increased, but acidosis is often
absent early. After several hours, metabolism to toxic organic acids
leads to a severe anion gap metabolic acidosis, tachypnea,
confusion, convulsions, and coma. Methanol intoxication frequently
causes visual disturbances, while ethylene glycol often produces
oxalate crystalluria and acute renal failure.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
For patients presenting within 30–60 minutes after ingestion, empty
the stomach by aspiration through a nasogastric tube (see p 1522).
Charcoal is not very effective but should be administered if other
poisons or drugs have also been ingested.
B. Specific Treatment
Patients with significant toxicity (manifested by severe metabolic
acidosis, altered mental status, and markedly elevated osmol gap)
should undergo hemodialysis as soon as possible to remove the
parent compound and the toxic metabolites. Treatment with folic
acid, thiamine, and pyridoxine may enhance the breakdown of toxic
metabolites.
Ethanol blocks metabolism of the parent compounds by
competing for the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase. Fomepizole (4-
methylpyrazole; Antizol) blocks alcohol dehydrogenase and is much
easier to use than ethanol. If started before onset of acidosis,
fomepizole may be used as the sole treatment for ethylene glycol
ingestion in some cases. A regional poison control center (800-
222-1222) should be contacted for indications and dosing.
Brent J. Fomepizole for ethylene glycol and methanol poisoning. N
Engl J Med. 2009 May 21;360(21):2216–23. [PMID: 19458366]
 
Caravati EM et al. Breath alcohol analyzer mistakes methanol
poisoning for alcohol intoxication. Ann Emerg Med. 2010
Feb;55(2):198–200. [PMID: 19833410]
 
Kraut JA et al. Toxic alcohol ingestions: clinical features, diagnosis,
and management. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Jan;3(1):208–25.
[PMID: 18045860]
 
Schep LJ et al. Diethylene glycol poisoning. Clin Toxicol (Phila).
2009 Jul;47(6):525–35. [PMID: 19586352]
 
METHEMOGLOBINEMIA-INDUCING AGENTS
A large number of chemical agents are capable of oxidizing ferrous
hemoglobin to its ferric state (methemoglobin), a form that cannot
carry oxygen. Drugs and chemicals known to cause
methemoglobinemia include benzocaine (a local anesthetic found in
some topical anesthetic sprays and a variety of nonprescription
products), aniline, propanil, nitrites, nitrogen oxide gases,
nitrobenzene, dapsone, phenazopyridine (Pyridium), and many
others. Dapsone has a long elimination half-life and may produce
prolonged or recurrent methemoglobinemia.
 Clinical Findings
Methemoglobinemia reduces oxygen-carrying capacity and may
cause dizziness, nausea, headache, dyspnea, confusion, seizures,
and coma. The severity of symptoms depends on the percentage of
hemoglobin oxidized to methemoglobin; severe poisoning is usually
present when methemoglobin fractions are > 40–50%. Even at low
levels (15–20%), victims appear cyanotic because of the “chocolate
brown” color of methemoglobin, but they have normal Po2 results
on arterial blood gas determinations. Pulse oximetry gives
inaccurate oxygen saturation measurements; the reading is often
between 85% and 90%. (A newer pulse oximetry device [Masimo
Pulse Co-oximeter] is capable of estimating the methemoglobin
level.) Severe metabolic acidosis may be present. Hemolysis may
occur, especially in patients susceptible to oxidant stress (ie, those
with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency).
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer high-flow oxygen. If the causative agent was recently
ingested, administer activated charcoal (see p 1523). Repeat-dose
activated charcoal may enhance dapsone elimination (see p 1523).
B. Specific Treatment
Methylene blue enhances the conversion of methemoglobin to
hemoglobin by increasing the activity of the enzyme methemoglobin
reductase. For symptomatic patients, administer 1–2 mg/kg (0.1–
0.2 mL/kg of 1% solution) intravenously. The dose may be
repeated once in 15–20 minutes if necessary. Patients with
hereditary methemoglobin reductase deficiency or glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency may not respond to methylene
blue treatment.
Guay J. Methemoglobinemia related to local anesthetics: a
summary of 242 episodes. Anesth Analg. 2009 Mar;108(3):837–
45. [PMID: 19224791]
 
Harvey M et al. Fatal methaemoglobinaemia induced by self-
poisoning with sodium nitrite. Emerg Med Australas. 2010
Oct;22(5):463–5. [PMID: 21040485]
 
MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS
Overdoses of MAO inhibitors (isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline,
moclobemide) cause ataxia, excitement, hyper-tension, and
tachycardia, followed several hours later by hypotension,
convulsions, and hyperthermia.
Ingestion of tyramine-containing foods may cause a severe
hypertensive reaction in patients taking MAO inhibitors. Foods
containing tyramine include aged cheese and red wines.
Hypertensive reactions may also occur with any sympathomimetic
drug. Severe or fatal hyperthermia (serotonin syndrome) may occur
if patients receiving MAO inhibitors are given meperidine,
fluoxetine, paroxetine, fluvoxamine, venlafaxine, tryptophan,
dextromethorphan, tramadol, or other serotonin-enhancing drugs.
This reaction can also occur with the newer selective MAO inhibitor
moclobemide, and the antibiotic linezolid, which has MAO-
inhibiting properties. The serotonin syndrome has also been
reported in patients taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) in large doses or in combination with other SSRIs, even in
the absence of an MAO inhibitor or meperidine.
 Treatment
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523). Treat severe
hypertension with nitroprusside, phentolamine, or other rapid-acting
vasodilators (see p 1520). Treat hypotension with fluids and
positioning, but avoid use of pressor agents if possible. Observe
patients for at least 24 hours, since hyperthermic reactions may be
delayed. Treat hyperthermia with aggressive cooling; neuromuscular
paralysis may be required (see p 1521). Cyproheptadine, 4 mg
orally (or by gastric tube) every hour for three or four doses, or
chlorpromazine, 25 mg intravenously, has been reported to be
effective against serotonin syndrome.
Sun-Edelstein C et al. Drug-induced serotonin syndrome. Expert
Opin Drug Saf. 2008 Sep;7(5):587–96. [PMID: 18759711]
 
Wu ML et al. Serotonin toxicity caused by moclobemide too soon
after paroxetine-selegiline. J Chin Med Assoc. 2009 Aug;72(8):
446–9. [PMID: 19687003]
 
MUSHROOMS
There are thousands of mushroom species that cause a variety of
toxic effects. The most dangerous species of mushrooms are A
phalloides, Amanita ocreata, Amanita verna, Amanita virosa,
Gyromitra esculenta, and the Galerina species, all of which
contain amatoxin, a potent cytotoxin. Ingestion of even a portion of
one mushroom of a dangerous species may be sufficient to cause
death.
The characteristic pathologic finding in fatalities from amatoxin-
containing mushroom poisoning is acute massive necrosis of the
liver.
 Clinical Findings (Table 38–9)
A. Symptoms and Signs
Amatoxin-containing mushrooms cause a delayed onset (8–12
hours after ingestion) of severe abdominal cramps, vomiting and
profuse diarrhea, followed by hepatic necrosis, hepatic
encephalopathy, and frequently acute kidney injury in 1–2 days.
Cooking the mushrooms does not prevent poisoning.
Monomethylhydrazine poisoning (Gyromitra 
and Helvella
species) is more common following ingestion of uncooked
mushrooms, as the toxin is water-soluble. Vomiting, diarrhea,
hepatic necrosis, convulsions, coma, and hemolysis may occur after
a latent period of 8–12 hours.
The clinical effects of these and other mushrooms are described
in Table 38–9.
 Treatment
A. Emergency Measures
After the onset of symptoms, efforts to remove the toxic agent are
probably useless, especially in cases of amatoxin or gyromitrin
poisoning, where there is usually a delay of 12 hours or more before
symptoms occur and patients seek medical attention. However,
induction of vomiting or administration of activated charcoal is
recommended for any recent ingestion of an unidentified or
potentially toxic mushroom (see p 1523).
B. Specific Treatment
A variety of antidotes (eg, thioctic acid, penicillin, corticosteroids)
have been suggested for amatoxin-type mushroom poisoning, but
controlled studies are lacking and experimental data in animals are
equivocal. Aggressive fluid replacement for diarrhea and intensive
supportive care for hepatic failure are the mainstays of treatment.
Silymarin (silibinin), a derivative of milk thistle, is commonly used in
Europe but is not yet available in the United States as a
pharmaceutical grade intravenous preparation. However, the
intravenous product (Legalon-SIL) can be obtained in the United
States under an emergency IND provided by the FDA. Contact the
regional poison control center (1-800-222-1222) for more
information.
Interruption of enterohepatic circulation of the amatoxin by the
administration of activated charcoal or by cannulation and drainage
of the bile duct may be of value in removing the toxin, based on
animal studies and isolated case reports.
 
Table 38–9. Poisonous mushrooms.
 
Liver transplant may be the only hope for survival in gravely ill
patients—contact a liver transplant center early.
Garrouste C et al. Amanita phalloides poisoning-induced end-
stage renal failure. Clin Nephrol. 2009 May;71(5):571–4. [PMID:
19473620]
 
Saller R et al. An updated systematic review with meta-analysis for
the clinical evidence of silymarin. Forsch Komplementmed. 2008
Feb;15(1):9–20. [PMID: 18334810]
 
West PL et al. Amanita smithiana mushroom ingestion: a case of
delayed renal failure and literature review. J Med Toxicol. 2009
Mar;5(1):32–8. [PMID: 19191214]
 
OPIATES & OPIOIDS
Prescription and illicit opiates and opioids (morphine, heroin,
codeine, oxycodone, fentanyl, hydromorphone, etc) are popular
drugs of misuse and abuse and the cause of frequent hospitalizations
for overdose. These drugs have widely varying potencies and
durations of action; for example, some of the illicit fentanyl
derivatives are up to 2000 times more potent than morphine. All of
these agents decrease central nervous system activity and
sympathetic outflow by acting on opiate receptors in the brain.
Tramadol is an analgesic that is unrelated chemically to the opioids
but acts on opioid receptors. Buprenorphine is a partial agonist-
antagonist opioid used for the outpatient treatment of opioid
addiction.
 Clinical Findings
Mild intoxication is characterized by euphoria, drowsiness, and
constricted pupils. More severe intoxication may cause
hypotension, bradycardia, hypothermia, coma, and respiratory
arrest. Pulmonary edema may occur. Death is usually due to apnea
or pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents. Methadone has been
associated with QT interval prolongation and torsades de pointes.
Tramadol, dextromethorphan, and meperidine also occasionally
cause seizures. With meperidine, the metabolite normeperidine is
probably the cause of seizures and is most likely to accumulate with
repeated dosing in patients with chronic kidney disease. While the
duration of effect for heroin is usually 3–5 hours, methadone
intoxication may last for 48–72 hours or longer. Propoxyphene may
cause seizures and prolongs the QRS interval; it has now been
removed from the US market by the FDA. Many opioids, including
fentanyl, tramadol, oxycodone, and methadone, are not detected on
routine urine toxicology “opiate” screening. Wound botulism has
been associated with skin-popping, especially involving “black tar”
heroin. Buprenorphine added to an opioid regimen may produce
acute narcotic withdrawal symptoms.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Protect the airway and assist ventilation. Administer activated
charcoal (see p 1523) for recent large ingestions.
B. Specific Treatment
Naloxone is a specific opioid antagonist that can rapidly reverse
signs of narcotic intoxication. Although it is structurally related to the
opioids, it has no agonist effects of its own. Administer 0.2–2 mg
intravenously, and repeat as needed to awaken the patient and
maintain airway protective reflexes and spontaneous breathing.
Very large doses (10–20 mg) may be required for patients
intoxicated by some opioids (eg, codeine, fentanyl derivatives).
Caution: The duration of effect of naloxone is only about 2–3
hours; repeated doses may be necessary for patients intoxicated by
long-acting drugs such as methadone. Continuous observation for at
least 3 hours after the last naloxone dose is mandatory.
Aquina CT et al. OxyContin abuse and overdose. Postgrad Med.
2009 Mar;121(2):163–7. [PMID: 19332974]
 
Okie S. A flood of opioids, a rising tide of deaths. N Engl J Med.
2010 Nov 18;363(21):1981–5. [PMID: 21083382]
 
Shadnia S et al. Tramadol intoxication: a review of 114 cases.
Hum Exp Toxicol. 2008 Mar;27(3):201–5. [PMID: 18650251]
 
PESTICIDES: CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Organophosphorus 
and 
carbamate 
insecticides 
(organo-
phosphates: parathion, malathion, etc; carbamates: carbaryl,
aldicarb, etc) are widely used in commercial agriculture and home
gardening and have largely replaced older, more environmentally
persistent organochlorine compounds such as DDT and chlordane.
The 
organophosphates 
and 
carbamates—also 
called
anticholinesterases 
because 
they 
inhibit 
the 
enzyme
acetylcholinesterase—cause an increase in acetylcholine activity at
nicotinic and muscarinic receptors and in the central nervous
system. There are a variety of chemical agents in this group, with
widely varying potencies. Most of them are poorly water-soluble,
are formulated with an aromatic hydrocarbon solvent such as
xylene, and are well absorbed through intact skin. Most chemical
warfare “nerve agents” (such as GA [tabun], GB [sarin], GD
[soman] and VX) are organophosphates.
 Clinical Findings
Inhibition of cholinesterase results in abdominal cramps, diarrhea,
vomiting, excessive salivation, sweating, lacrimation, miosis
(constricted pupils), wheezing and bronchor-rhea, seizures, and
skeletal muscle weakness. Initial tachycardia is usually followed by
bradycardia. Profound skeletal muscle weakness, aggravated by
excessive bronchial secretions and wheezing, may result in
respiratory arrest and death. Symptoms and signs of poisoning may
persist or recur over several days, especially with highly lipid-
soluble agents such as fenthion or dimethoate.
The diagnosis should be suspected in patients who present with
miosis, sweating, and hyperperistalsis. Serum and red blood cell
cholinesterase activity is usually depressed at least 50% below
baseline in those victims who have severe intoxication.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
If the agent was recently ingested, consider gut decontamination by
aspiration of the liquid using a nasogastric tube followed by
administration of activated charcoal (see p 1523). If the agent is on
the victim's skin or hair, wash repeatedly with soap or shampoo and
water. Providers should take care to avoid skin exposure by
wearing gloves and waterproof aprons. Dilute hypochlorite solution
(eg, household bleach diluted 1:10) is reported to help break down
organophosphate pesticides and nerve agents on equipment or
clothing.
B. Specific Treatment
Atropine reverses excessive muscarinic stimulation and is effective
for treatment of salivation, bronchial hypersecretion, wheezing,
abdominal cramping, and sweating. However, it does not interact
with nicotinic receptors at autonomic ganglia and at the
neuromuscular junction and has no effect on muscle weakness.
Administer 2 mg intravenously, and if there is no response after 5
minutes, give repeated boluses in rapidly escalating doses (eg,
doubling the dose each time) as needed to dry bronchial secretions
and decrease wheezing; as much as several hundred milligrams of
atropine has been given to treat severe poisoning.
Pralidoxime (2-PAM, Protopam) is a specific antidote that
reverses organophosphate binding to the cholinesterase enzyme;
therefore, it should be effective at the neuro-muscular junction as
well as other nicotinic and muscarinic sites. It is most likely to be
clinically effective if started very soon after poisoning, to prevent
permanent binding of the organophosphate to cholinesterase.
However, clinical studies are conflicting regarding the effectiveness
of pralidoxime in reducing mortality. Administer 1–2 g intravenously
as a loading dose, and begin a continuous infusion (200–500 mg/h,
titrated to clinical response). Continue to give pralidoxime as long as
there is any evidence of acetylcholine excess. Pralidoxime is of
questionable benefit for carbamate poisoning, because carbamates
have only a transitory effect on the cholinesterase enzyme. Other,
unproven therapies for organophosphate poisoning include
magnesium, sodium bicarbonate, clonidine, and extracorporeal
removal.
Eddleston M et al. Management of acute organophosphorus
pesticide poisoning. Lancet. 2008 Feb 16;371(9612):597–607.
[PMID: 17706760]
 
Peter JV et al. Adjuncts and alternatives to oxime therapy in
organophosphate poisoning—is there evidence of benefit in human
poisoning? Anaesth Intensive Care. 2008 May;36(3): 339–50.
[PMID: 18564794]
 
Peter JV et al. Clinical profile and outcome of patients hospitalized
with dimethyl and diethyl organophosphate poisoning. Clin Toxicol
(Phila). 2010 Nov;48(9):916–23. [PMID: 21171848]
 
PETROLEUM DISTILLATES & SOLVENTS
Petroleum distillate toxicity may occur from inhalation of the vapor
or as a result of pulmonary aspiration of the liquid during or after
ingestion. Acute manifestations of aspiration pneumonitis are
vomiting, coughing, and bronchopneumonia. Some hydrocarbons—
ie, those with aromatic or halogenated subunits—can also cause
severe systemic poisoning after oral ingestion. Hydrocarbons can
also cause systemic intoxication by inhalation. Vertigo, muscular
incoordination, irregular pulse, myoclonus, and seizures occur with
serious poisoning and may be due to hypoxemia or the systemic
effects of the agents. Chlorinated and fluorinated hydrocarbons
(trichloroethylene, Freons, etc) and many other hydrocarbons can
cause ventricular arrhythmias due to increased sensitivity of the
myocardium to the effects of endogenous catecholamines.
 Treatment
Remove the patient to fresh air. For simple aliphatic hydro-carbon
ingestion, gastric emptying and activated charcoal are not
recommended, but these procedures may be indicated if the
preparation contains toxic solutes (eg, an insecticide) or is an
aromatic or halogenated product. Observe the victim for 6–8 hours
for signs of aspiration pneumonitis (cough, localized rales or
rhonchi, tachypnea, and infiltrates on chest radiograph).
Corticosteroids are not recommended. If fever occurs, give a
specific antibiotic only after identification of bacterial pathogens by
laboratory studies. Because of the risk of arrhythmias, use
bronchodilators with caution in patients with chlorinated or
fluorinated solvent intoxication. If tachyarrhythmias occur, use
esmolol intravenously 25–100 mcg/kg/min.
Amiri AH et al. Clinical finding and outcome in suicidal attempt due
to intravenous injection of kerosene. Pak J Biol Sci. 2009 Mar
1;12(5):439–42. [PMID: 19579984]
 
Argo A et al. A fatal case of a paint thinner ingestion: comparison
between toxicological and histological findings. Am J Forensic
Med Pathol. 2010 June;31(2):186–91. [PMID: 20010286]
 
QUINIDINE & RELATED ANTIARRHYTHMICS
Quinidine, procainamide, and disopyramide are class Ia
antiarrhythmic agents, and flecainide and propafenone are class Ic
agents. These drugs have membrane-depressant effects on the
sodium-dependent 
channel 
responsible 
for 
cardiac 
cell
depolarization. Manifestations of cardiotoxicity include arrhythmias,
syncope, hypotension, and widening of the QRS complex on the
ECG (> 100–120 ms). With type Ia drugs, a lengthened QT
interval and atypical or polymorphous ventricular tachycardia
(torsades de pointes) may occur. The antimalarials chloroquine and
hydroxychloroquine have similar effects in overdose.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523); consider gastric lavage
after large recent overdose. Assist ventilation if needed. Perform
continuous cardiac monitoring.
B. Specific Treatment
Treat cardiotoxicity (hypotension, QRS interval widening) with
intravenous boluses of sodium bicarbonate, 50–100 mEq. Torsades
de pointes may be treated with intravenous magnesium or overdrive
pacing.
Gunja N et al. Survival after massive hydroxychloroquine
overdose. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2009 Jan;37(1):130–3.
[PMID: 19157361]
 
SALICYLATES
Salicylates (aspirin, methyl salicylate, etc) are found in a variety of
over-the-counter and prescription medications. Salicylates uncouple
cellular oxidative phosphorylation, resulting in anaerobic metabolism
and excessive production of lactic acid and heat, and they also
interfere with several Krebs cycle enzymes. A single ingestion of
more than 200 mg/kg of salicylate is likely to produce significant
acute intoxication. Poisoning may also occur as a result of chronic
excessive dosing over several days. Although the half-life of
salicylate is 2–3 hours after small doses, it may increase to 20 hours
or more in patients with intoxication.
 Clinical Findings
Acute ingestion often causes nausea and vomiting, occasionally with
gastritis. Moderate intoxication is characterized by hyperpnea (deep
and rapid breathing), tachycardia, tinnitus, and elevated anion gap
metabolic acidosis. Serious intoxication may result in agitation,
confusion, coma, seizures, cardiovascular collapse, pulmonary
edema, hyperthermia, and death. The prothrombin time is often
elevated owing to salicylate-induced hypoprothrombinemia. Central
nervous system intracellular glucose depletion can occur despite
normal measured serum glucose levels.
Diagnosis of salicylate poisoning is suspected in any patient with
metabolic acidosis and is confirmed by measuring the serum
salicylate level. Patients with levels > 100 mg/dL (1000 mg/L or 7.2
mcmol/L) after an acute overdose are more likely to have severe
poisoning. On the other hand, patients with subacute or chronic
intoxication may suffer severe symptoms with levels of only 60–70
mg/dL (4.3–5 mcmol/L). The arterial blood gas typically reveals a
respiratory alkalosis with an underlying metabolic acidosis.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Administer activated charcoal (see p 1523). Gastric lavage
followed by administration of extra doses of activated charcoal may
be needed in patients who ingest more than 10 g of aspirin (see p
1522). The desired ratio of charcoal to aspirin is about 10:1 by
weight; while this cannot always be given as a single dose, it may be
administered over the first 24 hours in divided doses every 2–4
hours along with whole bowel irrigation (see p 1523). Give glucose-
containing fluids to reduce the risk of cerebral hypoglycemia. Treat
metabolic acidosis with intravenous sodium bicarbonate. This is
critical because acidosis (especially acidemia, pH < 7.40) promotes
greater entry of salicylate into cells, worsening toxicity. Warning:
Sudden and severe deterioration can occur after rapid sequence
intubation and controlled ventilation if the pH is allowed to fall.
B. Specific Treatment
Alkalinization of the urine enhances renal salicylate excretion by
trapping the salicylate anion in the urine. Add 100 mEq (two
ampules) of sodium bicarbonate to 1 L of 5% dextrose in 0.2%
saline, and infuse this solution intravenously at a rate of about 150–
200 mL/h. Unless the patient is oliguric or hyperkalemic, add 20–
30 mEq of potassium chloride to each liter of intravenous fluid.
Patients who are volume-depleted often fail to produce an alkaline
urine (paradoxical aciduria) unless potassium is given.
Hemodialysis may be lifesaving and is indicated for patients with
severe metabolic acidosis, markedly altered mental status, or
significantly elevated salicylate levels (eg, > 100–120 mg/dL
[1000–1200 mg/L or 7.2–8.6 mcmol/L] after acute overdose or >
60–70 mg/dL [600–700 mg/L or 4.3–5 mcmol/L] with subacute or
chronic intoxication).
Fertel BS et al. The underutilization of hemodialysis in patients with
salicylate poisoning. Kidney Int. 2009 Jun;75(12): 1349–53.
[PMID: 18716600]
 
Herres J et al. Delayed salicylate toxicity with undetectable initial
levels after large-dose aspirin ingestion. Am J Emerg Med. 2009
Nov;27(9):1173.e1–3. [PMID: 19931787]
 
Stolbach AI et al. Mechanical ventilation was associated with
acidemia in a case series of salicylate-poisoned patients. Acad
Emerg Med. 2008 Sep;15(9):866–9. [PMID: 18821862]
 
SEAFOOD POISONINGS
A variety of intoxications may occur after eating certain types of fish
or other seafood. These include scombroid, ciguatera, paralytic
shellfish, and puffer fish poisoning. The mechanisms of toxicity and
clinical presentations are described in Table 38–10. In the majority
of cases, the seafood has a normal appearance and taste
(scombroid may have a peppery taste).
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Caution Abrupt respiratory arrest may occur in patients with acute
paralytic shellfish and puffer fish poisoning. Observe patients for at
least 4–6 hours. Replace fluid and electrolyte losses from
gastroenteritis with intravenous saline or other crystalloid solution.
For recent ingestions, it may be possible to adsorb residual toxin
in the gut with activated charcoal, 50–60 g orally (see p 1523).
B. Specific Treatment
There is no specific antidote for paralytic shellfish or puffer fish
poisoning.
1. Ciguatera—There are anecdotal reports of successful treatment
of acute neurologic symptoms with mannitol, 1 g/kg intravenously,
but this approach is not widely accepted.
2. Scombroid—Antihistamines such as diphenhydramine, 25–50
mg intravenously, and the H2-blocker cimetidine, 300 mg
intravenously, are usually effective. For severe reactions, give also
epinephrine, 0.3–0.5 mL of a 1:1000 solution subcutaneously.
Friedman MA et al. Ciguatera fish poisoning: treatment, prevention
and management. Mar Drugs. 2008;6(3):456–79. [PMID:
19005579]
 
Noguchi T et al. Tetrodotoxin—distribution and accumulation in
aquatic organisms, and cases of human intoxication. Mar Drugs.
2008 May 28;6(2):220–42. [PMID: 18728726]
 
Wang DZ. Neurotoxins from marine dinoflagellates: a brief review.
Mar Drugs. 2008 Jun 11;6(2):349–71. [PMID: 18728731]
 
SNAKE BITES
The venom of poisonous snakes and lizards may be predominantly
neurotoxic (coral snake) or predominantly cytolytic (rattlesnakes,
other pit vipers). Neurotoxins cause respiratory paralysis; cytolytic
venoms cause tissue destruction by digestion and hemorrhage due
to hemolysis and destruction of the endothelial lining of the blood
vessels. The manifestations of rattlesnake envenomation are mostly
local pain, redness, swelling, and extravasation of blood. Perioral
tingling, metallic taste, nausea and vomiting, hypotension, and
coagulopathy may also occur. Thrombocytopenia can persist for
several days after a rattlesnake bite. Neurotoxic envenomation may
cause ptosis, dysphagia, diplopia, and respiratory arrest.
 
Table 38–10. Common seafood poisonings.
 
 Treatment
A. Emergency Measures
Immobilize the patient and the bitten part in a neutral position.
Avoid manipulation of the bitten area. Transport the patient to a
medical facility for definitive treatment. Do not give alcoholic
beverages or stimulants; do not apply ice; do not apply a
tourniquet. The trauma to underlying structures resulting from
incision and suction performed by unskilled people is probably not
justified in view of the small amount of venom that can be
recovered.
B. Specific Antidote and General Measures
1. Pit viper (eg, rattlesnake) envenomation—For local signs
such as swelling, pain, and ecchymosis but no systemic symptoms,
give 4–6 vials of crotalid antivenin (CroFab) by slow intravenous
drip in 250–500 mL saline. Repeated doses of 2 vials every 6 hours
for up to 18 hours has been recommended. For more serious
envenomation with marked local effects and systemic toxicity (eg,
hypotension, coagulopathy), higher doses and additional vials may
be required. Monitor vital signs and the blood coagulation profile.
Type and cross-match blood. The adequacy of venom
neutralization is indicated by improvement in symptoms and signs,
and the rate that swelling slows. Prophylactic antibiotics are not
indicated after a rattlesnake bite.
2. Elapid (coral snake) envenomation—Give 1–2 vials of
specific antivenom as soon as possible. To locate antisera for exotic
snakes, call a regional poison control center (800-222-1222).
Açikalin A et al. The efficacy of low-dose antivenom therapy on
morbidity and mortality in snakebite cases. Am J Emerg Med.
2008 May;26(4):402–7. [PMID: 18410806]
 
Cruz LS et al. Snakebite envenomation and death in the
developing world. Ethn Dis. 2009 Spring;19(1 Suppl 1):S1–42–6.
[PMID: 19484874]
 
Lamb L et al. Management of venomous bites and stings in British
military personnel deployed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Cyprus. J R
Army Med Corps. 2008 Dec;154(4 Suppl):2–40. [PMID:
19530398]
 
Lavonas EJ et al. Crotaline Fab antivenom appears to be effective
in cases of severe North American pit viper envenomation: an
integrative review. BMC Emerg Med. 2009 Jun 22;9:13. [PMID:
19545426]
 
SPIDER BITES & SCORPION STINGS
The toxin of most species of spiders in the United States causes
only local pain, redness, and swelling. That of the more venomous
black widow spiders (Latrodectus mactans) causes generalized
muscular pains, muscle spasms, and rigidity. The brown recluse
spider (Loxosceles reclusa) causes progressive local necrosis as
well as hemolytic reactions (rare). Stings by most scorpions in the
United States cause only local pain. Stings by the more toxic
Centruroides species (found in the southwestern United States)
may cause muscle cramps, twitching and jerking, and occasionally
hypertension, convulsions, and pulmonary edema. Stings by
scorpions from other parts of the world are not discussed here.
 Treatment
A. Black Widow Spider Bites
Pain may be relieved with parenteral opioids or muscle relaxants
(eg, methocarbamol, 15 mg/kg). Calcium gluconate 10%, 0.1–0.2
mL/kg intravenously, may transiently relieve muscle rigidity, though
its effectiveness is unproven. Latrodectus antivenin is very effective,
but because of concerns about acute hypersensitivity reactions
(horse serum-derived), it is often reserved for very young or elderly
patients or those who do not respond promptly to the above
measures. Horse serum sensitivity testing is required. (Instruction
and testing materials are included in the antivenin kit.)
B. Brown Recluse Spider Bites
Because bites occasionally progress to extensive local necrosis,
some authorities recommend early excision of the bite site, whereas
others use oral corticosteroids. Anecdotal reports have claimed
success with dapsone and colchicine. All of these treatments remain
of unproved value.
C. Scorpion Stings
No specific treatment is available for envenomations by scorpions
found in the United States. For Centruroides stings, some
toxicologists use a specific antivenom developed in Arizona, but this
is neither FDA-approved nor widely available.
de Almeida DM et al. A new anti-loxoscelic serum produced
against recombinant sphingomyelinase D: results of pre-clinical
trials. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2008 Sep;79(3):463–70. [PMID:
18784245]
 
Isbister GK et al. A randomised controlled trial of intramuscular
vs. intravenous antivenom for latrodectism—the RAVE study.
QJM. 2008 Jul;101(7):557–65. [PMID: 18400776]
 
Suchard JR. Spider bite. Ann Emerg Med. 2009 Jul;54(1):8,11.
[PMID: 19541042]
 
THEOPHYLLINE & CAFFEINE
Theophylline may cause intoxication after an acute single overdose,
or intoxication may occur as a result of chronic accidental repeated
overmedication or reduced elimination resulting from hepatic
dysfunction or interacting drug (eg, cimetidine, erythromycin). The
usual serum half-life of theophylline is 4–6 hours, but this may
increase to more than 20 hours after overdose. Caffeine and
caffeine-containing herbal products can produce similar toxicity.
 Clinical Findings
Mild intoxication causes nausea, vomiting, tachycardia, and
tremulousness. Severe intoxication is characterized by ventricular
and supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, hypotension, and seizures.
Status epilepticus is common and often intractable to the usual
anticonvulsants. After acute overdose (but not chronic intoxication),
hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, and metabolic acidosis are common.
Seizures and other manifestations of toxicity may be delayed for
several hours after acute ingestion, especially if a sustained-release
preparation such as Theo-Dur was taken.
Diagnosis is based on measurement of the serum theophylline
concentration. Seizures and hypotension are likely to develop in
acute overdose patients with serum levels > 100 mg/L (555
mcmol/L). Serious toxicity may develop at lower levels (ie, 40–60
mg/L [222–333 mcmol/L]) in patients with chronic intoxication.
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
After acute ingestion, administer activated charcoal (see p 1523).
Repeated doses of activated charcoal may enhance theophylline
elimination by “gut dialysis.” Addition of whole bowel irrigation
should be considered for large ingestions involving sustained-release
preparations (see p 1523).
Hemodialysis is effective in removing theophylline and is indicated
for patients with status epilepticus or markedly elevated serum
theophylline levels (eg, > 100 mg/L [555 mcmol/L] after acute
overdose or > 60 mg/L [333 mcmol/L] with chronic intoxication).
B. Specific Treatment
Treat seizures with benzodiazepines (lorazepam, 2–3 mg
intravenously, or diazepam, 5–10 mg intravenously) or
phenobarbital (10–15 mg/kg intravenously). Phenytoin is not
effective. Hypotension and tachycardia—which are mediated
through excessive β-adrenergic stimulation—may respond to β-
blocker therapy even in low doses. Administer esmolol, 25–50
mcg/kg/min by intravenous infusion, or propranolol, 0.5–1 mg
intravenously.
Liu PH et al. Acute pancreatitis after severe theophylline overdose.
Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2008 Dec;46(10):1103. [PMID: 18949588]
 
Waring WS et al. Acute caffeine ingestion: clinical features in
patients attending the emergency department and Scottish poison
centre enquiries between 2000 and 2008. Scott Med J. 2009
Nov;54(4):3–6. [PMID: 20050298]
 
TRICYCLIC & OTHER ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Tricyclic and related cyclic antidepressants are among the most
dangerous drugs involved in suicidal overdose. These drugs have
anticholinergic and cardiac depressant properties (“quinidine-like”
sodium channel blockade). Tricyclic antidepressants produce more
marked membrane-depressant cardiotoxic effects than the
phenothiazines.
Newer antidepressants such as trazodone, fluoxetine, citalopram,
paroxetine, sertraline, bupropion, venlafaxine, and fluvoxamine are
not chemically related to the tricyclic antidepressant agents and do
not generally produce quinidine-like cardiotoxic effects. However,
they may cause seizures in overdoses and they may cause serotonin
syndrome (see Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors section).
 Clinical Findings
Signs of severe intoxication may occur abruptly and without warning
within 30–60 minutes after acute tricyclic overdose. Anticholinergic
effects include dilated pupils, tachycardia, dry mouth, flushed skin,
muscle twitching, and decreased peristalsis. Quinidine-like
cardiotoxic effects include QRS interval widening (> 0.12 s; Figure
38–2), ventricular arrhythmias, AV block, and hypotension.
Rightward-axis deviation of the terminal 40 ms of the QRS has also
been described. Prolongation of the QT interval has been reported
with citalopram and venlafaxine. Seizures and coma are common
with severe intoxication. Life-threatening hyperthermia may result
from status epilepticus and anticholinergic-induced impairment of
sweating. Among newer agents, bupropion and venlafaxine have
been associated with a greater risk of seizures.
The diagnosis should be suspected in any overdose patient with
anticholinergic side effects, especially if there is widening of the
QRS interval or seizures. For intoxication by most tricyclic
antidepressants, the QRS interval correlates with the severity of
intoxication more reliably than the serum drug level.
Serotonin syndrome should be suspected if agitation, delirium,
muscular hyperactivity, and fever develop in a patient taking
serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
 
Figure 38–2. Cardiac arrhythmias resulting from tri-cyclic
antidepressant overdose. A: Delayed intraventricular conduction
results in prolonged QRS interval (0.18 s). B and C:
Supraventricular tachycardia with progressive widening of QRS
complexes mimics ventricular tachycardia. (Reproduced, with
permission, from Benowitz NL, Goldschlager N. Cardiac
disturbances in the toxicologic patient. In: Haddad LM, Winchester
JF [editors], Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug
Overdose, 3rd edition. Saunders/Elsevier, 1998.)
 
 Treatment
A. Emergency and Supportive Measures
Observe patients for at least 6 hours, and admit all patients with
evidence of anticholinergic effects (eg, delirium, dilated pupils,
tachycardia) or signs of cardiotoxicity (see above).
Administer activated charcoal, (see p 1523) and consider gastric
lavage after recent large ingestions (see p 1523). All of these drugs
are highly tissue-bound and are not effectively removed by
hemodialysis procedures.
B. Specific Treatment
Cardiotoxic sodium channel-depressant effects of tricyclic
antidepressants may respond to boluses of sodium bicarbonate
(50–100 mEq intravenously). Sodium bicarbonate provides a large
sodium load that alleviates depression of the sodium-dependent
channel. Reversal of acidosis may also have beneficial effects at this
site. Maintain the pH between 7.45 and 7.50. Alkalinization does
not promote excretion of tricyclic antidepressants. Prolongation of
the QT interval or torsades de pointes is usually treated with
intravenous magnesium or overdrive pacing. Severe cardiotoxicity in
patients with overdoses of lipid-soluble drugs (eg, amitriptyline,
bupropion) has responded to intravenous lipid emulsion (Intralipid).
Mild serotonin syndrome may be treated with benzodiazepines
and withdrawal of the antidepressant. Moderate cases may respond
to cyproheptadine (4 mg orally or via gastric tube hourly for three
or four doses) or chlorpromazine (25 mg intravenously). Severe
hyperthermia should be treated with neuromuscular paralysis and
endotracheal intubation in addition to external cooling measures.
Agrawal P et al. Tricyclic antidepressant overdose. J Emerg Med.
2008 Apr;34(3):321–5. [PMID: 18296006]
 
Engels PT et al. Intravenous fat emulsion to reverse haemodynamic
instability from intentional amitriptyline overdose. Resuscitation.
2010 Aug;81(8):1037–9. [PMID: 20605670]
 
White N et al. Suicidal antidepressant overdoses: a comparative
analysis by antidepressant type. J Med Toxicol. 2008
Dec;4(4):238–50. [PMID: 19031375]
 
 
 
Cancer
Patricia A. Cornett, MD
Tiffany O. Dea, PharmD
The major features of this chapter are the clinical aspects of cancer,
including etiology and prevention; staging; diagnosis and treatment
of common cancers; and recognition and management of
complications from cancer. Additional information may be obtained
from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) website at
www.cancer.gov/cancerinformation, the American Society of
Clinical Oncology website at www.asco.org, and the National
Comprehensive 
Cancer 
Network 
(NCCN) 
website 
at
www.nccn.org. The NCCN website provides detailed, evidence-
based recommendations for management of specific cancers as well
as guidelines for cancer screening and for supportive care. General
reviews in oncology can be obtained from Medscape
Hematology/Oncology (www.medscape.com).
 Etiology
Cancer is the second most common cause of death in the United
States. In 2010, an estimated 1,529,560 cases of cancer were
diagnosed, and 569,490 persons died as a result of cancer. Based
on cancer rates determined in 2003–2005, more than 40% of
people born today will have cancer diagnosed at some point in their
lifetime. Table 39–1 lists the 10 leading cancer types in men and
women by site.
However, the incidence of cancer in both men and women is
decreasing. In 2008, the American Cancer Society, NCI, and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that the
incidence of all cancers for both sexes decreased 0.8% per year
from 1999 through 2005. In men, the rate decreased 1.8% per year
from 2001 through 2005, largely because the incidence of the three
most common cancers (prostate, lung, colorectum) decreased. In
women, the rate decreased 0.6% per year from 1998 through 2005
due to the decline in incidence of two of the top three cancers
(breast, colorectum); the incidence of the third cancer (lung) was
steady.
Over the last two decades, the decreasing incidence of cancer
has translated into a decrease in cancer death rates. Ten of the top
15 cancer sites have shown a decrease in mortality events. Only
esophageal cancer in men, pancreatic cancer in women, and
hepatocellular cancer in both men and women have increased in
mortality numbers. This decline in mortality has been seen in all
ethnic and racial groups except for American Indians and Alaskan
Natives.
Reductions in cancer incidence and mortality reflect a successful
implementation of a broad strategy of prevention, detection, and
treatment.
 Modifiable Risk Factors
Tobacco is the most common preventable cause of cancer death; it
is estimated that at least 30% of all cancer deaths in the United
States are directly linked to tobacco. A total of 171,000 cancer
deaths in the United States and 1.42 million cancer deaths
worldwide can be directly attributed to tobacco abuse. Clear
evidence links at least 15 cancers to tobacco use. The most
dramatic link is with lung cancer, the most common non-
dermatologic malignancy; 87% of lung cancer cases occur in
smokers. Any strategy for cancer control must start with the goal of
markedly reducing if not eliminating tobacco use.
Strategies for tobacco control should involve a focus on the
individual as well as society as a whole. Tobacco cessation directed
toward the individual should start with the clinician providing
counseling. Simple, concise advice from a clinician can yield
cessation rates of 10–20%. Additive strategies include more
intensive counseling; nicotine replacement therapy with patches,
gum, or lozenges; and prescription medication with bupropion or
varenicline. Perhaps a more intriguing phenomenon, with potential
for significant impact on cessation rates, is the influence of social
contact behavior on an individual smoker's abstinence decision. For
instance, analysis of the Framingham Heart Study demonstrated that
smoking cessation by a spouse resulted in a 67% decrease in the
subject's likelihood of continuing to smoke, and smoking cessation
by a friend resulted in a 36% decrease in the subject's likelihood of
smoking.
On a societal level, many initiatives have been put into place to
actively discourage tobacco use. State or local laws regulating
tobacco use in restaurants, the workplace, and other public places
have resulted in declines in tobacco use. Countermarketing with
aggressive anti-tobacco advertisements has also contributed to
tobacco cessation and abstinence. The key recipients of these
messages are children; 80% of smokers will start by age 18.
Preventing the start of addiction in this vulnerable population should
be a top priority (see Chapter 1).
 
Table 39–1. Estimated 10 most common cancer cases in the
United States in males and females (all races).
 
Data from the American Cancer Society, 2010.
There are encouraging signs of success with tobacco control. The
prevalence of smoking for United States adults based on the 2009
National Health Interview Survey is 21%, which is a remarkable
reduction from the 1955 peak of 57% for males and the 1965 peak
of 34% for females but still falls short of the Healthy People 2010
goal of < 12%. See Chapter 1 for additional material on smoking
cessation techniques.
For those Americans who do not abuse tobacco, the most
modifiable risk factors would be nutrition and physical activity.
Epidemiologic studies suggest that fruit- and vegetable-rich diets
lower risks of several gastrointestinal malignancies, including
esophageal, stomach, and colon cancers. Excessive consumption of
alcohol is linked to increased risks of head and neck cancers as well
as cancers of the esophagus and liver. Lastly, being overweight is
linked to several malignancies, including breast and uterine cancers
in women and colorectal, esophageal, and kidney cancers in both
men and women. More importantly, weight reduction can decrease
the risks of these cancers.
Another modifiable risk factor is radiation from radio-graphic
studies. A 2009 study reported that the use of computed
tomography (CT) in diagnostic algorithms exposes individuals to
significant radiation doses that may increase the lifetime risk of
developing cancer. Both standardization of CT radiation doses and
limiting testing will be important steps in minimizing this risk.
Smith-Bindman R et al. Radiation dose associated with common
computed tomography examinations and the associated lifetime
attributable risk of cancer. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Dec
14;169(22):2078–86. [PMID: 20008690]
 
 Staging
The most commonly used staging system at the time of diagnosis is
the 
TNM 
(Tumor, 
Nodes, 
Metastasis) 
system 
(see
www.cancerstaging.org). Rules for staging for individual cancers are
established and published by the American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC). Elements used for staging include tumor size and
level of tumor invasion (T), absence or presence and extent of nodal
metastases (N), and presence or absence of systemic metastases
(M). Once the TNM designations have been determined, an overall
stage is assigned, stage I, II, III, or IV. Clinical staging utilizes
physical examination, laboratory and imaging tests as well as results
from biopsies; pathologic staging relies on the results from surgery.
In some instances, other classifications may be used for certain
cancers such as the Ann Arbor staging system for lymphomas.
Other characteristics of cancers, not reflected in the TNM stage,
may be used as another indicator of prognosis. Pathologic features
seen on routine histologic examination for some cancers are very
important; examples include the Gleason score for prostate cancer
and the grade of sarcomas. Cancer specimens may also be sent for
targeted molecular diagnostic testing; results are used to determine
prognosis as well as treatment. Examples include testing for HER-
2/neu in breast and gastric cancers, KRAS and BRAF mutations in
colorectal cancers, and EGFR and KRAS mutations in lung cancer.
In the future, as the pathways for oncogenesis and relationships of
mutations to treatment and prognosis are better delineated, analysis
for detection of chromosomal alterations and oncogene products
will be increasingly incorporated into routine practice.
THE PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
The clinical manifestations of cancer are usually due to pressure
effects of local tumor growth, infiltration or meta-static deposition of
tumor cells in a variety of organs in the body, or certain systemic
symptoms. General problems observed in many patients with
advanced or widespread metastatic cancer include anorexia,
malaise, weight loss, and sometimes fever. These characteristics
must be considered when evaluating a patient with an undiagnosed
illness. Except in the case of functioning tumors such as those of the
endocrine glands, systemic symptoms of cancer usually are not
specific, often consisting of weakness, anorexia, and weight loss.
The term paraneoplastic refers to features of disease considered to
be due to the remote effects of a cancer that cannot be attributed
either to a cancer's direct invasive or metastatic properties and are
often considered to be due to aberrant hormonal or metabolic
effects not observed in a cancer's normal tissue equivalent. In the
paraneoplastic syndromes, clinical findings may resemble those of
primary endocrine, metabolic, hematologic, or neuromuscular
disorders. At present, the mechanisms for such remote effects can
be classified into three groups: (1) effects initiated by a tumor
product (eg, carcinoid syndrome, ectopic hormone production), (2)
effects of destruction of normal tissues by tumor (eg, hypercalcemia
with osteolytic skeletal metastases), and (3) effects due to unknown
mechanisms. In paraneoplastic syndromes associated with ectopic
hormone production, tumor tissue itself secretes the hormone that
produces the syndrome. Ectopic hormones secreted by neoplasms
are often pro-hormones of higher molecular weight than those
secreted by the more differentiated normal endocrine cell. Such
ectopic hormone production by cancer cells is believed to result
from activation of genes in the malignant cells that are suppressed in
the normal tissue equivalent and in most somatic cells. Autocrine
growth factors secreted by neoplastic cells may also result in
paraneoplastic syndromes. Small cell lung cancer is the one type of
cancer most likely to be associated with paraneoplastic syndromes.
The paraneoplastic syndromes are clinically important for the
following reasons:
(1) They sometimes accompany relatively limited neoplastic
growth and may provide the clinician with an early clue to the
presence of certain types of cancer.
(2) The metabolic or toxic effects of the syndrome may constitute
a more urgent hazard to the patient's life than the underlying cancer
(eg, hypercalcemia, hyponatremia).
(3) Effective treatment of the tumor should be accompanied by
resolution of the paraneoplastic syndrome and, conversely,
recurrence of the cancer may be heralded by return of the systemic
symptoms. In some instances, rapid response to cytotoxic
chemotherapy may briefly increase the severity of the
paraneoplastic syndrome in association with tumor lysis (eg,
hyponatremia with inappropriate antidiuretic hormone excretion). In
some instances the identical symptom complex (eg, hypercalcemia)
may be induced by entirely different mechanisms. A single
syndrome such as hypercalcemia may be due to any one of a
variety of humoral factors, such as secretion of parathyroid
hormone precursors or homologs or 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D.
Effective antitumor treatment usually results in return of serum
calcium to normal.
Common paraneoplastic syndromes and endocrine secretions
associated with functional cancers are summarized in Table 39–2.
TYPES OF CANCER
 
LUNG CANCER
Sunny Wang, MD
BRONCHOGENIC CARCINOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 New cough, or change in chronic cough.
 Dyspnea, hemoptysis, anorexia, weight loss.
 Enlarging nodule or mass; persistent opacity, atelectasis, or
pleural effusion on chest radio-graph or CT scan.
 Cytologic or histologic findings of lung cancer in sputum, pleural
fluid, or biopsy specimen.
 
 General Considerations
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in both men and
women. The American Cancer Society estimates 222,520 new
diagnoses and 157,300 deaths from lung cancer in the United
States in 2010, accounting for approximately 15% of new cancer
diagnoses and 28% of all cancer deaths. More Americans die of
lung cancer than of colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers
combined. Lung cancer was a previously reportable disease until
the widespread use of manufactured cigarettes in the 20th century.
The causal connection between cigarettes and lung cancer is
established not only epidemiologically but also through identification
of carcinogens in tobacco smoke and analysis of the effect of these
carcinogens on specific oncogenes expressed in lung cancer.
Cigarette smoking causes > 90% of cases of lung cancer. Since
the early 1990s, mortality from lung cancer fell among men while it
increased among women and is only now peaking among women,
reflecting changing patterns of tobacco use over the past 30 years
(see Chapter 1). Other environmental risk factors for the
development of lung cancer include exposure to environmental
tobacco smoke, radon gas (among uranium miners and in areas
where radium in the soil causes significant indoor air contamination),
asbestos (60- to 100-fold increased risk in smokers with asbestos
exposure), metals (arsenic, chromium, nickel, iron oxide), and
industrial carcinogens (bis-chloromethyl ether). A familial
predisposition to lung cancer is recognized. Certain diseases are
associated with an increased risk of lung cancer, including
pulmonary fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and
sarcoidosis. Second primary lung cancers are more frequent in
patients who survive their initial lung cancer.
The median age at diagnosis of lung cancer in the United States is
71; it is unusual under the age of 40. After the diagnosis of lung
cancer is made, approximately 41% of patients survive 1 year. The
combined relative 5-year survival rate for all stages of lung cancer is
currently 16%, slightly improved from 13% for lung cancers
diagnosed in the 1970-80s.
Five histologic categories of bronchogenic carcinoma account for
more than 90% of cases of primary lung cancer. Squamous cell
carcinoma (20% of cases) arises from the bronchial epithelium,
typically as a centrally located, intraluminal sessile or polypoid mass.
Squamous cell tumors are more likely to present with hemoptysis
and more frequently diagnosed by sputum cytology. They spread
locally and may be associated with hilar adenopathy and mediastinal
widening on chest radiography. Adenocarcinoma (35–40% of
cases) arises from mucus glands or, in the case of
bronchioloalveolar cell carcinoma (2% of cases), from any
epithelial cell within or distal to the terminal bronchioles.
Adenocarcinomas usually present as peripheral nodules or masses.
Bronchioloalveolar cell carcinoma spreads along preexisting
alveolar structures (lepidic growth) without evidence of invasion.
There are three types of bronchioloalveolar cell carcinoma:
mucinous, non-mucinous, and mixed. Mucinous bronchioloalveolar
cell carcinoma frequently presents as a pneumonic infiltrate,
whereas non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar cell carcinoma more
commonly presents as solitary or multiple pulmonary nodules.
Large cell carcinoma (3–5% of cases) is a heterogeneous group
of relatively undifferentiated tumors that share large cells and do not
fit into other categories. Large cell carcinomas typically have rapid
doubling times and an aggressive clinical course. They present as
central or peripheral masses. Tumors that are not better
differentiated on pathologic review other than carcinoma unspecified
make up about 20–25% of cases. Small cell carcinoma (10–15%
of cases) is a tumor of bronchial origin that typically begins centrally,
infiltrating submucosally to cause narrowing or obstruction of the
bronchus without a discrete luminal mass. Hilar and mediastinal
abnormalities are common on chest radiography.
 
Table 39–2. Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with cancer.
 
+, reported associated; ++, strong association.
SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone.
For purposes of staging and treatment, bronchogenic carcinoma
is divided into small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and the other four
types, conveniently labeled non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
This practical classification reflects different natural histories and
different treatment. SCLC is prone to early hematogenous spread.
It is rarely amenable to surgical resection and has a very aggressive
course with a median survival (untreated) of 6–18 weeks. The four
histologic categories comprising NSCLC spread more slowly. They
may be cured in the early stages following resection, and for
advanced disease, chemotherapy is tailored to specific histologies
and molecular mutations found within NSCLC.
 Clinical Findings
Lung cancer is symptomatic at diagnosis in 75–90% of patients.
The clinical presentation depends on the type and location of the
primary tumor, the extent of local spread, and the presence of
distant metastases and any paraneo-plastic syndromes.
A. Symptoms and Signs
Anorexia, weight loss, or asthenia occurs in 55–90% of patients
presenting with a new diagnosis of lung cancer. Up to 60% of
patients have a new cough or a change in a chronic cough; 6–31%
have hemoptysis; and 25–40% complain of pain, either nonspecific
chest pain or pain from bony metastases to the vertebrae, ribs, or
pelvis. Local spread may cause endobronchial obstruction with
atelectasis and postobstructive pneumonia, pleural effusion (12–
33%), change in voice (compromise of the recurrent laryngeal
nerve), superior vena cava syndrome (obstruction of the superior
vena cava with supraclavicular venous engorgement), and Horner
syndrome (ipsilateral ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis from
involvement of the inferior cervical ganglion and the paravertebral
sympathetic chain). Distant metastases to the liver are associated
with asthenia and weight loss. Brain metastases (10% in NSCLC,
more common in adenocarcinoma, and 20–30% in SCLC) may
present with headache, nausea, vomiting, seizures, dizziness, or
altered mental status.
Paraneoplastic syndromes are incompletely understood
patterns of organ dysfunction related to immune-mediated or
secretory effects of neoplasms. These syndromes occur in 10–20%
of lung cancer patients. They may precede, accompany, or follow
the diagnosis of lung cancer and do not necessarily indicate
metastatic disease. In patients with small cell carcinoma, the
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) can
develop in 10–15%; in those with squamous cell carcinoma,
hypercalcemia can develop in 10% (Table 39–2). Digital clubbing is
seen in up to 20% of patients at diagnosis (see Figure 6-47). Other
common paraneoplastic syndromes include increased ACTH
production, anemia, hypercoagulability, peripheral neuropathy, and
the Eaton-Lambert myasthenia syndrome. Their recognition is
important because treatment of the primary tumor may improve or
resolve symptoms even when the cancer is not curable.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of lung cancer rests on examination of a tissue or
cytology specimen. Sputum cytology is highly specific but
insensitive; the yield is highest when there are lesions in the central
airways. Thoracentesis (sensitivity 50–65%) can be used to
establish a diagnosis of lung cancer in patients with malignant pleural
effusions. If cytologic examination of an adequate sample (50–100
mL) of pleural fluid is nondiagnostic, the procedure should be
repeated; approximately 30% of second samples are positive when
the first sample is negative. If results remain negative, thoracoscopy
is preferred to blind pleural biopsy. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
of palpable supraclavicular or cervical lymph nodes is frequently
diagnostic. Serum tumor markers are neither sensitive nor specific
enough to aid in diagnosis.
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy allows visualization of the major
airways, cytology brushing of visible lesions or lavage of lung
segments with cytologic evaluation of specimens, direct biopsy of
endobronchial abnormalities, blind transbronchial biopsy of the
pulmonary parenchyma or peripheral nodules, and FNA biopsy of
mediastinal lymph nodes. Diagnostic yield varies widely (10–90%)
depending on the size of the lesion and its location. The use of
fluorescence bronchoscopy improves the ability to identify early
endobronchial lesions, while endobronchial and transesophageal
endoscopic ultrasound enhance the direction and yield of FNA of
mediastinal nodes. Transthoracic needle aspiration (TTNA) has a
sensitivity between 50% and 97%. Mediastinoscopy, video-
assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), and thoracotomy are
necessary in cases where less invasive techniques fail to yield a
diagnosis.
C. Imaging
Nearly all patients with lung cancer have abnormal findings on chest
radiography or CT scan. These findings are rarely specific for a
particular diagnosis. Interpretation of characteristic findings in
isolated nodules is described in Chapter 9.
D. Special Examinations
1. Staging—Accurate staging is crucial (1) to provide the clinician
with information to guide treatment, (2) to provide the patient with
accurate information regarding prognosis, and (3) to standardize
entry criteria for clinical trials to allow interpretation of results.
There are two essential principles of staging NSCLC. First, the
more extensive the disease, the worse the prognosis; second,
surgical resection offers the best hope for cure. Staging of NSCLC
uses two integrated systems. The TNM international staging
system attempts a physical description of the neoplasm: T
describes the size and location of the primary tumor; N describes
the presence and location of nodal metastases; and M refers to the
presence or absence of distant metastases. These TNM stages are
grouped into prognostic categories (stages I–IV) using the results of
clinical trials. This classification is used to guide therapy. Many
patients with stage I and stage II disease are cured through surgery.
Patients with stage IIIB and stage IV disease do not benefit from
surgery (Table 39–3). Patients with stage IIIA disease have locally
invasive disease that may benefit from surgery in certain
circumstances.
SCLC is not staged using the TNM system because
micrometastases are assumed to be present on diagnosis. SCLC is
divided into two categories: limited disease (30%), when the
tumor is limited to the unilateral hemithorax (including contralateral
mediastinal nodes); or extensive disease (70%), when the tumor
extends beyond the hemithorax (including pleural effusion). This
scheme also guides therapy. Patients with limited SCLC benefit
from thoracic radiation therapy in addition to chemotherapy as well
as prophylactic cranial radiation therapy.
For both SCLC and NSCLC, staging begins with a thorough
history and physical examination. A complete examination is
essential to exclude obvious metastatic disease to lymph nodes,
skin, and bone. A detailed history is essential because the patient's
performance status is a powerful predictor of disease course. All
patients should have measurement of a complete blood count,
electrolytes including calcium, creatinine, liver tests, lactate
dehydrogenase, albumin, and a chest radiograph. Further evaluation
will follow the results of these tests. In general, screening
asymptomatic lung cancer patients with MRI of the brain,
radionuclide bone imaging, and abdominal CT imaging does not
change patient outcomes. These tests should be targeted to specific
symptoms and signs.
 
Table 39–3. Approximate survival rates following treatment for
lung cancer.
 
1Independent of therapy, generally not surgical patients. Data from
multiple sources. Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Reif MS
et al. Evidence-based medicine in the treatment of non-small cell cancer.
Clin Chest Med. 2000;21:107.
NSCLC patients being considered for surgery require meticulous
evaluation to identify those with resectable disease. CT imaging is
the most important modality for staging candidates for resection. A
chest CT scan precisely defines the size of parenchymal lesions and
identifies atelectatic lung or pleural effusions. However, CT imaging
is less accurate at determining invasion of the chest wall (sensitivity
62%) or mediastinum (sensitivity 60–75%). The sensitivity and
specificity of CT imaging for identifying lung cancer metastatic to the
mediastinal lymph nodes are 57% (49–66%) and 82% (77–86%),
respectively. Therefore, chest CT imaging does not provide
definitive information on staging. CT imaging does help in making
the decision about whether to proceed to resection of the primary
tumor and sample the mediastinum at thoracotomy (common if there
are no lymph nodes > 1 cm) or to use TTNA, mediastinoscopy,
esophageal ultrasound with transesophageal needle aspiration, or
limited thoracotomy to biopsy suspected metastatic disease
(common where there are lymph nodes > 1–2 cm).
Positron emission tomography (PET) using 2-[18F] fluoro-2-
deoxyglucose (FDG) is an important modality for identifying
metastatic foci in the mediastinum or distant sites. The sensitivity and
specificity of PET for detecting mediastinal spread of primary lung
cancer depend on the size of mediastinal nodes or masses. When
only normalsized (< 1 cm) mediastinal lymph nodes are present, the
sensitivity and specificity of PET for tumor involvement of nodes are
74% and 96%, respectively. When CT shows enlarged (> 1 cm)
lymph nodes, the sensitivity and specificity are 95% and 76%,
respectively.
Since 2001, the combined modalities of PET and CT imaging
have improved preoperative staging compared with CT or PET
alone. Many lung cancer specialists find whole body fusion PET-CT
imaging most useful to confirm lack of metastatic disease in NSCLC
patients who are candidates for surgical resection. There is evidence
that PET-CT imaging reduces futile thoracotomies by identifying
mediastinal and distant metastases in patients with NSCLC.
Disadvantages of PET imaging include limited resolution below 1
cm; the expense of FDG; limited availability; and false-positive
scans due to sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, or fungal infections.
2. Preoperative assessment—See Chapter 3.
3. Pulmonary function testing—Many patients with NSCLC
have moderate to severe chronic lung disease that increases the risk
of perioperative complications as well as long-term pulmonary
insufficiency following lung resection. All patients considered for
surgery require spirometry. In the absence of other comorbidities,
patients with good lung function (preoperative FEV1 ≥ 2 L) are at
low risk for complications from lobectomy or pneumonectomy. If
the FEV1 is < 2 L, then an estimated postoperative FEV1 should be
calculated. The postresection FEV1 may be estimated from
considering preoperative spirometry and the amount of lung to be
resected; in severe obstructive disease, a quantitative lung perfusion
scan may improve the estimate. A predicted post-lung resection
FEV1 > 800 mL (or > 40% of predicted FEV1) is associated with
a low incidence of peri-operative complications. High-risk patients
include those with a predicted postoperative FEV1< 700 mL (or <
40% of predicted FEV1). In these patients and in those with
borderline spirometry, cardiopulmonary exercise testing may be
helpful. A maximal oxygen uptake ( o2) of > 15 mL/kg/min
identifies patients with an acceptable incidence of complications and
mortality. Patients with a o2 of < 10 mL/kg/min have a very high
mortality rate at thoracotomy. Hypoxemia and hypercapnia are not
independent predictors of outcome.
4. Screening—Prior data showed that chest radiographs and
analysis of expectorated sputum as lung cancer screening modalities
did not improve survival. The National Lung Screening Trial is a
multicenter randomized national trial, involving over 53,000 current
and former heavy smokers. It compares low-dose helical CT with
standard chest radiographs as screening modalities for lung cancer.
Early results show a 20% reduction in lung cancer deaths, leading
the Data and Safety Monitoring Board to close the trial early. The
data are still being reviewed. Given the latest findings from the
National Lung Screening Trial, clinical guidelines and policy
recommendations on lung cancer screening are currently being
discussed.The implications of widespread screening of smokers
raise issues of false positives, surgical and medical complications
from additional testing, risks of cumulative exposure to radiation,
and risks of increasing patient anxiety and stress on an already
limited pool of resources.
More 
information 
is 
available 
at
http://www.cancer.gov/nlst/updates.
 Treatment
A. Non–Small Cell Carcinoma
Cure of NSCLC is unlikely without resection. Therefore, the initial
approach to the patient is determined by the answers to two
questions: (1) Is complete surgical resection technically feasible? (2)
If yes, is the patient able to tolerate the surgery with acceptable
morbidity and mortality? Clinical features that preclude complete
resection include extrathoracic metastases or a malignant pleural
effusion; or tumor involving the heart, pericardium, great vessels,
esophagus, recurrent laryngeal or phrenic nerves, trachea, main
carina, or contralateral mediastinal lymph nodes. Accordingly, stage
I and stage II patients are treated with surgical resection where
possible. Stage II, and possibly a subset of stage IB, are
additionally recommended to receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Stage
IIIA patients have poor outcomes when treated with resection
alone. They should be referred to multimodality protocols, including
chemo-therapy or radiotherapy, or both. Stage IIIB patients treated
with concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy have improved
survival. Selected stage IIIB patients who undergo resection after
multimodality therapy have shown long-term survival and may be
cured. Stage IV patients are treated with chemotherapy or
symptom-based palliative therapy, or both (see below).
Surgical approach affects outcome. The North American Lung
Cancer Study Group conducted a prospective trial of stage IA
patients randomized to lobectomy versus limited resection. They
reported a threefold increased rate of local recurrence in the limited
resection group (P = 0.008) and a trend toward an increase in
overall death rate (increase of 30%, P = 0.08) and increase in
death rate due to cancer (increase of 50%, P = 0.09), compared
with patients receiving lobectomy. There are inadequate outcome
data on which to base a comparison of VATS with standard
thoracotomy. Radiation therapy following surgery improves local
control but does not improve survival.
Patients with small early-stage primary lung cancers who are not
candidates for surgery because of significant comorbidity or other
surgical contraindication may be candidates for stereotactic
radiosurgery 
or 
radiotherapy. 
Stereotactic 
radiosurgery
(cyberknife), which is composed of multiple non-parallel radiation
beams that converge, allows the delivery of a relatively large dose
of radiation to a small, well-defined target. For small, early-stage
cancers, 3-year local control rates with cyberknife exceed 90%,
and 3-year survival is estimated at over 55%. Patients with locally
advanced disease (stages IIIA and IIIB) who are not surgical
candidates have improved survival when treated with concurrent
chemotherapy and radiation therapy compared with no therapy,
radiation alone, or even sequential chemotherapy and radiation.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy consists of giving anti-neoplastic
drugs in advance of surgery or radiation therapy. There is no
consensus on the impact of neoadjuvant therapy on survival in stage
I and stage II NSCLC. Such therapy is not recommended outside
of ongoing clinical trials. Neoadjuvant therapy is more widely used
in selected patients with stage IIIA or stage IIIB disease. Some
studies suggest a survival advantage. This remains an area of active
research.
Adjuvant chemotherapy consists of administering antineoplastic
drugs following surgery or radiation therapy. Cisplatin-containing
regimens have been shown to confer an overall survival benefit in at
least stage II disease and possibly a subset of stage IB disease. The
Lung Adjuvant Cisplatin Evaluation Collaborative Group published
a meta-analysis of the five largest cisplatin-based adjuvant trials.
They reported a 5% absolute benefit in 5-year overall survival with
a cisplatin-containing doublet regimen following surgery (P = 0.005)
in patients with at least stage II disease. For patients with poor
performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Score ≤
2), there is no evidence of survival benefit for adjuvant
chemotherapy; rather, it may be detrimental. Novel targeted agents
with less toxicity are in clinical trials, and gene expression profiling
has shown promise in defining a subset of patients who may benefit
from adjuvant therapy.
Although not curative, chemotherapy has been shown in multiple
clinical trials to provide a modest increase in overall survival and
performance status in patients with stage IIIB and stage IV NSCLC
compared with supportive care alone, with median survival
increased from 5 months to a range of 7–11 months. Palliative
chemotherapy also leads to improved quality of life and symptom
control, with first-line therapy involving a platinum-based regimen.
Platinum-based doublet regimens consist of cisplatin or carboplatin
(agents that bind DNA to form adducts that inhibit their synthesis
and function) combined with another agent, such as gemcitabine,
taxane, vinorelbine, or pemetrexed. When compared in phase III
trials for advanced NSCLC, these doublet regimens have shown
comparable efficacy with varying toxicity profiles. Investigators have
shown that the choice of chemotherapeutic agent can be tailored to
histologic subtype in NSCLC. For nonsquamous histologies,
patients have modestly improved overall survival when treated with
a platinum agent plus pemetrexed (an inhibitor of folate-dependent
enzymes important in purine and pyrimidine synthesis). Patients with
squamous cell lung carcinomas have modestly improved overall
survival when a platinum agent is combined with gemcitabine (a
deoxycytidine analog that inhibits DNA synthesis). For good
performance status patients with nonsquamous histologies,
bevacizumab (a monoclonal antibody to vascular endothelial growth
factor [VEGF]) can be added to a traditional platinum doublet
regimen with further modest increase in survival benefit. Cetuximab
(a monoclonal antibody to the epidermal growth factor receptor
[EGFR]) added to a platinum doublet regimen for all histologies of
NSCLC has also shown a small survival benefit.
With the advent of molecular profiling, targeted therapy has
played a significant role in NSCLC. For the subgroup of patients
with EGFR mutations, an EGFR inhibitor (erlotinib and gefitinib)
rather than platinum-based chemotherapy is the first-line treatment.
Response rates with EGFR inhibitors in patients with EGFR
mutation are at least 60%, and median overall survival is estimated
at 27–30 months. EGFR mutations are found in approximated 10–
15% of the white population and 30–40% in the Asian population
and are usually found among nonsmokers to light-smokers, females,
and adenocarcinoma histology. Approximately 5% of all patients
with NSCLC carry a different mutation, the EML4-ALK fusion
gene product. This is found in a comparatively younger population,
with adenocarcinoma histology, and nonsmoking to light-smoking
history. Patients with this mutation are in clinical trials with ALK
inhibitors, with early results showing 60% response rates. Finally,
KRAS mutations are also found among patients with NSCLC,
indicate a poor prognosis, and typically do not respond to EGFR
inhibition. These three mutations are mutually exclusive. Ongoing
research seeks to define the role of these targeted agents in early
stage and locally advanced lung cancers.
B. Small Cell Carcinoma
Response rates of SCLC to cisplatin and etoposide are excellent
with 80–90% response in limited-stage disease (50–60% complete
response), and 60–80% response in extensive stage disease (15–
20% complete response). However, remissions tend to be short-
lived with a median duration of 6–8 months. Once the disease has
recurred, median survival is 3–4 months. Overall 2-year survival is
20–40% in limited-stage disease and < 5% in extensive-stage
disease. Thoracic radiation therapy improves survival in patients
with limited SCLC and is given concurrently with chemotherapy.
Thoracic radiation therapy is not beneficial for patients with
extensive disease, and they should receive chemotherapy alone.
There is a high rate brain metastasis in patients with SCLC, even
following a good response to chemotherapy, because
chemotherapy does not adequately penetrate the blood-brain
barrier. Prophylactic cranial irradiation has been shown to decrease
the incidence of central nervous system disease and improve
survival in patients with limited stage disease who respond to
chemotherapy and a subset of patients with extensive stage disease
who have had an excellent response to chemotherapy.
Occasionally, a patient may have a peripheral nodule resected
that turns out to be SCLC. Five-year survival following resection of
the equivalent of stage I and stage II SCLC is higher than in patients
treated with chemotherapy.
C. Palliative Therapy
Photoresection with the Nd:YAG laser is sometimes performed on
central tumors to relieve endobronchial obstruction, improve
dyspnea, and control hemoptysis. External beam radiation therapy
is also used to control dyspnea, hemoptysis, endobronchial
obstruction, pain from bony metastases, obstruction from superior
vena cava syndrome, and symptomatic brain metastases. Resection
of a solitary brain metastasis improves quality of life when
combined with radiation therapy, and if there is no evidence of other
metastatic disease, it may improve survival. Intraluminal radiation
(brachytherapy) is an alternative approach to endobronchial
disease. Pain syndromes are very common in advanced disease. As
patients approach the end of life, meticulous efforts at pain control
are essential (see Chapter 5). In addition to standard oncologic
care, early consultation with—or referral to—a palliative care
specialist is recommended in advanced disease to aid in symptom
management; it may even modestly improve survival.
 Prognosis
The overall 5-year survival rate for lung cancer is approximately
15%. Predictors of survival include the type of tumor (SCLC versus
NSCLC), molecular typing, the stage of the tumor, the patient's
performance status, and weight loss in the past 6 months. Patients
with EGFR mutation have better overall survival when compared
with those without EGFR mutation, even when receiving similar
cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Alberts WM et al. Diagnosis and management of lung cancer
executive summary: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines (2nd Edition). Chest. 2007 Sep;132(3 Suppl): 1S–19S.
[PMID: 17873156]
 
Anantham D et al. Endobronchial ultrasound. Respir Med. 2009
Oct;103(10):1406–14. [PMID: 19447014]
 
Fischer B et al. Preoperative staging of lung cancer with combined
PET-CT. N Engl J Med. 2009 July 2;361(1):32–39. [PMID:
19571281]
 
Jemal A et al. Cancer statistics, 2010. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010
Sep–Oct;60(5):277–300. [PMID: 20610543]
 
Kwak EK et al. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibition in non-
small cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct
28;363(18):1693–703. [PMID: 20979469]
 
Maemondo M et al; North-East Japan Study Group. Gefitinib or
chemotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer with mutated EGFR.
N Engl J Med. 2010 Jun 24;362(25):2380–8. [PMID: 20573926]
 
Mok TS et al. Gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel in pulmonary
adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2009 Sept 3;361(10):947–57.
[PMID: 19692680]
 
National Lung Screening Trial Research Team. The National Lung
Screening Trial: overview and study design. Radiology. 2011
Jan;258(1):243–53. [PMID: 21045183]
 
Pignon JP et al. Lung adjuvant cisplatin evaluation: a pooled
analysis by the LACE Collaborative Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jul
20;26(21):3552–9. [PMID: 18506026]
 
Pirker R et al; FLEX Study Team. Cetuximab plus chemotherapy
in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (FLEX): an
open-labeled randomised phase III trial. Lancet. 2009 May
2;373(9674):1525–31. [PMID: 19410716]
 
Ries LAG et al (eds). SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–
2005, National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD,
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2005/, based on November 2007
SEER data submission, posted to the SEER web site, 2008.
 
Rosell R et al; Spanish Lung Cancer Group.Screening for
epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in lung cancer.N Engl J
Med. 2009 Sep 3;361(10):958–67. [PMID: 19692684]
 
Scagliotti GV et al. Phase III study comparing cisplatin plus
gemcitabine with cisplatin plus pemetrexed in chemotherapynaïve
patients with advanced-stage non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2008 Jul 20;26(21):3543–51. [PMID: 18506025]
 
Slotman B et al. Prophylactic cranial irradiation in extensive small-
cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007 Aug 16;357(7):664–72.
[PMID: 17699816]
 
Temel JS et al. Early palliative care for patients with metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Aug
19;363(8):733–42. [PMID: 20818875]
 
Timmerman R et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy for
inoperable early stage lung cancer.JAMA. 2010 Mar 17;303(11):
1070–6. [PMID: 20233825]
 
PULMONARY METASTASES
Pulmonary metastasis results from the spread of an extra-pulmonary
malignant tumor through vascular or lymphatic channels or by direct
extension. Almost any cancer can metastasize to the lung, including
primary lung carcinomas. Metastases usually occur via the
pulmonary artery and typically present as multiple nodules or
masses on chest radiography. The radiographic differential diagnosis
of multiple pulmonary nodules also includes pulmonary
arteriovenous malformation, pulmonary abscesses, granulomatous
infection, sarcoidosis, rheumatoid nodules, and Wegener
granulomatosis. Metastases to the lungs are found in 20–55% of
patients dying of various malignancies. Most are intraparenchymal.
Endo bronchial metastases occur in < 5% of patients dying of
nonpulmonary cancer. Carcinoma of the kidney, breast, rectum,
colon, and cervix and malignant melanoma are the most likely
primary tumors. Head and neck cancers with extensive or lower
cervical nodal involvement have a 30% risk for distant metastasis;
half of these metastases present in the lungs.
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis denotes diffuse involvement of
the pulmonary lymphatic network by primary or metastatic lung
cancer, probably a result of extension of tumor from lung capillaries
to the lymphatics. Tumor embolization from extrapulmonary
cancer 
(renal 
cell 
carcinoma, 
hepatocellular 
carcinoma,
choriocarcinoma) is an uncommon route for tumor spread to the
lungs. Metastatic cancer may also present as a malignant pleural
effusion.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms are uncommon but include cough, hemoptysis and, in
advanced cases, dyspnea and hypoxemia. Symptoms are more
often referable to the site of the primary tumor.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis of metastatic cancer involving the lungs is usually
established by identifying a primary tumor. Appropriate studies
should be ordered if there is a suspicion of any primary cancer, such
as breast, thyroid, testis, colorectal, or prostate, for which specific
treatment is available. For example, an elevated prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) may indicate prostate cancer, carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) tests for colorectal or pancreatic cancer, and β-
human chorionic gonadotropin (βHCG) and α-fetoprotein test for
germ cell tumors. Based on the clinical setting, imaging studies
should be ordered (see below). If the history, physical examination,
and initial studies fail to reveal the site of the primary tumor,
attention is better focused on the lung, where tissue samples
obtained by bronchoscopy, percutaneous needle biopsy, VATS, or
thoracotomy may establish the histologic diagnosis and suggest the
most likely primary cancer. Occasionally, cytologic studies of
pleural fluid or pleural biopsy reveal the diagnosis. Sputum cytology
is rarely helpful.
If the initial histologic review does not reveal a primary diagnosis,
immunohistochemical staining should be done on the biopsy
specimen. For example, PSA and thyroglobulin staining are highly
specific for prostate and thyroid cancer, respectively. Thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is relatively specific for primary lung
adenocarcinoma, while also positive for SCLC and thyroid
carcinoma. An adenocarcinoma that demonstrates negative TTF-1
staining strongly suggests a nonpulmonary primary cancer. Positive
estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) stains
suggest primary breast cancer.
C. Imaging
Chest radiographs usually show multiple spherical densities with
sharp margins. The size of metastatic lesions varies from a few
millimeters (miliary densities) to large masses. Nearly all are < 5 cm
in diameter. The lesions are usually bilateral, pleural or subpleural in
location, and more common in lower lung zones. Cavitation
suggests squamous cell tumor; calcification suggests osteosarcoma.
Lymphangitic spread and solitary pulmonary nodule are less
common radiographic presentations of pulmonary metastasis.
Conventional chest radiography is less sensitive than CT scan in
detecting pulmonary metastases. Mammography should be
considered in women to search for possible primary breast cancer.
CT imaging of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis may reveal the site of
a primary tumor and will help determine feasibility of surgical
resection of the metastatic lung tumors. PET-CT scan may also help
in identifying the site of a primary cancer or identifying other areas
of extrathoracic metastasis.
 Treatment
Once the diagnosis has been established, management consists of
treatment of the primary neoplasm and any pulmonary
complications. Surgical resection of a solitary pulmonary nodule is
often prudent in the patient with known current or previous
extrapulmonary cancer. Local resection of one or more pulmonary
metastases is feasible in a few carefully selected patients with
various sarcomas and carcinomas (breast, testis, colon, and
kidney). Surgical resection should be considered only if the primary
tumor is under control, if the patient is a good surgical risk, if all of
the metastatic tumor can be resected, if effective nonsurgical
approaches are not available, and if there are no metastases
elsewhere in the body. Relative contraindications to resection of
pulmonary metastases include (1) malignant melanoma primary, (2)
requirement for pneumonectomy, and (3) pleural involvement. Data
from the International Registry of Lung Metastases report an overall
5-year survival rate of 36% and 10-year survival rate of 26% after
complete resection of pulmonary metastases. Patients who are not
surgical candidates but have solitary or limited metastatic disease to
the lungs may be candidates for stereotactic radiosurgery,
radioablation, or cryotherapy. For patients with progressive
disease, diligent attention to palliative care is essential (see Chapter
5).
Kaifi JT et al. Indications and approach to surgical resection of
lung metastases. J Surg Oncol. 2010 Aug 1;102(2):187–95.
[PMID:20648593]
 
Mitry E et al. Epidemiology, management and prognosis of
colorectal cancer with lung metastases: a 30-year population-
based study. Gut. 2010 Oct;59(10):1383–8. [PMID: 20732912]
 
Oliaro A et al. Pulmonary metastasectomy for melanoma. J Thorac
Oncol. 2010. Jun;5(6 Suppl 2):S187–91. [PMID: 20502260]
 
Pfannschmidt J. Reported outcome factors for pulmonary resection
of metastatic colorectal cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2010 Jun;5(6
Suppl 2):S172–8. [PMID: 20502257]
 
Pfannschmidt J. Thoracic metastasectomy for non-seminomatous
germ cell tumors.J Thorac Oncol. 2010 Jun;5(6 Suppl 2):S182–6.
[PMID: 20502259]
 
Rusch VW. Pulmonary metastasectomy: a moving target. J Thorac
Oncol. 2010 Jun;5(6 Suppl 2):S130–1. [PMID: 20502246]
 
Treasure T et al. Pulmonary metastasectomy in colorectal cancer:
the PulMiCC Trial. J Thor Oncol. 2010 Jun;5(6 Suppl 2): S203–
6. [PMID: 20502265]
 
MESOTHELIOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Unilateral, nonpleuritic chest pain and dyspnea.
 Distant (> 20 years earlier) history of exposure to asbestos.
 Pleural effusion or pleural thickening or both on chest
radiographs.
 Malignant cells in pleural fluid or tissue biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
Mesotheliomas are primary tumors arising from the surface lining of
the pleura (80% of cases) or peritoneum (20% of cases). About
three-fourths of pleural mesotheliomas are diffuse (usually
malignant) tumors, and the remaining one-fourth are localized
(usually benign). Men outnumber women by a 3:1 ratio. Numerous
studies have confirmed the association of malignant pleural
mesothelioma with exposure to asbestos (particularly the
crocidolite form). The lifetime risk to asbestos workers of
developing malignant pleural mesothelioma is as high as 10%. Sixty
to 80 percent of patients with malignant mesothelioma report a
history of asbestos exposure. The latent period between exposure
and onset of symptoms ranges from 20 to 40 years. The clinician
should inquire about asbestos exposure through mining, milling,
manufacturing, shipyard work, insulation, brake linings, building
construction and demolition, roofing materials, and a variety of
asbestos products (pipe, textiles, paint, tile, gaskets, panels).
Although cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of
bronchogenic carcinoma in asbestos workers and aggravates
asbestosis, there is no association between smoking and
mesothelioma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The average interval between onset of symptoms and diagnosis is
2–3 months; the median age at diagnosis is 69 years in Western
countries. Symptoms include the insidious onset of shortness of
breath, nonpleuritic chest pain, and weight loss. Physical findings
include dullness to percussion, diminished breath sounds and, in
some cases, digital clubbing.
B. Laboratory Findings
Pleural fluid is exudative and often hemorrhagic. Cytologic tests of
pleural fluid are often negative. VATS biopsy is usually necessary to
obtain an adequate specimen for histo-logic diagnosis. The
histologic variants of malignant pleural mesothelioma are epithelial
(50–60%), sarcomatoid (10%), and biphasic (30–40%). Since
distinction from benign inflammatory conditions and metastatic
adenocarcinoma may be difficult, immunohistochemical stains are
important to confirm the diagnosis. Epithelial mesothelioma stains
are positive for pankeratin, calretinin, keratin 5/6, and WT1 and are
negative for epithelial markers, such as CEA, MOC-31, TTF-1,
CD15, and B72.3 (usually three needed). Soluble mesothelin-
related peptide also may be found in serum or pleural fluid (or both)
of patients with mesothelioma, epitheliod type.
C. Imaging
Radiographic abnormalities consist of nodular, irregular, unilateral
pleural thickening and varying degrees of unilateral pleural effusion.
Sixty percent of patients have right-sided disease, while only 5%
have bilateral involvement. CT scans demonstrate the extent of
pleural involvement. PET-CT is increasingly used to help
differentiate benign from malignant pleural disease, improve staging
accuracy, and identify candidates for aggressive surgical
approaches.
 Complications
Malignant pleural mesothelioma progresses rapidly as the tumor
spreads along the pleural surface to involve the pericardium,
mediastinum, and contralateral pleura. The tumor may eventually
extend beyond the thorax to involve abdominal lymph nodes and
organs. Progressive pain and dyspnea are characteristic. Local
invasion of thoracic structures may cause superior vena cava
syndrome, hoarseness, Horner syndrome, arrhythmias, and
dysphagia. Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with mesothelioma
include 
thrombocytosis, 
hemolytic 
anemia, 
disseminated
intravascular 
coagulopathy, 
hypercalcemia, 
and 
migratory
thrombophlebitis.
 Treatment
Surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and a combination of
methods are attempted, but treatments are generally unsuccessful.
Pleurectomy and decortication (surgical stripping of the pleura and
pericardium from apex of the lung to diaphragm) is one surgical
approach and can be effective in controlling malignant pleural
effusion. Single institution studies have shown a possible
improvement in survival outcome when adjuvant chemotherapy is
added, but this has not yet been proven with randomized phase III
trials. Some surgeons favor a trimodality approach with extrapleural
pneumonectomy, adjuvant radiation, and chemotherapy, arguing
that it prolongs survival in highly selected patients. Extrapleural
pneumonectomy is a radical surgical procedure involving removal of
the ipsilateral lung, parietal and visceral pleura, pericardium, and
most of the hemi-diaphragm. However, the limited data for
extrapleural pneumonectomy comes from retrospective studies and
case series, where the patients are younger, have early-stage
disease, have epithelial histology, and lack extrapleural nodal
disease. In advanced unresectable cases, palliative chemotherapy
with cisplatin and pemetrexed can extend survival as well as
improve quality of life. Other alternative chemotherapy regimens
include gemcitabine, anthracyclines, or vinorelbine. Drainage of
pleural effusions, pleurodesis, radiation therapy, and even surgical
resection may offer palliative benefit in some patients.
 Prognosis
Most patients die of respiratory failure and complications of local
extension. Median survival time from onset of symptoms ranges
from 4 months in extensive disease to 16 months in localized
disease. Five-year survival is < 5%. Tumors that are predominantly
sarcomatoid are more resistant to therapy and have a worse
prognosis, with median survivals < 1 year. Poor prognostic features
include poor performance status, non-epithelioid histology, male
gender, nodal involvement, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, high
white blood cell count, low hemoglobin, and high platelet count.
Cameron RB. Extrapleural pneumonectomy is the preferred
surgical management in the multimodality therapy of pleural
mesothelioma: con Argument. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007
g
g
Apr;14(4):1249–53. [PMID: 17066226]
 
Nowak AK et al. Imaging in pleural mesothelioma: a review of
imaging research presented at the 9th International Meeting of the
International Mesothelioma Interest Group. Lung Cancer. 2010
Oct;70(1):1–6. [PMID: 20541834]
 
O'Reilly KM et al. Asbestos-related lung disease. Am Fam
Physician. 2007 Mar 1;75(5):683–8. [PMID: 17375514]
 
Stahel RA et al. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: ESMO Clinical
Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann
Oncol. 2010May;21(suppl 5):v126–8. [PMID: 20555061]
 
Van Meerbeeck JP et al. Malignant pleural mesothelioma: the
standard of care and challenges for future management. Crit Rev
Oncol Hematol. 2010 May 11. [Epub ahead of print] [PMID:
20466560]
 
Wheatley-Price P. Soluble mesothelin-related peptide and
osteopontin as markers of response in malignant mesothelioma. J
Clin Oncol. 2010 Jul 10;28(20):3316–22. [PMID: 20498407]
 
HEPATOBILIARY CANCERS
Lawrence S. Friedman, MD
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 In Western countries, usually a complication of cirrhosis.
 Characteristic CT and MRI features and elevated serum α-
fetoprotein may obviate the need for a confirmatory biopsy.
 
 General Considerations
Malignant neoplasms of the liver that arise from parenchymal cells
are called hepatocellular carcinomas; those that originate in the
ductular cells are called cholangiocarcinomas.
Hepatocellular carcinomas are associated with cirrhosis in 80%
of cases. Incidence rates are rising rapidly (twofold since 1978) in
the United States and other Western countries, presumably because
of the increasing prevalence of cirrhosis caused by chronic hepatitis
C infection and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. In Western
countries, risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma in patients
known to have cirrhosis are male gender, age > 55 years (although
there has been an increase in the number of younger cases), Asian
or Hispanic ethnicity, family history in a first-degree relative,
overweight, obesity, alcohol use (especially in combination with
obesity), diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism (in women), HCV
infection, HBsAg and anti-HBc positivity, a prolonged prothrombin
time, low platelet count, and an elevated serum transferrin
saturation. In Africa and most of Asia, hepatitis B is of major
etiologic significance, whereas in Western countries and Japan,
hepatitis C (particularly genotype 1b and sometimes in combination
with “occult” HBV infection) and alcoholic cirrhosis are the most
common risk factors. Other associations include hemochromatosis
(and possibly the C282Y carrier state), aflatoxin exposure
(associated with mutation of the TP53 gene), α1-antiprotease (α1-
antitrypsin) deficiency, and tyrosinemia. In patients with the
metabolic syndrome, hepatocellular carcinoma may arise from
hepatic adenomas in the absence of cirrhosis. Evidence for an
association with long-term use of oral contraceptives is inconclusive.
Coffee consumption and, in diabetic patients, the use of statins
appear to be protective. The fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular
carcinoma occurs in young women and is characterized by a
distinctive histologic picture, absence of risk factors, and indolent
course. Vinyl chloride exposure is associated with angiosarcoma of
the liver.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The presence of a hepatocellular carcinoma may be unsuspected
until there is deterioration in the condition of a cirrhotic patient who
was formerly stable. Cachexia, weakness, and weight loss are
associated symptoms. The sudden appearance of ascites, which
may be bloody, suggests portal or hepatic vein thrombosis by tumor
or bleeding from a necrotic tumor.
Physical examination may show tender enlargement of the liver,
occasionally with a palpable mass. In Africa, the typical
presentation in young patients is a rapidly expanding abdominal
mass. Auscultation may reveal a bruit over the tumor or a friction
rub when the process has extended to the surface of the liver.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory tests may reveal leukocytosis, as opposed to the
leukopenia that is frequently encountered in cirrhotic patients.
Anemia is common, but a normal or elevated hematocrit value may
be found in up to one-third of patients owing to elaboration of
erythropoietin by the tumor. Sudden and sustained elevation of the
serum alkaline phosphatase in a patient who was formerly stable is a
common finding. HBsAg is present in a majority of cases in endemic
areas, whereas in the United States anti-HCV is found in up to 40%
of cases. α-Fetoprotein levels are elevated in up to 70% of patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma in Western countries (although the
sensitivity is lower in blacks and levels are not elevated in patients
with fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma); however, mild
elevations are also often seen in patients with chronic hepatitis.
Serum levels of des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin are elevated in
up to 90% of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, but they may
also be elevated in patients with vitamin K deficiency, chronic
hepatitis, and metastatic cancer. The L3 glycoform of α-fetoprotein
(AFP-L3) is under study and may not be sensitive for early
hepatocellular carcinoma. Cytologic study of ascitic fluid rarely
reveals malignant cells.
C. Imaging
Multiphasic helical CT scanning and MRI with contrast
enhancement are the preferred imaging studies for determining the
location and vascularity of the tumor. Lesions smaller than 2 cm
may be difficult to characterize. Arterial phase enhancement of the
lesion followed by delayed hypointensity (“washout”) is most
specific for hepatocellular carcinoma. Ultrasound is less sensitive
and operator dependent but is used to screen for hepatic nodules in
high-risk patients. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound has a sensitivity
and specificity approaching those of arterial phase helical CT but,
unlike CT and MRI, cannot image the entire liver during the short
duration of the arterial phase. In selected cases, endoscopic
ultrasonography may be useful. PET is under study.
D. Liver Biopsy and Staging
Liver biopsy is diagnostic, although seeding of the needle tract by
tumor is a potential risk (1–3%). Biopsy can be deferred if imaging
studies and α-fetoprotein levels are diagnostic (eg, serum α-
fetoprotein > 200 ng/mL [200 mcg/L] and a hypervascular mass
lesion > 2 cm on imaging of a cirrhotic liver) or if surgical resection
is planned. Staging in the TNM classification includes the following
definitions: T0: no evidence of primary tumor; T1: solitary tumor
without vascular invasion; T2: solitary tumor with vascular invasion
or multiple tumors none more than 5 cm; T3: multiple tumors more
than 5 cm (3a) or tumor involving a major branch of the portal or
hepatic vein (3b); and T4: tumor (s) with direct invasion of adjacent
organs other than the gallbladder or with perforation of the visceral
peritoneum; N1, regional lymph node metastasis; M1, distant
metastasis; F0, no to moderate hepatic fibrosis; F1, severe hepatic
fibrosis to cirrhosis. The BCLC (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer)
staging system is preferred and includes the Child-Turcotte-Pugh
stage, tumor stage, and liver function and has the advantage of
linking overall stage with preferred treatment modalities and with an
estimation of life expectancy.
 Screening & Prevention
In the patient with chronic hepatitis B or cirrhosis caused by HCV
or alcohol, surveillance for the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma is recommended. Although the standard approach is α-
fetoprotein testing and ultrasonography every 6 months, the value of
α-fetoprotein screening has been questioned because of its low
sensitivity. CT and MRI are considered too expensive for
screening, but the sensitivity of ultrasound for detecting early
hepatocellular carcinoma is only 63%. The risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma in a patient with cirrhosis is 3–5% a year. The diagnosis
of hepatocellular carcinoma is established (without the need for
biopsy) for lesions > 2 cm when characteristic arterial
hypervascularity is demonstrated on both helical CT and MRI (or
on either CT or MRI if the serum α-fetoprotein level is > 200
ng/mL [200 mcg/L]). In a population of patients with cirrhosis, over
60% of nodules < 2 cm in diameter detected on a screening
ultrasound prove to be hepatocellular carcinoma. Mass vaccination
programs against HBV in developing countries are leading to
reduced rates of hepatocellular carcinoma. Successful treatment of
hepatitis B and of hepatitis C in patients with cirrhosis reduces the
subsequent risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
 Treatment
Surgical resection of solitary hepatocellular carcinomas may result in
cure if liver function is preserved (Child class A or possibly B) and
portal vein thrombosis is not present. Laparoscopic liver resection
has been performed in selected cases. Treatment of underlying
chronic viral hepatitis, adjuvant chemotherapy, and adaptive
immunotherapy may lower postsurgical recurrence rates. Liver
transplantation may be appropriate for small unresectable tumors in
a patient with advanced cirrhosis, with reported 5-year survival
rates of up to 75%. The recurrence-free survival may be better for
liver transplantation than for resection in patients with well-
compensated cirrhosis and small tumors (one tumor < 5 cm or three
or fewer tumors each < 3 cm in diameter [Milan criteria]). Patients
with stage 2 hepatocellular carcinoma receive an additional 22
points on their Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score
(see Chapter 16), markedly increasing their chances of undergoing
transplantation. However, liver transplantation is often impractical
because of the donor organ shortage, and living donor liver
transplantation may be considered in these cases. Patients with
larger tumors (3–5 cm), a serum α-fetoprotein level ≥ 455 ng/mL
(455 mcg/L), or a MELD score ≥20 have poor posttransplantation
survival. Chemotherapy, hormonal therapy with tamoxifen, and
long-acting octreotide have not been shown to prolong life, but
transarterial 
chemoembolization 
(TACE), 
transarterial
chemoinfusion (TACI), and transarterial radioembolization (TARE)
via the hepatic artery are palliative and may prolong survival in
patients with a large or multifocal tumor in the absence of
extrahepatic spread. TACI and TARE are suitable for patients with
portal vein thrombosis. Injection of absolute ethanol into,
radiofrequency ablation of, cryotherapy of, or microwave ablation
of small tumors (< 2 cm) may prolong survival in patients who are
not candidates for resection; these interventions may provide a
“bridge” to liver transplantation. Radiofrequency ablation is superior
to ethanol injection for tumors > 2 cm in diameter and can be
performed after TACE in select cases. Sorafenib (an oral
multikinase inhibitor of Raf kinase, the VEGF receptor, and the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor [and others]), prolongs
median survival as well as the time to radiologic progression by 3
months in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma;
sorafenib is the standard of care in these patients. New
chemotherapy 
and 
radiation 
therapy 
techniques
(“radioembolization”), novel biologic approaches (eg, bortezomib, a
proteasome inhibitor; antiangiogenesis agents; other inhibitors of
growth-factor signaling; and gene therapy), and multi-modal
approaches are under study. For patients whose disease progresses
despite treatment or who present with advanced tumors, vascular
invasion, or extrahepatic spread, meticulous efforts at palliative care
are essential (see Chapter 5). Severe pain may develop in such
patients due to expansion of the liver capsule by the tumor and
requires concerted efforts at pain management, including the use of
opioids (see Chapter 5).
 Prognosis
In the United States, overall 1- and 5-year survival rates for patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma are 23% and 5%, respectively. Five-
year survival rates rise to 56% for patients with localized resectable
disease (T1, T2, selected T3 and T4; N0; M0) but are virtually nil
for those with locally unresectable or advanced disease. Contrary to
traditional opinion, the fibrolamellar variant does not have a better
prognosis than conventional hepatocellular carcinoma without
cirrhosis.
 When to Refer
All patients with hepatocellular carcinoma should be referred to a
specialist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Complications of cirrhosis.
•    Severe pain.
•    For surgery and other interventions.
Cabrera R et al. Review article: the management of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Feb 15;31(4): 461–76.
[PMID: 19925500]
 
Dufour JF et al.Liver cancer: from molecular pathogenesis to new
therapies: summary of the EASL single topic conference. J
Hepatol. 2010 Feb;52(2):296–304. [PMID: 20006399]
 
Germani G et al. Clinical outcomes of radiofrequency ablation,
percutaneous alcohol and acetic acid injection for hepatocellular
carcinoma: a meta-analysis.J Hepatol. 2010 Mar;52(3):380–8.
[PMID: 20149473]
 
Lencioni R. Loco-regional treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatology. 2010 Aug;52(2):762–73. [PMID: 20564355]
 
Saunders D et al. Systematic review: the association between
obesity and hepatocellular carcinoma—epidemiological evidence.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 May;31(10):1051–63. [PMID:
20175765]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE BILIARY TRACT
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Presents with obstructive jaundice, usually pain-less, often with
dilated biliary tree.
 Pain is more common in gallbladder carcinoma than
cholangiocarcinoma.
 A Courvoisier (dilated) gallbladder may be detected.
 Diagnosis by cholangiography with biopsy and brushings for
cytology.
 
 General Considerations
Carcinoma of the gallbladder occurs in approximately 2% of all
people operated on for biliary tract disease. It is notoriously
insidious, and the diagnosis is often made unexpectedly at surgery.
Cholelithiasis (often large, symptomatic stones) is usually present.
Other risk factors are chronic infection of the gallbladder with
Salmonella typhi, gallbladder polyps over 1 cm in diameter,
mucosal calcification of the gallbladder (porcelain gallbladder), and
anomalous pancreaticobiliary ductal junction. Genetic factors
include K -ras and TP53 mutations. Spread of the cancer—by
direct extension into the liver or to the perito-neal surface—may be
the initial manifestation. The TNM classification includes the
following stages: Tis, carcinoma in situ; T1a, tumor invades lamina
propria, and T1b, tumor invades muscle layer; T2, tumor invades
peri-muscular connective tissue, no extension beyond serosa
(visceral peritoneum) or into liver; T3, tumor perforates the serosa
or directly invades the liver or adjacent organ or structure; T4,
tumor invades the main portal vein or hepatic artery or invades
multiple extrahepatic organs or structures; N1, regional lymph node
metastasis; and M1, distant metastasis.
Carcinoma of the bile ducts (cholangiocarcinoma) accounts for
3% of all cancer deaths in the United States. It is more prevalent in
persons aged 50–70, with a slight male predominance. Two-thirds
arise at the confluence of the hepatic ducts (Klatskin tumors), and
one-fourth arise in the distal extrahepatic bile duct; the remainder
are intrahepatic (peripheral), the incidence of which has risen
dramatically since the 1970s. Staging for extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma is as follows: T1, tumor confined to bile duct;
T2, tumor spread beyond the wall of the bile duct; T3, tumor
spread to liver, gallbladder, or pancreas or a single vein or artery in
the liver; T4, tumor spread to veins or arteries bilaterally in the liver
or colon, stomach, duodenum, or abdominal wall; N1, regional
lymph node metastasis; M1, distant metastasis. Staging for
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is as follows: T1, solitary tumor
without vascular invasion; T2, solitary tumor with vascular invasion
or multiple tumors ≤ 5 cm; T3, multiple tumors > 5 cm or involving
major branch of portal or hepatic veins; T4, tumor invading
adjacent organ (except gallbladder) or perforation of visceral
peritoneum; N1, regional lymph node metastasis; and M1, distant
metastasis. Other staging systems consider tumor extent, vascular
encasement, and hepatic lobe atrophy. The frequency of carcinoma
in persons with choledochal cysts has been reported to be over
14% at 20 years, and surgical excision is recommended. There is an
increased incidence in patients with bile duct adenoma; biliary
papillomatosis; Caroli disease; a biliaryenteric anastomosis;
ulcerative colitis, especially those with primary sclerosing
cholangitis; biliary cirrhosis; diabetes mellitus; hyperthyroidism;
chronic pancreatitis; heavy alcohol consumption; and past exposure
to thorotrast, a contrast agent. In southeast Asia, hepatolithiasis and
infection of the bile ducts with helminths (Clonorchis sinensis,
Opisthorchis viverrini) are associated with chronic cholangitis and
an increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma. Hepatitis C virus infection,
cirrhosis, HIV infection, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, diabetes
mellitus, obesity, and tobacco smoking are additional risk factors
for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Progressive jaundice is the most common and usually the first sign
of obstruction of the extrahepatic biliary system. Pain in the right
upper abdomen with radiation into the back is usually present early
in the course of gallbladder carcinoma but occurs later in the course
of bile duct carcinoma. Anorexia and weight loss are common and
may be associated with fever and chills due to cholangitis. Rarely,
hematemesis or melena results from erosion of tumor into a blood
vessel (hemobilia). Fistula formation between the biliary system and
adjacent organs may also occur. The course is usually one of rapid
deterioration, with death occurring within a few months.
Physical examination reveals profound jaundice. A palpable
gallbladder with obstructive jaundice usually is said to signify
malignant disease (Courvoisier law); however, this clinical
generalization has been proved to be accurate only about 50% of
the time. Hepatomegaly due to hypertrophy of the unobstructed
liver lobe is usually present and is associated with liver tenderness.
Ascites may occur with peritoneal implants. Pruritus and skin
excoriations are common.
B. Laboratory Findings
With biliary obstruction, laboratory examination reveals
predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, with total serum
bilirubin values ranging from 5 to 30 mg/dL. There is usually
concomitant elevation of the alkaline phosphatase and serum
cholesterol. AST is normal or minimally elevated. An elevated CA
19-9 level may help distinguish cholangiocarcinoma from a benign
biliary stricture (in the absence of cholangitis).
C. Imaging
Ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced, triple-phase, helical CT
may show a gallbladder mass in gallbladder carcinoma and
intrahepatic mass or biliary dilation in carcinoma of the bile ducts.
CT may also show involved regional lymph nodes and atrophy of a
hepatic lobe because of vascular encasement with compensatory
hypertrophy of the unaffected lobe. MRI with magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and gadolinium enhancement
permits visualization of the entire biliary tree and detection of
vascular invasion and obviates the need for angiography and, in
some cases, direct cholangiography; it is the imaging procedure of
choice but may under-stage malignant hilar strictures. The sensitivity
and image quality can be increased with use of ferumoxide
enhancement. The features of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma on
MRI appear to differ from those of hepatocellular carcinoma, with
contrast washout in the latter but not the former. In indeterminate
cases, PET can detect cholangiocarcinomas as small as 1 cm and
lymph node and distant metastases, but false-positive results occur.
The most helpful diagnostic studies before surgery are either
percutaneous 
transhepatic 
or 
endoscopic 
retrograde
cholangiography with biopsy and cytologic specimens, although
false-negative biopsy and cytology results are common. Digital
image analysis and fluorescent in situ hybridization of cytologic
specimens improve sensitivity. Endoscopic ultrasonography with
FNA of tumors, choledochoscopy, and intraductal ultrasonography
may confirm a diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma in a patient with bile
duct stricture and an otherwise indeterminate evaluation.
 Treatment
In young and fit patients, curative surgery may be attempted if the
tumor is well localized. The 5-year survival rate for carcinoma of the
gallbladder invading the lamina propria or muscularis (stage 1, T1a
or 1b, N0, M0) is as high as 85% with laparoscopic
cholecystectomy but drops to 60%, even with a more extended
open resection, if there is perimuscular invasion (T2). The role of
radical surgery for T3 and T4 tumors is debatable. If the tumor is
unresectable at laparotomy, biliary-enteric bypass (eg, Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunostomy) can be performed. Carcinoma of the bile
ducts is curable by surgery in < 10% of cases. If resection margins
are negative, the 5-year survival rate may be as high as 47% for
intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas, 
41% 
for 
hilar
cholangiocarcinoma, and 37% for distal cholangiocarcinomas, but
the perioperative mortality rate may be as high as 10%. Palliation
can be achieved by placement of a self-expandable metal stent via
an endoscopic or percutaneous transhepatic route. Covered metal
stents may be more cost-effective than uncovered metal stents
because of a lower risk of stent occlusion, but they are associated
with a higher rate of stent migration and cholecystitis due to
occlusion of the cystic duct and are not associated with longer
survival. For hilar tumors, there is controversy as to whether
unilateral or bilateral stents should be inserted. Plastic stents are less
expensive but more prone to occlude than metal ones; they are
suitable for patients expected to survive only a few months.
Photodynamic therapy in combination with stent placement has
been demonstrated to prolong survival when compared with stent
placement alone in patients with nonresectable cholangiocarcinoma.
Radiotherapy may relieve pain and contribute to biliary
decompression. There is limited response to chemotherapy with
gemcitabine alone, but the combination of cisplatin and gemcitabine
prolongs survival by about 3 months in patients with locally
advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma. Few patients survive
for more than 24 months. Although cholangiocarcinoma is generally
considered to be a contraindication to liver transplantation because
of rapid tumor recurrence, a 75% 5-year survival rate has been
reported in patients with stage I and II cholangiocarcinoma
undergoing chemoradiation and exploratory laparotomy followed by
liver transplantation.
For those patients whose disease progresses despite treatment,
meticulous efforts at palliative care are essential (see Chapter 5).
 When to Refer
All patients with carcinoma of the biliary tract should be referred to
a specialist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Biliary obstruction.
•    Cholangitis.
Singal AG et al.The clinical presentation and prognostic factors for
intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma in a tertiary care
centre. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Mar;31(6): 625–33.
[PMID: 20003093]
 
Valle J et al; ABC-02 Trial Investigators.Cisplatin plus gemcitabine
versus gemcitabine for biliary tract cancer.N Engl J Med. 2010
Apr 8;362(14):1273–81. [PMID: 20375404]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE PANCREAS & THE
PERIAMPULLARY AREA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Obstructive jaundice (may be painless).
 Enlarged gallbladder (may be painful).
 Upper abdominal pain with radiation to back, weight loss, and
thrombophlebitis are usually late manifestations.
 
 General Considerations
Carcinomas involving the head of the pancreas, the ampulla of
Vater, the distal common bile duct, and the duodenum are
considered together, because they are usually indistinguishable
clinically; of these, carcinomas of the pancreas constitute over 90%.
Carcinoma is the most common neoplasm of the pancreas. About
75% are in the head and 25% in the body and tail of the organ.
They comprise 2% of all cancers and 5% of cancer deaths. Risk
factors include age, tobacco use (which is thought to cause 20–
25% of cases), heavy alcohol use, obesity, chronic pancreatitis,
prior abdominal radiation, family history, and possibly gastric ulcer.
New-onset diabetes mellitus after age 45 years occasionally heralds
the onset of pancreatic cancer. In diabetic patients, preliminary data
suggest that metformin use reduces the risk but insulin use increases
the risk of pancreatic cancer. About 7–8% of patients with
pancreatic cancer have a family history of pancreatic cancer in a
first-degree relative, compared with 0.6% of control subjects. Point
mutations in codon 12 of the K-ras oncogene are found in 70–
100%; inactivation of the tumor suppressor genes INK4A on
chromosome 9, TP53 on chromosome 17, and MADH4 on
chromosome 18 is found in 95%, 75%, and 55% of pancreatic
cancers, respectively; mutation of the palladin gene is reported to be
common. In 5–10% of cases, pancreatic cancer occurs as part of
several hereditary syndromes, including familial breast cancer
(carriers of BRCA-2 have a 7% lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer),
hereditary pancreatitis (PSS1 mutation), familial cutaneous malignant
melanoma (p16/CDKN2A mutation), Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
(STK11/LKB1 mutation), ataxia-telangiectasia, and hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Polymorphisms of the genes for
methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase and thymidylate synthase have
been reported to be associated with pancreatic cancer.
Neuroendocrine tumors account for 1–2% of pancreatic neoplasms
and may be functional (producing gastrin, insulin, glucagon,
vasoactive intestinal peptide, somatostatin, growth hormone–
releasing hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and others) or
nonfunctional. Plasma chronogranin A levels are elevated in 88–
100% of affected patients. Cystic neoplasms account for only 1%
of pancreatic cancers, but they are important because they are often
mistaken for pseudocysts. A cystic neoplasm should be suspected
when a cystic lesion in the pancreas is found in the absence of a
history of pancreatitis. At least 15% of all pancreatic cysts are
neoplasms. Whereas serous cystadenomas (which account for 32–
39% of cystic pancreatic neoplasms and also occur in patients with
von Hippel-Lindau disease) are benign, mucinous cystic neoplasms
(defined by the presence of ovarian stroma) (10–45%), intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasms (21–33%), solid pseudopapillary
neoplasms (< 5%), and cystic islet cell tumors (3–5%) may be
malignant, although their prognoses are better than the prognosis of
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, unless the neoplasm is locally
advanced.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Pain is present in over 70% of cases and is often vague, diffuse, and
located in the epigastrium or left upper quadrant when the lesion is
in the tail. Radiation of pain into the back is common and sometimes
predominates. Sitting up and leaning forward may afford some
relief, and this usually indicates that the lesion has spread beyond
the pancreas and is inoperable. Diarrhea, perhaps due to mal-
digestion, 
is 
an 
occasional 
early 
symptom. 
Migratory
thrombophlebitis is a rare sign. Weight loss is a common but late
finding and may be associated with depression. Occasionally a
patient presents with acute pancreatitis in the absence of an
alternative cause. Jaundice is usually due to biliary obstruction by a
cancer in the pancreatic head. A palpable gallbladder is also
indicative of obstruction by neoplasm (Courvoisier law), but there
are frequent exceptions. A hard, fixed, occasionally tender mass
may be present. In advanced cases, a hard periumbilical (Sister
Joseph's) nodule may be palpable.
B. Laboratory Findings
There may be mild anemia. Glycosuria, hyperglycemia, and
impaired glucose tolerance or true diabetes mellitus are found in
10–20% of cases. The serum amylase or lipase level is occasionally
elevated. Liver biochemical tests may suggest obstructive jaundice.
Steatorrhea in the absence of jaundice is uncommon. Occult blood
in the stool is suggestive of carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater (the
combination of biliary obstruction and bleeding may give the stools
a distinctive silver appearance). CA 19-9, with a sensitivity of 70%
and a specificity of 87%, has not proved sensitive enough for early
detection of pancreatic cancer; increased values are also found in
acute and chronic pancreatitis and cholangitis.
C. Imaging
With carcinoma of the head of the pancreas, an upper
gastrointestinal series may show a widening of the duodenal loop,
mucosal abnormalities in the duodenum ranging from edema to
invasion or ulceration, spasm, or compression. Ultrasound is not
reliable because of interference by intestinal gas. Multiphase thin-cut
helical CT scanning is generally the initial diagnostic procedure and
detects a mass in over 80% of cases. CT scanning identifies
metastases, delineates the extent of the tumor, and allows for
percutaneous FNA for cytologic studies and tumor markers. MRI is
an alternative to CT scanning. Preliminary experience suggests that
PET is a sensitive technique for detecting pancreatic cancer and
metastases. Selective celiac and superior mesenteric arteriography
may demonstrate vessel invasion by tumor, a finding that would
interdict attempts at surgical resection, but it is less widely used
since the advent of multiphase helical CT. Endoscopic
ultrasonography is more sensitive than CT scanning for detecting
pancreatic cancer and equivalent to CT scanning for determining
nodal involvement and resectability. A normal endoscopic
ultrasonogram 
excludes 
pancreatic 
cancer. 
Endoscopic
ultrasonography may also be used to guide FNA for tissue
diagnosis, tumor markers, and DNA analysis. Endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) may clarify an
ambiguous CT scan or MRI study by delineating the pancreatic
duct system or confirming an ampullary or biliary neoplasm. MRCP
appears to be at least as sensitive as ERCP in diagnosing pancreatic
cancer. In some centers, pancreatoscopy or intraductal
ultrasonography can be used to evaluate filling defects in the
pancreatic duct and assess resectability of intraductal papillary
mucinous tumors. With obstruction of the splenic vein,
splenomegaly or gastric varices are present, the latter delineated by
endoscopy, endoscopic ultrasonography, or angiography.
Cystic neoplasms can be distinguished by their appearance on
CT, endoscopic ultrasonography, and ERCP and features of the
cyst fluid on gross and cytologic analysis. For example, serous
cystadenomas may have a central scar or honeycomb appearance;
mucinous cystadenomas are unilocular or multilocular and contain
mucin-rich fluid with high carcinoembryonic antigen levels (> 200
ng/mL) (200 mcg/L); and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms
are associated with a dilated pancreatic duct and extrusion of
gelatinous material from the ampulla.
Staging of pancreatic cancer by the TNM classification includes
the following definitions: Tis: carcinoma in situ; T1: tumor limited to
the pancreas, 2 cm or less in greatest dimension; T2: tumor limited
to the pancreas, more than 2 cm in greatest dimension; T3: tumor
extends beyond the pancreas but without involvement of the celiac
axis or the superior mesenteric artery; T4, tumor involves the celiac
axis or the superior mesenteric artery (unresectable primary tumor);
N1, regional lymph node metastasis; M1, distant metastasis.
 Treatment
Abdominal exploration is usually necessary when cytologic
diagnosis cannot be made or if resection is to be attempted, which
includes about 30% of patients. In a patient with a localized mass in
the head of the pancreas and without jaundice, laparoscopy may
detect tiny peritoneal or liver metastases and thereby avoid
resection in 4–13% of patients. Radical pancreaticoduodenal
(Whipple) resection is indicated for lesions strictly limited to the
head of the pancreas, periampullary area, and duodenum (T1, N0,
M0). Five-year survival rates are 20–25% in this group and as high
as 40% in those with negative resection margins and without lymph
node involvement. Preoperative endoscopic decompression of an
obstructed bile duct is often achieved with a plastic stent or short
metal stent but does not reduce operative mortality and is
associated with complications. The best surgical results are
achieved at centers that specialize in the multidisciplinary treatment
of pancreatic cancer. Adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy with
gemcitabine or fluorouracil (or both), possibly combined with
irradiation, is of benefit (Table 39–4). When resection is not
feasible, endoscopic stenting of the bile duct is performed to relieve
jaundice. A plastic stent is generally placed if the patient's
anticipated survival is < 6 months (or surgery is planned). A metal
stent is preferred when anticipated survival is 6 months or greater.
Whether covered metal stents designed to prevent tumor ingrowth
offer an advantage over uncovered stents is uncertain because
covered stents are associated with higher rates of migration and
acute cholecystitis due to occlusion of the cystic duct. Surgical
biliary bypass may be considered in patients expected to survive at
least 6 months. Surgical duodenal bypass may be considered in
patients in whom duodenal obstruction is expected to develop later;
alternatively, endoscopic placement of a self-expandable duodenal
stent may be feasible. Chemoradiation may be used for palliation of
unresectable cancer confined to the pancreas. Chemotherapy has
been disappointing in meta-static pancreatic cancer, although
improved response rates have been reported with gemcitabine. The
addition of erlotinib (an inhibitor of the EGFR receptor),
capecitabine (an oral fluoropyrimidine), or a platinum agent may
improve survival but also increases toxicity. The high rate of K-ras
mutations in pancreatic cancer limits the benefit of erlotinib.
Nucleoside cytidine analogues and topoisomerase inhibitors are
under study. Celiac plexus nerve block (under CT or endoscopic
ultrasound guidance) or thoracoscopic splanchnicectomy may
improve pain control. Photodynamic therapy is under study.
Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for neuroendocrine
tumors, when feasible. Metastatic disease may be controlled with
long-acting somatostatin analogs, interferon, peptide-receptor
radionuclide therapy, and chemoembolization. There is a growing
consensus that asymptomatic incidental pancreatic cysts ≤ 2 cm are
at low risk for harboring invasive carcinoma. The cysts may be
monitored by imaging tests at 6- to 12-month intervals and every 3-
6 months in those > 2 cm, with surgery performed if a cyst enlarges
or exceeds 2.5 cm.
Surgical resection is indicated for mucinous cystic neoplasms,
symptomatic serous cystadenomas, and cystic tumors > 2 cm in
diameter that remain undefined after helical CT, endoscopic
ultrasonography, and diagnostic aspiration. All intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasms of the main pancreatic duct should be
resected, but those of branch ducts may be followed with serial
imaging if they are asymptomatic and exhibit benign features (eg,
diameter < 3 cm, absence of nodules or thick walls); most of the
latter remain stable on follow-up, but the risk of pancreatic ductal
carcinoma and of nonpancreatic cancers may also be increased in
this group of patients. In the absence of locally advanced disease,
survival is higher for malignant cystic neoplasms than for
adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic resection or ablation, with temporary
placement of a pancreatic duct stent, may be feasible for ampullary
adenomas, but patients must be followed for recurrence.
 Prognosis
Carcinoma of the pancreas, especially in the body or tail, has a
poor prognosis. Reported 5-year survival rates range from 2% to
5%. Lesions of the ampulla have a better prognosis, with reported
5-year survival rates of 20–40% after resection; jaundice and lymph
node involvement are adverse prognostic factors. In carefully
selected patients, resection of cancer of the pancreatic head is
feasible and results in reasonable survival. In persons with a family
history of pancreatic cancer in at least two first-degree relatives,
screening with endoscopic ultrasonography and helical CT or
MRI/MRCP should be considered beginning at age 40–45 or 10
years before the age at which pancreatic cancer was diagnosed in a
family member.
For those patients whose disease progresses despite treatment,
meticulous efforts at palliative care are essential (see Chapter 5).
 
Table 39–4. Treatment choices for cancers responsive to systemic
agents.
 
 When to Refer
All patients with carcinoma involving the pancreas and the
periampullary area should be referred to a specialist.
 When to Admit
Patients who require surgery and other interventions should be
hospitalized.
Fernández-del Castillo C et al. Intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasms of the pancreas. Gastroenterology. 2010 Sep;139(3):
708–13, 713.e1–2. [PMID: 20650278]
 
Grover S et al. Hereditary pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology.
2010 Oct;139(4):1076–80, 1080.e1–2. [PMID: 20727885]
 
Hidalgo M. Pancreatic cancer.N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr 29;
362(17):1605–17. [PMID: 20427809]
 
Neoptolemos JP et al; European Study Group for Pancreatic
Cancer. Adjuvant chemotherapy with fluorouracil plus folinic acid
vs gemcitabine following pancreatic cancer resection: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2010 Sep 8;304(10):1073–81.[PMID:
20823433]
 
van der Gaag NA et al. Preoperative biliary drainage for cancer of
the head of the pancreas. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jan 14;
362(2):129–37.[PMID: 20071702]
 
ALIMENTARY TRACT CANCERS
Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD
Robin K. Kelley, MD
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Progressive solid food dysphagia.
 Weight loss common.
 Endoscopy with biopsy establishes diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Esophageal cancer usually develops in persons between 50 and 70
years of age. The overall ratio of men to women is 3:1. There are
two 
histologic 
types: 
squamous 
cell 
carcinoma 
and
adenocarcinoma. In the United States, squamous cell cancer is
much more common in blacks than in whites. Chronic alcohol and
tobacco use are strongly associated with an increased risk of
squamous cell carcinoma. The risk of squamous cell cancer is also
increased in patients with tylosis, achalasia, caustic-induced
esophageal stricture, and other head and neck cancers. Squamous
cell cancer has a high incidence in certain regions of China and
Southeast Asia. Half of all cases occur in the distal third of the
esophagus. Adenocarcinoma is more common in whites. It is
increasing dramatically in incidence and now is as common as
squamous carcinoma. The majority of adenocarcinomas develop as
a complication of Barrett metaplasia due to chronic
gastroesophageal reflux. Thus, most adenocarcinomas arise in the
distal third of the esophagus. Obesity also is strongly associated
with adenocarcinoma, even after controlling for gastroesophageal
reflux; however, no causal relationship has been convincingly
shown.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with esophageal cancer present with advanced,
incurable disease. Over 90% have solid food dysphagia, which
progresses over weeks to months. Odynophagia is sometimes
present. Significant weight loss is common. Local tumor extension
into the tracheobronchial tree may result in a tracheoesophageal
fistula, characterized by coughing on swallowing or pneumonia.
Chest or back pain suggests mediastinal extension. Recurrent
laryngeal involvement may produce hoarseness. Physical
examination is often unrevealing. The presence of supraclavicular or
cervical lymphadenopathy or of hepatomegaly implies metastatic
disease.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings are nonspecific. Anemia related to chronic
disease or occult blood loss is common. Elevated aminotransferase
or alkaline phosphatase concentrations suggest hepatic or bony
metastases. Hypoalbuminemia may result from malnutrition.
C. Imaging
Chest radiographs may show adenopathy, a widened mediastinum,
pulmonary or bony metastases, or signs of tracheoesophageal fistula
such as pneumonia. A barium esophagogram may be the first study
obtained to evaluate dysphagia. The appearance of a polypoid,
infiltrative, or ulcerative lesion is suggestive of carcinoma and
requires endoscopic evaluation. However, even lesions believed to
be benign by radiography warrant endoscopic evaluation.
D. Upper Endoscopy
Endoscopy with biopsy establishes the diagnosis of esophageal
carcinoma with a high degree of reliability. In some cases, significant
submucosal spread of the tumor may yield nondiagnostic mucosal
biopsies. Repeated biopsy may be necessary.
 Staging
After confirmation of the diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma, the
stage of the disease should be determined since doing so influences
the choice of therapy. Patients should undergo evaluation with CT
of the chest and abdomen to look for evidence of pulmonary or
hepatic metastases, lymphadenopathy, and local tumor extension. If
there is no evidence of distant metastases or extensive local spread
on CT, endoscopic ultrasonography with guided FNA biopsy of
lymph nodes should be performed, which is superior to CT in
demonstrating the level of local mediastinal extension and local
lymph node involvement. PET with fluorodeoxyglucose or
integrated PET-CT imaging is more sensitive than CT for detection
of distant metastasis. It is increasingly used to look for regional or
distant spread in patients thought to have localized disease after
other diagnostic studies. Bronchoscopy is sometimes required in
proximal esophageal cancer to exclude tracheobronchial extension.
Apart from distant metastasis (M1b), the two most important
predictors of poor survival are adjacent mediastinal spread (T4)
and lymph node involvement. Whereas cure may be achieved in
patients with regional lymph node involvement (stages IIB and III),
involvement of nodes outside the chest (M1a) is indicative of
metastatic disease (stage IV) that is incurable.
 Differential Diagnosis
Esophageal carcinoma must be distinguished from other causes of
progressive dysphagia, including peptic stricture, achalasia, and
adenocarcinoma of the gastric cardia with esophageal involvement.
Benign-appearing peptic strictures should be biopsied at
presentation to exclude occult malignancy.
 Treatment
The approach to esophageal cancer depends on the tumor stage,
patient preference and functional status, and the expertise of the
attending 
surgeons, 
oncologists, 
gastroenterologists, 
and
radiotherapists. There is no consensus about the optimal treatment
approach. It is helpful, however, to classify patients into two general
categories.
A. Therapy for “Curable” Disease
Superficial esophageal cancers confined to the epithelium (high-
grade dysplasia or carcinoma in situ [Tis]), lamina propria (T1a), or
submucosal (T1b) are increasingly recognized in endoscopic
screening and surveillance programs. Esophagectomy achieves high
cure rates for superficial tumors but is associated with mortality
(2%) and morbidity. If performed by experienced physicians,
endoscopic mucosal resection of superficial cancers (especially Tis
and T1a) achieves equivalent long-term survival with less morbidity.
For a full discussion of management options in superficial
adenocarcinoma, see the section on Barrett Esophagus in Chapter
15. The management of other invasive but potentially “curable”
esophageal cancers (stage I, II, or IIIA) is controversial and
depends on institutional experience.
1. Surgery with or without neoadjuvant chemo-radiation
therapy—There is debate over the optimal surgical approach. The
procedure with the lowest morbidity is transhiatal esophagectomy
with anastomosis of the stomach to the cervical esophagus;
however, this approach does not involve sampling or removal of
mediastinal lymph nodes. Alternatively, surgeons may perform en
bloc transthoracic excision of the esophagus with extended
dissection of lymph nodes in the mediastinum and upper abdomen.
In a randomized controlled trial comparing these two approaches,
en bloc resection was associated with higher perioperative
morbidity but a non-significant trend toward improved 5-year
survival (39% vs 27%). Transhiatal resection may be more
appropriate for patients who are elderly or have comorbid illness,
and en bloc resection more appropriate in younger or healthier
patients with a better prognosis. New, minimally invasive techniques
may result in less morbidity and faster recovery than open
procedures.
Patients with small, superficial tumors without regional lymph
node spread (stage I) have high cure rates with surgery alone and
require no other radiation or chemotherapy. If regional lymph node
metastases have occurred (stages IIB and III), the rate of cure with
surgery alone is reduced to < 20%. Meta-analysis of trials
comparing neoadjuvant (preoperative) therapy followed by surgery
with surgery alone suggests a 13% absolute improvement in 2-year
survival with combined therapy. A 2008 randomized phase III trial
of surgery alone versus a combined modality approach with
neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by surgery also demonstrated
a significant survival benefit, with 5-year survival of 39% in the
combined modality group versus 16% for surgery alone. Therefore,
in most centers, preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemoradiation therapy
is recommended for stage IIA, IIB, and III tumors. The most
commonly used chemotherapeutic agents are cisplatin and 5-
fluorouracil (5-FU), although a regimen of weekly carboplatin and
paclitaxel with radiation is gaining frequency based on randomized,
phase III data showing equivalent response outcomes and an
improved toxicity profile. Perioperative chemotherapy alone without
radiation is also appropriate for tumors of the gastroesophageal
junction based on the randomized, multi-center, phase III MAGIC
trial.
2. Chemotherapy plus radiation therapy without surgery
—Combined treatment with chemotherapy and radiation therapy is
superior to radiation therapy alone and has achieved long-term
survival rates in up to 25% of patients. In two randomized trials,
there was no difference in long-term survival between patients
treated with chemoradiation therapy alone versus chemoradiation
therapy followed by surgery, although combination therapy achieves
superior control of mediastinal disease with a reduced need for
subsequent palliative therapies. Chemoradiation therapy alone
should be considered in patients with localized disease (stage II or
IIIA) who are poor surgical candidates due to serious medical
illness or poor functional status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group score > 2). Chemoradiation alone as definitive, nonsurgical
therapy may produce superior outcomes in patients with squamous
histology than in adenocarcinoma.
B. Therapy for Incurable Disease
More than half of patients have either locally extensive tumor spread
(T4) that is unresectable or distant metastases (M1) ie, stage IIIB
and stage IV tumors. Surgery is not warranted in these patients.
Since prolonged survival can be achieved in few patients, the
primary goal is to provide relief from dysphagia and pain, optimize
quality of life, and minimize treatment side effects. The optimal
palliative approach depends on the presence or absence of
metastatic disease, patient's expected survival, patient preference,
and local institutional experience. Many patients with advanced
disease may prefer concerted efforts at pain relief and care directed
at symptom management (see Chapter 5).
1. Radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and combined therapy
—Combined radiation therapy and chemotherapy may achieve
palliation in two-thirds of patients but is associated with significant
side effects. It should be considered for patients with locally
advanced tumors without distant metastases (stage IIIB) who have
good functional status and no significant medical problems, in whom
prolonged survival may be achieved. Improvement in dysphagia
occurs within 2–4 weeks in almost 90% of patients.
Combination chemotherapy may be considered in patients with
metastatic disease who still have good functional status and
expected survival of several months. Although there is no consensus
on optimal therapy, three drug combinations are commonly used:
(1) epirubicin or a taxane (docetaxel or paclitaxel), (2) cisplatin or
oxaliplatin, and (3) a fluoropyrimidine (5-FU or capecitabine). For
patients with poor functional status, single-agent therapy with a
fluoropyrimidine, a taxane, or irinotecan may be used. In patients
with metastatic distal esophageal and gastroesophageal junction
adenocarcinomas positive for amplification of the HER-2 gene
(approximately 15% of cases), addition of the monoclonal antibody
trastuzumab to chemotherapy is associated with prolonged survival.
Radiation therapy alone may afford short-term relief of pain and
dysphagia and may be suitable for patients with poor functional
status or underlying medical problems. This can generally be
performed in a short course over a few weeks or less, but may be
complicated by temporary worsening of dysphagia and
odynophagia. For patients with frank obstruction or near
obstruction, local antitumor therapies may be preferred.
2. Local antitumor therapy—Patients with advanced esophageal
cancer often have a poor functional and nutritional status with an
average survival of < 12 weeks from diagnosis. In patients with
poor performance status, chemoradiation or radiation may be
associated with greater toxicity than potential for long-term benefit.
Rapid palliation of dysphagia may be achieved by peroral
placement of permanent expandable wire stents, application of
endoscopic laser therapy, or photodynamic therapy. Although
dysphagia and quality of life are improved significantly, patients can
seldom eat normally. Stents are most commonly used because of
their relative ease of placement, although the choice of treatment
depends on available expertise and equipment.
 Prognosis
The overall 5-year survival rate of esophageal carcinoma is < 20%.
For those patients whose disease progresses despite chemotherapy,
meticulous efforts at palliative care are essential (see Chapter 5).
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients should be referred to gastroenterologist for
evaluation 
and 
staging 
(endoscopy 
with 
biopsy,
endoscopic ultrasonography) and palliative endoscopic
antitumor therapy (stent).
•    Patients with curable and resectable disease (stage IIB
or IIIA) and those with locally advanced or metastatic
disease should be referred to an oncologist for
consideration of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy or
palliative chemotherapy, respectively.
 When to Admit
Patients with high-grade esophageal obstruction with inability to
manage oral secretions should be admitted.
Bang Y et al; ToGA Trial Investigators.Trastuzumab in
combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for
treatment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or gastro-
oesophageal junction cancer (ToGA): a phase 3, open-label,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Aug
28;376(9742):687–97. [PMID: 20728210]
 
Bedenne L et al. Chemoradiation followed by surgery compared
with chemoradiation alone in squamous cancer of the esophagus:
FFCD 9102. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 1;25(10):1160–8. [PMID:
17401004]
 
Courrech Staal EF et al. Systematic review of the benefits and
risks of neoadjuvant chemoradiation for oesophageal cancer. Br J
Surg. 2010 Oct;97(10):1482–96. [PMID: 20645400]
 
Cunningham D et al; Upper Gastrointestinal Clinical Studies Group
of the National Cancer Research Institute of the United Kingdom.
Capecitabine and oxaliplatin for advanced esophagogastric cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 3;358(1):36–46. [PMID: 18172173]
 
Krasna MJ. Multimodality therapy for esophageal cancer.
Oncology (Williston Park). 2010 Nov 15;24(12):1134–8. [PMID:
21141694]
 
Schuchert MJ et al. Management of esophageal cancer. Curr
Probl Surg. 2010 Nov;47(11):845–946. [PMID: 20937424]
 
Sharma P et al. Role of esophageal stents in benign and malignant
diseases. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Feb;105(2):258–73. [PMID:
20029413]
 
Stahl M et al; ESMO Guidelines Working Group. Esophageal
cancer: clinical practice guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and
follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2010 May;21(Suppl 5):v46–9. [PMID:
20555101]
 
Tepper J et al. Phase III trial of trimodality therapy with cisplatin,
fluorouracil, radiotherapy, and surgery compared with surgery
alone for esophageal cancer: CALGB 9781. J Clin Oncol. 2008
Mar 1;26(7):1086–92. [PMID: 18309943]
 
Umar SB et al. Esophageal cancer: epidemiology, pathogenesis
and prevention. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008
Sep;5(9):517–26. [PMID: 18679388]
 
Zingg U et al. Minimally invasive versus open esophagectomy for
patients with esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009 Mar;
87(3):911–9. [PMID: 19231418]
 
GASTRIC ADENOCARCINOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Dyspeptic symptoms with weight loss in patients over age 40
years.
 Iron deficiency anemia: occult blood in stools.
 Abnormality detected on upper gastrointestinal series or
endoscopy.
 
 General Considerations
Gastric adenocarcinoma remains the second most common cause of
cancer death worldwide. However, its incidence has declined
rapidly over the last 70 years, especially in western countries, which
may be attributable to changes in diet (more fruits and vegetables),
food refrigeration (allowing more fresh foods and reduced salted,
smoked, and preserved foods), reduced toxic environmental
exposures, and a decline in Helicobacter pylori. The incidence of
gastric cancer remains high (70/100,000) in Japan and many
developing regions, including eastern Asia, Eastern Europe, Chile,
Colombia, and Central America. In the United States, there are an
estimated 21,500 new cases and 10,800 deaths/year. The
incidence is higher in Latinos, African Americans, and Asian
Americans.
There are two main histologic variants of gastric cancer:
“intestinal-type” (which resembles intestinal cancers in forming
glandular structures) and “diffuse” (which is poorly differentiated,
has signet-ring cells, and lacks glandular formation). Although both
types are declining in incidence, intestinal-type has had the most
dramatic reduction. Intestinal-type is still more common (70–
80%), occurs twice as often in men as women, primarily affects
older people (mean age 63 years), and is more strongly associated
with environmental factors. It is believed to arise through a gradual,
multi-step progression from inflammation (most commonly due to H
pylori), to atrophic gastritis, to intestinal metaplasia, and finally
dysplasia or cancer. Chronic H pylori gastritis is the strong risk
factor for gastric carcinoma, increasing the relative risk 3.5- to 20-
fold. It is estimated that 60–90% of cases of gastric carcinomas
may be attributable to H pylori. Because of its unproven efficacy
and cost-effectiveness, screening for H pylori infection and treating
it to prevent gastric cancer is not recommended for asymptomatic
adults in the general population but may be considered in patients
who have immigrated from regions with a high incidence of gastric
cancer or who have a family history of gastric cancer. Other risk
factors for intestinal-type gastric cancer include pernicious anemia, a
history of partial gastric resection more than 15 years previously,
smoking, and diets that are high in nitrates or salt and low in vitamin
C.
Diffuse gastric cancer accounts for 20–30% of gastric cancer.
In contrast to intestinal-type cancer, it affects men and women
equally, occurs more commonly in young people, is not as strongly
related to H pylori infection, has a worse prognosis, and has not
declined in incidence. Most diffuse gastric cancers are attributable
to acquired or hereditary mutations in the genes regulating the E-
cadherin cell adhesion protein. Familial diffuse gastric cancer
accounts for 1–3% of gastric cancers. The cancer may arise at a
young age, is often multifocal and infiltrating with signet ring cell
histology, and carries a poor prognosis. Many of these families have
a germline mutation of E-cadherin CDH1, which is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern and carries a > 60% lifetime risk of
gastric cancer. Prophylactic gastrectomy should be considered in
patients known to carry this mutation.
Most gastric cancers arise in the body and antrum. These may
occur in a variety of morphologic types: (1) polypoid or fungating
intraluminal masses; (2) ulcerating masses; (3) diffusely spreading
(linitis plastica), in which the tumor spreads through the submucosa,
resulting in a rigid, atonic stomach with thickened folds (prognosis
dismal); and (4) superficially spreading or “early” gastric cancer—
confined to the mucosa or submucosa (with or without lymph node
metastases) and associated with an excellent prognosis.
In contrast to the dramatic decline in cancers of the distal
stomach, a rise in incidence of tumors of the gastric cardia has been
noted. These tumors have demographic and pathologic features that
resemble Barrett-associated esophageal adenocarcinomas (see
Esophageal Cancer).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Gastric carcinoma is generally asymptomatic until the disease is
quite advanced. Symptoms are nonspecific and are determined in
part by the location of the tumor. Dyspepsia, vague epigastric pain,
anorexia, early satiety, and weight loss are the presenting symptoms
in most patients. Patients may derive initial symptomatic relief from
over-the-counter remedies, further delaying diagnosis. Ulcerating
lesions can lead to acute gastrointestinal bleeding with hematemesis
or melena. Pyloric obstruction results in postprandial vomiting.
Lower esophageal obstruction causes progressive dysphagia.
Physical examination is rarely helpful. A gastric mass is palpated in
< 20% of patients. Signs of metastatic spread include a left
supraclavicular lymph node (Virchow node), an umbilical nodule
(Sister Mary Joseph nodule), a rigid rectal shelf (Blumer shelf), and
ovarian metastases (Krukenberg tumor). Guaiac-positive stools
may be detectable.
B. Laboratory Findings
Iron deficiency anemia due to chronic blood loss or anemia of
chronic disease is common. Liver function test abnormalities,
particularly elevation of alkaline phosphatase, may be present if
there is metastatic liver spread. Other tumor markers are of no
value.
C. Endoscopy
Upper endoscopy should be obtained in all patients over age 55
years with new onset of epigastric symptoms (dyspepsia) and in
anyone with dyspepsia that is persistent or fails to respond to a
short trial of antisecretory therapy. Endoscopy with biopsies of
suspicious lesions is highly sensitive for detecting gastric carcinoma.
It can be difficult to obtain adequate biopsy specimens in linitis
plastica lesions. Because of the high incidence of gastric carcinoma
in Japan, screening upper endoscopy is performed to detect early
gastric carcinoma. Approximately 40% of tumors detected by
screening are early, with a 5-year survival rate of almost 90%.
Screening programs are not recommended in the United States.
D. Imaging
A barium upper gastrointestinal series is an acceptable alternative
when endoscopy is not readily available but may not detect small or
superficial lesions and cannot reliably distinguish benign from
malignant ulcerations. Any abnormalities detected with this
procedure require endoscopic confirmation.
Once a gastric cancer is diagnosed, preoperative evaluation with
abdominal and chest CT and endoscopic ultra-sonography is
indicated to delineate the local extent of the primary tumor as well
as nodal or distant metastases. PET or combined PET-CT imaging
may be more sensitive than CT for detection of distant metastasis.
Endoscopic ultra-sonography is superior to CT in determining the
depth of tumor penetration and is useful for evaluation of early
gastric cancers that may be removed by endoscopic mucosal
resection.
 Staging
Staging is defined according to the TNM system, in which T1
tumors invade the lamina propria (T1a) or submucosa (T1b), T2
invade the muscularis propria, T3 penetrate the serosa, and T4
invade adjacent structures. Lymph nodes are graded as N0 if there
is no involvement, and N1, N2, or N3 if there are is involvement of
1–6, 7–15, or more than 15 regional nodes. M1 signifies the
presence of metastatic disease.
 Differential Diagnosis
Ulcerating gastric adenocarcinomas are distinguished from benign
gastric ulcers by biopsies. Approximately 3% of gastric ulcers
initially believed to be benign later prove to be malignant. To
exclude malignancy, all gastric ulcers identified at endoscopy should
be biopsied. Ulcers that are suspicious for malignancy to the
endoscopist or that have atypia or dysplasia on histologic
examination warrant repeat endoscopy in 2–3 months to verify
healing and exclude malignancy. Nonhealing ulcers should be
considered for resection. Infiltrative carcinoma with thickened
gastric folds must be distinguished from lymphoma and other
hypertrophic gastropathies.
 Treatment
A. Curative Surgical Resection
After preoperative staging, about two-thirds of patients will be
found to have localized disease (ie, stages I–III). In Japan and in
specialized centers in the United States, endoscopic mucosal
resection is performed in selected patients with small (< 1–2 cm),
early (intramucosal or T1aN0) gastric cancers after careful staging
with endoscopic ultrasonography. For all other patients, surgical
resection is the only therapy with curative potential. At surgery,
approximately 25% of these patients will be found to have locally
unresectable tumors or peritoneal, hepatic, or distant lymph node
metastases for which “curative” surgical resection is not warranted
(see below). The remaining patients with confirmed localized
disease should undergo radical surgical resection with curative
intent. For adenocarcinoma localized to the distal two-thirds of the
stomach, a subtotal distal gastrectomy should be performed. For
proximal gastric cancer or diffusely infiltrating disease, total
gastrectomy is necessary. Vitamin B12 supplementation is required
postgastrectomy. Although lymph node dissection should be
performed for curative resections, there has been ongoing debate
about whether an extended (perigastric; D1), regional (D2), or
distant (porta hepatic and periaortic; D3) lymph node dissection is
needed. A 2008 large Japanese trial found no difference in survival
between patients treated with D2 and D3 (para-aortic)
lymphadenectomy. 
Current 
NCCN 
treatment 
guidelines
recommend regional (D2) node resection with 15 or more lymph
nodes sampled. The role of preoperative (neoadjuvant) or
postoperative (adjuvant) chemotherapy or radiochemotherapy after
curative resection is controversial. Recommended options include
either adjuvant chemoradiotherapy (commonly 5-FU and
leucovorin) or a perioperative chemotherapy regimen of epirubicin,
5-FU, and cisplatin (ECF) without radiation. Treatment of tumors
arising in the gastroesophageal junction is controversial. Either
gastric or esophageal treatment algorithms may be followed.
B. Palliative Modalities
Many patients will be found either preoperatively or at the time of
surgical exploration to have advanced disease that is not amenable
to “curative” surgery due to peritoneal or distant metastases or local
invasion of other organs. In some of these cases, palliative resection
of the tumor nonetheless may be indicated to alleviate pain,
bleeding, or obstruction. For patients with unresectable disease,
gastrojejunostomy may be indicated to prevent obstruction.
Alternatively, unresected tumors may be treated with endoscopic
laser or stent therapy, radiation therapy, or angiographic
embolization to relieve bleeding or obstruction. Chemotherapy may
be considered in patients with meta-static disease who still have
good functional status and expected survival of several months.
Although there is no consensus on optimal therapy, a combination
of epirubicin, cisplatin, and 5-FU commonly is used. A large 2008
trial assigned patients with advanced esophageal and gastric cancer
to one of four triplet therapies: epirubicin and cisplatin plus either 5-
FU (ECF) or capecitabine (ECX) or epirubicin and oxaliplatin plus
either 5-FU (EOF) or capecitabine (EOX). No difference in
median survival was found among the four regimens (9–11 months),
and toxicities were similar. A 2009 randomized, phase III study
showed that addition of the biologic agent trastuzumab to standard
chemotherapy prolonged survival in the subset (approximately
15%) of patients with advanced gastric adenocarcinomas harboring
amplification of the EGFR-2 (HER-2).
 Prognosis
The long-term survival of gastric carcinoma is < 15%. However, 5-
year survival in patients who undergo successful curative resection is
over 45%. Survival is related to tumor stage, location, and
histologic features. Stage I and stage II tumors resected for cure
have a > 50% long-term survival. Patients with stage III tumors
have a poor prognosis (< 20% long-term survival) and should be
considered for enrollment in clinical trials. Tumors of the diffuse type
have a worse prognosis than the intestinal type. Tumors of the
proximal stomach (fundus and cardia) carry a far worse prognosis
than distal lesions. Even with apparently localized disease, proximal
tumors have a 5-year survival of < 15%. For those whose disease
progresses despite therapy, meticulous efforts at palliative care are
essential (see Chapter 5).
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with dysphagia, weight loss, protracted
vomiting, iron-deficiency anemia, or new-onset of
dyspepsia (especially if age 55 years or older or
associated with other alarm symptoms) in whom gastric
cancer 
is 
suspected 
should 
be 
referred 
to 
a
gastroenterologist for endoscopic screening.
•    Patients should be referred to a surgeon for attempt at
curative resection in stage I, II, or III cancer.
•    Patients who have undergone gastrectomy require
consultation with a nutritionist due to propensity for
malnutrition and complications, such as dumping
syndrome, postoperatively.
•    Patients with unresectable or metastatic disease should
be referred to an oncologist for consideration of adjuvant
chemotherapy 
or 
chemoradiotherapy 
after 
curative
resection or palliative therapy.
 When to Admit
Patients with protracted vomiting, inability to maintain oral intake, or
acute bleeding.
Ajani JA et al; NCCN Gastric Cancer Panel. Gastric cancer. J
Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2010 Apr;8(4):378–409. [PMID:
20410333]
 
Bang Y et al; ToGA Trial Investigators.Trastuzumab in
combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for
treatment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or gastro-
oesophageal junction cancer (ToGA): a phase 3, open-label,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Aug 28;376(9742):
687–97.[PMID: 20728210]
 
Cunningham D et al; MAGIC Trial Participants. Perioperative
chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable
gastroesophageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 6;355(1):11–
20. [PMID: 16822992]
 
Cunningham D et al; Upper Gastrointestinal Clinical Studies Group
of the National Cancer Research Institute of the United Kingdom.
Capecitabine and oxaliplatin for advanced esophagogastric cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 3;358(1):36–46. [PMID: 18172173]
 
de Bree E et al. The extent of lymph node dissection for gastric
cancer: a critical appraisal. J Surg Oncol. 2010 Nov 1;102(6):
552–62. [PMID: 20976727]
 
De Vita F et al. Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) in gastric cancer: a new therapeutic target. Cancer Treat
Rev. 2010 Nov;36(Suppl 3):S11–5. [PMID: 21129604]
 
Ohtani H et al. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials that
compared laparoscopy-assisted and open distal gastrectomy for
early gastric cancer. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010 Jun;14(6):958–64.
[PMID: 20354807]
 
Okines A et al. Gastric cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines
for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2010
May;21(Suppl 5):v50–4. [PMID 20555102]
 
Polk DB et al. Helicobacter pylori: gastric cancer and beyond.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Jun;10(6):403–14. [PMID: 20495574]
 
Rogers WM et al. Risk-reducing total gastrectomy for germline
mutations in E-cadherin (CDH1): pathologic findings with clinical
implications. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Jun;32(6): 799–809.
[PMID: 18391748]
 
Sasako M et al; Japan Clinical Oncology Group.D2 lymph-
adenectomy alone or with para-aortic nodal dissection for gastric
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jul 31;359(5):453–62. [PMID:
18669424]
 
Schrader K et al. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Cancer Treat
Res. 2010;155:33–63. [PMID: 20517687]
 
Shi Y et al. The role of surgery in the treatment of gastric cancer. J
Surg Oncol. 2010 Jun 15;101(8):687–92. [PMID: 20512944]
 
Wagner AD et al. Chemotherapy for advanced gastric cancer.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 Mar 17; (3):CD004064.
[PMID: 20238327]
 
GASTRIC LYMPHOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Symptoms of dyspepsia, weight loss, or anemia.
 Variable abnormalities on upper gastrointestinal series or
endoscopy including thickened folds, ulcer, mass or infiltrating
lesions; diagnosis established by endoscopic biopsy.
 Abdominal CT and endoscopic ultrasonography required for
staging.
 
 General Considerations
Gastric lymphomas may be primary (arising from the gastric
mucosa) or may represent a site of secondary involvement in
patients with nodal lymphomas. Distinguishing advanced primary
gastric lymphoma with adjacent nodal spread from advanced nodal
lymphoma with secondary gastric spread can be problematic.
Because the prognosis and treatment of primary and secondary
gastric lymphomas are entirely different, the distinction is important.
Primary lymphoma is the second most common gastric malignancy,
accounting for 3% of cancers. More than 95% of these are non-
Hodgkin B cell lymphomas. Most primary gastric lymphomas are
believed to arise from mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).
Primary gastric lymphomas comprise two main types: 60% are
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (previously called “high-grade”
MALT lymphomas) and 40% are marginal zone B-cell lymphomas
of the MALT-type (previously call “low-grade” MALT lymphoma).
Infection with H pylori is an important risk factor for the
development of primary gastric lymphoma. Chronic infection with H
pylori causes an intense lymphocytic inflammatory response that
may lead to the development of lymphoid follicles. Over 90% of
low-grade primary gastric MALT-type lymphomas are associated
with H pylori infection. It is hypothesized that chronic antigenic
stimulation may result in a monoclonal lymphoproliferation that may
culminate in low-grade or high-grade lymphoma.
 Clinical Findings
The clinical presentation and endoscopic appearance of gastric
lymphoma are similar to those of adenocarcinoma. Most patients
have abdominal pain, weight loss, or bleeding. Patients with diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma are more likely to have systemic symptoms
and advanced tumor stage. At endoscopy, lymphoma may appear
as an ulcer, mass, or diffusely infiltrating lesion. The diagnosis is
established with endoscopic biopsy. All patients should undergo
staging with abdominal and chest CT. Endoscopic ultrasonography
is the most sensitive test for determining the level of invasion and
presence of peri-gastric lymphadenopathy.
 Treatment
Nodal lymphomas with secondary gastrointestinal involvement
usually present at an advanced stage with widely disseminated
disease and are seldom curable. Their treatment is addressed in
Chapter 13. Treatment of primary gastric lymphomas depends on
the tumor histology, grade, and stage. Marginal B-cell lymphomas
of the MALT type that are low-grade and localized to the stomach
wall (stage IE) or perigastric lymph nodes (stage IIE1) have an
excellent prognosis. Endoscopic ultrasonography should be
performed to accurately determine tumor stage. Patients with
primary gastric MALT-lymphoma should be tested for H pylori
infection and treated if positive. Complete lymphoma regression
after successful H pylori eradication occurs in 75% of cases of
stage IE and 55% with stage II1 low-grade lymphoma. Remission
may take as long as a year, and relapse occurs in 2% of cases per
year. Endoscopic surveillance after H pylori eradication is
recommended every 6 months for 2 years to look for recurrence.
Remission rates (22%) are much lower in patients whose tumors
have an API2-MALT1 gene translocation. Patients with localized
marginal zone MALT-type lymphomas who either are not infected
with H pylori or do not respond to eradication therapy may be
treated with radiation therapy or rituximab, if not a candidate for
radiation. Recent data, however, suggest that many patients with
minimal disease after successful H pylori eradication may be
observed closely without further therapy. The long-term survival of
low-grade MALT lymphoma for stage I is over 90% and for stage
II is 35–65%. Patients with diffuse large cell (high-grade)
lymphomas or disseminated MALT-type lymphomas should be
treated with combination chemotherapy (eg, CHOP with rituximab).
Because of a low risk of perforation with either radiation therapy or
chemotherapy, surgical resection is no longer recommended.
Sagaert X et al. Gastric MALT lymphoma: a model of chronic
inflammation-induced tumor development. Nat Rev Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2010 Jun;7(6):336–46. [PMID: 20440281]
 
Zullo A et al. Effects of Helicobacter pylori eradication on early
stage gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Feb;8(2):105–10. [PMID:
19631287]
 
GASTRIC CARCINOID TUMORS
Gastric carcinoids are rare neuroendocrine tumors that make up <
1% of gastric neoplasms. They may occur sporadically or
secondary to chronic hypergastrinemia that results in hyperplasia
and transformation of enterochromaffin cells in the gastric fundus.
Sporadic carcinoids account for 20% of gastric carcinoids. Most
are solitary, over 2 cm in size, and have a strong propensity for
meta-static spread. Most sporadic carcinoids already have
carcinoid syndrome and hepatic or pulmonary metastatic
involvement at initial presentation. Localized sporadic carcinoids
should be treated with radical gastrectomy.
The majority of carcinoids caused by hypergastrinemia occur in
association with either pernicious anemia (75%) or Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome (5%). Carcinoids associated with Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome occur almost exclusively in patients with MEN 1, in
which loss of 11q13 has been reported. Carcinoids caused by
hypergastrinemia tend to be multicentric, < 1 cm in size, and have a
low potential for metastatic spread or development of carcinoid
syndrome. Small lesions may be successfully treated with
endoscopic resection followed by periodic endoscopic surveillance.
Antrectomy reduces serum gastrin levels and may lead to regression
of small tumors. Patients with large or multiple carcinoids should
undergo surgical tumor resection (see Carcinoid Tumors section).
Landry CS et al. A proposed staging system for gastric carcinoid
tumors based on an analysis of 1,543 patients. Ann Surg Oncol.
2009 Jan;16(1):51–60. [PMID: 18953609]
 
GASTROINTESTINAL MESENCHYMAL TUMORS
Gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors occur throughout the
gastrointestinal tract, but approximately two-thirds occur in the
stomach. These tumors (which include stromal tumors, leiomyomas,
and schwannomas) derive from mesenchymal stem cells and have
an epithelioid or spindle cell histologic pattern, resembling smooth
muscle. The most common stromal tumors are gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (“GISTs”), which appear to originate from interstitial
cells of Cajal. GISTs occur throughout the gastrointestinal tract but
most commonly in the stomach (50%) and small intestine (30%).
About 85–90% of GISTs have mutations in KIT, a receptor
tyrosine kinase that binds stem cell factor, or a homologous tyrosine
kinase, platelet-derived growth factor alpha that lead to constitutive
activation. Approximately 90% of stromal tumors stain positively for
CD117 (part of the KIT protein). Other mesenchymal tumors such
as leiomyomas, which derive from smooth muscle cells, stain
negative for CD117. Mesenchymal tumors may be discovered
incidentally on imaging studies or endoscopy or may cause
symptoms, mainly obstruction by large tumors or acute or chronic
bleeding due to central ulceration within the tumor. At endoscopy,
they appear as a submucosal mass that may have central
umbilication or ulceration. Endoscopic ultrasonography (possibly
with guided FNA biopsy) is the optimal study for diagnosing
mesenchymal tumors and distinguishing them from other submucosal
lesions. While almost all GISTs have malignant potential, the risk of
developing metastasis is related to the tumor size (> 3–5 cm),
location (small bowel is highest risk), and mitotic index (> 5 mitoses
per high-powered field); however, mitotic index can only be
assessed after resection. It is difficult to distinguish with certainty
benign from malignant (sarcoma) tumors before resection by
endoscopic ultrasonographic appearance or FNA. In general,
lesions that are smaller than 2 cm, have a smooth border, and have
a homogeneous echo pattern on endoscopic ultrasonogram are
more likely benign.
Surgery is recommended for all patients with tumors that are
symptomatic, ≥ 2 cm, are increasing in size, or have an endoscopic
ultrasonographic appearance suspicious for malignancy. PET-CT
scan should be obtained prior to surgery to look for metastatic
disease. The management of asymptomatic benign-appearing
lesions ≤ 2 cm in size is problematic. Because of a low risk of
malignancy, surgical resection should be considered in younger,
otherwise healthy patients; however, other patients may be followed
up with serial endoscopic ultrasonographic examinations or, in
selected cases, endoscopic resections. (GIST tumors with high-risk
features have a 50% 5-year survival rate after complete surgical
resection.) Adjuvant therapy with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor
imatinib should be considered for high-risk tumors, though the
optimal duration of therapy is not known. Metastatic tumors are
aggressive and carry a poor prognosis. Imatinib induces disease
control in up to 85% of patients with meta-static disease with a
progression free-survival of 20–24 months. Patients with exon 11
mutations in the KIT gene are more likely to respond to imatinib.
Resistant tumors may respond to another tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
sunitinib, and trials of potent new KIT inhibitors are underway.
Increasing the dose of imatinib may induce response in some
patients.
Chen P et al. Efficacy evaluation of imatinib treatment in patients
with gastrointestinal stromal tumors: a meta- analysis. World J
Gastroenterol. 2010 Sep 7;16(33):4227–32. [PMID: 20806443]
 
Dematteo RP et al; American College of Surgeons Oncology
Group (ACOSOG) Intergroup Adjuvant GIST Study Team.
Adjuvant imatinib mesylate after resection of localised, primary
gastrointestinal stromal tumor: a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2009 March
28;373(9669):1097–104. [PMID: 19303137]
 
Dematteo RP et al. Tumor mitotic rate, size, and location
independently predict recurrence after resection of primary
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Cancer. 2008 Feb 1;
112(3):608–15. [PMID: 18076015]
 
Demetri GD et al. Imatinib plasma levels are correlated with
clinical benefit in patients with unresectable/metastatic
gastrointestinal stromal tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jul 1;
27(19):3141–7. [PMID: 19451435]
 
Demetri GD et al. NCCN Task Force Report: update on the
management of patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumors. J Natl
Compr Canc Netw. 2010 Apr;8(Suppl 2):S1–41. [PMID:
20457867]
 
Reichardt P. Optimal use of targeted agents for advanced
gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Oncology. 2010;78(2):130–40.
[PMID: 20389135]
 
MALIGNANCIES OF THE SMALL INTESTINE
1. Adenocarcinoma
These are aggressive tumors that occur most commonly in the
duodenum or proximal jejunum. The ampulla of Vater is the most
common site of small bowel carcinoma, and the incidence of
ampullary carcinoma is increased more than 200-fold in patients
with familial adenomatous polyposis. Ampullary carcinoma may
present with jaundice due to bile duct obstruction or bleeding.
Surgical resection of early lesions is curative in up to 40% of
patients. Periodic endoscopic surveillance to detect early ampullary
neoplasms therefore is recommended in patients with this disorder.
Nonampullary adenocarcinoma of the small intestine accounts for <
3% of all gastrointestinal cancers but one-third of small bowel
cancers. Peak incidence is in the sixth decade. Most cases present
with symptoms of obstruction, acute or chronic bleeding, or weight
loss. The majority of small bowel cancers have already metastasized
at the time of diagnosis. Resection is recommended for control of
symptoms. The role of adjuvant therapy is unclear but is generally
administered using chemotherapy agents active in colorectal cancer.
The prognosis is poor with a 5-year overall survival of 20–30%.
Patients with Crohn disease have an increased risk of small intestine
adenocarcinoma, most commonly in the ileum, which may be
difficult to distinguish from disease-related fibrous strictures. Small
bowel adenocarcinoma in young patients or those with a family
history of gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas should prompt screening
for the Lynch syndrome.
2. Lymphoma
Gastrointestinal lymphomas may arise in the gastrointestinal tract or
involve it secondarily with disseminated disease. In Western
countries, primary gastrointestinal lymphomas account for 5% of
lymphomas and 20% of small bowel malignancies. They occur most
commonly in the distal small intestine. The majority are non-
Hodgkin high-grade marginal zone B cell lymphomas. There is an
increased incidence of small intestinal lymphomas in patients with
AIDS, immunosuppressive therapy, and Crohn disease. T cell
lymphomas may arise in patients with celiac sprue. In the Middle
East, lymphomas may arise in the setting of immunoproliferative
small intestinal disease. In this condition, there is diffuse
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with IgA-secreting B lymphocytes of
the mucosa and submucosa that results in weight loss, diarrhea, and
malabsorption, which may lead to lymphomatous transformation. A
characteristic feature of the disease is the presence of α heavy
chains in the serum in 70% produced by clones of IgA plasma cells.
Other types of intestinal lymphomas include mantle cell and Burkitt.
Presenting symptoms or signs of primary lymphoma include
abdominal pain, weight loss, nausea and vomiting, distention,
anemia, and occult blood in the stool. Fevers are unusual. Protein-
losing enteropathy may result in hypoalbuminemia, but other signs of
malabsorption are unusual. Barium radiography or CT enterography
helps localize the site of the lesion. The diagnosis requires
endoscopic, percutaneous, or laparoscopic biopsy. Imaging and
bone marrow biopsy are required to determine stage.
Treatment depends on the tumor histologic grade and stage of
disease. Resection of primary intestinal lymphoma, if feasible, is
usually recommended. Even in cases of stage III or stage IV
disease, surgical debulking may improve survival. In patients with
limited disease (stage IE) in whom resection is performed, the role
of adjuvant chemotherapy is unclear. Most patients with more
extensive disease are treated with combination chemotherapy (eg,
CHOP with rituximab) with or without radiation therapy.
3. Carcinoid Tumors
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Majority are asymptomatic and discovered incidentally at
endoscopy or surgery.
 Carcinoid syndrome occurs in < 10%; hepatic metastases are
generally present.
 Risk of metastasis related to tumor size and location.
 
 General Considerations
Gastrointestinal carcinoids are slow growing neuroendocrine tumors
that may arise anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract but most
commonly occur in the small intestine (30%), rectum (12%), colon
(8%), appendix (8%), and stomach (10–30%; see above).
Carcinoids may contain a variety of hormones, including serotonin,
somatostatin, gastrin, and substance P that may or may not be
secreted, and usually display immunoreactivity to chromogranin A.
Although many carcinoids behave in an indolent fashion, the overall
5-year survival rate for patients with carcinoids is 50%, suggesting
that most are malignant. The risk of metastatic spread is closely
related to tumor size and tumor location. Many small carcinoids are
detected incidentally at endoscopy or autopsy. It is not possible by
histologic examination to distinguish benign from malignant disease.
The best indicator of prognosis is evidence of invasive growth and
the presence of regional or distant metastasis.
Carcinoids account for one-third of small intestinal tumors. Small
intestinal carcinoids most commonly arise in the ileum. Up to one-
third are multicentric. Although 60% are < 2 cm in size, even these
small carcinoids may metastasize. Almost all small intestinal
carcinoids over 2 cm are associated with metastasis.
Appendiceal 
carcinoids 
are 
identified 
in 
0.3% 
of
appendectomies, usually as an incidental finding. Almost 80% of
these tumors are < 1 cm in size, and 90% are < 2 cm. Rectal
carcinoids are usually detected incidentally as submucosal nodules
during proctoscopic examination. Rectal carcinoids < 1 cm and
localized appendiceal carcinoids < 2 cm virtually never metastasize
and are treated effectively with local excision or simple
appendectomy. Tumors larger than 2 cm are associated with the
development of metastasis in over 20% of appendiceal carcinoids
and 10% of rectal carcinoids. Hence, in younger patients who are
good candidates for surgery, a more extensive cancer resection
operation is warranted.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most smaller lesions (< 1–2 cm) are asymptomatic and difficult to
detect by endoscopy or imaging studies. Through local extension or
metastasis to mesenteric lymph nodes, carcinoids engender a
fibroblastic reaction with contraction and kinking of the bowel or
encasement of mesenteric vessels. Small intestinal carcinoids may
present with abdominal pain, bowel obstruction, bleeding, or bowel
infarction. Abdominal CT or enterography may reveal kinking, but
because the lesion is extraluminal the diagnosis may be overlooked
for several years. Appendiceal and rectal carcinoids usually are
small and asymptomatic but large lesions can cause bleeding,
obstruction, or altered bowel habits. Carcinoid syndrome occurs
in < 10% of patients. More than 90% of patients with carcinoid
syndrome have hepatic metastases, usually from carcinoids of small
bowel origin. About 10% of patients with carcinoid syndrome have
primary bronchial or ovarian tumors without hepatic metastases.
Carcinoid syndrome is caused by tumor secretion of hormonal
mediators. The manifestations include facial flushing, edema of the
head and neck (especially with bronchial carcinoid), abdominal
cramps and diarrhea, bronchospasm, cardiac lesions (pulmonary or
tricuspid stenosis or regurgitation), and telangiectases.
B. Laboratory Findings
Plasma chromogranin A (CgA) is the most sensitive screening test
for small intestine carcinoids, although its sensitivity for small,
localized tumors is unknown. CgA is elevated in almost 90% of
patients with advanced small bowel carcinoid. Urinary 5-
hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) or platelet serotonin levels are
also elevated in patients with metastatic carcinoid; however, these
tests are less sensitive than CgA. There is increased urinary 5-
HIAA in carcinoid syndrome; symptomatic patients usually excrete
more than 25 mg of 5-HIAA per day in the urine. Ideally, all drugs
should be withheld for several days prior to a 24-hour urine
collection.
C. Imaging
Abdominal CT may demonstrate a mesenteric mass with tethering
of the bowel, lymphadenopathy, and hepatic metastasis.
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, which is positive in up to 90%
of patients with metastatic carcinoid, is routinely used in staging.
Almost all patients with carcinoid syndrome have obvious signs of
cancer with liver metastasis on abdominal imaging.
 Treatment
Small intestinal carcinoids are extremely indolent tumors with slow
spread. Patients with disease confined to the small intestine should
be treated with surgical excision, for which the cure rate exceeds
85%. In patients with resectable disease who have lymph node
involvement, the 5-year disease-free survival is 80%; however, by
25 years, < 25% remain disease free. Even patients with hepatic
metastases may have an indolent course with a median survival of 3
years. In patients with advanced disease, therapy historically has
been deferred until the patient is symptomatic, although a 2009
phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled trial demonstrated that
early initiation of somatostatin analog therapy delayed time to
progression of hepatic metastases. Surgery should be directed
toward palliation of obstructive symptoms.
In patients with carcinoid syndrome, resection of hepatic
metastases may provide dramatic improvement. The somatostatin
analog octreotide, 100–500 mcg subcutaneously three times daily,
(also available in long-acting intramuscular depot formulation)
inhibits hormone secretion from the carcinoid tumor, resulting in
dramatic relief of symptoms of carcinoid syndrome, including
diarrhea or flushing, in 90% of patients for a median period of 1
year. Thereafter, many patients stop responding to octreotide.
Hepatic artery occlusion, liver-directed debulking procedures, and
chemotherapy may provide symptomatic improvement in some
patients with hepatic metastases. Emergency therapy for patients
with symptomatic bronchial carcinoids consists of giving prednisone,
15–30 mg orally daily.
4. Small Intestine Sarcoma
Most small intestine sarcomas arise from stromal tumors (GISTs)
that stain positive for CD117; a minority arise from smooth muscle
tumors (leiomyosarcomas) (see Gastrointestinal Mesenchymal
Tumors above).
Kaposi sarcoma was at one time a common complication in
AIDS, but the incidence is declining with highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART). It is strongly associated with infection with
human herpesvirus 8. Lesions may be present anywhere in the
intestinal tract. Visceral involvement usually is associated with
cutaneous disease. Most lesions are clinically silent; however, large
lesions may be symptomatic. Interferon-α induces regression in up
to one-third of patients who have a CD4 cell count of > 200/mcL.
Widespread involvement may be best treated by systemic
chemotherapy using combinations of vincristine, bleomycin, or
doxorubicin, to which the tumor is very responsive.
Bilimoria KY et al. Small bowel cancer in the United States:
changes in epidemiology, treatment, and survival over the last 20
years. Ann Surg. 2009 Jan;249(1):63–71. [PMID: 19106677]
 
Chambers AJ et al. The palliative benefit of aggressive surgical
intervention for both hepatic and mesenteric metastases from
neuroendocrine tumors. Surgery. 2008 Oct;144(4):645–51.
[PMID: 18847650]
 
Ellis L et al. Carcinoid tumors of the gastrointestinal tract: trends in
incidence in England since 1971. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010
Dec;105(12):2563–9. [PMID: 20823835]
 
Massironi S et al. Plasma chromogranin A response to octreotide
test: prognostic value for clinical outcome in endocrine digestive
tumors. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Sep;105(9):2072–8. [PMID:
20372113]
 
Pasieka JL. Carcinoid tumors. Surg Clin North Am. 2009
Oct;89(5):1123–37. [PMID: 19836488]
 
Rinke A et al. Placebo-controlled, double-blind, prospective,
randomized study on the effect of octreotide LAR in the control of
tumor growth in patients with metastatic neuroendocrine midgut
tumors: a report from the PROMID Study Group. J Clin Oncol.
2009 Oct 1;27(28):4656–63. [PMID: 19704057]
 
Yamagami H et al. Usefulness of double-balloon endoscopy in the
diagnosis of malignant small-bowel tumors. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2008 Nov;6(11):1202–5. [PMID: 18799359]
 
COLORECTAL CANCER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Personal or family history of adenomatous polyps or colorectal
cancer are important risk factors.
 Symptoms or signs depend on tumor location.
 Proximal colon: fecal occult blood, anemia.
 Distal colon: change in bowel habits, hematochezia.
 Diagnosis established with colonoscopy.
 
 General Considerations
Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death due to
malignancy in the United States. Colorectal cancer will develop in
approximately 6% of Americans and 40% of those will die of the
disease. In 2010, there were an estimated 142,570 new cases and
51,370 deaths. Colorectal cancers are almost all adenocarcinomas,
which tend to form bulky exophytic masses or annular constricting
lesions. Slightly < 50% of cancers are located distal to the splenic
flexure (within the descending colon or rectosigmoid region).
The current belief is that the majority of colorectal cancers arise
from malignant transformation of an adenomatous polyp (tubular,
tubulovillous, or villous adenoma) or serrated polyp (hyperplastic
polyp, traditional serrated adenoma, or sessile serrated adenoma).
Polyps that are “advanced” (ie, polyps at least 1 cm in size,
adenomas with villous features, or adenomas with high-grade
dysplasia) are associated with a greater risk of cancer.
Approximately 85% of sporadic colorectal cancers arise from
adenomatous polyps and have loss of function of one or more
tumor suppressor genes (eg, p53, APC, or DCC) due to a
combination of spontaneous mutation of one allele combined with
chromosomal instability and aneuploidy (abnormal DNA content)
that leads to deletion and loss of heterozygosity of the other allele
(eg, 5q, 17q, or 18p deletion).
Approximately 10–20% of colorectal cancers arise from serrated
polyps and have mutations in K-ras or BRAF, and gene promoter
methylation of CpG-rich regions that leads to inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes, DNA mismatch repair genes, and varying levels
of microsatellite instability. Serrated colon cancers have distinct
clinical and pathologic characteristics, including diploid DNA
content, predominance in the proximal colon, poor differentiation,
and more favorable prognosis.
Up to 5% of colorectal cancers are caused by inherited germline
mutations resulting in polyposis syndromes (eg, familial
adenomatous polyposis) or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer (HNPCC or Lynch syndrome). These conditions are
discussed further in Chapter 15.
 Risk Factors
A number of factors increase the risk of developing colorectal
cancer. Recognition of these has impact on screening strategies.
However, 75% of all cases occur in people with no known
predisposing factors.
A. Age
The incidence of colorectal cancer rises sharply after age 45 years,
and 90% of cases occur in persons over the age of 50 years.
B. Family History of Neoplasia
A family history of colorectal cancer is present in 20% of patients
with colon cancer. Hereditary factors are believed to contribute to
20–30% of colorectal cancers; however, the genes responsible for
most of these cases have not yet been identified. (See Chapter 15
for discussion of inherited polyposis syndromes.) Approximately
6% of the Ashkenazic Jewish population has a missense mutation in
the APC gene (APC I1307K) that confers a modestly increased
lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer (OR 1.4–1.9) but
phenotypically resembles sporadic colorectal cancer rather than
familial adenomatous polyposis. Genetic screening is available, and
patients harboring the mutation merit intensive screening.
A family history of colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps is
one of the most important risk factors for colorectal cancer. The
risk of colon cancer is proportionate to the number and age of
affected first-degree family members with colon neoplasia. People
with one first-degree family member with colorectal cancer have an
increased risk approximately two times that of the general
population; however, the risk is almost four times if the family
member's cancer was diagnosed at < 45 years of age. Patients with
two first-degree relatives have a fourfold, or 25–30% lifetime, risk
of developing colon cancer. First-degree relatives of patients with
adenomatous polyps also have a twofold increased risk for
colorectal neoplasia, especially if the polyp was large (≥ 10 mm) or
detected before age 60 years.
C. Inflammatory Bowel Disease
The risk of adenocarcinoma of the colon begins to rise 7–10 years
after disease onset in patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn
colitis. The cumulative risk approaches 5–10% after 20 years and
20% after 30 years. Chronic treatment with 5-ASA agents and
folate is associated with a lower risk of cancer in patients with
ulcerative colitis.
D. Dietary Factors and Chemoprevention
In epidemiologic studies, diets rich in fats and red meat are
associated with an increased risk of colorectal adenomas and
cancer, whereas diets high in fruits, vegetables, and fiber are
associated with a decreased risk. However, prospective,
randomized controlled trials failed to demonstrate a risk reduction in
the recurrence of adenomatous polyps after treatment with a diet
low in fat and high in fiber, fruits, and vegetables, or with fiber
supplementation. Calcium carbonate (3 g/d) has been shown in
large cohort studies as well as small prospective trials to yield a
modest reduction in the relative risk of developing colorectal
neoplasia; however, a prospective study of 36,000 women did not
show a protective benefit of calcium (500 mg) and vitamin D (200
international units twice daily) in preventing colon cancer. Similarly,
the risk of colon cancer is not decreased in persons taking folic acid
supplements. The antioxidant vitamins A, C, E, and beta carotene
also have not been shown to be of benefit in prospective controlled
studies.
A US Preventive Services Task Force meta-analysis of cohort
and case-control studies suggest that prolonged (> 6 years) regular
use of aspirin (at least 325 mg twice weekly) and NSAIDs is
associated with a 22–33% relative risk reduction in the incidence of
colorectal cancer. Two prospective, blinded clinical trials have
shown that daily low-dose aspirin (80–325 mg) reduces the number
of recurrent adenomas at 1–3 years in patients with a history of
colorectal adenomas or cancer; however, two large randomized
controlled trials in the United States did not demonstrate a reduction
in colorectal cancer incidence in patients taking low-dose aspirin
over a 5–10 years. Because long-term aspirin use is associated with
a low incidence of serious complications (gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, stroke), the US Preventive Services Task Force
concluded that it should not be prescribed as a chemopreventive
agent in people without polyps or with small adenomas unless there
are other medical indications. Long-term administration of low-dose
aspirin may be considered in patients with a personal or family
history of colorectal cancer or advanced adenomas; however, they
do not obviate the need for colonoscopy screening and surveillance.
E. Other Factors
The incidence of colon adenocarcinoma is higher in blacks than in
whites. It is unclear whether this is due to genetic or socioeconomic
factors (eg, diet or reduced access to screening). Diabetes,
metabolic syndrome, obesity, and cigarette smoking are associated
with a modest increase in cancer risk.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Adenocarcinomas grow slowly and may be present for several
years before symptoms appear. However, some asymptomatic
tumors may be detected by the presence of fecal occult blood (see
Colorectal Cancer Screening, below). Symptoms depend on the
location of the carcinoma. Chronic blood loss from right-sided
colonic cancers may cause iron deficiency anemia, manifested by
fatigue and weakness. Obstruction, however, is uncommon because
of the large diameter of the right colon and the liquid consistency of
the fecal material. Lesions of the left colon often involve the bowel
circumferentially. Because the left colon has a smaller diameter and
the fecal matter is solid, obstructive symptoms may develop with
colicky abdominal pain and a change in bowel habits. Constipation
may alternate with periods of increased frequency and loose stools.
The stool may be streaked with blood, though marked bleeding is
unusual. With rectal cancers, patients note tenesmus, urgency, and
recurrent hematochezia. Weight loss is uncommon. Physical
examination is usually normal except in advanced disease. A mass
may be palpable in the abdomen. The liver should be examined for
hepatomegaly, suggesting metastatic spread. For cancers of the
distal rectum, digital examination is necessary to determine whether
there is extension into the anal sphincter or fixation, suggesting
extension to the pelvic floor.
B. Laboratory Findings
A complete blood count is obtained to look for evidence of anemia.
Elevated liver function tests, particularly the alkaline phosphatase,
are suspicious for metastatic disease. Carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) should be measured in all patients with proved colorectal
cancer. A preoperative CEA level > 5 ng/mL is a poor prognostic
indicator. After complete surgical resection, CEA levels should
normalize; persistently elevated levels suggest the presence of
persistent disease and warrant further evaluation.
C. Colonoscopy
Colonoscopy is the diagnostic procedure of choice in patients with
a clinical history suggestive of colon cancer or in patients with an
abnormality suspicious for cancer detected on radiographic imaging.
Colonoscopy permits biopsy for pathologic confirmation of
malignancy (Figure 39–1). In patients in whom colonoscopy is
unable to reach the cecum (< 5% of cases) or when a nearly
obstructing tumor precludes passage of the colonoscope, barium
enema or CT colonography examination should be performed.
 
Figure 39–1. Cecal adenocarcinoma on colonoscopy. (Courtesy
of Marvin Derezin, MD; used, with permission, from Usatine RP,
Smith MA, Mayeaux EJ Jr, Chumley H, Tysinger J. The Color
Atlas of Family Medicine. McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
D. Imaging
Clinicians obtain a chest, abdominal, and pelvic CT scan to assist in
preoperative staging. CT scans may demonstrate distal metastases
but are less accurate in the determination of the level of local tumor
extension (T stage) or lymphatic spread (N stage). Intraoperative
assessment of the liver by direct palpation and ultrasonography is
more accurate than CT scanning for the detection of hepatic
metastases. For rectal cancer, pelvic MRI or endorectal
ultrasonography identifies the depth of penetration of the cancer
through the rectal wall (T stage) and perirectal lymph nodes,
informing 
decisions 
about 
preoperative 
(neoadjuvant)
chemoradiotherapy and operative management. PET is not routinely
used for staging or surveillance in colorectal cancers.
 Staging
The TNM system is the commonly used classification to stage
colorectal cancer. Staging is important not only because it correlates
with the patient's long-term survival but also because it is used to
determine which patients should receive adjuvant therapy.
 Differential Diagnosis
The nonspecific symptoms of colon cancer may be confused with
those of irritable bowel syndrome, diverticular disease, ischemic
colitis, inflammatory bowel disease, infectious colitis, and
hemorrhoids. Neoplasm must be excluded in any patient over age
40 years who reports a change in bowel habits or hematochezia or
who has an unexplained iron deficiency anemia or occult blood in
the stools.
 Treatment
A. Surgery
Resection of the primary colonic or rectal cancer is the treatment of
choice for almost all patients who have resec-table lesions and can
tolerate general anesthesia. For colon cancer, multiple studies
demonstrate that minimally invasive, laparoscopically assisted
colectomy results in similar outcomes and rates of recurrence to
open colectomy. Regional dissection of at least 12 lymph nodes
should be performed to determine staging, which guides decisions
about adjuvant therapy.
For rectal carcinoma, preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemoradiation
with 5-FU is recommended in all node-positive tumors, and in T3
and greater tumors. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation is discussed
further below. After neoadjuvant therapy, the operative approach
depends on the level of the tumor above the anal verge, the size and
depth of penetration, and the patient's overall condition. Clinical
staging by endorectal ultrasound or MRI with endorectal coil is
important in guiding the clinical approach. In carefully selected
patients with small, mobile (< 4 cm), well-differentiated T1 or T2
rectal tumors that are < 8 cm from the anal verge and that appear
on endosonography to be localized to the rectal wall, transanal
excision may be performed. This approach avoids laparotomy and
spares the rectum and anal sphincter, preserving normal bowel
continence. All other patients will require either a low anterior
resection with a colorectal anastomosis or an abdominoperineal
resection with a colostomy, depending on how far above the anal
verge the tumor is located and the extent of local tumor spread.
Careful dissection of the entire mesorectum at the time of surgery
has been shown to reduce local recurrence to 8%. With
improvements in surgical stapling techniques, it is possible to
perform low anterior resection provided there is a margin of at least
2 cm of normal tissue below the tumor. Although low resections
obviate a colostomy, they are associated with increased immediate
postsurgical complications (leak, dehiscence, stricture) and
defecatory complaints (increased stool frequency, defecatory
problems, and incontinence). With unresectable rectal cancer, the
patient may be palliated with a diverting colostomy, laser
fulguration, or placement of an expandable wire stent.
B. Adjuvant Therapy for Colon Cancer
Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy have been demonstrated
to improve overall and tumor-free survival in selected patients with
colon cancer.
1. Stage I—Because of the excellent 5-year survival rate (90–
100%), no adjuvant therapy is recommended.
2. Stage II (node-negative disease)—The expected 5-year
survival rate is 80%. A survival benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy
has not been demonstrated in most controlled trials for stage II
colon cancer (see discussion for stage III disease). However,
otherwise healthy patients with stage II disease that is at higher risk
for recurrence (perforation, obstruction, T4 tumors, or fewer than
12 lymph nodes sampled) may benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy.
New methods to better discriminate recurrence risk and likelihood
of benefit from adjuvant therapy, such as gene expression profiling,
are under investigation in stage II colon cancer.
3. Stage III (node-positive disease)—With surgical resection
alone, the expected 5-year survival rate is 30–50%. Postoperative
adjuvant chemotherapy significantly increases disease-free survival
as well as overall survival by up to 30% and is recommended for all
fit patients. Large, well-designed studies of adjuvant therapy for
stage III colon cancer reported a higher rate of disease-free survival
at 5 years for patients treated with a combination of oxaliplatin, 5-
FU, and leucovorin (FOLFOX) (73.3%) than with 5-FU and
leucovorin (FL) alone (67.4%). The addition of oxaliplatin is
associated 
with 
an 
increased 
incidence 
of 
diarrhea,
myelosuppression, and peripheral sensory neuropathy, which
generally is reversible. Based on these studies, FOLFOX currently
is the preferred adjuvant therapy for most patients with stage III
disease 
(see Table 39–10). Current studies are evaluating
capecitabine, an oral 5-FU analog in combination with oxaliplatin.
The addition of a biologic agent (bevacizumab or cetuximab) to
FOLFOX does not improve outcomes in the adjuvant setting.
4. Stage IV (metastatic disease)—Approximately 20% of
patients have metastatic disease at the time of initial diagnosis, and
another 30% eventually develop metastasis. A subset of these
patients has limited disease that is potentially curable with surgical
resection. Resection of isolated liver or lung metastases may result
in long-term (over 5 years) survival in 35–55% of cases. For those
with unresectable hepatic metastases, local ablative techniques
(cryosurgery, radio frequency or microwave coagulation,
embolization, hepatic intra- arterial chemotherapy) may provide
long-term tumor control. The majority of patients with metastatic
disease do not have resectable (curable) disease. In the absence of
other treatment, the median survival is only 6 months. The goals of
therapy are to slow tumor progression while maintaining a
reasonable quality of life for as long as possible. Currently, either
FOLFOX (the addition of oxaliplatin to 5-FU and folinic acid) or
FOLFIRI (the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and folinic acid) is the
preferred first-line treatment regimens for most patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer, increasing median survival to 15–20
months. For convenience, oral capecitabine (instead of intravenous
5-FU and leucovorin) can be used in combination with oxaliplatin;
however, combination with irinotecan should not be used due to
increased toxicity (diarrhea). The role of combination therapy with
both oxaliplatin and irinotecan is under investigation. Addition of a
biologic agent to combination chemotherapy improves response
rates and overall survival and is recommended in the first-line of
treatment in suitable patients. Cetuximab and panitumumab are
monoclonal antibodies to EGFR; bevacizumab is a monoclonal
antibody to VEGF. Combination therapy with bevacizumab and
FOLFOX or FOLFIRI prolongs mean survival 2–5 months
compared with either regimen alone (see Table 39–10).
Bevacizumab may cause serious side effects, including arterial
thromboembolic events, bowel perforation, or serious bleeding, in
up to 5% of patients. EGFR-targeted agents cause an acneiform
rash in the majority of patients.
When disease progresses with FOLFOX or FOLFIRI (often in
conjunction with bevacizumab or an EGFR-targeted antibody),
therapy is switched to the alternative regimen. Patients progressing
with one regimen may respond to the alternative regimen,
prolonging mean survival to > 20 months. A phase III study
randomizing patients to receive either cetuximab or bevacizumab in
addition to standard first-line chemotherapy (FOLFIRI or
FOLFOX) is ongoing to determine whether one biologic agent is
superior. The simultaneous combination of both classes of biologic
agents (anti-EGFR and anti-VEGF) with chemotherapy does not
appear to improve response rates and has been associated with
worse outcomes in multiple studies. This is a sobering finding that
demonstrates the complexity of the signaling pathways involved.
Single-agent, palliative therapy with cetuximab or panitumumab can
benefit patients whose disease has progressed after first-line and
second-line chemotherapies. Tumor K-ras gene mutations are a
biomarker for nonresponse to cetuximab and panitumumab in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer; the use of these agents is
restricted to patients with wild-type K-ras. Clinical trial
participation should be considered for eligible patients whose
tumors have progressed despite standard treatment, including 5-
FU, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, an EGFR-inhibitor (if K-ras gene is
wild-type), and bevacizumab.
C. Adjuvant Therapy for Rectal Cancer
Compared with colon cancer, rectal cancer has lower long-term
survival rates and significantly higher rates of local tumor recurrence
(25%) due to the difficulty of achieving adequate surgical resection
margins. When initial imaging studies suggest stage I disease,
surgery may be performed first. Combination therapy with 5-FU (as
a radiation sensitizing agent) and radiation has been shown to
improve the disease-free survival rate and to decrease pelvic
recurrence and is recommended for all patients with stage II and
stage III rectal cancers (see Table 39–10). It has long been
controversial whether chemoradiation should be administered
preoperatively (“neoadjuvant”) or postoperatively (“adjuvant”). In
2004, a large, randomized controlled trial reported that
preoperative therapy led to better patient treatment compliance,
reduced local recurrence and toxicity, and a higher number of
sphincter-preserving 
resections. 
Therefore, 
preoperative
chemoradiation is recommended for patients with distal rectal
cancers that are determined to be stage II or III by endorectal ultra-
sound or MRI. Following surgical resection with total mesorectal
excision, 5-FU–based therapy (generally with the FOLFOX
regimen extrapolating from its benefit in patients with similarly-
staged colon cancers) may be administered for an additional 4
months.
 Follow-up after Surgery
Patients who have undergone resections for cure are followed
closely to look for evidence of symptomatic or asymptomatic tumor
recurrence that may be amenable to curative resection in a small
number of patients. The optimal cost-effective strategy is not clear.
Two randomized trials reported that intense follow-up with yearly
colonoscopy, abdominal CT, and chest radiography did not
improve overall outcome compared with most standard follow-up
protocols. Patients should be evaluated every 3–6 months for 3–5
years with history, physical examination, and CEA determinations.
The NCCN recommends surveillance CT scans of chest, abdomen,
and pelvis annually for the first 3 years postresection in high-risk
patients. Patients who had a complete preoperative colonoscopy
should undergo another colonoscopy 1 year after surgical resection.
Patients who did not undergo full colonoscopy preoperatively also
should undergo colonoscopy within 3–6 months postoperatively to
exclude other synchronous colorectal neoplasms. If a colonoscopy
does not detect new adenomatous polyps 1 year postoperatively,
surveillance colonoscopy should be performed every 3–5 years
thereafter to look for metachronous polyps or cancer. Because of
the high incidence of local tumor recurrence in patients with rectal
cancer, proctoscopy surveillance of the low anterior resection
anastomotic site may also be performed periodically. New onset of
symptoms or a rising CEA warrants investigation with chest,
abdominal, and pelvic CT to look for recurrent or metastatic
disease that may be amenable to therapy. For patients with a rising
CEA with unrevealing CT imaging, a PET scan is more sensitive for
the detection of occult metastatic disease.
 Prognosis
The stage of disease at presentation is the most important
determinant of long-term survival: stage I, > 90%; stage II, 70–
85%; stage III with fewer than four positive lymph nodes, 67%;
stage III with more than four positive lymph nodes, 33%; and stage
IV, 5–7%. For each stage, rectal cancers have a worse prognosis.
For those patients whose disease progresses despite therapy,
meticulous efforts at palliative care are essential (see Chapter 5).
 Screening for Colorectal Neoplasms
Colorectal cancer is ideal for screening because it is a common
disease that is fatal in almost 50% of cases yet is curable if detected
at an earlier stage. Furthermore, most cases arise from benign
adenomatous or serrated polyps that progress over many years to
cancer, and removal of these polyps has been shown to prevent the
majority of cancers. Colorectal cancer screening is endorsed by the
US Preventive Services Task Force, the Agency for Health Care
Policy and Research, the American Cancer Society, and every
professional gastroenterology and colorectal surgery society.
Although there is continued debate about the optimal cost-effective
means of providing population screening, there is unanimous
consent that screening of some kind should be offered to every
patient over the age of 50 years. Several analyses suggest that
screening is cost effective.
It is important for primary care providers to understand the
relative merits of various options and to discuss them with their
patients. Despite growing awareness of the importance of screening
on the part of medical professionals and the public, < 50% of
patients have undergone screening of any kind. Discussion and
encouragement by the primary care provider are the most important
factors in achieving patient compliance with screening programs.
Recommendations for screening from the US Multi-society Task
Force are listed in Table 39–5. Screening is recommended for all
men and women ages 50 through 75 years of age who are at
average risk for cancer. The potential for harm from screening must
be weighed against the likelihood of benefit, especially in elderly
patients with comorbid illnesses and shorter life expectancy.
Although routine screening is not recommended in adults above age
75, it may be considered on a case-by-case basis in adults age 76
through 85 years who have excellent health and functional status.
Patients with first-degree relatives with colorectal neoplasms
(cancer or adenomatous polyps) are at increased risk; earlier and
more frequent screening is recommended (preferably with
colonoscopy) for these individuals. Recommendations for screening
in families with inherited cancer syndromes or inflammatory bowel
disease are provided in Chapter 15. For patients at average risk for
colorectal cancer, the recommendations of the Task Force are
discussed below. Screening tests may be classified into two broad
categories: stool-based tests and exams that visualize the structure
of the colon by direct endoscopic inspection or radiographic
imaging.
 
Table 39–5. Recommendations for colorectal cancer screening.1
 
Average-risk individuals ≥ 50 years old2
     Annual fecal occult blood testing using higher sensitivity
tests (Hemeoccult SENSA)
     Annual fecal immunochemical test (FIT)
     Fecal DNA test (interval uncertain)
     Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years
     Colonoscopy every 10 years
     CT colonography every 5 years
 
Individuals with a family history of a first-degree member
with colorectal neoplasia3
Single first-degree relative with colorectal cancer
diagnosed at age ≥ 60 years: Begin screening at age
40. Screening guidelines same as average-risk individual;
however, preferred method is colonoscopy every 10 years.
 
Single first-degree relative with colorectal cancer or
advanced adenoma diagnosed at age < 60 years, or
two first-degree relatives: Begin screening at age 40 or
at age 10 years younger than age at diagnosis of the
youngest affected relative, whichever is first in time.
Recommended screening: colonoscopy every 5 years.
 
1 For recommendations for families with inherited polyposis syndromes or
hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, see Chapter 15.
2 Joint Guideline from the American Cancer Society, the US Multi-Society
Task Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology.
Gastroenterology 2008 May; 134(5):1570.
3 American College of Gastroenterology. Guidelines for Colorectal Cancer
Screening. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009 Mar;104(3):739.
A. Stool-based Tests
1. Fecal occult blood test—Most colorectal cancers and some
large adenomas result in increased chronic blood loss. A variety of
tests for fecal occult blood are commercially available that have
varying sensitivities and specificities for colorectal neoplasia. These
include guaiac-based tests (Hemoccult I and II and Hemeoccult
SENSA) that detect the pseudoperoxidase activity of heme or
hemoglobin and fecal immunochemical tests (FITs) that detect
human globin.
Guaiac-based tests have undergone the most extensive testing
and currently have the greatest clinical use. For optimal detection,
one specimen card must be prepared from three consecutive bowel
movements. To reduce the likelihood of false-positive tests, patients
should abstain from aspirin (in doses > 325 mg/d), NSAIDs, red
meat, poultry, fish, and vegetables with peroxide activity (turnips,
horseradish) for 72 hours. Vitamin C may cause a false-negative
test. Slides should be developed within 7 days after preparation.
The reported sensitivities of a single guaiac-based test for detection
of colorectal cancer vary widely, but are lower for Hemeoccult II
(35%) than Hemeoccult SENSA (65%). When fecal occult blood
test is administered to the general population as part of a screening
program, 2–6% of tests are positive. Of those with positive tests,
5–18% have colorectal cancer that is more likely to be at an earlier
stage (stage I or II).
Several FITs are commercially available. These tests are highly
specific for detecting human globin and therefore eliminate the need
for pretest dietary restrictions. As with guaiac-based tests, sampling
of three consecutive bowel movements is recommended. In clinical
trials that compare FIT with guaiac-based tests, FIT had at least
comparable sensitivity to Hemeoccult SENSA for detection of
cancers (60–85%) with higher specificity. Because FITs are not
affected by diet or medications and have superior accuracy, they
are increasingly being substituted for guaiac-based tests despite a
higher cost per test ($10–20).
The US Multi-Society Task Force emphasizes that colon cancer
prevention should be the primary goal of screening. For that reason,
the lower sensitivity of fecal occult blood tests for advanced
neoplasia (cancer and advanced adenomatous polyps) makes them
a less attractive choice for population-based screening than
endoscopic or radio-graphic tests. Currently, fecal occult blood
tests are most suitable in settings where health care resources are
limited or in patients who desire a noninvasive method of screening.
The Task Force recommends that tests with higher sensitivity for
colorectal cancer (Hemeoccult SENSA or FIT) be used rather than
less sensitive tests (Hemeoccult II). Regardless of which stool-
based test is used, patients should understand that annual testing is
required to achieve the maximum screening benefit and that a
positive test will require evaluation by colonoscopy accompanied by
removal of any polyps identified. If colonoscopy reveals no
colorectal neoplasm, further screening for colorectal cancer can be
deferred for 10 years. In a meta-analysis of four large, prospective,
longitudinal studies, annual or biennial screening with Hemeoccult or
Hemeoccult II reduced mortality from colorectal cancer by 25%
among those who were compliant with regular testing. Long-term
studies with more sensitive stool tests (Heme SENSA or FIT) have
not been performed.
2. Multitarget DNA assay—A fecal DNA assay (Pre-Gen Plus)
is available for screening for colorectal neoplasia. The test analyzes
fecal DNA for 22 gene mutations and DNA integrity. The
commercially available first-generation fecal DNA panel detected
only one-half of cancers; however, a second-generation assay
detected almost 90%. Although the Multisociety Task Force
concluded that fecal DNA is an acceptable option for colorectal
cancer screening, this test is not yet practical for population-based
screening due to its high cost and cumbersome requirements for
stool collection and mailing.
B. Endoscopic Examinations of the Colon
1. Flexible sigmoidoscopy—Use of a 60-cm flexible
sigmoidoscope permits visualization of the rectosigmoid and
descending colon. It requires no sedation and in many centers is
performed by a nurse specialist or physician's assistant.
Adenomatous polyps are identified in 10–20% and colorectal
cancers in 1% of patients. Case-control studies suggest that
screening sigmoidoscopy programs lead to a 60% reduction in
colorectal cancer mortality. A 2010 randomized controlled trial in
170,000 participants in the United Kingdom comparing a one-time
flexible sigmoidoscopy screening to usual care confirmed a 50%
reduction in distal colorectal cancer incidence and 43% reduction in
mortality after a median follow-up of 11 years. The risk of serious
complications (perforation) associated with flexible sigmoidoscopy
is < 1:10,000 patients.
The chief disadvantage of screening with flexible sigmoidoscopy
is that is does not examine the proximal colon. The prevalence of
proximal versus distal neoplasia is higher in people over age 65
years of age, African Americans, and women. In men,
approximately 50% of advanced neoplasms (cancer, adenomas ≥ 1
cm in size, polyps with villous histology, or high-grade dysplasia)
are located in the proximal colon, compared with 60–70% in
women. The finding at sigmoidoscopy of an adenomatous polyp in
the distal colon increases the likelihood at least twofold that an
advanced neoplasm is present in the proximal colon. Therefore,
patients found on screening sigmoidoscopy to have an adenomatous
polyp of any size should subsequently undergo colonoscopy to
evaluate the proximal colon. Using this strategy in men, it is
estimated that screening sigmoidoscopy programs will detect
approximately 65% of advanced colonic neoplasms. In women,
however, sigmoidoscopy screening programs may fail to detect up
to 65% of advanced neoplasia.
2. Colonoscopy—Colonoscopy permits examination of the entire
colon. In addition to detecting early cancers, colonoscopy allows
removal of adenomatous polyps by biopsy or polypectomy, which
is believed to reduce the risk of subsequent cancer. Over the past
decade, there has been a dramatic increase in screening
colonoscopy and a similar decrease in screening sigmoidoscopy due
to poor reimbursement and the perceived inferiority of
sigmoidoscopy compared with colonoscopy. Colonoscopy requires
aggressive bowel cleansing prior to the examination. To alleviate
discomfort, intravenous sedation is used for most patients. The
incidence of serious complications after colonoscopy (perforation,
bleeding, cardiopulmonary events) is 0.1%. In asymptomatic
individuals between 50 and 75 years of age undergoing screening
colonoscopy, the prevalence of advanced neoplasia is 4–11% and
of cancer is 0.1–1%.
Although colonoscopy is believed to be the most sensitive test for
detecting adenomas and cancer, it is not infallible. In several studies,
the rate of colorectal cancer within 3 years of a screening
colonoscopy was 0.7–0.9%, ie, approximately 1 in 110 patients.
This may be attributable to adenomatous polyps and early cancers
that were overlooked during colonoscopy. Studies of back-to-back
colonoscopies confirm that endoscopists overlook 6–12% of
polyps > 1 cm and up to 25% of smaller adenomas. Polyps that are
small, flat, or located behind folds are easily missed, especially if the
bowel preparation is poor. Population-based case-control and
cohort studies suggest that colonoscopy is associated with greater
reduction in colorectal cancer incidence and mortality in the distal
colon than the proximal colon. This may be attributable to
incomplete examination of the proximal colon, and differences
between the proximal and distal colon that include worse bowel
preparation, suboptimal colonoscopic technique, and a higher
prevalence of serrated polyps and flat adenomas. The latter are
more common that previously recognized, are more likely to contain
advanced pathology, and are more difficult to identify than raised
(sessile or pedunculated) polyps. To optimize diagnostic accuracy
as well as patient safety and comfort, colonoscopy should be
performed after optimal bowel preparation by a well-trained
endoscopist who spends sufficient time (at least 7 minutes) carefully
examining the colon (especially the proximal colon) while
withdrawing the endoscope.
C. Radiographic Examinations of the Colon
1. CT colonography—Using helical CT with computer-assisted
image reconstruction, two- and three-dimensional views can be
generated of the colon lumen that simulate the view of colonoscopy.
CT colonography requires a similar bowel cleansing regimen as
colonoscopy as well as insufflation of air into the colon through a
rectal tube, which may be associated with discomfort. Nonetheless,
this examination is performed rapidly and requires no sedation or
intravenous contrast. It has minimal acute risk although there is
controversy about potential long-term risks related to radiation
exposure from CT examinations. Several large studies have
compared the accuracy of virtual colonoscopy with colonoscopy
for colorectal screening. Using current imaging software with
multidetector helical scanners, the sensitivity is > 95% for the
detection of cancer and > 84–92% for the detection of polyps ≥ 10
mm in size. The sensitivity for polyps 6–9 mm in size ranges from
57% to 84%; for polyps 5 mm or less, the sensitivity is extremely
poor.
Patients undergoing screening with CT colonography should be
managed appropriately. If no polyps are found, the interval for
repeat screening examination is uncertain; however, 5 years may be
reasonable. All patients with polyps ≥ 10 mm in size should be
referred for colonoscopy with polypectomy because of the high
prevalence (30%) of advanced pathology (cancer, high-grade
dysplasia, or villous features) within these polyps. The optimal
management of patients with polyps < 10 mm in size is
controversial. The likelihood of advanced pathology in polyps 6–9
mm in size is 4–7% and in polyps 1–5 mm is < 2%. The US
Multisociety Task Force currently recommends that colonoscopy
with polypectomy be offered to patients with one or more 6–9 mm
polyps. Patients who refuse or who have increased risk of
carcinoma should undergo surveillance CT colonography in 3–5
years. At the present time, there is no consensus on the
management of patients with polyps < 6 mm; however, some
radiologists choose not even to report these findings.
2. Barium enema—Double-contrast barium enema was previously
an attractive screening technique because it was widely available,
relatively inexpensive, and safe. However, compared to CT
colonography, it is more time consuming and difficult to perform,
less comfortable, and less accurate. Although it continues to be
included among recommended screening options, it has been
supplanted by CT colonography, where available. A multicenter
trial demonstrated that the sensitivity of barium enema is only 50%
for polyps ≥ 1 cm and 55–85% for early-stage cancers when
compared with colonoscopy. At present, barium enema may be
recommended when screening of the entire colon is desired but
expertise in CT colonography is unavailable and the patient is
unable or unwilling to undergo colonoscopy.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with symptoms (change in bowel habits,
hematochezia), signs (mass on abdominal examination or
digital rectal examination [DRE]), or laboratory tests (iron
deficiency anemia) suggestive of colorectal neoplasia
should be referred for colonoscopy.
•    Patients with suspected cancer or adenomatous polyps
of any size should be referred for colonoscopy.
•    Virtually all patients with proven colorectal cancer should
be referred to a surgeon for resection. Patients with stage
III or IV disease should be referred to an oncologist.
 When to Admit
 
•    Patients with complications of colorectal cancer
(obstruction, acute bleeding) requiring urgent evaluation
and intervention.
•    Patients with severe complications of chemotherapy.
•    Patients with advanced metastatic disease requiring
palliative care.
Allison JE. FIT: a valuable but underutilized screening test for
colorectal cancer—it's time for a change. Am J Gastroenterol.
2010 Sep;105(9):2026–8.[PMID: 20818351]
 
André T et al. Improved overall survival with oxaliplatin,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin as adjuvant treatment in stage II or III
colon cancer in the MOSAIC trial. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jul
1;27(19):3109–16. [PMID: 19451431]
 
Atkin WS et al; UK Flexible Sigmoidoscopy Trial Investigators.
Once-only flexible sigmoidoscopy screening in prevention of
colorectal cancer: a multicentre randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2010 May 8;375(9726):1624–33.[PMID: 20430429]
 
Baxter NN et al. Analysis of administrative data finds endoscopist
quality measures associated with postcolonoscopy colorectal
cancer. Gastroenterology. 2011 Jan;140(1):65–72. [PMID:
20854818]
 
Brenner H et al. Protection from colorectal cancer after
colonoscopy: a population-based, case-control study. Ann Intern
Med. 2011 Jan 4;154(1):22–30. [PMID: 21200035]
 
Chan AT et al. Aspirin dose and duration of use and risk of
colorectal cancer in men.Gastroenterology. 2008 Jan;134(1):21–
8. [PMID: 18005960]
 
Colon Cancer—National Cancer Institute—Cancer Net:
http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov.
 
Di Nicolantonio et al. Wild-type BRAF is required for response to
panitumumab or cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2008 December 10;26(35):5705–12. [PMID: 19001320]
 
Hecht JR et al. A randomized phase IIIB trial of chemotherapy,
bevacizumab, and panitumumab compared with chemotherapy and
bevacizumab alone for metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2009 Feb 10;27(5):672–80. [PMID: 19114685]
 
Jemal A et al. Cancer statistics, 2010. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010
Sep–Oct;60(5):277–300. [PMID: 20610543]
 
Kaminski MF et al. Quality indicators for colonoscopy and the risk
of interval cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 May 13;362(19):1795–
803. [PMID: 20463339]
 
Karpetis CS et al. K-ras mutations and benefit from cetuximab in
advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct
23;359(17):1757–65. [PMID: 18946061]
 
Koopman L et al. Sequential versus combination chemotherapy
with capecitabine, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in advanced
colorectal cancer (CAIRO): a phase III randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2007 Jul 14;370(9582):135–42. [PMID: 17630036]
 
Lakoff J et al. Risk of developing a proximal versus distal
colorectal cancer after a negative colonoscopy: a population-based
study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Oct;6(10):1117–21.
[PMID: 18691942]
 
Levin B et al. Screening and surveillance for the early detection of
colorectal cancer and adenomatous polyps, 2008: a joint guideline
from the American Cancer Society, the US Multi-Society Task
Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of
Radiology. Gastroenterology. 2008 May;134(5):1570–95.
[PMID: 18384785]
 
Lieberman DA. Clinical Practice. Screening for colorectal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 17;361(12):1179–87. [PMID:
19759380]
 
Loupakis F et al. KRAS codon 61, 146 and BRAF mutations
predict resistance to cetuximab plus irinotecan in KRAS codon 12
and 13 wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2009
Aug 18;101(4):715–21. [PMID: 19603018]
 
Pohl H et al. Colorectal cancers detected after colonoscopy
frequently result from missed lesions. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2010 Oct;8(10):858–64. [PMID: 20655393]
 
Regge D et al. Diagnostic accuracy of computed tomographic
colonography for the detection of advanced neoplasia in individuals
at increased risk of colorectal cancer. JAMA. 2009 Jun
17;301(23):2453–61. [PMID: 19531785]
 
Rex D et al. American College of Gastroenterology Guidelines for
colorectal cancer screening 2009. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009
Mar;104(3):739–50. [PMID: 19240699]
 
Seymour MT et al. Different strategies of sequential and
combination chemotherapy for patients with poor prognosis
advanced colorectal cancer (MRC FOCUS): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2007 Jul 14;370(9582):143–52. [PMID:
17630037]
 
Singh H et al. The reduction in colorectal cancer mortality after
colonoscopy varies by site of cancer. Gastroenterology. 2010
Oct;139(4):1128–37. [PMID: 20600026]
 
Singh H et al. Rate and predictors of early/missed colorectal
cancers after colonoscopy in Manitoba: a population-based study.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2010 Dec;105(12):2588–96. [PMID:
20877348]
 
Soetikno RM et al. Prevalence of nonpolypoid (flat and
depressed) colorectal neoplasms in asymptomatic and
symptomatic adults. JAMA. 2008 Mar 5;299(9):1027–35.
[PMID: 18319413]
 
Terdiman JP et al. Surveillance guidelines should be updated to
recognize the importance of serrated polyps. Gastroenterology.
2010 Nov;139(5):1444–7. [PMID: 20875785]
 
Tol J et al. Chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and cetuximab in
metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009 Feb 5;360(6):
563–72. [PMID: 19196673]
 
Van Cutsem E et al. Cetuximab and chemotherapy as initial
treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009
Apr 2;360(14):1408–17. [PMID: 19339720]
 
Van Rossum LG et al. Random comparison of guaiac and
immunochemical fecal occult blood tests for colorectal cancer in a
screening population. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jul;135(1): 82–90.
[PMID: 18482589]
 
Wolpin BM et al. Systemic treatment of colorectal cancer.
Gastroenterology. 2008 May;134(5):1296–310. [PMID:
18471507]
 
CARCINOMA OF THE ANUS
The anal canal is lined from its proximal to distal extent by
columnar, transitional and non-keratinized squamous epithelium,
which merges at the anal verge with the keratinized perianal skin.
Tumors arising from the mucosa of the anal canal are relatively rare,
comprising only 1–2% of all cancers of the anus and large intestine.
Squamous cancers make up the majority of anal cancers. Anal
cancer is increased among people practicing receptive anal
intercourse and those with a history of anorectal warts. In over 80%
of cases, HPV may be detected, suggesting that this virus is a major
causal factor. Women with anal cancer are at increased risk for
cervical cancer, which may be due to a field effect of oncogenic
HPV infection, and require gynecologic screening and surveillance.
Anal cancer is increased in HIV-infected individuals, possibly due
to interaction with HPV. Bleeding, pain, and local tumor are the
most common symptoms. The lesion is often confused with
hemorrhoids or other common anal disorders. These tumors tend to
become annular, invade the sphincter, and spread upward via the
lymphatics into the perirectal mesenteric lymphatic nodes. CT or
MRI scans of the abdomen and pelvis are required to identify
regional lymphadenopathy or metastatic disease at diagnosis. PET
imaging may be used in conjunction.
Treatment depends on the tumor location and histo-logic stage.
Small (< 3 cm) superficial lesions of the perianal skin may be
treated with wide local excision. Adenocarcinoma of the anal canal
is treated in similar fashion to rectal cancer (see above), commonly
by abdominoperineal resection with adjuvant or neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy. Squamous cancer of the anal canal and large
perianal tumors invading the sphincter or rectum are treated with
combined-modality therapy that includes external radiation with
simultaneous chemo-therapy (5-FU and mitomycin). Local control
is achieved in approximately 80% of patients. Radical surgery
(abdominoperineal resection) is reserved for patients who fail
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Metastatic disease is generally
treated with 5-FU in combination with cisplatin. The 5-year survival
rate is 60–70% for localized tumors and over 25% for metastatic
(stage IV) disease.
Ajani JA et al. Fluorouracil, mitomycin, and radiotherapy vs
fluorouracil, cisplatin, and radiotherapy for carcinoma of the anal
canal: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008 Apr
23;299(16):1914–21. [PMID: 18430910]
 
Glynne-Jones R et al. Anal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice
Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol.
2010 May;21(suppl 5):v87–92. [PMID: 20555110]
 
National Cancer Institute. Anal Cancer Treatment
(PDQ).http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/
anal/HealthProfessional
 
Shia J. An update on tumors of the anal canal. Arch Pathol Lab
Med. 2010 Nov;134(11):1601–11. [PMID: 21043813]
 
Zeller JL et al. JAMA patient page. Anal cancer. JAMA. 2008
Apr 23;299(16):1980. [PMID: 18430917]
 
CANCERS OF THE GENITOURINARY
TRACT
Maxwell V. Meng, MD, FACS
PROSTATE CANCER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Prostatic induration on DRE or elevation of PSA.
 Most often asymptomatic.
 Rarely: systemic symptoms (weight loss, bone pain).
 
 General Considerations
Prostatic cancer is the most common noncutaneous cancer detected
in American men and the second leading cause of cancer-related
death. In the United States, over 218,000 new cases of prostate
cancer are diagnosed annually, and about 27,000 deaths result.
However, the clinical incidence of the disease does not match the
prevalence noted at autopsy, where more than 40% of men over 50
years of age are found to have prostatic carcinoma. Most such
occult cancers are small and contained within the prostate gland;
few are associated with regional or distant disease. The incidence of
prostatic cancer increases with age. Whereas 30% of men aged
60–69 years will have the disease, autopsy incidence increases to
67% in men aged 80–89 years. Although the global prevalence of
prostatic cancer at autopsy is relatively consistent, the clinical
incidence varies considerably (high in North America and European
countries, intermediate in South America, and low in the Far East),
suggesting that environmental or dietary differences among
populations may be important for prostatic cancer growth. A 50-
year-old American man has a lifetime risk of 40% for latent cancer,
16% for developing clinically apparent cancer, and a 2.9% risk of
death due to prostatic cancer. Blacks, men with a family history of
prostatic cancer, and those with a history of high dietary fat intake
are at increased risk for developing prostate cancer.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Prostate cancer may manifest as focal nodules or areas of induration
within the prostate at the time of DRE. However, currently most
prostate cancers are associated with palpably normal prostates and
are detected solely on the basis of elevations in serum PSA.
Patients rarely present with signs of urinary retention or
neurologic symptoms as a result of epidural metastases and cord
compression. Obstructive voiding symptoms are most often due to
benign prostatic hyperplasia, which occurs in the same age group.
Nevertheless, large or locally extensive prostatic cancers can cause
obstructive voiding symptoms while lymph node metastases can
lead to lower extremity lymphedema. As the axial skeleton is the
most common site of metastases, patients may present with back
pain or pathologic fractures.
B. Laboratory Findings
1. Serum tumor markers—PSA is a glycoprotein produced only
by cells, either benign or malignant, of the prostate gland. The serum
level is typically low and correlates with the volume of both benign
and malignant prostate tissue. Measurement of serum PSA is useful
in detecting and staging prostate cancer, monitoring response to
treatment, and detecting recurrence before it becomes clinically
evident. As a screening test, PSA will be elevated in 10–15% of
men. Approximately 18–30% of men with intermediate degrees of
elevation (4.1–10 ng/mL) will be found to have prostate cancer.
Between 50% and 70% of those with elevations >10 ng/mL will
have prostate cancer. (See age-specific PSA reference ranges
under Screening for Prostate Cancer, below.) Patients with
intermediate levels of PSA usually have localized and therefore
potentially curable cancers. It should be remembered that
approximately 20% of patients who undergo radical prostatectomy
for localized prostate cancer have normal levels of PSA.
In untreated patients with prostate cancer, the level of PSA
correlates with the volume and stage of the disease. Whereas most
organ-confined cancers are associated with PSA levels <10 ng/mL,
advanced disease (seminal vesicle invasion, lymph node
involvement, or occult distant metastases) is more common in
patients with PSA levels in excess of 40 ng/mL. Approximately
98% of patients with metastatic prostate cancer will have elevated
PSA. However, there are rare cancers that are localized despite
substantial elevations in PSA. Therefore, initial treatment decisions
cannot be made on the basis of PSA testing alone. A rising PSA
after therapy is usually consistent with progressive disease, either
locally recurrent or metastatic.
2. Miscellaneous laboratory testing—Patients in urinary
retention or those with ureteral obstruction due to loco-regionally
advanced prostate cancers may present with elevations in blood
urea nitrogen or creatinine. Patients with bony metastases may have
elevations in alkaline phosphatase or hypercalcemia. Laboratory
and clinical evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation can
occur in patients with advanced prostate cancers.
3. Prostate biopsy—Transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy is the
standard method for detection of prostate cancer. The use of a
spring-loaded, 18-gauge biopsy needle has allowed transrectal
biopsy to be performed with minimal patient discomfort and
morbidity. Local anesthesia is routinely used and increases the
tolerability of the procedure. The specimen preserves glandular
architecture and permits accurate grading. Prostate biopsy
specimens are taken from the apex, mid-portion, and base in men
who have an abnormal DRE or an elevated serum PSA, or both.
Extended-pattern biopsies, including a total of at least ten biopsies,
are associated with improved cancer detection and risk stratification
of patients with newly diagnosed disease. Patients with
abnormalities of the seminal vesicles can have these structures
specifically biopsied to identify local tumor invasion.
C. Imaging
Transrectal ultrasonography has primarily been used for the
staging of prostate carcinomas, where tumors typically appear as
hypoechoic areas. In addition, transrectal ultrasound-guided, rather
than digitally guided, biopsy of the prostate is a more accurate way
to evaluate suspicious lesions. Use of imaging should be tailored to
the likelihood of advanced disease in newly diagnosed cases.
Asymptomatic patients with well-differentiated to moderately
differentiated cancers, thought to be localized to the prostate on
DRE and transurethral ultrasound and associated with modest
elevations of PSA (ie, < 10 ng/mL), need no further imaging.
MRI allows for evaluation of the prostate as well as regional
lymph nodes. The positive predictive value for detection of both
capsular penetration and seminal vesicle invasion is similar for
transrectal ultrasound and MRI. CT plays little role because of its
inability to accurately identify or stage prostate cancers, but it can
be used to detect regional lymphatic metastases and intra-
abdominal metastases.
Radionuclide bone scan is superior to conventional plain
skeletal radiographs in detecting bony metastases. Most prostate
cancer metastases are multiple and most commonly localized to the
axial skeleton. Men with more advanced local lesions, symptoms of
metastases (eg, bone pain), high-grade disease, or elevations in
PSA > 20 ng/mL should undergo radionuclide bone scan. Because
of the high frequency of abnormal scans in patients in this age group
resulting from degenerative joint disease, plain films are often
necessary in evaluating patients with indeterminate findings on bone
scan. Cross-sectional imaging either by CT or MRI is usually
indicated only in those patients in the latter group who have negative
bone scans in an attempt to detect lymph node metastases. Patients
found to have enlarged pelvic lymph nodes are candidates for FNA.
Intravenous urography and cystoscopy are not routinely needed
to evaluate patients with prostate cancer.
Despite application of modern, sophisticated techniques,
understaging of prostate cancer occurs in at least 20% of patients.
 Screening for Prostate Cancer
Whether screening for prostate cancer results in a decrease in
mortality rates due to the disease is the subject of much debate. The
screening tests currently available include DRE, PSA testing, and
transrectal ultrasound. Depending on the patient population being
evaluated, detection rates using DRE alone vary from 1.5% to 7%.
Unfortunately, most cancers detected in this manner are advanced
(stage T3 or greater). Transrectal ultrasound should not be used as
a first-line screening tool because of its expense, low specificity
(and therefore high biopsy rate), and minimal improvement in
detection rate when compared with the combined use of DRE and
PSA testing.
PSA testing increases the detection rate of prostate cancers
compared with DRE. Approximately 2–2.5% of men older than 50
years of age will be found to have prostate cancer using PSA testing
compared with a rate of approximately 1.5% using DRE alone.
PSA is not specific for cancer, and there is considerable overlap of
values between men with benign prostate hyperplasia and those
with prostate cancers. The sensitivity, specificity, and positive
predictive value of PSA and DRE are listed in Table 39–6. PSA-
detected cancers are more likely to be localized compared with
those detected by DRE alone.
To improve the performance of PSA as a screening test, several
investigators have developed alternative methods for its use. The
serial measurement of PSA over time (PSA velocity) may increase
specificity for cancer detection with little loss in sensitivity. A rate of
change in PSA >0.75 ng/mL per year is associated with an
increased likelihood of cancer detection. In a patient with a normal
DRE, an elevated PSA, and a normal transrectal ultra-sound, the
indications for prostate biopsy may be refined by calculating PSA
density (serum PSA/volume of the prostate as measured by
ultrasound). Patients with high PSA density are more likely to have
disease despite a normal DRE and normal transrectal ultrasound.
Some have found measurement of PSA transition zone density
(portion of the prostate that enlarges with development of benign
prostate hyperplasia) to be more predictive of the presence or
absence of cancer than PSA density calculated using the entire
prostate volume. As PSA concentration is directly related to patient
age, establishment of age-specific reference ranges increases
specificity (fewer older men with benign prostate hyperplasia would
undergo evaluation) and increases sensitivity (more younger men
with cancer would undergo evaluation). Age-specific reference
ranges have been established: men 40–49, < 2.5 ng/mL; men 50–
59, < 3.5 ng/mL; men 60–69, < 4.5 ng/mL; and men 70–79, < 6.5
ng/mL (based on a previously normal serum PSA of < 4 ng/mL).
Black men have lower age-specific reference ranges (age 40–49, <
2 ng/mL; age 50–59, < 4 ng/mL; age 60–69, < 4.5 ng/mL; age 70–
79, < 5.5 ng/mL). A more recent attempt at refining PSA has been
the measurement of free serum and protein-bound levels (cancer
patients have a lower percentage of free serum PSA). Generally,
men with free fractions exceeding 25% are unlikely to have prostate
cancer, whereas those with free fractions < 10% have an
approximately 50% chance of having prostate cancer. Early reports
using cutoffs of 18–20% of free PSA resulted in 5–10% lost
sensitivity for 15–40% gains in specificity. The frequency of PSA
testing remains a matter of some debate. In men with a normal DRE
and a PSA > 2.5 ng/mL, PSA testing should be performed yearly
because approximately 50% of these patients convert to having a
PSA >4 ng/mL. Screening can be performed biennially in those with
a normal DRE and serum PSA < 2.5 ng/mL; progression in this
group is less likely.
 
Table 39–6. Screening for prostatic cancer: Test performance.
 
DRE, digital rectal examination; PSA, prostate-specific antigen. Modified,
with permission, from Kramer BS et al. Prostate cancer screening: what
we know and what we need to know. Ann Intern Med. 1993 Nov
1;119(9):914–23.
Two large, randomized trials question the benefit of screening
men for prostate cancer. In the US Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and
Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial, no mortality benefit was
observed after combined screening with PSA testing and digital
rectal examination during follow-up of 11 years. Similarly in the
European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer
(ERSPC) trial, the benefit of PSA screening was minimal with a
20% relative reduction in death rate from prostate at follow-up of 9
years, with an absolute reduction of 7 prostate cancer deaths per
10,000 men screened.
 Staging
The majority of prostate cancers are adenocarcinomas. Most arise
in the periphery of the prostate (peripheral zone), though a small
percentage arise in the central (5–10%) and transition zones (20%)
of the gland. Pathologists utilize the Gleason grading system
whereby a “primary” grade is applied to the architectural pattern of
malignant glands occupying the largest area of the specimen and a
“secondary” pattern is assigned to the next largest area of cancer.
Grading is based on architectural rather than histologic criteria, and
five “grades” are possible. Adding the score of the primary and
secondary patterns (grades) gives a Gleason score. Grade
correlates with tumor volume, pathologic stage, and prognosis
(Figure 39–2).
 Treatment
A. Localized Disease
The optimal treatment for patients with clinically localized prostate
cancers remains controversial. Patients need to be advised of all
treatment options, including active surveillance, with the specific
benefits, risks, and limitations. Currently, treatment decisions are
made based on tumor grade and stage as well as the age and health
of the patient. Although selected patients may be candidates for
surveillance based on age or health and evidence of small-volume or
well-differentiated cancers, most men with an anticipated life
expectancy in excess of 10 years should be considered for
treatment. Both radiation therapy and radical prostatectomy result in
acceptable levels of local control. A large, prospective, randomized
trial compared surveillance with radical prostatectomy in 695 men
with clinically localized and well- differentiated to moderately
differentiated tumors for a median of 8.2 years. Radical
prostatectomy reduced disease-specific mortality, overall mortality,
and risks of metastasis and local progression. The absolute
reduction in the risk of death after 10 years was small yet
statistically significant, but the reductions in the risk of metastasis
and local tumor progression were substantial. This trial accrued
patients in Sweden between 1989 and 1999, thus likely including
patients with greater cancer burden compared with that in patients
currently diagnosed using PSA screening.
B. Radical Prostatectomy
During radical prostatectomy, the seminal vesicles, prostate, and
ampullae of the vas deferens are removed. Refinements in technique
have allowed preservation of urinary continence in most patients
and erectile function in selected patients. Radical prostatectomy can
be performed via open retropubic, transperineal, or laparoscopic
(with or without robotic assistance) surgery. Local recurrence is
uncommon after radical prostatectomy, and the incidence is related
to pathologic stage. Organ-confined cancers rarely recur; however,
cancers with adverse pathologic features (capsular penetration,
seminal vesicle invasion) are associated with higher local (10–25%)
and distant (20–50%) relapse rates.
Ideal candidates for prostatectomy include healthy patients with
stages T1 and T2 prostate cancers. Patients with advanced local
tumors (T4) or lymph node metastases are rarely candidates for
prostatectomy alone, although surgery is sometimes used in
combination with hormonal therapy and postoperative radiation
therapy for select high-risk patients.
Patients with advanced pathologic stage or positive surgical
margins are at an increased risk for local and distant tumor relapse.
Such patients are candidates for adjuvant therapy (radiation for
positive margins or androgen deprivation for lymph node
metastases). Two randomized clinical trials (EORTC 22911 and
SWOG 8794) have demonstrated improved progression-free and
metastasis-free survival with early radiotherapy in these men, and
subsequent analysis of SWOG 8794 showed improved overall
survival in men receiving adjuvant radiation therapy. Recent
evidence suggests that salvage radiotherapy after radical
prostatectomy, within 2 years of PSA relapse, increases prostate
cancer-specific survival in men with shorter PSA doubling time (< 6
months).
 
Figure 39–2. Prostate cancer mortality as a factor of gleason
grade and age at diagnosis in men managed conservatively.
(Adapted, with permission, from Albertsen PC et al. 20-year
outcomes following conservative management of clinically localized
prostate cancer. JAMA. 2005 May 4;293(17):2095-101.)
 
C. Radiation Therapy
Radiation can be delivered by a variety of techniques including use
of external beam radiotherapy and transperineal implantation of
radioisotopes. Morbidity is limited, and the survival of patients with
localized cancers (T1, T2, and selected T3) approaches 65% at 10
years. As with surgery, the likelihood of local failure correlates with
technique and tumor characteristics. The likelihood of a positive
prostate biopsy more than 18 months after radiation varies between
20% and 60%. Patients with local recurrence are at an increased
risk of cancer progression and cancer death compared with those
who have negative biopsies. Ambiguous target definitions,
inadequate radiation doses, and understaging of the tumor may be
responsible for the failure noted in some series. Newer techniques
of radiation (implantation, conformal therapy using three-
dimensional reconstruction of CT-based tumor volumes, heavy
particle, charged particle, and heavy charged particle) may improve
local control rates. Three-dimensional conformal radiation delivers a
higher dose because of improved targeting and appears to be
associated with greater efficacy as well as lower likelihood of
adverse side effects compared with previous techniques. As a result
of improvements in imaging, most notably transrectal ultrasound,
there has been a resurgence of interest in brachytherapy—the
implantation of permanent or temporary radioactive sources
(palladium, iodine, or iridium) into the prostate. Brachytherapy can
be combined with external beam radiation in patients with higher-
grade or higher-volume disease or as mono-therapy in those with
low-grade or low-volume malignancies. The PSA may rise after
brachytherapy because of prostate inflammation and necrosis. This
transient elevation (PSA bounce) should not be mistaken for
recurrence and may occur up to 20 months after treatment.
D. Surveillance
A beneficial impact of treating localized prostate cancer with
respect to survival has not been conclusively demonstrated.
Therefore, surveillance alone may be an appropriate form of
management for selected patients with prostate cancer. Patients
included in observational series are typically older with small
volume, well-differentiated cancers. Currently, many men diagnosed
with prostate cancer may be candidates for surveillance due to the
significant migration to lower stage, as well as lower grade, resulting
from screening for prostate cancer using PSA testing. Depending on
the age and health of the patient, some of these very low-volume,
low-grade cancers may never become clinically relevant and can be
monitored with serial PSA levels, rectal examinations, and periodic
prostate biopsies to assess grade and extent of tumor. The goal of
surveillance is to avoid treatment in men who never experience
disease progression while recognizing and effectively treating men
with early evidence of progression. End points for intervention in
patients on surveillance have not been clearly defined and
surveillance regimens remain investigational.
E. Cryosurgery
Cryosurgery is a technique whereby liquid nitrogen is circulated
through small hollow-core needles inserted into the prostate under
ultrasound guidance. The freezing process results in tissue
destruction. There has been a resurgence of interest in less invasive
forms of therapy for localized prostate cancer as well as several
recent technical innovations, including improved percutaneous
techniques, expertise in transrectal ultrasound, improved
cryotechnology, and better understanding of cryobiology. The
positive biopsy rate after cryoablation ranges between 7% and
23%.
F. Locally and Regionally Advanced Disease
Prostate cancers associated with minimal degrees of capsular
penetration are candidates for standard irradiation or surgery.
Those with locally extensive cancers, including those with seminal
vesicle and bladder neck invasion, are at increased risk for both
local and distant relapse despite conventional therapy. Currently, a
variety of investigational regimens are being tested in an effort to
improve cancer outcomes in such patients. Combination therapy
(androgen deprivation combined with surgery or irradiation), newer
forms of irradiation, and hormonal therapy alone are being tested,
as is neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy. Neoadjuvant and
adjuvant androgen deprivation therapy combined with external
beam radiation therapy have demonstrated improved survival
compared with external beam radiation therapy alone.
G. Metastatic Disease
Since death due to prostate carcinoma is almost invariably the result
of failure to control metastatic disease, research has emphasized
efforts to improve control of distant disease. It is well known that
most prostate carcinomas are hormone dependent and
approximately 70–80% of men with metastatic prostate carcinoma
will respond to various forms of androgen deprivation. Androgen
deprivation may be affected at several levels along the pituitary–
gonadal axis using a variety of methods or agents (Table 39–7).
Use of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists
(leuprolide, goserelin) achieves androgen deprivation without
orchiectomy or administration of diethylstilbestrol and is currently
the most common method of reducing testosterone levels. A single
LHRH antagonist (degarelix) is FDA approved and has no short-
term testosterone “flare” associated with LHRH agonists. Because
of its rapid onset of action, ketoconazole should be considered in
patients with advanced prostate cancer who present with spinal
cord compression, bilateral ureteral obstruction, or disseminated
intravascular coagulation. Although testosterone is the major
circulating androgen, the adrenal gland secretes the androgens
dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and
androstenedione. Some investigators believe that suppressing both
testicular and adrenal androgens allows for a better initial and longer
response than methods that only inhibit production of testicular
androgens. Complete androgen blockade can be achieved by
combining an antiandrogen with use of an LHRH agonist or
orchiectomy. Nonsteroidal antiandrogen agents appear to act by
competitively binding the receptor for DHT, the intracellular
androgen responsible for prostate cell growth and development. A
meta-analysis of trials comparing the use of either an LHRH agonist
or orchiectomy alone with the use of either in combination with an
antiandrogen agent shows little benefit of combination therapy.
However, patients at risk for disease-related symptoms (bone pain,
obstructive voiding symptoms) due to the initial elevation of serum
testosterone that accompanies the use of an LHRH agonist should
receive antiandrogens initially. Bisphosphonates are increasingly
being used to prevent osteoporosis associated with androgen
deprivation, to decrease bone pain from metastases, and to reduce
skeletal related events.
 
Table 39–7. Androgen deprivation for prostatic cancer.
 
LHRH, luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone.
Docetaxel is the first cytotoxic chemotherapy agent to improve
survival in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer.
Current research is underway combining docetaxel with androgen
deprivation therapy, radiation therapy, and surgery to determine
whether combinations are effective in patients with high-risk
prostate cancer. Immune therapies are also under investigation and
have shown promise for patients with advanced prostate cancer.
Sipuleucel-T, an autologous cellular immunotherapy, is now FDA
approved in asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic men with
metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Other agents—
cabazitaxel and abiraterone—have also been approved for
advanced prostate cancer after clinical trials have demonstrated
improvements in survival.
 Prognosis
The likelihood of success of surveillance or treatment can be
predicted using risk assessment tools that usually combine stage,
grade, PSA level, and number and extent of positive prostate
biopsies. Several tools are available on the Internet (eg,
http://mskcc.org/mskcc/html/5794.cfm). One of the most widely
used is the Kattan nomogram; it incorporates tumor stage, grade,
and PSA level to predict the likelihood that a patient will be
disease-free after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy.
The CAPRA nomogram uses serum PSA, Gleason grade,
clinical stage, percent positive biopsies, and patient age in a point
system to risk stratify and predict the likelihood of PSA recurrence
3 and 5 years after radical prostatectomy (Tables 39–8 and 39–9).
The CAPRA has been validated on large multicenter and
international radical prostatectomy cohorts.
The patterns of prostate cancer progression have been well
defined. Small and well-differentiated cancers (Gleason grades 1
and 2) are usually confined within the prostate, whereas large-
volume (> 4 mL) or poorly differentiated (Gleason grades 4 and 5)
cancers are more often locally extensive or metastatic to regional
lymph nodes or bone. Penetration of the prostate capsule by cancer
is common and occurs along perineural spaces. Seminal vesicle
invasion is associated with a high likelihood of regional or distant
disease, and disease recurrence. Lymphatic metastases can be
identified in the obturator and internal iliac lymph node chains. The
axial skeleton, as mentioned previously, is the most common site of
distant metastases.
 
Table 39–8. The UCSf Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment
(CAPRA).
 
 
Table 39–9. CAPRA: Probability of freedom from PSA
recurrence after radical prostatectomy by CAPRA point total.
 
PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients should be referred to an urologist. PSA
remains integral in prostate cancer diagnosis. Low-risk
disease may be managed by active surveillance, surgery,
or radiation therapy.
•    High-risk disease often requires multimodal treatment
strategies.
Albertsen PC et al. 20-year outcomes following conservative
management of clinically localized prostate cancer. JAMA. 2005
May 4;293(17):2095–101. [PMID: 15870412]
 
Andriole GL et al; PLCO Project Team. Mortality results from a
randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl Med. 2009
Mar;360(13):1310–9. [PMID: 19297565]
 
Andriole GL et al; REDUCE Study Group. Effect of dutasteride
on the risk of prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010 Apr
1;362(13):1192–202. [PMID: 20357281]
 
Bill-Axelson A et al; Scandinavian Prostate Cancer Study Group
No. 4. Radical prostatectomy versus watchful waiting in early
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005 May 12;352(19):1977–84.
[PMID: 15888698]
 
Dall'Era MA et al. Active surveillance for the management of
prostate cancer in a contemporary cohort. Cancer. 2008 Jun
15;112(12):2664–70. [PMID: 18433013]
 
Djulbegovic M et al. Screening for prostate cancer: systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ.
2010 Sep 14;341:c4543. [PMID: 20843937]
 
Freedland SJ et al. Risk of prostate cancer-specific mortality
following biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy.
JAMA. 2005 Jul 27;294(4):433–9. [PMID: 16046649]
 
Meng MV et al. Treatment of patients with high risk localized
prostate cancer: results from cancer of the prostate strategic
urological research endeavor (CaPSURE). J Urol. 2005 May;
173(5):1557–61. [PMID: 15821485]
 
Schröder FH et al; ERSPC Investigators.Screening and prostate-
cancer mortality in a randomized European study. N Engl J Med.
2009 Mar;360(13):1320–8. [PMID: 19297566]
 
Thompson IM et al. Prediction of prostate cancer for patients
receiving finasteride: results from the Prostate Cancer Prevention
Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Jul 20;25(21):3076–81. [PMID:
17634486]
 
Trock BJ et al. Prostate cancer-specific survival following salvage
radiotherapy vs observation in men with biochemical recurrence
after radical prostatectomy.JAMA. 2008 Jun 18; 299(23):2760–
9. [PMID: 18560003]
 
Walsh PC et al. Clinical practice. Localized prostate cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2007 Dec 27;357(26):2696–705. [PMID:
18160689]
 
Zeller JL et al. JAMA patient page. Prostate cancer. JAMA. 2008
Jul 9;300(2):236. [PMID: 18612121]
 
BLADDER CANCER
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Irritative voiding symptoms.
 Gross or microscopic hematuria.
 Positive urinary cytology in most patients.
 Filling defect within bladder noted on imaging.
 
 General Considerations
Bladder cancer is the second most common urologic cancer; it
occurs more commonly in men than women (2.7:1), and the mean
age of patients at diagnosis is 65 years. Cigarette smoking and
exposure to industrial dyes or solvents are risk factors for the
disease and account for approximately 60% and 15% of new
cases, respectively. Ninety-eight percent of primary bladder
cancers are epithelial malignancies, with the majority being urothelial
cell carcinomas (90%). Adenocarcinomas and squamous cell
cancers account for approximately 2% and 7%, respectively, of all
bladder cancers detected in the United States. The latter is often
associated with schistosomiasis, vesical calculi, or prolonged
catheter use.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hematuria—gross or microscopic, chronic or intermittent—is the
presenting symptom in 85–90% of patients with bladder cancer.
Irritative voiding symptoms (urinary frequency and urgency) occur
in a small percentage of patients as a result of the location or size of
the cancer. Most patients with bladder cancer do not have signs of
the disease because of its superficial nature. Abdominal masses
detected on bimanual examination may be present in patients with
large-volume or deeply infiltrating cancers. Hepatomegaly or
palpable lymphadenopathy may be present in patients with
metastatic disease, and lymphedema of the lower extremities may
be present as a result of locally advanced cancers or metastases to
pelvic lymph nodes.
B. Laboratory Findings
Urinalysis reveals microscopic or gross hematuria in the majority of
cases. On occasion, hematuria may be accompanied by pyuria.
Azotemia may be present in a small number of cases associated
with ureteral obstruction. Anemia may occasionally be due to
chronic blood loss or to bone marrow metastases. Exfoliated cells
from normal and abnormal urothelium can be readily detected in
voided urine specimens. Cytology can be useful in detecting the
disease at the time of initial presentation or to detect recurrence.
Cytology is sensitive in detecting cancers of higher grade and stage
(80–90%) but less so in detecting superficial or well-differentiated
lesions (50%). There are numerous urinary tumor markers under
investigation for screening, assessing recurrence, progression,
prognosis or response to therapy; the NMP22 point-of-care assay
for a specific urinary protein has shown utility in detecting recurrent
tumors.
C. Imaging
Bladder cancers may be identified using ultrasound, CT, or MRI
where filling defects within the bladder are noted. However, the
presence of cancer is confirmed by cystoscopy and biopsy, with
imaging primarily used to evaluate the upper urinary tract and stage
more advanced lesions.
D. Cystourethroscopy and Biopsy
The diagnosis and staging of bladder cancers are made by
cystoscopy and transurethral resection. If cystoscopy—performed
usually under local anesthesia—confirms the presence of bladder
cancer, the patient is scheduled for transurethral resection under
general or regional anesthesia. Random bladder and, on occasion,
prostate urethral biopsies are performed to detect occult disease
elsewhere in the bladder and potentially identify patients at greater
risk for tumor recurrence and progression.
 Pathology & Staging
Grading is based on cellular features: size, pleomorphism, mitotic
rate, and hyperchromatism. Bladder cancer staging is based on the
extent of bladder wall penetration and the presence of regional or
distant metastases.
The natural history of bladder cancer is based on two separate
but related processes: tumor recurrence within the bladder and
progression to higher-stage disease. Both are correlated with tumor
grade and stage.
 Treatment
Patients with superficial cancers (Ta, T1) are treated with complete
transurethral resection and selective use of intravesical
chemotherapy. In the subset of patients with large, high-grade,
recurrent Ta lesions or T1 cancers and those with carcinoma in situ
are good candidates for adjuvant intravesical therapy.
Patients with invasive (T2, T3) but still localized cancers are at
risk for both nodal metastases and progression and require radical
cystectomy, irradiation, or the combination of chemotherapy and
selective surgery or irradiation due to the much higher risk of
progression compared with patients with lower-stage lesions.
For patients with muscle invasive (T2 or greater) transitional cell
carcinoma, neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy prior to radical
cystectomy is superior to radical cystectomy alone. This is
particularly important for higher stage or bulky tumors in order to
improve their surgical resectability.
A. Intravesical Chemotherapy
Immunotherapeutic or chemotherapeutic agents delivered directly
into the bladder via a urethral catheter can reduce the likelihood of
recurrence in those who have undergone complete transurethral
resection. Most agents are administered weekly for 6–12 weeks.
Efficacy may be increased by prolonging contact time to 2 hours.
The use of maintenance therapy after the initial induction regimen is
beneficial. Common agents include thiotepa, mitomycin,
doxorubicin, and BCG, the last being the most effective agent when
compared with the others with respect to reducing disease
progression. Side effects of intravesical chemotherapy include
irritative voiding symptoms and hemorrhagic cystitis. Patients in
whom symptoms or infection develop from BCG may require
antituberculous therapy.
B. Surgical Treatment
Although transurethral resection is the initial form of treatment for all
bladder tumors since it is diagnostic, allows for proper staging, and
controls superficial cancers, muscle-infiltrating cancers require more
aggressive treatment. Partial cystectomy is indicated in selected
patients with solitary lesions or those with cancers in a bladder
diverticulum. Radical cystectomy entails removal of the bladder,
prostate, seminal vesicles, and surrounding fat and peritoneal
attachments in men and the uterus, cervix, urethra, anterior vaginal
vault, and usually the ovaries in women. Bilateral pelvic lymph node
dissection is performed in all patients.
Urinary diversion can be performed using a conduit of small or
large bowel. However, continent forms of diversion have been
developed that avoid the necessity of an external appliance and can
be considered in a significant number of patients.
C. Radiotherapy
External beam radiotherapy delivered in fractions over a 6- to 8-
week period is generally well tolerated, but approximately 10–15%
of patients will develop bladder, bowel, or rectal complications.
Local recurrence is common after radiotherapy alone (30–70%)
and is therefore combined with systemic chemotherapy in an effort
to reduce the need for radical cystectomy or to treat patients who
are poor candidates for radical cystectomy.
D. Chemotherapy
Metastatic disease is present in 15% of patients with newly
diagnosed bladder cancer, and metastases develop within 2 years in
up to 40% of patients who were believed to have localized disease
at the time of cystectomy or definitive radiotherapy. Cisplatin-based
combination chemotherapy results in partial or complete responses
in 15–45% of patients (see Table 39–4).
Combination chemotherapy has been integrated into trials of
surgery and radiotherapy. It has been used to decrease recurrence
rates with both modalities and to attempt bladder preservation in
those treated with radiation. Chemotherapy should be considered
before surgery in those with bulky lesions or those suspected of
having regional disease, and recent evidence suggests that
neoadjuvant chemotherapy may benefit all patients prior to planned
cystectomy. Chemoradiation is best suited for those with T2 or
limited T3 disease without ureteral obstruction. Alternatively,
chemotherapy has been used after cystectomy in patients at high
risk for recurrence.
 Prognosis
The frequency of recurrence and progression are correlated with
grade. Whereas progression may be noted in few grade I cancers
(19–37%), it is common with poorly differentiated lesions (33–
67%). Carcinoma in situ is most often found in association with
papillary bladder cancers. Its presence identifies patients at
increased risk for recurrence and progression.
At initial presentation, approximately 50–80% of bladder cancers
are superficial: stage Ta, Tis, or T1. When properly treated, lymph
node metastases and progression are uncommon in this population
and survival is excellent at 81%. Five-year survival of patients with
T2 and T3 disease ranges from 50% to 75% after radical
cystectomy. Long-term survival for patients with metastatic disease
at presentation is rare.
 When to Refer
 
•    All patients should be referred to an urologist.
Hematuria often deserves evaluation with upper urinary
tract imaging and cystoscopy.
•    Histologic diagnosis and staging require endoscopic
resection of tumor.
Grossman HB et al. Surveillance for recurrent bladder cancer using
a point-of-care proteomic assay. JAMA. 2006 Jan
18;295(3):299–305. [PMID: 16418465]
 
Parekh DJ et al. Superficial and muscle-invasive bladder cancer:
principles of management for outcomes assessments. J Clin Oncol.
2006 Dec 10;24(35):5519–27. [PMID: 17158537]
 
Stenzl A et al. The updated EAU guidelines on muscle-invasive
and metastatic bladder cancer. Eur Urol. 2009 Apr;55(4): 815–
25. [PMID: 19157687]
 
Sternberg CN et al. Chemotherapy for bladder cancer: treatment
guidelines for neoadjuvant chemotherapy, bladder preservation,
adjuvant chemotherapy, and metastatic cancer. Urology. 2007
Jan;69(1 Suppl):62–79. [PMID: 17280909]
 
CANCERS OF THE URETER & RENAL PELVIS
Cancers of the renal pelvis and ureter are rare and occur more
commonly in patients with bladder cancer, smokers, those with
Balkan nephropathy, those exposed to Thorotrast (a contrast agent
with radioactive thorium in use until the 1960s), or those with a long
history of analgesic abuse. The majority are urothelial cell
carcinomas. Gross or microscopic hematuria is present in most
patients, and flank pain secondary to bleeding and obstruction
occurs less commonly. Like primary bladder tumors, urinary
cytology is often positive. The most common signs identified at the
time of intravenous urography or CT include an intraluminal filling
defect, unilateral nonvisualization of the collecting system, and
hydronephrosis. Ureteral and renal pelvic tumors must be
differentiated from calculi, blood clots, papillary necrosis, or
inflammatory and infectious lesions. On occasion, upper urinary
tract lesions are accessible for biopsy, fulguration, or resection using
a ureteroscope. Treatment is based on the site, size, grade, depth of
penetration, and number of tumors present. Most are excised with
laparoscopic or open nephroureterectomy (renal pelvic and upper
ureteral lesions) or segmental excision of the ureter (distal ureteral
lesions). Endoscopic resection may be indicated in patients with
limited renal function or focal, low-grade, cancers.
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Gross or microscopic hematuria.
 Flank pain or mass in some patients.
 Systemic symptoms such as fever, weight loss may be prominent.
 Solid renal mass on imaging.
 
 General Considerations
Renal cell carcinoma accounts for 2.6% of all adult cancers. In the
United States, approximately 52,190 cases of renal cell carcinoma
are diagnosed and 12,890 deaths result annually. Renal cell
carcinoma has a peak incidence in the sixth decade of life and a
male-to-female ratio of 2:1. It may be associated with a number of
paraneoplastic syndromes (see below and Table 39–2).
The cause is unknown. Cigarette smoking is the only significant
environmental risk factor that has been identified. Familial settings
for renal cell carcinoma have been identified (von Hippel–Lindau
syndrome) as well as an association with dialysis-related acquired
cystic disease and specific genetic aberrations (eg, Xp11.2
translocation), but sporadic tumors are far more common.
Renal cell carcinoma originates from the proximal tubule cells.
Various histologic cell types are recognized (clear cell, papillary,
chromophobe, collecting duct and sarcomatoid).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Historically, 60% of patients presented with gross or microscopic
hematuria. Flank pain or an abdominal mass was detected in
approximately 30% of cases. The triad of flank pain, hematuria, and
mass was found in only 10–15% of patients and is often a sign of
advanced disease. Fever may be present as a paraneoplastic
symptom (see Table 39–2). Symptoms of metastatic disease
(cough, bone pain) occur in 20–30% of patients at presentation.
Because of the widespread use of ultrasound and CT scanning,
renal tumors are frequently detected incidentally in individuals with
no urologic symptoms. There has been profound stage migration
toward lower stages of disease over the past 10 years, likely due to
the increased use of abdominal imaging. However, population
mortality rates remain stable.
B. Laboratory Findings
Hematuria is present in 60% of patients. Erythrocytosis from
increased erythropoietin production occurs in 5%, though anemia is
more common; hypercalcemia may be present in up to 10% of
patients. Stauffer syndrome is a reversible syndrome of hepatic
dysfunction (with elevated liver function tests) in the absence of
metastatic disease.
C. Imaging
Renal masses are often first identified by abdominal ultra-
sonography or CT. CT scanning is the most valuable imaging test
for renal cell carcinoma. It confirms the character of the mass and
further stages the lesion with respect to regional lymph nodes, renal
vein, or hepatic involvement. CT also provides valuable information
regarding the contralateral kidney (function, bilaterality of
neoplasm). Chest radiographs exclude pulmonary metastases, and
bone scans should be performed for large tumors and in patients
with bone pain or elevated alkaline phosphatase levels. MRI and
duplex Doppler ultrasonography are excellent methods of assessing
for the presence and extent of tumor thrombus within the renal vein
or vena cava.
 Differential Diagnosis
Solid lesions of the kidney are renal cell carcinoma until proved
otherwise. Other solid masses include angiomyolipomas (fat density
usually visible by CT), urothelial cell cancers of the renal pelvis
(more centrally located, involvement of the collecting system,
positive urinary cytologic tests), adrenal tumors (superoanterior to
the kidney) and oncocytomas (indistinguishable from renal cell
carcinoma preoperatively), and renal abscesses.
 Treatment
Radical nephrectomy is the primary treatment for localized renal cell
carcinoma. Patients with a single kidney, bilateral lesions, or
significant medical renal disease should be considered for partial
nephrectomy. Patients with a normal contralateral kidney and good
renal function but a small cancer are also candidates for partial
nephrectomy. The use of radiofrequency or cryosurgical ablation is
being studied.
No effective chemotherapy is available for metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. Vinblastine is the single most effective agent, with short-
term partial response rates of 15%. Bevacizumab can prolong time
to progression in those with metastatic disease (see Table 39–4).
Biologic response modifiers have received much attention, including
interferon-α and interleukin-2. Partial response rates of 15–20%
and 15–35%, respectively, have been reported. Responders tend
to have lower tumor burdens, metastatic disease confined to the
lung, and a high performance status. Patients with metastatic kidney
cancer and good performance status who have resectable primary
tumors should undergo cytoreductive nephrectomy. Two
randomized trials have shown a survival benefit of surgery followed
by the use of systemic therapy—specifically, biologic response
modifiers—compared with the use of systemic therapy alone.
Several targeted drugs, specifically VEGF and Rafkinase
inhibitors, are effective (40% response rates) in patients with
advanced kidney cancer. The drugs are oral agents, well tolerated,
and particularly active for clear cell carcinoma. The appropriate
timing and combination of these agents, with and without surgery
and cytokine therapy, remains to be determined.
 Prognosis
After radical nephrectomy, tumors confined to the renal capsule
(T1–T2) demonstrate 5-year disease-free survivals of 90–100%.
Tumors extending beyond the renal capsule (T3 or T4) and node-
positive tumors have 50–60% and 0–15% 5-year disease-free
survival, respectively. One subgroup of patients with nonlocalized
disease has reasonable long-term survival, namely, those with
solitary resectable metastases. In this setting, radical nephrectomy
with resection of the metastasis results in 5-year disease-free
survival rates of 15–30%.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with solid renal masses require further
evaluation and should be referred to an urologist.
•    Surgical excision of renal cell carcinoma remains the
gold standard.
•    Patients with metastatic disease should be referred to
an oncologist.
Choueiri TK et al. Clinical factors associated with outcome in
patients with metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma treated with
vascular endothelial growth factor-targeted therapy. Cancer. 2007
Aug 1;110(3):543–50. [PMID: 17577222]
 
Escudier B et al. Sorafenib in advanced clear-cell renal-cell
carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 11;356(2):125–34. [PMID:
17215530]
 
Flanigan RC et al. Nephrectomy followed by interferon alfa-2b
compared with interferon alfa-2b alone for metastatic renal-cell
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2001 Dec 6;345(23):1655–9. [PMID:
11759643]
 
Hudes G et al. Temsirolimus, interferon alfa, or both for advanced
renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007 May
31;356(22):2271–81. [PMID: 17538086]
 
Motzer RJ et al. Sunitinib in patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma. JAMA. 2006 Jun 7;295(21):2516–24. [PMID:
15479931]
 
Motzer RJ et al. Sunitinib versus interferon alfa in metastatic renal-
cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 11;356(2):115–24.
[PMID: 17215529]
 
OTHER PRIMARY TUMORS OF THE KIDNEY
Oncocytomas account for 3–5% of renal tumors, are usually
benign, and are indistinguishable from renal cell carcinoma on
preoperative imaging. These tumors are seen in other organs,
including the adrenals, salivary glands, and thyroid and parathyroid
glands.
Angiomyolipomas are rare benign tumors composed of fat,
smooth muscle, and blood vessels. They are most commonly seen
in patients with tuberous sclerosis (often multiple and bilateral) or in
young to middle-aged women. CT scanning may identify the fat
component, which is diagnostic for angiomyolipoma. Asymptomatic
lesions < 5 cm in diameter usually do not require intervention; large
lesions can spontaneously bleed. Acute bleeding can be treated by
angiographic embolization or, in rare cases, nephrectomy. Lesions
over 5 cm are often prophylactically treated with angioembolization
to reduce the risk of bleeding.
SECONDARY TUMORS OF THE KIDNEY
The kidney is not an infrequent site for metastatic disease. Of the
solid tumors, lung cancer is the most common (20%), followed by
breast (10%), stomach (10%), and the contralateral kidney (10%).
Lymphoma, both Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin, may also involve the
kidney, although it tends to appear as a diffusely infiltrative process
resulting in renal enlargement rather than a discrete mass.
PRIMARY TUMORS OF THE TESTIS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most common neoplasm in men aged 20–35 years.
 Patient typically discovers a painless nodule.
 Orchiectomy necessary for diagnosis.
 
 General Considerations
Malignant tumors of the testis are rare, with approximately two to
three new cases per 100,000 males reported in the United States
each year. Ninety to 95 percent of all primary testicular tumors are
germ cell tumors and can be divided into two major categories:
nonseminomas, including embryonal cell carcinoma (20%),
teratoma (5%), choriocarcinoma (< 1%), and mixed cell types
(40%); and seminomas (35%). The remainder of primary testicular
tumors are non-germinal neoplasms (Leydig cell, Sertoli cell,
gonadoblastoma). The lifetime probability of developing testicular
cancer is 0.2% for an American white male. For the purposes of
this review, only germ cell tumors will be considered.
Approximately 5% of testicular tumors develop in a patient with
a history of cryptorchism, with seminoma being the most common.
However, 5–10% of these tumors occur in the contralateral,
normally descended testis. The relative risk of development of
malignancy is highest for the intra-abdominal testis (1:20) and lower
for the inguinal testis (1:80). Placement of the cryptorchid testis into
the scrotum (orchidopexy) does not alter the malignant potential of
the cryptorchid testis but does facilitate routine examination and
tumor detection.
Testicular cancer is slightly more common on the right than the
left, paralleling the increased incidence of cryptorchidism on the
right side. One to 2 percent of primary testicular tumors are bilateral
and up to 50% of these men have a history of unilateral or bilateral
cryptorchidism. Primary bilateral testicular tumors may occur
synchronously or asynchronously but tend to be of the same histo
logy. Seminoma is the most common histologic finding in bilateral
primary testicular tumors, while malignant lymphoma is the most
common bilateral testicular tumor overall.
In animal models, exogenous estrogen administration during
pregnancy has been associated with an increased development of
testicular tumors with relative risk ranging from 2.8 to 5.3. Other
acquired factors such as trauma and infection-related testicular
atrophy have been associated with testicular tumors; however, a
causal relationship has not been established.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The most common symptom of testicular cancer is painless
enlargement of the testis. Sensations of heaviness are not unusual.
Patients are usually the first to recognize an abnormality, yet the
typical delay in seeking medical attention ranges from 3 to 6
months. Acute testicular pain resulting from intratesticular
hemorrhage occurs in approximately 10% of cases. Ten percent of
patients are asymptomatic at presentation, and 10% manifest
symptoms relating to metastatic disease such as back pain
(retroperitoneal metastases), cough (pulmonary metastases), or
lower extremity edema (vena cava obstruction).
A discrete mass or diffuse testicular enlargement is noted in most
cases. Secondary hydroceles may be present in 5–10% of cases. In
advanced disease, supraclavicular adenopathy may be present, and
abdominal examination may reveal a mass. Gynecomastia is seen in
5% of germ cell tumors.
B. Laboratory Findings
Several serum markers are important in the diagnosis and
monitoring of testicular carcinoma, including human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG), α-fetoprotein, and lactate dehydrogenase. α-
Fetoprotein is never elevated with pure seminomas, and while hCG
is occasionally elevated in seminomas, levels tend to be lower than
those seen with nonseminomas. Lactate dehydrogenase may be
elevated with either type of tumor. Liver function tests may be
elevated in the presence of hepatic metastases, and anemia may be
present in advanced disease.
C. Imaging
Scrotal ultrasound can readily determine whether a mass is
intratesticular or extratesticular. Once the diagnosis of testicular
cancer has been established by inguinal orchiectomy, clinical staging
of the disease is accomplished by chest, abdominal, and pelvic CT
scanning.
 Staging
In a commonly used staging system for nonseminoma germ cell
tumors, a stage A lesion is confined to the testis; stage B
demonstrates regional lymph node involvement in the
retroperitoneum; and stage C indicates distant metastasis. For
seminoma, the M.D. Anderson system is commonly used. In this
system, a stage I lesion is confined to the testis, a stage II lesion has
spread to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes, and a stage III lesion has
supradiaphragmatic nodal or visceral involvement.
 Differential Diagnosis
An incorrect diagnosis is made at the initial examination in up to
25% of patients with testicular tumors. Scrotal ultra-sonography
should be performed if any uncertainty exists with respect to the
diagnosis. Although most intratesticular masses are malignant, a
benign lesion—epidermoid cyst—may rarely be seen. Epidermoid
cysts are usually very small benign nodules located just underneath
the tunica albuginea; occasionally, however, they can be large.
 Treatment
Inguinal exploration with early vascular control of the spermatic
cord structures is the initial intervention. If cancer cannot be
excluded by examination of the testis, radical orchiectomy is
warranted. Scrotal approaches and open testicular biopsies should
be avoided. Further therapy depends on the histology of the tumor
as well as the clinical stage.
Up to 75% of clinical stage I nonseminomas are cured by
orchiectomy alone. Selected patients who meet specific criteria may
be offered surveillance after orchiectomy. These criteria are as
follows: (1) tumor is confined within the tunica albuginea; (2) tumor
does not demonstrate vascular invasion; (3) tumor markers
normalize after orchiectomy; (4) radiographic imaging of the chest
and abdomen shows no evidence of disease; and (5) the patient is
reliable. Patients most likely to experience relapse on a surveillance
regimen include those with predominantly embryonal cancer and
those with vascular or lymphatic invasion identified in the
orchiectomy specimen.
Stage I and IIa/b seminomas (retroperitoneal disease < 2 cm/2–
5 cm in diameter) are treated by radical orchiectomy and
retroperitoneal irradiation. Patients with clinical stage I disease may
be candidates for surveillance or single-agent carboplatin.
Seminomas of stage IIc (> 5 cm retroperitoneal involvement) and
stage III receive primary chemotherapy (etoposide and cisplatin or
cisplatin, etopo-side, and bleomycin) (Table 39–4). Surgical
resection of residual retroperitoneal masses is warranted if the mass
is > 3 cm in diameter, under which circumstances 40% will harbor
residual carcinoma.
Surveillance needs to be considered an active process both by
the clinician and by the patient. Patients are followed monthly for the
first 2 years and bimonthly in the third year. Tumor markers are
obtained at each visit, and chest radiographs and CT scans are
obtained every 3 months. Follow-up continues beyond the initial 3
years; however, 80% of relapses will occur within the first 2 years.
With rare exceptions, patients who relapse can be cured by
chemotherapy or surgery. Alternatives to surveillance include
adjuvant chemotherapy (bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin) and
retroperitoneal lymph nodes dissection.
Patients with bulky retroperitoneal disease (> 5 cm nodes) or
metastatic nonseminomas are treated with primary cisplatin-based
combination chemotherapy following orchiectomy (etoposide and
cisplatin or cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin) (see Table 39–4).
If tumor markers normalize and a residual mass > 1 cm persists on
imaging studies, the mass is resected because 20% of the time it will
harbor viable cancer and 40% of the time it will harbor teratoma.
Even if patients have a complete response to chemotherapy, some
clinicians advocate retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy since 10% of
patients may harbor residual carcinoma and 10% may have
teratoma in the retroperitoneum. If tumor markers fail to normalize
following primary chemotherapy, salvage chemotherapy is required
(cisplatin, etoposide, ifosfamide).
 Prognosis
The 5-year disease-free survival rate for patients with stage A
nonseminomas (includes all treatments) ranges from 96% to
100%. For low-volume stage B disease, 90% 5-year disease-free
survival is expected. The 5-year disease-free survival rates for stage
I and IIa seminomas (retroperitoneal disease < 10 cm in diameter)
treated by radical orchiectomy and retroperitoneal irradiation are
98% and 92–94%, respectively. Ninety-five percent of patients
with stage III disease attain a complete response following
orchiectomy and chemotherapy. Patients with bulky retroperitoneal
or disseminated disease treated with primary chemotherapy
followed by surgery have a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 55–
80%.
 When to Refer
Patients with solid masses of the testis should be referred to a
urologist.
Albers P et al. Randomized phase III trial comparing
retroperitoneal lymph node dissection with one course of
bleomycin and etoposide plus cisplatin chemotherapy in the
adjuvant treatment of clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular
germ cell tumors: AUO trial AH 01/94 by the German Testicular
Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jun 20;26(18):2966–72.
[PMID: 18458040]
 
Aparicio J et al. Risk-adapted management for patients with
clinical stage I seminoma: the Second Spanish Germ Cell Cancer
Cooperative Group study. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Dec
1;23(34):8717–23. [PMID: 16260698]
 
de Wit R et al. Controversies in the management of clinical stage I
testis cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Dec 10;24(35):5482–92.
[PMID: 17158533]
 
Einhorn LH et al. High-dose chemotherapy and stem-cell rescue
for metastatic germ-cell tumors. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jul
26;357(4):340–8. [PMID: 17652649]
 
Pettersson A et al. Age at surgery for undescended testis and risk
of testicular cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007 May 3;356(18):1835–
41. [PMID: 17476009]
 
Torpy JM et al. JAMA patient page. Testicular cancer. JAMA.
2008 Feb 13;299(6):718. [PMID: 18270362]
 
SECONDARY TUMORS OF THE TESTIS
Secondary tumors of the testis are rare. In men over the age of 50
years, lymphoma is the most common testis tumor, and overall it is
the most common secondary neoplasm of the testis, accounting for
5% of all testicular tumors. It may be seen in three clinical settings:
(1) late manifestation of widespread lymphoma, (2) the initial
presentation of clinically occult disease, and (3) primary extranodal
disease. Radical orchiectomy is indicated to make the diagnosis.
Prognosis is related to the stage of disease.
Metastasis to the testis is rare. The most common primary site of
origin is the prostate, followed by the lung, gastrointestinal tract,
melanoma, and kidney.
CANCER COMPLICATIONS &
EMERGENCIES
 
SPINAL CORD COMPRESSION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Complication of metastatic solid tumor, lymphoma, or multiple
myeloma.
 Back pain is most common presenting symptom.
 Prompt diagnosis is essential because once a severe neurologic
deficit develops, it is generally irreversible.
 Emergent treatment may prevent or potentially reverse paresis
and urinary and bowel incontinence.
 
 General Considerations
Cancers that cause spinal cord compression most commonly
metastasize to the vertebral bodies, resulting in physical damage to
the spinal cord from edema, hemorrhage, and pressure-induced
ischemia to the vasculature of the spinal cord. Persistent
compression can result in irreversible changes to the myelin sheaths
resulting in permanent neurologic impairment.
Prompt diagnosis and therapeutic intervention are essential, since
the probability of reversing neurologic symptoms largely depends on
the duration of symptoms. Patients who are treated promptly after
symptoms appear may have partial or complete return of function
and, depending on tumor sensitivity to specific treatment, may
respond favorably to subsequent anticancer therapy.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Back pain at the level of the tumor mass occurs in over 80% of
cases and may be aggravated by lying down, weight bearing,
sneezing, or coughing; it usually precedes the development of
neurologic symptoms or signs. Since involvement is usually epidural,
a mixture of nerve root and spinal cord symptoms often develops.
Progressive weakness and sensory changes commonly occur.
Bowel and bladder symptoms progressing to incontinence are late
findings.
The initial findings of impending cord compression may be quite
subtle, and there should be a high index of suspicion when back
pain or weakness of the lower extremities develops in cancer
patients.
B. Imaging
MRI is usually the initial imaging procedure of choice in a cancer
patient with new-onset back pain. When there are neurologic
findings suggesting spinal cord compression, an emergent MRI
should be obtained; the MRI should include a survey of the entire
spine in order to define all areas of tumor involvement for treatment
planning purposes.
Bone radiographs, if done, may show evidence of vertebral body
or pedicle destruction by the cancer. However, bone radiographs
are neither sensitive nor specific and therefore are not helpful in
diagnosis or treatment planning. If the back pain symptoms are
nonspecific, bone scan imaging may be useful as a screening
procedure.
 Treatment
Patients found to have epidural impingement of the spinal cord
should be given corticosteroids immediately. The initial dose is 10–
100 mg intravenously followed by 4–6 mg every 6 hours
intravenously or orally. Patients without a known diagnosis of
cancer should have emergent surgery to relieve the impingement and
obtain a pathologic specimen. Patients with a single area of
compression due to solid tumors are best treated with surgical
decompression followed by radiation therapy. A randomized trial
comparing surgery followed by radiation therapy with radiation
therapy alone showed better outcomes (ie, improved ability to
ambulate and improved bladder and bowel functions) in persons
who had surgery followed by radiation therapy. If multiple vertebral
body levels are involved with cancer, radiation therapy is the
preferred treatment option. Corticosteroids are generally tapered
toward the end of radiation therapy.
George R et al. Interventions for the treatment of metastatic
extradural spinal cord compression in adults. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2008 Oct 8; (4):CD006716. [PMID: 18843728]
 
Walji N et al. Common acute oncological emergencies: diagnosis,
investigation and management. Postgrad Med J. 2008
Aug;84(994):418–27. [PMID: 18832403]
 
White BD et al. Diagnosis and management of patients at risk of or
with metastatic spinal cord compression: summary of NICE
guidance. BMJ. 2008 Nov 27;337:a2538. [PMID: 19039017]
 
MALIGNANT EFFUSIONS
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Occur in pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal spaces.
 Caused by direct neoplastic involvement of serous surface or
obstruction of lymphatic drainage.
 Half of undiagnosed effusions in patients no known to have
cancer are malignant.
 
 General Considerations
The development of an effusion in the pleural, pericardial, or
peritoneal space may be the initial finding in a patient with cancer, or
an effusion may appear during the course of disease progression.
Direct involvement of the serous surface with tumor is the most
frequent initiating cause of the accumulation of fluid. The most
common malignancies causing pleural and pericardial effusions are
lung and breast cancers; the most common malignancies associated
with malignant ascites are ovarian, colorectal, stomach, and
pancreatic cancers.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients with pleural and pericardial effusions complain of shortness
of breath and orthopnea. Patients with ascites complain of
abdominal distention and discomfort. Cardiac tamponade causing
pressure equalization in the chambers impairing both filling and
cardiac output can be a life-threatening event. Signs of tamponade
include tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, and hypotension. Signs of
pleural effusions include decreased breath sounds, egophony, and
percussion dullness.
B. Laboratory Findings
Malignancy is confirmed as the cause of an effusion when analysis
of the fluid specimen shows malignant cells in either the cytology or
cell block specimen.
C. Imaging
The presence of effusions can be confirmed with radio-graphic
studies or ultrasonography.
 Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of a malignant exudative pleural or
pericardial effusion includes nonmalignant processes, such as
infection, pulmonary embolism, congestive heart failure, and trauma.
Malignant effusions are rarely transudative.
The differential diagnosis of malignant ascites includes similar
benign processes, such as congestive heart failure and infections;
cirrhosis and pancreatic disease also cause ascites.
Bloody effusions are usually due to cancer, but a bloody pleural
effusion can also be due to pulmonary embolism or trauma. Chylous
pleural or ascitic fluid is generally associated with obstruction of
lymphatic drainage as might occur in lymphomas.
 Treatment
In some cases, treatment of the underlying cancer with
chemotherapy can cause regression of the effusions; however, not
uncommonly, the presence of an effusion is an end-stage
manifestation of the disease. In this situation, decisions regarding
management are in large part dictated by the patient's symptoms
and goals of care.
A. Pleural Effusion
A pleural effusion that is symptomatic may be managed initially with
a large volume thoracentesis. With some patients, the effusion
slowly reaccumulates, which allows for periodic thoracentesis when
the patient becomes symptomatic. However, in many patients, the
effusion reaccumulates quickly, causing rapid return of symptoms of
shortness of breath. For those patients, several options exist for
management. Chest tube drainage followed by pleurodesis is
the preferred option for patients with a reasonable life expectancy.
The procedure involves placement of a chest tube that is connected
to closed water seal drainage. After lung expansion is confirmed on
a chest radiograph, a sclerosing agent (such as talc slurry or
doxycycline) is injected into the catheter. Patients should be
premedicated with analgesics and placed in a variety of positions in
order to distribute the drug through the pleural spaces. Previously,
injection of the sclerosing agent was done only afterdrainage had
decreased to < 100 mL/d; but it is now clear that effective sclerosis
can be achieved after 24 hours of drainage. Pleurodesis will not be
successful if the lung cannot be reexpanded; these patients may be
treated with the placement of a shunt or an indwelling catheter.
Placement of an indwelling catheter that can be drained by a family
member or a visiting nurse may also be preferable for patients with
short life expectancies or for those who do not respond to
pleurodesis.
B. Pericardial Effusion
Fluid may be removed by a needle aspiration or by placement of a
catheter for more thorough drainage. As with pleural effusions, most
pericardial effusions will reaccumulate. Management options for
recurrent, symptomatic effusions include catheter drainage followed
by sclerosis with such agents as doxycycline or bleomycin or by
pericardiectomy.
C. Malignant Ascites
Patients with malignant ascites not responsive to chemo-therapy are
generally treated with repeated large volume paracenteses. As the
frequency of drainage to maintain comfort can compromise the
patient's quality of life, other alternatives include placement of a
catheter or port so that the patient, family member, or visiting nurse
can drain fluid as needed at home. Another option is placement of a
peritoneovenous shunt; this can be considered for a select group of
patients with life expectancy > 3 months and fluid that is nonviscous,
nonbloody, and nonloculated.
Becker G et al. Malignant ascites: systematic review and guideline
for treatment. Eur J Cancer. 2006 Mar;42(5):589–97. [PMID:
16434188]
Maisch B et al. Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of
pericardial diseases executive summary; The Task Force on the
Diagnosis and Management of Pericardial Diseases of the
European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2004
Apr;25(7):587–610. [PMID: 15120056]
 
Roberts ME et al. Management of a malignant pleural effusion:
British Thoracic Society Pleural Disease Guideline, 2010. Thorax.
2010 Aug;65(Suppl 2):ii32–40. [PMID: 20696691]
 
HYPERCALCEMIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually symptomatic and severe (≥ 15 mg/dl [> 3.75 mmol/l]).
 Most common paraneoplastic endocrine syndrome; accounts for
most inpatients with hypercalcemia.
 The neoplasm is clinically apparent in nearly all cases when
hypercalcemia is detected.
 
 General Considerations
Hypercalcemia affects 20–30% of cancer patients at some point
during their illness. The most common cancers causing
hypercalcemia are myeloma, breast carcinoma, and non–small cell
lung cancer. The presence of bone metastases is not an essential
feature of the syndrome, since hyper-calcemia can be caused by
systemic effects of tumor-released proteins (see The Paraneoplastic
Syndromes above).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms and signs of hypercalcemia can be subtle; more severe
symptoms occur with higher levels of hypercalcemia and with a
rapid rate at which the calcium level rises. Early symptoms typically
include anorexia, nausea, fatigue, constipation, and polyuria; later
findings may include muscular weakness and hyporeflexia,
confusion, psychosis, tremor, and lethargy.
B. Laboratory Findings
Symptoms and signs are caused by free calcium; as calcium is
bound by protein in the serum, the measured serum calcium will
underestimate the free or ionized calcium in patients with low
albumin levels. In the setting of hypoalbuminemia, the corrected
serum calcium should be calculated by one of several available
formulas (eg, corrected calcium = measured calcium – measured
albumin + 4). Alternatively, the free calcium can be measured.
When the corrected serum calcium rises above 12 mg/dL (3
mmol/L), sudden death due to cardiac arrhythmia or asystole may
),
y
y
y
occur. The presence of hypercalcemia does not invariably indicate a
dismal prognosis, especially in patients with breast cancer,
myeloma, or lymphoma.
In the absence of signs or symptoms of hypercalcemia, a
laboratory finding of elevated serum calcium should be retested
immediately to exclude the possibility of error.
C. ECG
Electrocardiography often shows a shortening of the QT interval.
 Treatment
Emergency management should begin with the initiation of
intravenous fluids with 0.9% saline at 100–200 mL/h to ensure
rehydration with brisk urinary output of the often volume-depleted
patient. If kidney function is normal or only marginally impaired, a
bisphosphonate should be given. Choices include pamidronate, 60–
90 mg intravenously over 2–4 hours, or zoledronic acid, 4 mg
intravenously over several minutes. Zoledronic acid is more potent
than pamidronate and has the advantage of a shorter administration
time as well as a longer duration of effect but is more associated
with the uncommon but serious side effect of osteonecrosis of the
jaw. Once hypercalcemia is controlled, treatment directed at the
cancer should be initiated if possible. Commonly, though,
hypercalcemia occurs in patients with cancers that are unresponsive
to treatment. In the event that the hyper calcemia becomes
refractory to repeated doses of bisphosphonates, other agents that
can help control hypercalcemia (at least temporarily) include gallium
nitrate, calcitonin, and mithramycin; corticosteroids can be useful in
patients with myeloma and lymphoma. Salmon calcitonin, 4–8
international units/kg given subcutaneously or intramuscularly every
12 hours, can be useful in patients with kidney disease; its onset of
action is within hours but its hypocalcemic effect will wane in 2–3
days.
Body JJ et al. International Society of Geriatric Oncology (SIOG)
clinical practice recommendations for the use of bisphosphonates
in elderly patients. Eur J Cancer. 2007 Mar; 43(5):852–8. [PMID:
17258449]
 
Drake MT et al. Bisphosphonates: mechanism of action and role in
clinical practice. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008 Sep;83(9):1032–45.
[PMID: 18775204]
 
Mundy GR et al. PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) in hyper calcemia.
J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Apr;19(4):672–5. [PMID: 18256357]
 
Walji N et al. Common acute oncological emergencies: diagnosis,
investigation and management. Postgrad Med J. 2008
Aug;84(994):418–27. [PMID: 18832403]
 
HYPERURICEMIA & TUMOR LYSIS SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Complication of treatment-associated tumor lysis of hematologic
malignancies as well as rapidlyproliferating malignancies.
 May be worsened by thiazide diuretic use.
 Rapid increase in serum uric acid can cause acute urate
nephropathy from uric acid crystallization.
 Reducing pre-chemotherapy serum uric acid is fundamental to
preventing urate nephropathy.
 
 General Considerations
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) is seen most commonly following
treatment of hematologic malignancies, such as acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and Burkitt lymphoma. However, TLS can develop from
any tumor highly sensitive to chemotherapy. TLS is caused by the
massive release of cellular material including nucleic acids, proteins,
phosphorus, and potassium. If both the metabolism and excretion of
these breakdown products are overwhelmed, hyperuricemia,
hyperphosphatemia, and hyperkalemia will develop abruptly. Acute
kidney injury may then develop from the crystallization and
deposition of uric acid and calcium phosphate within the renal
tubules further exacerbating the hyperphosphatemia and
hyperkalemia.
 Clinical Findings
Symptoms of hyperphosphatemia include nausea and vomiting as
well as seizures. Also, with high levels of phosphorus, co-
precipitation with calcium can cause renal tubule blockage further
exacerbating the kidney injury. Hyperkalemia, due to release of
intracellular potassium and with excretion impaired by the kidney
disease, can cause arrhythmias and sudden death.
 Treatment
Prevention is the most important factor in the management of TLS.
Published guidelines for management of TLS include aggressive
hydration prior to initiation of chemo-therapy as well as during and
after completion of the chemotherapy. Administration of fluid helps
keep urine flowing and facilitates excretion of uric acid and
phosphorus. For the patients with moderate risk of developing TLS,
for instance, those with intermediate grade lymphomas and acute
leukemias, allopurinol (which blocks the enzyme xanthine oxidase
and therefore the formation of uric acid from purine breakdown)
should be given before starting chemotherapy at an oral dose of
100 mg/m2 every 8 hours (maximum 800 mg/d) with dose
reductions for impaired kidney function. For patients at high risk for
developing TLS, for instance, patients with high-grade lymphomas
or patients with acute leukemias and markedly elevated white blood
cell counts (with acute myeloid leukemia, white blood cell count >
50,000/mcL [>50,000/109/L]; with acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
white blood cell count > 100,000/mcL [> 100,000/109/L]) or in
whom hyperuricemia develops despite treatment with allopurinol,
rasburicase 0.1–0.2 mg/kg/d is given intravenously for 1–7 days.
Rasburicase is a recombinant urate oxidase that converts uric acid
into the more soluble form resulting in rapid decline in uric acid
levels. Rasburicase cannot be given to patients with known glucose
6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency nor can it be given
to pregnant or lactating women. One of the mainstays of TLS
management, systemic bicarbonate infusions to alkalinize the urine,
is no longer routinely recommended. Laboratory values should be
monitored following initiation of chemotherapy; elevated potassium
or phosphorus levels need to be promptly managed.
 When to Refer
Should urinary output drop, creatinine level rise, or
hyperphosphatemia persist, a nephrologist should be immediately
consulted to evaluate the need for dialysis.
Cairo MS et al. Recommendations for the evaluation of risk and
prophylaxis of tumour lysis syndrome (TLS) in adults and children
with malignant diseases: an expert TLS panel consensus. Br J
Haematol. 2010 May;149(4):578–86. [PMID: 20331465]
 
INFECTIONS
Chapter 30 provides a more detailed discussion of infections in the
immunocompromised patient.
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 In patients with neutropenia, infection is a medical emergency.
 The presence of fever, although sometimes attributable to other
causes, must be assumed to be due to an infection.
 
 General Considerations
Many patients with disseminated neoplasms have increased
susceptibility to infection. In some patients, this results from
impaired defense mechanisms (eg, acute leukemia, Hodgkin
disease, multiple myeloma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia); in
others, it results from the myelosuppressive and immunosuppressive
effects of cancer chemotherapy or a combination of these factors.
Complicating impaired defense mechanisms are the frequent
presence of indwelling catheters, impaired mucosal surfaces, and
colonization with more virulent hospital-acquired pathogens.
The source of a neutropenic febrile episode is determined in
about 30% of cases through blood, urine, or sputum cultures. The
bacterial organisms accounting for the majority of infections in
cancer patients include gram-negative bacteria (Escherichia coli,
Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter) and gram-positive
bacteria 
(coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Staphylococcus
aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Corynebacterium, and
streptococci). There has been a trend over the last decade of an
increasing percentage of gram-positive organisms. The risk of
bacterial infections rises when the neutrophil count is below
1000/mcL (1.0 × 109/L); the risk dramatically increases when the
count falls below 100/mcL (0.1 × 109/L).
 Clinical Findings
A thorough physical examination should be performed. Routine
DREs are generally avoided unless symptoms suggest a rectal
abscess or prostatitis. If a rectal examination is necessary,
antibiotics should be administered first. Appropriate cultures (eg,
blood, sputum, urine, cerebro-spinal fluid) should always be
obtained before starting therapy. Two sets of blood cultures should
be drawn; if the patient has an indwelling catheter, one of the
cultures should be drawn from the line. A chest radiograph should
also be obtained.
 Treatment
Empiric antibiotic therapy needs to be initiated immediately in the
febrile, neutropenic patient. The choice of antibiotics depends on a
number of different factors including the patient's clinical status and
any localizing source of infection. If the patient is clinically well,
monotherapy with an intravenous β-lactam with anti-Pseudomonas
activity 
(cefepime, 
ceftazidime, 
imipenem/cilastatin,
piperacillin/tazobactam) should be started (see Infections in the
Immunocompromised Patient, Chapter 30). If the patient is clinically
ill with hypotension or hypoxia, an aminoglycoside or
fluoroquinolone should be added for “double” gram-negative
bacteria coverage. If there is a strong suspicion of a gram-positive
organism, such as from S aureus catheter infection, vancomycin can
be given empirically. In some instances, patients may be treated
with oral antibiotics and potentially in the outpatient setting. The
Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) has published
recommendations for antibiotic use in these low-risk patients. These
patients must have an expected neutropenic timeframe of 7 days or
less and not have comorbidities or signs of hemodynamic instability,
gastrointestinal symptoms, altered mental status, pulmonary issues
(an infiltrate, hypoxia, or underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease) and their liver and kidney function must not be impaired. If
a patient is to be treated as an outpatient, he or she must also have
good support at home and easy access to returning to the hospital if
the clinical status worsens.
Antibiotics should be continued until the neutrophil count is rising
and > 500/mcL (> 0.5 × 109/L) for at least 1 day and the patient
has been afebrile for 2 days. If an organism is identified through the
cultures, the antibiotics should be adjusted to the antibiotic
sensitivities of the isolate; treatment should be continued for the
appropriate period of time and at least until the neutrophil count
recovers.
For the neutropenic patient who is persistently febrile despite
broad-spectrum antibiotics, an empiric antifungal drug should be
added (amphotericin B, caspofungin, itraconazole, voriconazole, or
liposomal amphotericin B).
Segal BH et al. Prevention and treatment of cancer-related
infections. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2008 Feb;6(2):122–74.
[PMID: 18319048]
 
PRIMARY CANCER
TREATMENT
 
SYSTEMIC CANCER THERAPY
Detailed guidelines from the NCCN for cancer treatment can be
found at www.nccn.org.
Use of cytotoxic drugs, hormones, antihormones, and biologic
agents has become a highly specialized and increasingly effective
means of treating cancer, with therapy usually administered by a
medical oncologist. Selection of specific drugs or protocols for
various types of cancer has traditionally been based on results of
prior clinical trials; however, many patients have drug-resistant
tumors. Molecular mechanisms of drug resistance continue to be the
subject of intense study. Described mechanisms of drug resistance
include impaired membrane transport of drugs, enhanced drug
metabolism, mutated target proteins, and blockage of apoptosis due
to mutations in cell cycle proteins. Cancer cells may initially be
resistant to chemo-therapy or acquire resistance when exposed to
drugs.
TOXICITY & DOSE MODIFICATION OF
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS
Use of chemotherapy to treat cancer is generally guided by results
from clinical trials in individual tumor types. The complexity of
treating cancer has increased over the last decade as more drugs,
including those with novel mechanisms of action, have been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration and introduced into
general practice. Drug side effects and toxicities must be anticipated
and carefully monitored. The short- and long-term toxicities of
individual drugs are listed in Tables 39–10 and 39–11. Decisions on
dose modifications for toxicities should be guided by the intent of
therapy. In the palliative setting where the aim of therapy is to
improve symptoms and quality of life, lowering doses to minimize
toxicity is commonly done. However, when the goal of treatment is
cure, dosing frequency and intensity should be maintained whenever
possible. Cancer chemotherapy should be given and monitored by a
medical oncologist or hematologist.
A complete blood count consisting of a differential count with
particular attention to the absolute neutrophil count and platelet
count as well as tests of liver and kidney function should be
obtained before the initiation of chemotherapy. In patients with
normal blood counts as well as normal liver and kidney function,
drugs are started at their full dose. When the intent of chemotherapy
is cure, including treatment in the adjuvant setting, every attempt
should be made to schedule chemotherapy on time and at full dose.
A complete blood count with differential should be checked at mid
cycle to determine the nadir of the absolute neutrophil and platelet
counts as well as immediately before the next cycle of
chemotherapy is due.
Dose reductions may be necessary for patients with impaired
kidney or liver function depending on the clearance mechanism of
the drug. For patients receiving chemotherapy for palliation, bone
marrow toxicity can be managed with dose reductions or delaying
the next treatment cycle. A schema for dose modification is shown
in Table 39–12.
1. Bone Marrow Toxicity
A. Neutropenia
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), given as either
daily subcutaneous injections (filgrastim, 300 mcg or 480 mcg) or
as a one-time dose (pegfilgrastim, 6 mg) beginning 24–72 hours
after cytotoxic chemotherapy is completed, has been shown to
reduce the duration and severity of granulocytopenia following
cytotoxic chemo-therapy (Table 39–11). The American Society of
Clinical Oncology and NCCN guidelines recommend primary
prophylaxis with a G-CSF when there is 20% risk of febrile
neutropenia or when the patient's age, medical history, and disease
characteristics make the patient at high risk for complications
related to myelosuppression.
B. Anemia
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) have been shown to
ameliorate the anemia and associated symptoms caused by cancer
chemotherapy. However, more recent evidence shows that these
drugs have untoward effects, including an increased risk of
thromboembolism, and even more concerning, decreased survival
due to cancer-related deaths. These findings have prompted the US
Food and Drug Administration and other organizations (American
Society of Hematology, American Society of Clinical Oncology,
and NCCN) to issue advisories and guidelines limiting their use. The
NCCN recommendation that these drugs should not be used when
the intent of chemotherapy is curative is based on evidence that
survival can be affected by the administration of ESAs. Studies
done in patients with potentially curable head and neck, breast, and
cervical cancers have shown inferior outcomes when ESAs were
used. It is important to point out that the target hemoglobin used in
these studies was higher than is currently recommended.
Nonetheless, ESAs cannot be currently recommended when the
intent of therapy is cure. The alternative to managing symptomatic
anemia in these patients receiving curative chemotherapy is
administration of red blood cell transfusions.
When using ESAs, treatment should not be initiated until the
hemoglobin is < 10 g/dL (< 100 g/L) with the medication held when
the hemoglobin is > 12 g/dL (> 120 g/L). Epoetin alfa can be given
subcutaneously as a weekly dose of 30,000–40,000 units with a
target hemoglobin of 11–12 g/dL (110–120 g/L) (see Table 39–
11). Darbepoetin alfa is given subcutaneously every 2–3 weeks at a
dose of 200–300 mcg with the same target hemoglobin. Patients
need to be iron replete to have maximum therapeutic effect.
Uncontrolled hypertension is a contraindication to the use of ESAs;
blood pressure must be controlled prior to initiation of this therapy.
The FDA mandates that prescribing clinicians receive specific
education on use of ESAs, and patients receiving ESAs must be
provided written material describing the risks and benefits of the
drug.
 
Table 39–10. Chemotherapeutic agents: Dosage and toxicity.
 
GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LFT, liver function tests; LHRH, luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone; MAO, monoamine oxidase; NSAIDs,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone; TMP-SMZ, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
C. Thrombocytopenia
Drug management of chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia is
more limited. The only available drug, oprelvekin or recombinant
interleukin-11, has modest activity in improving thrombocytopenia
associated with chemo-therapy; however, the side effects of fluid
retention, congestive heart failure, and arrhythmias have limited its
use. Thrombopoietin, the protein that stimulates megakaryopoiesis
in vivo, was isolated in 1994. Despite much work attempting to
produce a clinically effective thrombopoietin agent for therapeutic
use, no such drug is commercially available for this indication. Two
drugs that activate the thrombopoietin receptor and are approved
for use in idiopathic thrombocytopenia, romiplostim and
eltrombopag, have not as yet been shown to benefit patients with
che-motherapy-associated thrombocytopenia, although trials
evaluating their use in this setting are ongoing.
2. Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea & Vomiting
A number of cytotoxic anticancer drugs can induce nausea and
vomiting, which can be the most anticipated and stressful side
effects for patients. Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting is
mediated in part by the stimulation of at least two central nervous
system receptors, 5-hydroxytryptamine subtype 3 (5HT3) and
neuro kinin subtype 1 (NK1). Chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting can be acute, occurring within minutes to hours of
chemotherapy administration, or delayed until the second day and
lasting up to 7 days. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting may even
occur before the administration of chemotherapy. Chemotherapy
drugs or drug regimens are classified into high, moderate, low, and
minimal likeli-hoods of causing emesis (90%, 30–90%, 10–30%, <
10%, respectively). Highly emetogenic chemotherapy drugs include
cisplatin, carmustine, cyclophosphamide at doses over 1.5 g/m2,
dacarbazine, mechlorethamine, and streptozocin. Chemotherapy
drugs that are moderately emetogenic include doxorubicin,
daunomycin, idarubicin, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide, irinotecan,
oxaliplatin, ifosfamide, cytarabine, and carboplatin. Drugs with low
emetic potential include bortezomib, docetaxel, etoposide,
fluorouracil, gemcitabine, methotrexate, mitomycin, mitoxantrone,
paclitaxel, pemetrexed, temsirolimus, and topotecan. Drugs with
minimal risk of emesis include bevacizumab, bleomycin, cladribine,
fludarabine, vinblastine, vincristine, and vinorelbine.
 
Table 39–11. Supportive care agents: Dosage and toxicity.
 
G6PD, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
By understanding the physiology of chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting, major advances have occurred with the
development of new, highly effective antiemetic drugs. Antagonists
to the 5HT3-receptor include ondansetron, granisetron, dolasetron,
tropisetron, and palonosetron. Each of these drugs have similar
efficacy. Ondansetron can be given either intravenously (8 mg or
0.15 mg/kg) or orally (24 mg for highly emetogenic chemotherapy,
8 mg twice daily for moderately emetogenic chemotherapy). Doses
of 8 mg can be repeated parenterally or orally every 8 hours.
Dosing of granisetron is 1 mg or 0.01 mg/kg intravenously or 1–2
mg orally. Dolasetron is given 1.8 mg/kg or a fixed dose of 100 mg
intravenously or 100 mg can be given orally. Tropisetron is given at
a dose of 5 mg either orally or intravenously. Palonosetron, a long-
acting 5HT3 with high affinity for the 5HT3-receptor given at a dose
of 0.25 mg intravenously, is effective for not only acute but also
delayed emesis. The efficacy of the 5HT3-blockers is improved by
adding 6–10 mg of either oral or intravenous dexamethasone.
 
Table 39–12. A common scheme for dose modification of cancer
chemotherapeutic agents.
 
Aprepitant is an antagonist to the NK1 receptor. When given as
a 125-mg oral dose followed by 80 mg on the second and third day
with a 5HT3-receptor antagonist (such as ondansetron or
granisetron), the immediate and delayed protective effect for highly
emetogenic chemo-therapy is increased.
Standard therapy for highly emetogenic chemotherapy includes a
5HT3-antagonist given on the first day and both dexamethasone and
aprepitant given on the first day as well as the second and third
days. Moderately emetogenic chemotherapy regimens are best
managed with a two-drug regimen of a 5HT3-antagonist and
dexamethasone. Doses of the 5HT3 may be given on days 2 and 3
to prevent delayed emesis.
Other adjunctive medications that may be helpful include
lorazepam, 0.5–1.0 mg given orally every 6–8 hours, and
prochlorperazine, 5–10 mg orally or intravenously every 8 hours.
Lorazepam, in addition to antianxiety effects, has an antinausea
effect. Prochlorperazine is generally sufficient to treat patients
receiving low emetogenic chemotherapy. A suppository form of
prochlorperazine, 25 mg, may be used for patients who are unable
to swallow oral medications.
The importance of treating chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting expectantly and aggressively beginning with the first course
of chemotherapy cannot be overemphasized. Patients being treated
in the clinic setting should always be given antiemetics for home use
with written instructions as well as contact numbers to call for
advice.
3. Gastrointestinal Toxicity
Untoward effects of cancer chemotherapy include damage to the
more rapidly growing cells of the body such as the mucosal lining
from the mouth through the gastrointestinal tract. Oral symptoms
range from mild mouth soreness to frank ulcerations in the mouth.
Not uncommonly, mouth ulcerations will have superimposed
candida or herpes simplex infections. In addition to receiving
cytotoxic chemotherapy, a significant risk factor for development of
oral mucositis is poor oral hygiene and existing caries or periodontal
disease. Toxicity in the gastrointestinal tract usually manifests as
diarrhea. Gastrointestinal symptoms can range from mild symptoms
of loose stools to life-threatening diarrhea due to dehydration and
electrolyte imbalances. Drugs most commonly associated with
causing mucositis in the mouth and the gastrointestinal tract are
cytarabine, 5-FU, and methotrexate.
Patients undergoing treatment for head and neck cancer with
concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy have a very high
risk of developing severe mucositis.
Preventive strategies for managing oral mucositis includes a
pretreatment dental examination, particularly for all head and neck
cancer patients and any cancer patient with poor dental hygiene
who will be receiving chemotherapy. For patients receiving
fluorouracil, simple measures such as ice chips in the mouth for 30
minutes during infusion can reduce the incidence and severity of
mucositis. Once mucositis is encountered, superimposed fungal
infections should be treated with topical anti fungal medications (oral
nystatin mouth suspensions, or clotrimazole troches) or systemic
therapy (fluconazole 100–400 mg orally daily). Suspected herpetic
infections can be treated with acyclovir (up to 800 mg orally five
times daily) or valacyclovir (1 g orally twice daily). Mucositis may
also be managed with mouthwashes; it is also important to provide
adequate pain medication.
Newer strategies for prevention of oral mucositis include the
recombinant keratinocyte growth factor inhibitor palifermin. Practice
guidelines recommend prophylaxis with intravenous palifermin (60
mcg/kg/d) for patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy in order to
reduce the incidence and duration of mucositis.
Diarrhea is most associated with fluorouracil, capecitabine, and
irinotecan as well as the tyrosine kinase inhibitors (sorafenib,
sunitinib, imatinib, dasatinib) and epithelial growth factor inhibitors
(cetuximab, panitumumab, and erlotinib). Mild to moderate diarrhea
can be managed with oral antidiarrheal medication (loperamide, 4
mg initially followed by 2 mg every 2–4 hours until bowel
movements are formed). Occasionally, the diarrhea will be
overwhelming causing dehydration, electrolyte imbalances, and
acute kidney injury. These patients require inpatient management
with aggressive intravenous hydration and replacement of
electrolytes.
4. Skin Toxicity
Dermatologic complications from cancer chemotherapy can include
hyperpigmentation (liposomal doxorubicin, busulfan, hydroxyurea)
alopecia, photosensitivity, nail changes, acral erythema, and
generalized rashes. Acral erythema, otherwise known as hand-foot
syndrome and most commonly associated with administration of
fluorouracil, capecitabine, and liposomal doxorubicin, manifests as
painful palms or soles accompanied by erythema, progressing to
blistering desquamation and ulceration in its worst forms.
Management can include attempts at prevention with oral
pyridoxine, 200 mg daily, and applying cold packs to the
extremities while the chemotherapy is being administered. The
newer agents targeting the epidermal growth factor pathway can
cause an acne like rash; interestingly, the development of the rash
may identify those who will respond to the drug. Inhibitors of the
tyrosine kinase pathway are also associated with a high incidence of
dermatologic complications, such as rash and acral erythema.
5. Miscellaneous Drug-Specific Toxicities
The toxicities of individual drugs have been summarized in Tables
39–10 and 39–11; however, several of these warrant additional
mention, since they occur with frequently administered agents, and
special measures are often indicated.
A. Hemorrhagic Cystitis Induced by Cyclophosphamide or Ifosfamide
Metabolic products of cyclophosphamide that retain cytotoxic
activity are excreted into the urine. Some patients appear to
metabolize more of the drug to these active excretory products; if
their urine is concentrated, severe bladder damage may result.
Patients receiving cyclophosphamide must maintain a high fluid
intake prior to and following the administration of the drug and be
counseled to empty their bladders frequently. Early symptoms
suggesting bladder toxicity include dysuria and increased frequency
or urination. Should microscopic hematuria develop, it is advisable
to stop the drug temporarily or switch to a different alkylating agent,
to increase fluid intake, and to administer a urinary analgesic such as
phenazopyridine. With severe cystitis, large segments of bladder
mucosa may be shed, resulting in prolonged gross hematuria. Such
patients should be observed for signs of urinary obstruction and
may require cystoscopy for removal of obstructing blood clots. The
cyclophosph-amide analog ifosfamide can cause severe
hemorrhagic cystitis when used alone. However, when its use is
followed by a series of doses of the neutralizing agent mesna,
bladder toxicity can be prevented. Mesna can also be used for
patients taking cyclophosphamide in whom cystitis develops.
B. Neuropathy Due to Vinca Alkaloids and Other Chemotherapy Drugs
Neuropathy is caused by a number of different chemo-therapy
drugs, the most common being vincristine. The peripheral
neuropathy can be sensory, motor, autonomic, or a combination of
these effects. In its mildest form, it consists of paresthesias of the
fingers and toes. Occasionally, acute jaw or throat pain can develop
after vincristine therapy. This may be a form of trigeminal neuralgia.
With continued vincristine therapy, the paresthesias extend to the
proximal interphalangeal joints, hyporeflexia appears in the lower
extremities, and significant weakness can develop. Other drugs in
the vinca alkaloid class as well as the taxane drugs (paclitaxel and
docetaxel) and the newer agents to treat myeloma (thalidomide and
bortezomib) cause similar toxicity. The presence of neurologic
symptoms is not in itself a reason to stop therapy; the severity of the
symptoms must be balanced against the goals of therapy. Usually
though, the presence of moderate to severe paresthesias or the
detection of motor impairment would result in the decision to
discontinue the drug.
Constipation is the most common symptom of autonomic
neuropathy associated with the vinca alkaloids. Patients receiving
these drugs should be started on stool softeners and mild cathartics
when therapy is begun; otherwise, severe impaction may result from
an atonic bowel.
More serious autonomic involvement can lead to acute intestinal
obstruction with signs indistinguishable from those of an acute
abdomen. Bladder neuropathies are uncommon but may be severe.
These two complications are absolute contraindications to
continued vincristine therapy.
C. Methotrexate Toxicity
Methotrexate, a folate antagonist, is a commonly used drug and a
key component of regimens to treat patients with leptomeningeal
disease, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and sarcomas. The dose
used in intrathecal therapy is 12 mg. Methotrexate is almost entirely
eliminated by the kidney. The methotrexate toxicity affects cells with
rapid turnover, including the bone marrow and mucosa resulting in
myelosuppression and mucositis. Methotrexate can also damage the
liver and kidney manifesting as elevated liver enzymes and
creatinine. High-dose methotrexate, usually defined as a dose of
500 mg/m2 or more given over 4–36 hours, would be lethal without
“rescue” of the normal tissues. Leucovorin, a form of folate, will
reverse the toxic effects of methotrexate and is given until serum
methotrexate levels are in the safe range (< 0.05 mmol/L). It is
crucial that high-dose methotrexate and leucovorin are given
precisely according to protocol as deviations of the timing of
methotrexate delivery or delay in rescue can result in patient death.
Lower doses of methotrexate can be problematic in patients with
kidney disease who cannot clear the drug normally or with patients
who have effusions. In the latter instance, methotrexate distributes
itself in effusions and will leak out continuously, exposing normal
tissue to small but cumulatively toxic amounts of the drug. If
methotrexate is given to a patient who either has or develops kidney
disease or to a patient with an effusion, prolonged rescue with
leucovorin will be necessary.
Vigorous hydration and bicarbonate loading also appear to be
important in preventing crystallization of high-dose methotrexate in
the renal tubular epithelium and minimizing the possibility of
nephrotoxicity. Daily monitoring of the serum creatinine is
mandatory. Drugs impairing methotrexate excretion include aspirin,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, amiodarone, omeprazole,
penicillin, phenytoin, and sulfa compounds; these drugs should be
stopped if possible before methotrexate administration.
D. Anthracycline Cardiotoxicity
A number of cancer chemotherapy drugs can cause cardiotoxicity.
The most common class of drugs associated with cardiotoxicity is
the anthracycline antibiotics, including doxorubicin, daunomycin,
idarubicin, and epirubicin. They can produce acute (during
administration), subacute (days to months following administration),
and delayed (years following administration) cardiac toxicity. The
most feared complication is the delayed development of congestive
heart failure. Risk factors for this debilitating toxicity include the
anthracycline cumulative dose, age over 70, previous or concurrent
irradiation of the chest, preexisting cardiac disease, and concurrent
administration of chemo-therapy drugs such as trastuzumab. The
problem is greatest with doxorubicin because this drug is the most
commonly administered anthracycline due to its major role in the
treatment of lymphomas, sarcomas, breast cancer, and certain other
solid tumors. Patients receiving anthracyclines should have a
baseline multiple-gated radio nuclide cardiac scan (MUGA) to
calculate the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). If the LVEF is
> 50%, anthracyclines can be administered; if the LVEF is < 30%,
these drugs should not be given. For patients with intermediate
cardiac function, anthracycline dosing, if necessary, should be
cautiously done with LVEF monitoring between doses. Studies of
left ventricular function and endomyocardial biopsies indicate that
some changes in cardiac dynamics occur in most patients by the
time they have received 300 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. In general,
patients should not receive a total dose of doxorubicin in excess of
450 mg/m2; the dose should be lower if prior chest radiotherapy
has been given. The appearance of a high resting pulse may herald
the appearance of overt cardiac toxicity. Unfortunately, toxicity may
be irreversible and frequently fatal at dosage levels above 550
mg/m2. At lower doses (eg, 350 mg/m2 of doxorubicin), the
symptoms and signs of cardiac failure generally respond well to
medical therapy as well as the discontinuation of anthracycline.
Laboratory studies suggest that cardiac toxicity may be due to a
mechanism involving the formation of intracellular free radicals in
cardiac muscle. The iron chelator dexrazoxane has been approved
for use as a cardioprotectant for patients receiving anthracyclines;
however, some evidence suggests that the anthracycline anticancer
effect may be compromised by the coadministration of
dexrazoxane. In general, dexrazoxane should not be used when the
goal of chemotherapy is for curative intent either in the settings of
adjuvant or definitive treatment. Doxorubicin and daunomycin have
been formulated as liposomal products; these drugs, approved for
use in patients with Kaposi sarcoma and sometimes used in certain
cancers as a substitute for conventional anthracyclines, appear to
have minimal potential for cardiac toxicity.
E. Cisplatin Nephrotoxicity and Neurotoxicity
Cisplatin is effective in treating a wide range of malignancies,
including testicular, bladder, lung, and ovarian cancers. Although
nausea and vomiting are the side effects most commonly associated
with cisplatin, the more serious side effects of nephrotoxicity and
neurotoxicity must also be anticipated and aggressively managed.
Patients must be vigorously hydrated prior, during, and after
cisplatin administration. Both kidney function and electrolytes must
be monitored. Low magnesium and potassium levels as well as
hyponatremia can develop. The neurotoxicity is usually manifested
as a peripheral neuropathy of mixed sensorimotor type and may be
associated with painful paresthesias. Development of neuropathy
typically occurs after cumulative doses of 300 mg/m2. Ototoxicity is
a potentially serious manifestation of neurotoxicity and can progress
to deafness. Amifostine, developed initially as a radioprotective
agent and given intravenously at a dose of 910 mg/m2 over 15
minutes prior to cisplatin, is used to protect against nephrotoxicity
and neuropathy. Use of amifostine does not appear to compromise
the antineo-plastic effect of cisplatin. The second-generation
platinum analog carboplatin is non-nephrotoxic, although it is
myelosuppressive. In the setting of preexisting kidney disease or
neuropathy, carboplatin is occasionally substituted for cisplatin.
PROGNOSIS
A valuable sign of clinical improvement is the general well-being of
the patient. Although this finding is a combination of subjective and
objective factors and may be partly a placebo effect, it nonetheless
serves as a sign of clinical improvement in assessing some of the
objective observations listed above. Factors included in the
assessment of general well-being are improved appetite and weight
gain and increased “performance status” (eg, ambulatory versus
bedridden). Evaluation of factors such as activity status enables the
clinician to judge whether the net effect of chemotherapy is
worthwhile palliation (see Chapter 5).
Zeller JL et al. JAMA patient page. Cancer chemotherapy.
JAMA. 2008 Jun 11;299(22):2706. [PMID: 18544731]
 
 
 
Clinical Genetic
Disorders
Reed E. Pyeritz, MD, PhD
ACUTE INTERMITTENT PORPHYRIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Unexplained abdominal crisis, generally in young women.
 Acute peripheral or central nervous system dysfunction.
 Recurrent psychiatric illnesses.
 Hyponatremia.
 Porphobilinogen in the urine during an attack.
 
 General Considerations
Though there are several different types of porphyrias, the one with
the most serious consequences and the one that usually presents in
adulthood is acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), which is inherited as
an autosomal dominant, though it remains clinically silent in most
patients who carry the trait. Clinical illness usually develops in
women. Symptoms begin in the teens or 20s, but onset can begin
after menopause in rare cases. The disorder is caused by partial
deficiency of porphobilinogen deaminase activity, leading to
increased excretion of aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen in
the urine. The diagnosis may be elusive if not specifically
considered. The characteristic abdominal pain may be due to
abnormalities in autonomic innervation in the gut. In contrast to
other forms of porphyria, cutaneous photosensitivity is absent in
AIP. Attacks are precipitated by numerous factors, including drugs
and intercurrent infections. Harmful and relatively safe drugs for use
in treatment are listed in Table 40–1. Hyponatremia may be seen,
due in part to inappropriate release of antidiuretic hormone,
although gastrointestinal loss of sodium in some patients may be a
contributing factor.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients show intermittent abdominal pain of varying severity, and in
some instances it may so simulate acute abdomen as to lead to
exploratory laparotomy. Because the origin of the abdominal pain is
neurologic, there is an absence of fever and leukocytosis. Complete
recovery between attacks is usual. Any part of the nervous system
may be involved, with evidence for autonomic and peripheral
neuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy may be symmetric or
asymmetric and mild or profound; in the latter instance, it can even
lead to quadriplegia with respiratory paralysis. Other central
nervous system manifestations include seizures, psychosis, and
abnormalities of the basal ganglia. Hyponatremia may further cause
or exacerbate central nervous system manifestations.
B. Laboratory Findings
Often there is profound hyponatremia. The diagnosis can be
confirmed 
by 
demonstrating 
an 
increased 
amount 
of
porphobilinogen in the urine during an acute attack. Freshly voided
urine is of normal color but may turn dark upon standing in light and
air.
Most families have a different mutation in the porphobilinogen
deaminase gene causing AIP. Mutations can be detected and used
for presymptomatic and prenatal diagnosis.
 Prevention
Avoidance of factors known to precipitate attacks of AIP—
especially drugs—can reduce morbidity. Sulfonamides and
barbiturates are the most common culprits; others are listed in Table
40–1 and on the Internet (www.drugs-porphyria.org). Starvation
diets or prolonged fasting also cause attacks and so must be
avoided. Hormonal changes during pregnancy can precipitate
crises.
 Treatment
Treatment with a high-carbohydrate diet diminishes the number of
attacks in some patients and is a reasonable empiric gesture
considering its benignity. Acute attacks may be life-threatening and
require prompt diagnosis, withdrawal of the inciting agent (if
possible), and treatment with analgesics and intravenous glucose
and hematin. A minimum of 300 g of carbohydrate per day should
be provided orally or intravenously. Electrolyte balance requires
close attention. Hematin therapy is still evolving and should be
undertaken with full recognition of adverse consequences, especially
phlebitis and coagulopathy. The intravenous dosage is up to 4
mg/kg once or twice daily. Liver transplantation may provide an
option for patients with disease poorly controlled by medical
therapy.
 
Table 40–1. Some of the “unsafe” and “probably safe” drugs used
in the treatment of acute porphyrias.
 
Unsafe
Probably Safe
Alcohol
Alkylating agents
Barbiturates
Carbamazepine
Chloroquine
Acetaminophen
β-Adrenergic blockers
Amitriptyline
Aspirin
Atropine
Chlorpropamide
Chloral hydrate
Clonidine
Dapsone
Ergots
Erythromycin
Estrogens, synthetic
Food additives
Chlordiazepoxide
Corticosteroids
Diazepam
Digoxin
Diphenhydramine
Guanethidine
Glutethimide
Griseofulvin
Hydralazine
Ketamine
Meprobamate
Methyldopa
Metoclopramide
Hyoscine
Ibuprofen
Imipramine
Insulin
Lithium
Naproxen
Nitrofurantoin
Nortriptyline
Pentazocine
Phenytoin
Progestins
Pyrazinamide
Rifampin
Opioid analgesics
Penicillamine
Penicillin and derivatives
Phenothiazines
Procaine
Streptomycin
Spironolactone
Succinimides
Sulfonamides
Theophylline
Tolazamide
Tolbutamide
Valproic acid
Succinylcholine
Tetracycline
Thiouracil
 When to Refer
 
•    For management of severe abdominal pain, seizures, or
psychosis.
•    For preventive management when a patient with
porphyria contemplates pregnancy.
•    For genetic counseling and molecular diagnosis.
 When to Admit
The patient should be hospitalized when he or she has an acute
attack accompanied by mental status changes, seizure, or
hyponatremia.
Dar FS et al. Liver transplantation for acute intermittent porphyria:
a viable treatment? Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2010
Feb;9(1):93–6. [PMID: 20133237]
 
Desnick RJ et al. Inherited porphyrias. In: Rimoin DL et al
(editors). Emery and Rimoin's Principles and Practice of
Medical Genetics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone,
2007.
 
Pischik E et al. Neurological manifestations of acute intermittent
porphyria. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-Grand). 2009 Feb
16;55(1):72–83. [PMID: 19268005]
 
Seth AK et al. Liver transplantation for porphyria: who, when and
how? Liver Transpl. 2007 Sep;13(9):1219–27. [PMID:
17763398]
 
Thunell S et al. Guide to drug porphyrogenicity and drug
prescription in the acute porphyrias. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2007
Nov;64(5):668–79. [PMID: 17578481]
 
ALKAPTONURIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Ochronosis (gray-black discoloration of connective tissue,
including the sclerae, ears, and cartilage).
 Characteristic radiologic changes in the spine, with radiodense
intervertebral discs.
 Arthropathy.
 Urine darkens on standing.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Alkaptonuria is caused by a recessively inherited deficiency of the
enzyme homogentisic acid oxidase. This acid derives from
metabolism of both phenylalanine and tyrosine and is present in
large amounts in the urine throughout the patient's life. An oxidation
product accumulates slowly in cartilage throughout the body,
leading to degenerative joint disease of the spine and peripheral
joints. Indeed, examination of patients in the third and fourth
decades shows a slight darkish blue color below the skin in areas
overlying cartilage, such as in the ears, a phenomenon called
ochronosis. In some patients, a more severe hyper-pigmentation
can be seen in the sclera, conjunctiva, and cornea. Accumulation of
metabolites in heart valves can lead to aortic or mitral stenosis. A
predisposition to coronary artery disease may also be present.
Although the syndrome causes considerable morbidity, life
expectancy is reduced only modestly. Symptoms are more often
attributable to spondylitis with back pain, leading to a clinical picture
difficult to distinguish from that of ankylosing spondylitis, though on
radiographic assessment the sacroiliac joints are not fused in
alkaptonuria.
B. Laboratory Findings
The diagnosis is established by demonstrating homogentisic acid in
the urine, which turns black spontaneously on exposure to the air;
this reaction is particularly noteworthy if the urine is alkaline or when
alkali is added to a specimen. Molecular analysis of the
homogentisic acid oxidase gene, recently mapped to chromosome
3, is available but not necessary for diagnosis.
 Prevention
Carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis are possible by testing for
genetic mutations.
 Treatment
Treatment of the arthritis is similar to that for other arthropathies.
Though, in theory, rigid dietary restriction might reduce
accumulation of the pigment, this has not proved to be of practical
benefit.
Al-Mahfoudh R et al. Alkaptonuria presenting with ochronotic
spondyloarthropathy. Br J Neurosurg. 2008 Dec;22(6):805–7.
[PMID: 19085367]
 
Vilboux T et al. Mutation spectrum of homogentisic acid oxidase
(HGD) in alkaptonuria. Hum Mutat. 2009 Dec;30(12):1611–9.
[PMID: 19862842]
 
DOWN SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Typical craniofacial features (flat occiput, epicanthal folds, large
tongue).
 Mental retardation.
 Congenital heart disease (eg, atrioventricular canal defects) in
50% of patients.
 Three copies of chromosome 21 (trisomy 21) or a chromosome
rearrangement that results in three copies of a region of the long
arm of chromosome 21.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Down syndrome is usually diagnosed at birth on the basis of the
typical craniofacial features, hypotonia, and single palmar crease.
Several serious problems that may be evident at birth or may
develop early in childhood include duodenal atresia, congenital heart
disease (especially atrioventricular canal defects), and hematologic
malignancy. The intestinal and cardiac anomalies usually respond to
surgery. A transient neonatal leukemia generally responds to
conservative management. The incidences of both acute
lymphoblastic and myeloid leukemias are increased in childhood.
Intelligence varies across a wide spectrum. Many people with
Down syndrome do well in sheltered workshops and group homes,
but few achieve full independence in adulthood. Other frequent
complications include atlanto-axial instability, celiac disease, and
hypothyroidism. An Alzheimer-like dementia usually becomes
evident in the fourth or fifth decade. Patients with Down syndrome
who survive childhood and who develop dementia have a reduced
life expectancy; on average, they live to about age 55 years.
B. Laboratory Findings
Cytogenomic analysis should always be performed—even though
most patients will have simple trisomy for chromosome 21—to
detect unbalanced translocations; such patients may have a parent
with a balanced translocation, and there will be a substantial
recurrence risk of Down syndrome in future offspring of that parent
and potentially that parent's relatives.
 Prevention
Nearly 0.5% of all human conceptions are trisomic for chromosome
21. Because of increased fetal mortality, birth incidence of Down
syndrome is 1 per 700 but varies from 1 per 1000 in young mothers
to more than three times as frequent in women of advanced
maternal age. The presence of a fetus with Down syndrome can be
detected in many pregnancies in the first or early second trimester
through screening maternal serum for α-fetoprotein and other
biomarkers (“multiple marker screening”) and by detecting
increased nuchal thickness and underdevelopment of the nasal bone
on fetal ultrasound. The risk of bearing a child with Down syndrome
increases exponentially with the age of the mother at conception and
begins a marked rise after age 35. By age 45 years, the odds of
having an affected child are as high as 1 in 40. The risk of other
conditions associated with trisomy also increases, because of the
predisposition of older oocytes to nondisjunction during meiosis.
There is little risk of trisomy associated with increased paternal age.
However, older men do have an increased risk of fathering a child
with a new autosomal dominant condition. But because there are so
many distinct conditions, the chance of fathering an offspring with
any given one is extremely small.
 Treatment
Duodenal atresia should be treated surgically. Congenital heart
disease should be treated as in any other patient. No medical
treatment has been proven to affect the intellectual capacity.
 When to Refer
 
•    For comprehensive evaluation of infants to investigate
congenital heart disease, hematologic malignancy, and
duodenal atresia.
•    For genetic counseling of the parents.
•    For signs of dementia in an adult patient.
 When to Admit
An affected young patient should be hospitalized when he or she
has failure to thrive, regurgitation, breathlessness, or easy bruising.
Andriolo RB et al. Aerobic exercise training programmes for
improving physical and psychosocial health in adults with Down
syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010 May
12;5:CD005176. [PMID: 20464738]
 
Driscoll DA et al; Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee.
First trimester diagnosis and screening for fetal aneuploidy. Genet
Med. 2008 Jan;10(1):73–4. [PMID: 18197059]
 
Lott IT et al. Cognitive deficits and associated neurological
complications in individuals with Down's syndrome. Lancet
Neurol. 2010 Jun;9(6):623–33. [PMID: 20494326]
 
Mégarbané A et al. The 50th anniversary of the discovery of
trisomy 21: the past, present, and future of research and treatment
of Down syndrome. Genet Med. 2009 Sept;11(9):611–16.
[PMID: 19636252]
 
Tolmie JL et al. Down syndrome and other autosomal trisomies.
In: Rimoin DL et al (editors). Emery and Rimoin's Principles and
Practice of Medical Genetics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill
Livingstone, 2007.
 
Wiseman FK et al. Down syndrome—recent progress and future
prospects. Hum Molec Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(R1):R75–83.
[PMID: 19297404]
 
FRAGILE X MENTAL RETARDATION
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Expanded trinucleotide repeat in the FMR1 gene.
 Mental retardation and autism in males.
 Large testes after puberty.
 Learning disabilities or mental retardation in females.
 Premature ovarian failure.
 Late-onset tremor and ataxia in males and females with moderate
trinucleotide repeat expansion (premutation carriers).
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
This X-linked condition accounts for more cases of mental
retardation in males than any condition except Down syndrome;
about 1 in 5000 males is affected. The condition also affects
intellectual function in females, although less severely and about
50% less frequently than in males. Affected (heterozygous) young
women show no physical signs other than early menopause, but
they may have learning difficulties or frank retardation. Affected
males show macro-orchidism (enlarged testes) after puberty, large
ears and a prominent jaw, a high-pitched voice, autistic
characteristics, and mental retardation. Some males show evidence
of a mild connective tissue defect, with joint hypermobility and
mitral valve prolapse.
Women who are premutation carriers (55–200 CGG repeats)
are at increased risk for premature ovarian failure and mild cognitive
abnormalities. Male and female premutation carriers are at risk for
mood and anxiety disorders and the development of tremor and
ataxia beyond middle age (fragile-X tremor-ataxia syndrome,
FXTAS). Changes in the cerebellar white matter may be evident on
MRI before symptoms appear. Because of the relatively high
prevalence of premutation carriers in the general population, older
people in whom any of these behavioral or neurologic problems
develop should undergo testing of the FMR1 locus.
B. Laboratory Findings
The first marker for this condition was a small gap, or fragile site,
evident near the tip of the long arm of the X chromosome.
Subsequently, the condition was found to be due to expansion of a
trinucleotide repeat (CGG) near a gene called FMR1. All
individuals have some CGG repeats in this location, but as the
number increases beyond 52, the chances of further expansion
during spermatogenesis or oogenesis increase.
Being born with one FMR1 allele with 200 or more repeats
results in mental retardation in most men, and in about 60% of
women. The more repeats, the greater the likelihood that further
expansion will occur during gametogenesis; this results in
anticipation, in which the disorder can worsen from one generation
to the next.
 Prevention
DNA diagnosis for the number of repeats has supplanted
cytogenetic analysis for both clinical and prenatal diagnosis. This
should be done on any male or female who has unexplained mental
retardation. Newborn screening based on hypermethylation of the
FMR1 gene is being considered as a means of early detection and
intervention.
 Treatment
No specific treatments have been developed. Attention-deficit and
hyperactivity symptoms can respond to standard therapy, and a trial
of L-acetylcarnitine showed promise.
 When to Refer
 
•    For otherwise unexplained mental retardation or
learning difficulties in boys and girls.
•    For otherwise unexplained tremor or ataxia in middle-
aged individuals.
•    For premature ovarian failure.
•    For genetic counseling.
Berry-Kravis E et al. Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia
syndrome: clinical features, genetics, and testing guidelines. Mov
Disord. 2007 Oct 31;22(14):2018–30. [PMID: 17618523]
 
Bourgeois JA et al. A review of fragile X premutation disorders:
expanding the psychiatric perspective. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009
Jun;70(6):852–62. [PMID: 19422761]
 
Coffee B et al. Incidence of fragile X syndrome by newborn
screening for methylated FMR1 DNA. Am J Hum Genet. 2009
Oct;85(4):503–14. [PMID: 19804849]
 
Martin JR et al. Fragile X and reproduction. Curr Opin Obstet
Gynecol. 2008 Jun;20(3):216–20. [PMID: 18460934]
 
Sutherland GR et al. Fragile X syndrome and other causes of X-
linked mental handicap. In: Rimoin DL et al (editors). Emery and
Rimoin's Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2007.
 
Torrioli M et al. Treatment with valproic acid ameliorates ADHD
symptoms in fragile X syndrome boys. Am J Med Genet A. 2010
Jun;152A (6):1420–7. [PMID: 20503316]
 
GAUCHER DISEASE
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Deficiency of β-glucocerebrosidase.
 Anemia and thrombocytopenia.
 Hypersplenism.
 Pathologic fractures.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Gaucher disease has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
A deficiency of β-glucocerebrosidase causes an accumulation of
sphingolipid within phagocytic cells throughout the body. Anemia
and thrombocytopenia are common and may be symptomatic; both
are due primarily to hypersplenism, but marrow infiltration with
Gaucher cells may be a contributing factor. Cortical erosions of
bones, especially the vertebrae and femur, are due to local
infarctions, but the mechanism is unclear. Episodes of bone pain
(termed “crises”) are reminiscent of those in sickle cell disease. A
hip fracture in a patient with a palpable spleen—especially in a
Jewish person of Eastern European origin—suggests the possibility
of Gaucher disease.
Two uncommon forms of Gaucher disease, called type II and
type III, involve neurologic accumulation of sphingolipid and a
variety of neurologic problems. Type II is of infantile onset and has
a poor prognosis. Heterozygotes for Gaucher disease are at
increased risk for developing Parkinson disease.
B. Laboratory Findings
Bone marrow aspirates reveal typical Gaucher cells, which have an
eccentric nucleus and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)-positive
inclusions, along with wrinkled cytoplasm and inclusion bodies of a
fibrillar type. In addition, the serum acid phosphatase is elevated.
Definitive diagnosis requires the demonstration of deficient
glucocerebrosidase activity in leukocytes. Hundreds of mutations
have been found to cause Gaucher disease and some are highly
predictive of the neuronopathic forms. Thus, mutation detection,
especially in a young person, is of potential value. Only four
mutations in glucocerebrosidase account for more than 90% of the
disease among Ashkenazi Jews, in whom the carrier frequency is
1:15.
 Prevention
Most clinical complications can be prevented by early institution of
enzyme replacement therapy. Carrier screening, especially among
Ashkenazi Jews, detects those couples at 25% risk of having an
affected child. Prenatal diagnosis through mutation analysis is
feasible.
 Treatment
For many years, treatment was supportive and included
splenectomy for thrombocytopenia secondary to platelet
sequestration. 
A 
recombinant 
form 
of 
the 
enzyme
glucocerebrosidase (imiglucerase) for intravenous administration on
a regular basis now permits a reduction in total body stores of
glycolipid and improvement in orthopedic and hematologic
manifestations. Unfortunately, the neurologic manifestations of types
II and III have not improved with enzyme replacement therapy. The
major drawback is the exceptional cost of imiglucerase, which can
exceed $350,000 per year for a severely affected patient.
Administration of less enzyme (30 units/kg per month) is effective
for most adults and reduces the cost to about $100,000–150,000
annually. Early treatment of affected children normalizes growth and
bone mineral density and improves liver and spleen size, anemia,
and thrombocytopenia. Alternative or complementary therapies,
including methods to reduce substrate and to provide a chaperone
for a defective enzyme, are being developed.
Andersson H et al. Eight-year clinical outcomes of long-term
enzyme replacement therapy for 884 children with Gaucher
disease type I. Pediatrics. 2008 Dec;122(6):1182–90. [PMID:
19047232]
 
Beck M. New therapeutic options for lysosomal storage disorders:
enzyme replacement, small molecules and gene therapy. Hum
Genet. 2007 Mar;121(1):1–22. [PMID: 17089160]
 
Cox TM et al. Management of non-neuronopathic Gaucher
disease with special reference to pregnancy, splenectomy,
bisphosphonate therapy, use of biomarkers and bone disease
monitoring. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2008 Jun;31(3):319–36. [PMID:
18509745]
 
Piran S et al. Gaucher disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of bone complications and their response to treatment. J
Inherit Metab Dis. 2010 Jun;33(3):271–9. [PMID: 20336376]
 
Sidransky E et al. Multicenter analysis of glucocerebrosidase
mutation in Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct
22;361(17):1651–61. [PMID: 19846850]
 
Weinreb N et al. Imiglucerase (Cerezyme) improves quality of life
in patients with skeletal manifestations of Gaucher disease. Clin
Genet. 2007 Jun;71(6):576–88. [PMID: 17539908]
 
Zimran A et al. Phase 1/2 and extension study of velaglucerase alfa
replacement therapy in adults with type 1 Gaucher disease: 48-
month experience. Blood. 2010 Jun 10;115(23): 4651–6. [PMID:
20299511]
 
DISORDERS OF HOMOCYSTEINE METABOLISM
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 For homocystinuria, dislocated ocular lenses.
 Elevated homocysteine in the urine or plasma.
 
 General Considerations
Considerable evidence has accumulated to support the 20-year-old
observation that patients with clinical and angiographic evidence of
coronary artery disease tend to have higher levels of plasma
homocysteine than persons without coronary artery disease. The
relationship has been extended to cerebrovascular and peripheral
vascular diseases. Although this effect was initially thought to be due
at least in part to heterozygotes for cystathionine β-synthase
deficiency (see below), there is little supporting evidence. Rather, an
important factor leading to hyperhomocysteinemia is folate
deficiency. Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) and vitamin B12 are also
important in the metabolism of methionine, and deficiency of any of
these vitamins can lead to accumulation of homocysteine. A number
of genes influence utilization of these vitamins and can predispose to
deficiency. For example, having one—and especially two—copies
of an allele that causes thermolability of methylene tetrahydrofolate
reductase predisposes people to elevated fasting homocysteine
levels. However, both nutritional and most genetic deficiencies of
these vitamins can be corrected by dietary supplementation of folic
acid and, if serum levels are low, vitamins B6 and B12. In the United
States, cereal grains are now fortified with folic acid. However,
therapy with B vitamins lowers homocysteine levels significantly but
does not reduce the risk of either venous thromboembolism or
complications of coronary artery disease. The role of lowering
homocysteine as primary prevention for sequelae of atherosclerosis
has 
received 
little 
direct 
support 
in 
clinical 
trials.
Hyperhomocysteinemia occurs with end-stage chronic kidney
disease.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Homocystinuria in its classic form is caused by cystathionine β-
synthase deficiency and exhibits an autosomal recessive pattern of
inheritance. This results in extreme elevations of plasma and urinary
homocystine levels, a basis for diagnosis of this disorder.
Homocystinuria is similar in certain superficial aspects to Marfan
syndrome, since patients may have a similar body habitus and
ectopia lentis is almost always present. However, mental retardation
is often present in homocystinuria, and the cardiovascular events are
those of repeated venous and arterial thromboses whose precise
cause remains obscure. Life expectancy is reduced, especially in
untreated and pyridoxine-unresponsive patients; myocardial
infarction, stroke, and pulmonary embolism are the most common
causes of death. This condition is diagnosed by newborn screening
for hypermethioninemia; however, pyridoxine-responsive infants
may not be detected. The diagnosis should be suspected in patients
in the second and third decades of life who show evidence of
arterial or venous thromboses and have no other risk factors.
B. Laboratory Findings
Although many mutations have been identified in the cystathionine
β-synthase gene, amino acid analysis of plasma remains the most
appropriate diagnostic test. Patients should be studied after they
have been off folate or pyridoxine supplementation for at least 1
week. Relatively few laboratories currently provide highly reliable
assays for homocysteine. Processing of the specimen is crucial to
obtain accurate results. The plasma must be separated within 30
minutes; otherwise, blood cells release the amino acid and the
measurement will then be artificially elevated.
 Prevention
About 50% of patients have a form of cystathionine β-synthase
deficiency that improves biochemically and clinically through
pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine and folate. For these patients,
treatment from infancy can prevent retardation and the other clinical
problems. Patients who are pyridoxine nonresponders must be
treated with a dietary reduction in methionine and supplementation
of cysteine, also from infancy. The vitamin betaine is also useful in
reducing plasma methionine levels by facilitating a metabolic
pathway that bypasses the defective enzyme.
 Treatment
Patients with classic homocystinuria who have suffered venous
thrombosis receive anticoagulation therapy, but there are no studies
to support prophylactic use of warfarin or antiplatelet agents.
Ebbing M et al. Mortality and cardiovascular events in patients
treated with homocysteine-lowering B vitamins after coronary
angiography: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008 Aug
20;300(7):795–804. [PMID: 18714059]
 
Lee M et al. Efficacy of homocysteine-lowering therapy with folic
acid in stroke prevention: a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2010
Jun;41(6):1205–12. [PMID: 20413740]
 
Miller ER 3rd et al. Meta-analysis of folic acid supplementation
trials on risk of cardiovascular disease and risk interaction with
baseline homocysteine levels. Am J Cardiol. 2010 Aug
15;106(4):517–27. [PMID: 20691310]
 
Ray JG et al. Homocysteine-lowering therapy and risk for venous
thromboembolism: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Jun
5;146(11):761–7. [PMID: 17470822]
 
Study of the Effectiveness of Additional Reductions in Cholesterol
and Homocysteine (SEARCH) Collaborative Group et al. Effects
of homocysteine-lowering with folic acid plus vitamin B12 vs
placebo on mortality and major morbidity in myocardial infarction
survivors: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2010 Jun 23;303(24):2486–
94. [PMID: 20571015]
 
Varela-Moreiras G et al. Cobalamin, folic acid and homocysteine.
Nutr Rev. 2009 May;67(Suppl 1):S69–72. [PMID: 19453682]
 
KLINEFELTER SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Males with hypogonadism and small testes.
 47,XXY karyotype.
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Boys with an extra X chromosome are normal in appearance before
puberty; thereafter, they have disproportionately long legs and arms,
a female escutcheon, gynecomastia, and small testes. Infertility is
due to azoospermia; the seminiferous tubules are hyalinized. The
diagnosis is often not made until a couple is evaluated for inability to
conceive. Mental retardation is somewhat more common than in the
general population. Many men with Klinefelter syndrome have
learning problems. However, their intelligence usually tests within
the broad range of normal. As adults, detailed psychometric testing
may reveal a deficiency in executive skills. The risk of breast cancer
and diabetes mellitus is much higher in men with Klinefelter
syndrome than in 46,XY men.
B. Laboratory Findings
Low serum testosterone is common. The karyotype is typically
47,XXY.
 Prevention
Screening for cancer, especially of the breast, and for glucose
intolerance are indicated.
 Treatment
Treatment with testosterone after puberty is advisable but will not
restore fertility. However, men with Klinefelter syndrome have had
mature sperm aspirated from their testes and injected into oocytes,
resulting in fertilization. After the blastocysts have been implanted
into the uterus of a partner, conception has resulted. However, men
with Klinefelter syndrome do have an increased risk for aneuploidy
in sperm, and therefore genomic analysis of a blastocyst should be
considered before implantation.
Graham GE et al. Sex chromosome abnormalities. In: Rimoin DL
et al (editors). Emery and Rimoin's Principles and Practice of
Medical Genetics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone,
2007.
 
Radicioni AF et al. Strategies and advantages of early diagnosis in
Klinefelter's syndrome. Mol Hum Reprod. 2010 Jun;16(6):434–
40. [PMID: 20392711]
 
Ramasamy R et al. Successful fertility treatment for Klinefelter's
syndrome. J Urol. 2009 Sept;182(3):1108–13. [PMID:
19616796]
 
Ross JL et al. Cognitive and motor development during childhood
in boys with Klinefelter syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar
15;146A (6):708–19. [PMID: 18266239]
 
Vignozzi L et al. Clinical and therapeutic aspects of Klinefelter's
syndrome: sexual function. Mol Hum Reprod. 2010
Jun;16(6):418–24. [PMID: 20348547]
 
MARFAN SYNDROME
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Disproportionately tall stature, thoracic deformity, and joint laxity
or contractures.
 Ectopia lentis and myopia.
 Aortic dilation and dissection.
 Mitral valve prolapse.
 
 General Considerations
Marfan syndrome, a systemic connective tissue disease, has an
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. It is characterized by
abnormalities of the skeletal, ocular, and cardiovascular systems;
spontaneous pneumothorax; dural ectasia; and striae atrophicae. Of
most concern is disease of the ascending aorta, which begins as a
dilated aortic root. Histology of the aorta shows diffuse medial
degeneration. Mitral valve leaflets are also abnormal and mitral
prolapse and regurgitation may be present, often with elongated
chordae tendineae, which on occasion may rupture.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Affected patients are typically tall, with particularly long arms, legs,
and digits (arachnodactyly). However, there can be wide variability
in the clinical presentation. Commonly, scoliosis and anterior chest
deformity, such as pectus excavatum, are found. Ectopia lentis is
present in about half of patients; severe myopia is common and
retinal detachment can occur. Mitral valve prolapse is seen in about
85% of patients. Aortic root dilation is common and leads to aortic
regurgitation or dissection with rupture. To diagnose Marfan
syndrome, people with an affected relative need features in at least
two systems. People with no family history need features in the
skeletal system, two other systems, and one of the major criteria of
ectopia lentis, dilation of the aortic root, or aortic dissection.
Patients with homo-cystinuria due to cystathionine synthase
deficiency also have dislocated lenses; tall, disproportionate stature;
and thoracic deformity. They tend to have below normal
intelligence, stiff joints, and a predisposition to arterial and venous
occlusive disease. Males with Klinefelter syndrome do not show the
typical ocular or cardiovascular features of Marfan syndrome and
are generally sporadic occurrences in the family.
B. Laboratory Findings
Mutations in the fibrillin gene (FBN1) on chromosome 15 cause
Marfan syndrome. Nonetheless, no simple laboratory test is
available to support the diagnosis in questionable cases because
related conditions may also be due to defects in fibrillin. The nature
of the FBN1 mutation has little predictive value in terms of
prognosis. The pathogenesis of Marfan syndrome involves aberrant
regulation of transforming growth factor (TGF) β activity. Mutations
in either of two receptors for TGFβ (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) can
cause conditions that resemble Marfan syndrome in terms of aortic
aneurysm and dissection and autosomal dominant inheritance.
 Prevention
There is prenatal and presymptomatic diagnosis for patients in
whom the molecular defect in fibrillin has been found.
 Treatment
Children with Marfan syndrome require regular ophthalmologic
surveillance to correct visual acuity and thus prevent amblyopia, and
annual orthopedic consultation for diagnosis of scoliosis at an early
enough stage so that bracing might delay progression. Patients of all
ages require echocardiography at least annually to monitor aortic
diameter and mitral valve function. Long-term β-adrenergic
blockade, titrated to individual tolerance but enough to produce a
negative inotropic effect (atenolol, 1–2 mg/kg), retards the rate of
aortic dilation. Several clinical trials comparing the effectiveness of
atenolol and losartan, a drug that reduces activity of TGFβ, are
underway. Restriction from vigorous physical exertion protects from
aortic dissection. Prophylactic replacement of the aortic root with a
composite graft when the diameter reaches 45–50 mm in an adult
(normal: < 40 mm) prolongs life. A procedure to reimplant the
patient's native aortic valve and replace just the aneurysmal sinuses
of Valsalva shows promise and also avoids the need for lifelong
anticoagulation.
 Prognosis
People with Marfan syndrome who are untreated commonly die in
the fourth or fifth decade from aortic dissection or congestive heart
failure secondary to aortic regurgitation. However, because of
earlier diagnosis, lifestyle modifications, β-adrenergic blockade, and
prophylactic aortic surgery, life expectancy has increased by several
decades in the past 25 years.
 When to Refer
 
•    For detailed ophthalmologic examination.
•    For at least annual cardiologic evaluation.
•    For moderate scoliosis.
•    For pregnancy in a woman with Marfan syndrome.
•    For genetic counseling.
g
g
 When to Admit
Any patient with Marfan syndrome in whom severe or unusual chest
pain develops should be hospitalized to exclude pneumothorax and
aortic dissection.
Brooke BS et al. Angiotensin II blockade and aortic-root dilation
in Marfan's syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jun 26;358(26):
2787–95. [PMID: 18579813]
 
Faivre L et al. Effect of mutation type and location on clinical
outcome in 1,013 probands with Marfan syndrome or related
phenotypes and FBN1 mutations: an international study. Am J
Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):454–66. [PMID: 17701892]
 
Keane M et al. Medical management of Marfan syndrome.
Circulation. 2008 May 27;117(21):2802–13. [PMID: 18506019]
 
Loeys BL et al. The revised Ghent nosology for the Marfan
syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010 Jul;47(7):476–85. [PMID:
20591885]
 
Pyeritz RE. Marfan syndrome and related disorders. In: Rimoin
DL et al (editors). Emery and Rimoin's Principles and Practice
of Medical Genetics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone,
2007.
 
HEREDITARY HEMORRHAGIC TELANGIECTASIA
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Recurrent epistaxis.
 Mucocutaneous telangiectases.
 Visceral arteriovenous malformations (especially lung, liver, brain,
bowel).
 
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), formerly termed
“Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome,” is an autosomal dominant
disorder of development of the vasculature. Epistaxis may begin in
childhood or later in adolescence. Punctate telangiectases of the
lips, tongue, fingers, and skin generally appear in later childhood
and adolescence. Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) can occur
at any age in the brain, lungs, and liver. Bleeding from the
gastrointestinal tract is due to mucosal vascular malformations and
usually is not a problem until mid-adult years or later. Pulmonary
AVMs can cause hypoxemia (with peripheral cyanosis, dyspnea,
and clubbing) and right-to-left shunting (with embolic stroke or
brain abscess). The criteria for diagnosis require presence of three
of the following four features: (1) recurrent epistaxis, (2) visceral
AVMs, (3) mucocutaneous telangiectases, and (4) being the near
relative of a clearly affected individual. Mutation analysis can be
used for presymptomatic diagnosis or exclusion of the worry of
HHT.
B. Laboratory Findings
MR or CT arteriography detects AVMs. Mutations in at least five
genes can cause HHT. Three have been identified and molecular
analysis to identify them is available; these mutations in ENG,
ALK1, and SMAD4 account for about 70% of families with HHT.
 Prevention
Embolization of pulmonary AVMs with wire coils or other occlusive
devices reduces the risk of stroke and brain abscess. Treatment of
brain AVMs reduces the risk of hemorrhagic stroke. All patients
with HHT with evidence of a pulmonary shunt should practice
routine endocarditis prophylaxis. All intravenous lines should have
an air-filter to prevent embolization of an air bubble. Prenatal
diagnosis through mutation detection is possible.
 Treatment
All patients in whom the diagnosis of HHT is considered should
have an MRI of the brain with contrast. A contrast echocardiogram
will detect most pulmonary AVMs when “bubbles” appear on the
left side of the heart after 3–6 cardiac cycles. A positive contrast
echocardiogram should be followed by a high-resolution CT
angiogram for localization of pulmonary AVMs. Patients who have
AVMs with a feeding artery of 1–2 mm diameter or greater should
undergo embolization. After successful embolization of all treatable
pulmonary AVMs, the CT angiogram should be repeated in 3
years. A person with a negative contrast echocardiogram should
have the test repeated every 5 years.
Faughnan ME et al; HHT Guidelines Working Group. International
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia. J Med Genet. 2011 Feb;48(2):73–
87. [PMID: 19553198]
 
Guttmacher AE et al. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. In:
Rimoin DL et al (editors). Emery and Rimoin's Principles and
Practice of Medical Genetics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill
Livingstone, 2007.
 
Nawaz A et al. Digital subtraction pulmonary arteriography versus
multidetector CT in the detection of pulmonary arteriovenous
malformations. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2008 Nov;19(11):1582–8.
[PMID: 18774307]
 
Trerotola SO et al. Outpatient single-session pulmonary
arteriovenous malformation embolization. J Vasc Interv Radiol.
2009 Oct;20(10):1287–91. [PMID: 19683942]
 
Trerotola SO et al. PAVM embolization: an update. AJR Am J
Roentgenol. 2010 Oct;195(4):837–45. [PMID: 20858807]
 
 
 
Sports Medicine &
Outpatient Orthopedics
Anthony Luke MD, MPH, &
C. Benjamin Ma, MD
GENERAL APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL
INJURIES
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 History is most important in diagnosing musculo-skeletal
problems.
 The mechanism of injury can explain the pathology and
symptoms.
 Determine whether the injury is traumatic or atraumatic, acute or
chronic, high or low velocity (greater velocity suggests more
structural damage), or whether any movement aggravates or
relieves pain associated with the injury.
 
 General Considerations
Musculoskeletal problems account for about 10–20% of outpatient
primary care clinical visits. Orthopedic problems can be classified
as traumatic (ie, injury-related) or atraumatic (ie, degenerative or
overuse syndromes) as well as acute or chronic. The mechanism of
injury is usually the most helpful part of the history in determining the
diagnosis.
The onset of symptoms should be elicited. With acute traumatic
injuries, patients typically seek medical attention within 1–6 weeks
of onset. The patient should describe the exact location of
symptoms, which helps determine anatomic structures that may be
damaged. If the patient is vague, the clinician can ask the patient to
point with one finger only to the point of maximal tenderness.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients most often complain of pain, instability, or dysfunction
around the joints. Patients may describe symptoms of “locking” or
“catching,” suggesting internal derangement in joints. Symptoms of
“instability” or “giving way” suggest ligamentous injury; however,
these symptoms may also be due to pain causing muscular
inhibition. Constitutional symptoms of fever or weight loss, swelling
with no injury, or systemic illness suggest medical conditions (such
as infection, cancer, or rheumatologic disease).
Initial evaluation should follow routine trauma guidelines to rule
out serious joint injury. However, typical evaluations in the clinic
follow the traditional components of the physical examination and
should include inspection, palpation, and assessment of range of
motion and neurovascular status.
Inspection includes observation of swelling, erythema, atrophy,
deformity, and (surgical) scars (remembered by the mnemonic,
“SEADS”). The patient should be asked to move joints of concern
(see Table 41–1). If motion is asymmetric, the clinician should
assess the passive range of motion for any physical limitation.
There are special tests to assess each joint. Typically,
provocative tests recreate the mechanism of injury with the goal to
reproduce the patient's pain. Stress tests apply load to ligaments
of concern. Typically, 10 to 15 pounds of force should be applied
when performing stress tests. Functional testing, including simple
tasks performed during activities of daily living, is useful to assess
injury severity.
B. Imaging
Bony pathology can be assessed using standard radio-graphs,
although there may also be characteristic soft tissue findings.
However, CT scans are the most effective method for visualizing
any bony pathology, including morphology of fractures. Nuclear
bone scans are now less commonly used but are still valuable for
identifying stress injuries, infection, malignancy, or multisite
pathology. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans are useful in
identifying metastatic malignant lesions. MRI provides excellent
visualization of ligaments, cartilage, and soft tissues. Gadolinium
contrast can be injected as an MRI arthrogram to increase
sensitivity of detecting certain internal derangements in joints such as
labral injuries. Musculoskeletal ultrasound, where available, can be
useful for identifying superficial tissue problems, including
tendinopathies and synovial problems.
C. Special Tests
Arthrocentesis must be performed promptly to rule out an infection
when acute knee pain with effusion and inflammation are present
and the patient is unable to actively flex the joint. The joint fluid
should be sent for cell count, crystal analysis, and culture.
Arthrocentesis and joint fluid analysis demonstrating crystals can
lead to the diagnosis of gout (negatively birefringent, needle-shaped
crystals) or pseudogout (positively birefringent, rectangular-shaped
crystals). In large, uncomfortable knee joint effusions, removal of
excessive joint fluid may improve joint range of motion (flexion) and
patient comfort. To avoid infecting the joint, arthrocentesis should
not be performed when there is an active cellulitis or abscess
overlying the joint. It is also contraindicated if there is a significant
coagulopathy (INR > 3.0). Markers of inflammation such as
complete blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-
reactive protein, and rheumatologic tests are useful in evaluating for
infectious, oncologic, or rheumatologic processes. Electrodiagnostic
studies such as electromyography and nerve conduction studies are
useful when there are neurologic concerns; they can also help with
prognostication in chronic conditions.
 Treatment
While most outpatient musculoskeletal problems are best treated
conservatively, the first consideration is whether there is an
immediate surgical need. Surgical treatment is chosen when the
outcome promises better health, restoration of function, and
improved quality of life. During surgery, the musculoskeletal
problem is usually repaired, removed, realigned, reconstructed, or
replaced (eg, joint replacement).
If surgery is not immediately indicated, conservative treatment in
the outpatient setting usually includes modification of activities, ice,
compression, 
and elevation (remembered by the mnemonic,
“MICE”). Controlling pain is an early concern for most patients.
Commonly prescribed medications are analgesics (nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], acetaminophen, or opioids).
Other medications that may also be prescribed, albeit less
commonly, are muscle relaxants or co-analgesics for neuropathic
pain (which include the calcium channel α2-δ ligands [eg,
gabapentin] or tricyclic antidepressants). Topical medications, such
as capsaicin cream or patch, lidocaine patches, and NSAID
patches, can help provide superficial local pain relief.
Immobilization by casting, slings, and braces is helpful to protect
an injured limb. Crutches are useful to reduce weight bearing.
Rehabilitation and physical therapy are frequently needed. Other
modalities commonly used by patients include chiropractic
manipulation, massage therapy, acupuncture, and osteopathy.
 When to Refer
Indications for emergency referral (immediate)
•    Neurovascular injury.
•    Fractures (open, unstable).
•    Unreduced joint dislocation.
•    Septic arthritis.
Indications for urgent referral (within 7 days)
•    Fractures (closed, stable).
•    Reduced joint dislocation.
•    “Locked” joint (inability to fully extend a joint due to
mechanical derangement, usually a loose body or torn
cartilage).
•    Tumor.
Indications for early orthopedic assessment (2–4 weeks)
•    Motor weakness (neurologic).
•    Constitutional symptoms (eg, fever not due to septic
arthritis, weight loss).
•    Multiple joint involvement.
Indications 
for routine orthopedic assessment (for further
management)
•    Failure of conservative treatment (persistent symptoms
> 3 months).
•    Persistent numbness and tingling in an extremity.
Ma L et al. Acute monoarthritis: what is the cause of my patient's
painful swollen joint? CMAJ. 2009 Jan 6;180(1):59–65. [PMID:
19124791]
 
Margaretten ME et al. Does this adult patient have septic arthritis?
JAMA. 2007 Apr 4;297(13):1478–88. [PMID: 17405973]
 
SHOULDER
1. Subacromial Impingement Syndrome
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Shoulder pain with overhead motion.
 Night pain with sleeping on shoulder.
 Pain with internal rotation.
 Numbness and pain radiation below the elbow are usually due to
cervical spine disease.
 
 General Considerations
The chief complaints for shoulder problems are usually pain,
instability, weakness, or loss of range of motion. With any shoulder
problem, it is important to establish the patient's hand dominance,
occupation, and recreational activities because shoulder injuries may
present differently depending on the demands placed on the
shoulder joint. For example, baseball pitchers with impingement
syndrome may complain of pain while throwing. Alternatively,
elders with even full thickness rotator cuff tears may not complain of
any pain because the demands on the joint are low.
The subacromial impingement syndrome describes a collection of
diagnoses that cause mechanical inflammation in the subacromial
space. Causes of impingement syndrome can be related to muscle
strength imbalances, poor scapula control, rotator cuff tears, and
subacromial bone spurs.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Shoulder problems classically present with one or more of the
following: pain with overhead activities, nocturnal pain with sleeping
on the shoulder, or pain on internal rotation (eg, putting on a jacket
or bra). On inspection, there may be appreciable atrophy in the
supraspinatus or infraspinatus fossa. The patient with impingement
syndrome can have mild scapula winging or “dyskinesis.” The
patient often has a rolled-forward shoulder posture or head-
forward posture. On palpation, the patient can have tenderness
over the ante-rolateral shoulder at the edge of the greater
tuberosity. The patient may lack full active range of motion (Table
41–1) but should have preserved passive range of motion.
Impingement symptoms can be elicited with the Neer and Hawkins
impingement signs (Table 41–1).
B. Imaging
The following four radiographic views should be ordered to
evaluate subacromial impingement syndrome: the antero-posterior
scapula, the anteroposterior acromioclavicular joint, the lateral
scapula (scapular Y), and the axillary lateral. The anteroposterior
scapula view can rule out glenohumeral joint arthritis. The
anteroposterior 
acromioclavicular 
view 
evaluates 
the
acromioclavicular joint for inferior spurs. The scapula Y view
evaluates the acromial shape, and the axillary lateral view visualizes
the glenohumeral joint as well and for the presence of os acromiale.
MRI of the shoulder may demonstrate full or partial thickness
tears or tendinosis. Ultrasound evaluation may demonstrate
thickening of the rotator cuff tendons and tendinosis. Tears may also
be visualized, although it is more difficult to identify partial tears
from small full thickness on ultrasound than on MRI.
 Treatment
A. Conservative
The first-line treatment for impingement syndrome is usually a
conservative approach with education, activity modification, and
physical therapy exercises. Impingement syndrome can be caused
by muscle weakness or tear. Rotator cuff muscle strengthening can
alleviate weakness or pain, unless the tendons are seriously
compromised, which may cause more symptoms. Physical therapy
is directed at rotator cuff muscle strengthening, scapula stabilization,
and postural exercises. There is no strong evidence supporting the
effectiveness of ice and NSAID therapy. In a 2004 Cochrane
review, corticosteroid injections produced slightly better relief of
symptoms in the short-term when compared with placebo. Most
patients respond well to conservative treatment.
B. Surgical
Procedures include arthroscopic acromioplasty with coracoacromial
ligament release, bursectomy, or debridement or repair of rotator
cuff tears.
 When to Refer
 
•    Failure of conservative treatment over 3 months.
•    Young and active patients with impingement due to full
thickness rotator cuff tears.
Hegedus EJ et al. Physical examination tests of the shoulder: a
systematic review with meta-analysis of individual tests. Br J
Sports Med. 2008 Feb;42(2):80–92. [PMID: 17720798]
 
Kuhn JE. Exercise in the treatment of rotator cuff impingement: a
systematic review and a synthesized evidence-based rehabilitation
protocol. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2009 Jan–Feb; 18(1):138–60.
[PMID: 18835532]
 
2. Rotator Cuff Tears
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 A common cause of shoulder impingement syndrome after age
40.
 Difficulty lifting the arm with limited active range of motion.
 Weakness with resisted strength testing suggests full thickness
tears.
 
 General Considerations
Rotator cuff tears can be caused by acute injuries related to falls on
an outstretched arm or to pulling on the shoulder. It can also be
related to chronic repetitive injuries with overhead movement and
lifting. Partial rotator cuff tears are one of the major reasons for
impingement syndrome. Full thickness rotator cuff tears are usually
more symptomatic and may require surgical treatment. The most
commonly torn tendon is the supraspinatus.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients complain of weakness or pain with overhead
movement. Night pain is also a common complaint. The clinical
findings with rotator cuff tears include those of the impingement
syndrome except that with full-thickness rotator cuff tears there may
be more obvious weakness noted with light resistance testing of
specific rotator cuff muscles. Supraspinatus tendon strength is tested
with resisted shoulder abduction at 90 degrees with slight forward
flexion to around 45 degrees (“open can” test) (Table 41–1).
Infraspinatus/teres minor strength is tested with resisted shoulder
external rotation with shoulder at 0 degrees abduction, elbow by
side (Table 41–1). Subscapularis strength is tested with the “lift-off”
or “belly-press” tests (Table 41–1). The affected patient usually
also has positive Neer and Hawkins impingement tests.
 
Table 41–1. Shoulder examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Check the
patient's posture
and “SEADS” (s
welling, e
rythema, a
trophy, d
eformity, surgical
s cars)
 
Palpation
Include important
landmarks:
acromioclavicular
(AC) joint, long
head of biceps
tendon, coracoid,
and greater
tuberosity
(supraspinatus
insertion)
 
Range of motion testing
Check range of
motion actively
(patient
performs) and
passively
(clinician
performs)
 
Flexion
Move the arm
forward as high
as possible in the
sagittal plane
 
 
External rotation
Check the
patient's elbow
touching their
body so that
external rotation
occurs
predominantly at
the glenohumeral
joint
 
 
Internal rotation
The patient is
asked to reach
the thumbs as
high as possible
behind the spine
on each side.
The clinician can
record the
highest spinous
process that the
individual can
reach on each
side (iliac crest =
L4, inferior angle
of scapula = T8).
 
 
Rotator cuff strength testing
Supraspinatus (open can) test
Perform resisted
shoulder
abduction at 90
degrees with
slight forward
flexion to around
45 degrees to
test for
supraspinatus
tendon strength
(“open can” test),
or with shoulder
abduction at 30
degrees and
flexion to 30
degrees (“empty
can” test)
 
 
External rotation
The patient
resists by
externally rotating
the arms with
elbows at his or
her side.
 
 
A positive “lift-off”
test is the
inability of the
patient to hold his
or her hand away
from the body
when reaching
toward the small
Internal rotation (lift off test)
of the back. The
clinician pushes
the patient's hand
toward the back
while the patient
resists. A
positive lift-off
indicates
subscapularis
tendon
insufficiency.
 
 
Internal rotation (belly press test)
A positive “belly-
press” test is the
inability to hold
the elbow in front
of the trunk while
pressing down
with the hand on
the belly. A
positive belly
press test
indicates
subscapularis
tendon
insufficiency.
 
 
Impingement tests
Neer impingement sign
Perform by
having the
clinician flex the
shoulder
maximally in an
overhead
position. The test
is positive when
pain is
reproduced with
full passive
shoulder flexion.
Sensitivity is
79%; specificity
is 53%.
 
 
Hawkins impingement sign
Perform with the
shoulder forward
flexed 90
degrees and the
elbow flexed at
90 degrees. The
shoulder is then
maximally
internally rotated
to impinge the
greater tuberosity
on the
undersurface of
the acromion.
The test is
considered
positive when the
patient's pain is
reproduced by
this maneuver.
Sensitivity is
79%; specificity
is 59%.
 
 
Stability tests
Apprehension test
With persistent
anterior instability
or a recent
dislocation, the
patient feels pain
or guards when
the shoulder is
abducted and
externally rotated
at 90 degrees.
With posterior
instability, the
patient is
apprehensive
with the shoulder
forward flexed
and internally
rotated to 90
degrees with a
posteriorly
directed force
 
 
Load and shift test
Perform to
determine
shoulder
instability by
manually
translating the
humeral head
anteriorly and
posteriorly in
relation to the
glenoid.
However, this
test can be
difficult to
perform when the
patient is not
relaxed.
 
 
Performed to rule
out labral
cartilage tears
that often occur
following a
shoulder
subluxation or
dislocation. The
test involves
flexing the
patient's arm to
90 degrees, fully
internally rotating
the arm so the
thumb is facing
down (palm
down) and
adducting the
arm to 10
degrees. Once
positioned
properly, the
clinician applies
downward force
O'Brien test
and asks the
patient to resist.
The test is then
repeated in the
same position
except that the
patient has his
arm fully
supinated (palm
up). A positive
O'Brien test for
labral tear is pain
deep in the
shoulder with
palm down more
than the palm up.
The O'Brien test
can also be used
to identify AC
joint pathology.
The patient would
typically complain
equally of pain
directly over the
AC joint with the
palm down or up.
 
 
B. Imaging
Recommended radiographs are very similar to impingement
syndrome: anteroposterior scapula (glenohumeral), axillary lateral,
supraspinatus outlet, and anteroposterior acromioclavicular joint
views. The anteroposterior scapula view is useful in visualizing
rotator cuff tears because degenerative changes can appear
between the acromion and greater tuberosity of the shoulder.
Axillary lateral views show superior elevation of the humeral head in
relation to the center of the glenoid. Supraspinatus outlet views
allow evaluation of the shape of the acromion. High-grade acromial
spurs are associated with a higher incidence of rotator cuff tears.
The anteroposterior acromioclavicular joint view evaluates for the
presence of acromioclavicular joint arthritis, which can mimic
rotator cuff tears, and for spurs that can cause rotator cuff injuries.
MRI is the best method for visualizing rotator cuff tears. The MR
arthrogram can show partial or small (< 1 cm) rotator cuff tears.
For patients who cannot undergo MRI testing or when
postoperative artifacts limit MRI evaluations, ultrasonography can
be helpful.
 Treatment
Partial rotator cuff tears may heal with scarring. Most partial
rotator cuff tears can be treated with physical therapy and scapular
and rotator cuff muscle strengthening. Physical therapy can
strengthen the remaining muscles to compensate for loss of strength.
Physical therapy is also an option for older sedentary patients. On
the contrary, full-thickness rotator cuff tears do not heal well
and have a tendency to progress with time. Most young active
patients with acute, full-thickness tears should be treated with
operative fixation.
Subscapularis tendon injuries warrant different treatment. Full-
thickness subscapularis tendon tears should undergo surgical repair
as they usually lead to premature osteoarthritis of the shoulder.
 When to Refer
 
•    Young and active patients with full thickness rotator cuff
tears.
•    Partial tears with > 50% involvement and with significant
pain.
•    Older and sedentary patients with full-thickness rotator
cuff tears who have not responded to nonoperative
treatment.
•    Full thickness subscapularis tears.
Kim HM et al. Shoulder strength in asymptomatic individuals with
intact compared with torn rotator cuffs. J Bone Joint Surg Am.
2009 Feb;91(2):289–96. [PMID: 19181972]
 
Yadav H et al. Rotator cuff tears: pathology and repair. Knee Surg
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2009 Apr;17(4):409–21. [PMID:
19104772]
 
Yamaguchi K et al. The demographic and morphological features
of rotator cuff disease. A comparison of asymptomatic and
symptomatic shoulders. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2006
Aug;88(8):1699–704. [PMID: 16882890]
 
3. Shoulder Dislocation & Instability
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Most dislocations (95%) are in the anterior direction.
 Pain and apprehension with an unstable shoulder that is abducted
and externally rotated.
 Acute shoulder dislocations should be reduced as quickly as
possible, using manual relocation techniques if necessary.
 
 General Considerations
The shoulder is a ball and socket joint, similar to the hip. However,
the bony contours of the shoulder bones are much different than the
hip. Overall, the joint has much less stability than the hip, allowing
greater movement and action. Stabilizing the shoulder joint relies
heavily on rotator cuff muscle strength and also scapular control.
Ninety five percent of the shoulder dislocations/instability occur in
the anterior direction. Dislocations usually are caused by a fall on an
outstretched and abducted arm. Patients complain of pain and
feeling of instability when the arm is in the abducted and externally
rotated position. Posterior dislocations are usually caused by falls
from a height, epileptic seizures, or electric shocks. Traumatic
shoulder dislocation can lead to instability. The rate of repeated
dislocation is directly related to the patient's age: patients age 21
years or younger have a 70–90% risk of redislocation, whereas
patients age 40 years or older have a much lower rate (20–30%).
Ninety percent of young active individuals who had traumatic
shoulder dislocation have labral injuries often described as Bankart
lesions when the anterior inferior labrum is torn, which can lead to
continued instability. Older patients (over age 55 years) are more
likely to have rotator cuff tears or fractures following dislocation.
Atraumatic shoulder dislocations are usually caused by intrinsic
ligament laxity or repetitive microtrauma leading to joint instability.
This is often seen in swimmers, gymnasts, and pitchers as well as
other athletes involved in overhead and throwing sports.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
For acute traumatic dislocations, patients usually have an obvious
deformity with the humeral head dislocated anteriorly. The patient
holds the shoulder and arm in an externally rotated position. The
patient complains of acute pain and deformity that are improved
with manual relocation of the shoulder. Reductions are usually
performed in the emergency department. Even after reduction, the
patient will continue to have limited range of motion and pain
especially following a first-time shoulder dislocation.
Patients with recurrent dislocations can have less pain with
subsequent dislocations. Posterior dislocations can be easily missed
because the patient usually holds the shoulder and arm in an
internally rotated position, which makes the shoulder deformity less
obvious. Patients complain of difficulty pushing open a door.
Atraumatic shoulder instability is usually well tolerated with
activities of daily living. Patients usually complain of a ‘sliding’
sensation during exercises or strenuous activities such as throwing.
Such dislocations may be less symptomatic and can often undergo
spontaneous reduction of the shoulder with pain resolving within
days after onset. The clinical examination for shoulder instability
includes the apprehension test (Table 41–1), the load and shift test
(Table 41–1) and O'Brien test (Table 41–1). Most patients with
persistent shoulder instability have preserved range of motion.
B. Imaging
Radiographs for acute dislocations should include a standard trauma
series of anteroposterior and axillary lateral scapula (glenohumeral)
views to determine the relationship of the humerus and the glenoid
and to rule out fractures. Orthogonal views are used to identify a
posterior shoulder dislocation, which can be missed easily with one
anteroposterior view of the shoulder. An axillary lateral view of the
shoulder can be safely performed even in the acute setting of a
patient with a painful shoulder dislocation. For chronic injuries or
symptomatic instability, these recommended radiographic views are
helpful to identify bony injuries and Hill-Sachs lesions (indented
compression fractures at the posterior-superior part of the humeral
head associated with anterior shoulder dislocation). MRI is
commonly used to show soft tissue injuries to the labrum and to
visualize associated rotator cuff tears. MRI arthrograms better
identify labral tears and ligamentous structures.
 Treatment
For acute dislocations, the shoulder should be reduced as soon as
possible. The Stimson procedure is the least traumatic method and
is quite effective. The patient lies prone with the dislocated arm
hanging off the examination table with a weight applied to the wrist
to provide traction for 20–30 minutes. Afterward, gentle medial
mobilization can be applied manually to assist the reduction. The
shoulder can also be reduced with axial “traction” on the arm with
“counter-traction” along the trunk. The patient should be sedated
and relaxed. The shoulder can then be gently internally and
externally rotated to guide it back into the socket.
Initial treatment of acute shoulder dislocations should include sling
immobilization for 2–4 weeks along with pendulum exercises. Early
physical therapy can be used to maintain range of motion and
strengthening of rotator cuff muscles. Patients can also modify their
activities to avoid active and risky sports. For patients with a
traumatic incident and unilateral shoulder dislocation, a Bankart
lesion is commonly present (remembered by the mnemonic,
“TUBS”) and surgical treatment is often required.
The treatment of atraumatic shoulder instability is different
than traumatic shoulder instability. Patients with chronic, recurrent
shoulder dislocations should be managed with physical therapy and
a regular maintenance program, consisting of scapular stabilization
and postural and rotator cuff strengthening exercises. Activities may
need to be modified. In patients with an atraumatic, multidirectional,
bilateral shoulder instability, rehabilitation is the mainstay for
treatment; inferior capsular shift surgery is rarely required
(remembered by the mnemonic, “AMBRI”).
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients who are at risk for second dislocation, such as
young patients, certain jobholders (eg, police officers, fire
fighters, and rock climbers) to avoid recurrent dislocation or
dislocation while at work.
•    Patients who have not responded to conservative
approach or who have chronic instability.
Hovelius L et al. Nonoperative treatment of primary anterior
shoulder dislocation in patients forty years of age and younger: a
prospective twenty-five-year follow-up. J Bone Joint Surg Am.
2008 May;90(5):945–52. [PMID: 18451384]
 
Johnson SM et al. Shoulder instability in patients with joint
hyperlaxity. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2010 Jun;92(6):1545–57.
[PMID: 20516333]
 
Voos JE et al. Prospective evaluation of arthroscopic Bankart
repairs for anterior instability. Am J Sports Med. 2010
Feb;38(2):302–7. [PMID: 20028847]
 
4. Adhesive Capsulitis (“Frozen Shoulder”)
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Very painful shoulder triggered by minimal or no trauma.
 Pain out of proportion to clinical findings during the inflammatory
phase.
 Stiffness during the “freezing” phase and resolution during the
“thawing” phase.
 
 General Considerations
Adhesive capsulitis (“frozen shoulder”) is seen commonly in patients
40- to 65-years-old. It is more commonly seen in women than men,
especially in perimenopausal women or in patients with endocrine
disorders, such as diabetes mellitus or thyroid disease. Adhesive
capsulitis is a self-limiting but very debilitating disease.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients usually present with a painful shoulder that has a limited
range of motion with both passive and active movements. A useful
clinical sign is limitation of movement of external rotation with the
elbow by the side of the trunk (Table 41–1). Strength is usually
normal but it can appear diminished when the patient is in pain.
There are three phases: the inflammatory phase, the “freezing”
phase, and the “thawing” phase. During the inflammatory phase,
which usually lasts 4–6 months, patients complain of a very painful
shoulder without obvious clinical findings to suggest trauma,
fracture, or rotator cuff tear. During the “freezing” phase, which
also usually lasts 4–6 months, the shoulder becomes stiffer and
stiffer even though the pain is improving. The “thawing” phase can
take up to a year as the shoulder slowly regains its motion. The total
duration of an idiopathic frozen shoulder is usually about 24 months;
it can be much longer for patients who have trauma or an
endocrinopathy.
B. Imaging
Standard anteroposterior, axillary, and lateral glenohumeral
radiographs are useful to rule out glenohumeral arthritis, which can
also present with limited active and passive range of motion.
However, adhesive capsulitis is usually a clinical diagnosis, and it
does not need an extensive diagnostic work-up.
 Treatment
Adhesive capsulitis is caused by acute inflammation of the capsule
followed by scarring and remodeling. During the acute “freezing”
phase, NSAIDs and physical therapy are recommended to maintain
motion. There is also evidence of short-term benefit from intra-
articular corticosteroid injection or oral prednisone. One study
demonstrated improvement at 6 weeks but not 12 weeks following
30 mg of daily prednisone for 3 weeks. During the “freezing” phase,
the shoulder is less painful but remains stiff. Anti-inflammatory
medication is not as helpful during the “thawing” phase as it is during
the “freezing” phase, and the shoulder symptoms usually resolve
with time. Surgical treatments include manipulation under anesthesia
and arthroscopic release.
 When to Refer
 
•    When the patient does not respond after more than 6
months of conservative treatment.
•    When there is no progress or worsening range of
motion over 3 months.
Neviaser AS et al. Adhesive capsulitis: a review of current
treatment. Am J Sports Med. 2010 Nov;38(11):2346–56.
[PMID: 20110457]
 
Rill BK et al. Predictors of outcome after nonoperative and
operative treatment of adhesive capsulitis. Am J Sports Med.
2011 Mar;39(3):567–74. [PMID: 21160014]
 
SPINE PROBLEMS
1. Low Back Pain
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 The cause of back pain may be categorized by pain on flexion
versus pain on extension.
 Nerve root impingement is suspected when pain is leg-dominant
rather than back-dominant.
 Alarming signs for serious spinal disease include unexplained
weight loss, failure to improve with treatment, severe pain for
more than 6 weeks, and night or rest pain.
 The cauda equina syndrome often presents with bowel or
bladder symptoms (or both) and is an emergency.
 
 General Considerations
Low back pain is the most common cause of disability for patients
under the age of 45 and is the second most common cause for
primary care visits. The annual prevalence of low back pain is 15–
45%, and the annual cost in the United States is over $50 billion.
Approximately 80% of episodes of low back pain resolve within 2
weeks and 90% resolve within 6 weeks. The exact cause of the low
back pain is often difficult to diagnose; its cause is often
multifactorial, although there are usually degenerative changes in the
lumbar spine.
Alarming symptoms for back pain caused by cancer include
unexplained weight loss, failure to improve with treatment, pain for
more than 6 weeks, and pain at night or rest. History of cancer and
age > 50 years are other risk factors for malignancy. Alarming
symptoms for infection include fever, rest pain, recent infection
(urinary tract infection, cellulitis, pneumonia), or history of
immunocompromise or injection drug use. The cauda equina
syndrome is suggested by urinary retention or incontinence, saddle
anesthesia, decreased anal sphincter tone or fecal incontinence,
bilateral lower extremity weakness, and progressive neurologic
deficits. Risk factors for back pain due to vertebral fracture include
use of corticosteroids, age > 70 years, history of osteoporosis,
recent significant trauma, or very severe focal pain. Back pain may
also be the presenting symptom in other serious medical problems,
including abdominal aortic aneurysm, peptic ulcer disease, kidney
stones, and pancreatitis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The physical examination is best done with the patient in the
standing, sitting, supine, and then prone positions to avoid frequent
repositioning of the patient. In the standing position, the patient's
posture can be observed. Commonly encountered spinal
asymmetries include scoliosis, thoracic kyphosis, and lumbar
hyperlordosis. The active range of motion of the lumbar spine can
be assessed. The common directions include flexion, rotation, and
extension. The one-leg standing extension test assesses for pain as
the patient stands on one leg while extending the spine. A positive
test can be caused by pars interarticularis fractures (spondylolysis
or spondylolisthesis) or facet joint arthritis, although sensitivity and
specificity of the test is limited.
In the sitting position, the major muscles in the lower extremities
are assessed for weakness by eliciting a resisted isometric
contraction for approximately 5 seconds. It is important to compare
the strength bilaterally to detect subtle muscle weakness, including
hip flexors (L1–2 nerve roots), knee extensors or quadriceps (L3),
ankle dorsiflexors (L4–L5), first toe extensor or extensor hallucis
longus (L5), knee flexors or hamstrings (S1), ankle plantar-flexors
or calf muscles (S1), and hip extensors (S1). Sensory testing to light
touch is done next for the following areas: groin (L1 nerve root),
thigh (L2), knee (L3), lateral shin and medial ankle (L4), first dorsal
web space of the foot between first and second toes (L5), lateral
foot (S1), back of the thigh (S2), and perianal area (S3, S4, S5).
Knee (femoral nerve L2–4), ankle (deep peroneal nerve L4–L5),
and Babinski (sciatic nerve L5–S1) reflexes can be checked with
the patient sitting.
In the supine position, the hip should be evaluated for range of
motion, focusing on internal rotation. The straight leg raise test puts
traction and compression forces on the lower lumbar nerve roots
(Table 41–2).
Finally, in the prone position, the clinician can carefully palpate
each level of the spine and sacroiliac joints for tenderness. A rectal
examination is required if the cauda equina syndrome is suspected.
Superficial skin tenderness to a light touch over the lumbar spine,
over-reaction to maneuvers in the regular back examination, low
back pain on axial loading of spine in standing, inconsistency in the
straight leg raise test or on the neurologic examination suggest
nonorthopedic causes for the pain or malingering.
B. Imaging
In the absence of red flag symptoms, diagnostic imaging, including
radiographs, is not recommended in the first 6 weeks. If done,
radiographs of the lumbar spine should include anteroposterior and
lateral views. Oblique views can be useful if the neuroforamina or
lesions need to be visualized. MRI is the method of choice in the
evaluation of symptoms not responding to conservative treatment or
in the presence of red flags of serious conditions.
 
Table 41–2. Spine: back examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Check the patient's posture in the standing
position. Assess for hyperlordosis, kyphosis,
and scoliosis.
 
Palpation
Include important landmarks: spinous
process, facet joints, paravertebral muscles,
sacroiliac joints, sacrum.
 
Range of
motion
testing
Check range of motion actively (patient
performs) and passively (clinician performs)
especially with flexion and extension of the
spine. Rotation and lateral bending are also
helpful to assess symmetric motion or any
restrictions.
 
Neurologic
examination
Check motor strength, reflexes and
dermatomal sensation in the lower
extremities.
 
A positive test for sciatica pain is classically
described as “electric shock”-like pain
radiating down the posterior aspect of the
     Straight
leg raise
test
leg from the low back. This can occur in the
setting of a disk herniation or degenerative
conditions causing neural foraminal
stenosis. Cross-over pain, where sciatica
symptoms occur down the opposite leg
during a straight leg raise, usually indicates
a large disk herniation.
 
     Indirect
straight leg
raise test
The patient sits on the side of the exam table
with the knees bent. The clinician extends
the knee fully. A positive test for sciatica pain
is classically described as “electric shock”-
like pain radiating down the posterior aspect
of the leg from the low back. Cross-over
pain, where sciatica symptoms occur down
the opposite leg during a straight leg raise,
usually indicates a large disk herniation.
 
C. Special Tests
Electromyography or nerve conduction studies may be useful in
assessing patients with possible nerve root symptoms lasting longer
than 6 weeks; back pain may or may not also be present. These
tests are usually not necessary if the diagnosis of radiculopathy is
clear.
 Treatment
A. Conservative
Nonpharmacologic treatments are key in the management of low
back pain. Education alone improves patient satisfaction with
recovery and recurrence. Patients require information and
reassurance when diagnostic procedures are not necessary.
Discussion must include reviewing safe and effective methods of
symptom control as well as how to decrease the risk of recurrence
with proper lifting techniques, weight loss, and smoking cessation.
Strengthening and stabilization effectively reduce pain and functional
limitation compared with usual care.
Physical therapy exercise programs can be tailored to the
patient's symptoms and pathology. Spinal manipulation has short-
term benefits if therapy is started within 6 weeks of onset of low
back pain without radiculopathy. Heat and cold treatments have not
shown any long-term benefits but may be used for symptomatic
treatment. The efficacy of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(TENS), back braces, physical agents, and acupuncture is
unproven. Improvements in posture, core stability strengthening,
physical conditioning, and modifications of activities to decrease
physical strain are keys for ongoing management.
NSAIDs are effective in the early treatment of low back pain
(see Chapter 20). There is limited evidence that muscle relaxants
can provide short-term relief; since these medications have
addictive potential, they should be used with care. Muscle relaxants
are best used if there is true muscle spasm that is painful rather than
simply a protective response. Opioids may be necessary to alleviate
pain immediately. Treatment of more chronic neuropathic pain with
gabapentin and tricyclic antidepressants may be helpful.
B. Surgical
Surgical indications for back surgery include cauda equina
syndrome, ongoing morbidity with no response to > 6 months of
conservative treatment, cancer, infection, or severe spinal deformity.
Prognosis is improved when there is an anatomic lesion that can be
corrected and symptoms are neurologic. Spinal surgery has
limitations. Patient selection is very important and the specific
surgery recommended should have very clear indications. Patients
should understand that surgery can improve their pain but is unlikely
to cure it. Surgery is not generally indicated for radiographic
abnormalities alone when the patient is asymptomatic. Depending
on the surgery performed, possible complications include persistent
pain; surgical site pain, especially if bone grafting is needed;
infection; neurologic damage; non-union; cutaneous nerve damage;
implant failure; deep venous thrombosis; and death.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with the cauda equina syndrome.
•    Patients with cancer, infection, or severe spinal
deformity.
•    Patients who have not responded to conservative
treatment.
Chou R et al. Will this patient develop persistent disabling low
back pain? JAMA. 2010 Apr 7;303(13):1295–302. [PMID:
20371789]
 
Chou R et al. Surgery for low back pain: a review of the evidence
for an American Pain Society Clinical Practice Guideline. Spine
(Phila Pa 1976). 2009 May 1;34(10):1094–109. [PMID:
19363455]
 
Lin CW et al. Cost-effectiveness of guideline-endorsed treatments
for low back pain: a systematic review. Eur Spine J. 2011 Jan 13.
[Epub ahead of print] [PMID: 21229367]
 
2. Spinal Stenosis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain is usually worse with back extension and relieved by sitting.
 Occurs in older patients.
 May present with neurogenic claudication symptoms with
walking.
 
 General Considerations
Osteoarthritis in the lumbar spine can cause narrowing of the spinal
canal. A large disk herniation can also cause stenosis and
compression of neural structures or the spinal artery resulting in
“claudication” symptoms with ambulation. The condition usually
affects patients aged 50 years or older.
 Clinical Findings
Patients report pain that worsens with extension. They describe
reproducible single or bilateral leg symptoms that are worse after
walking several minutes and that are relieved by sitting (termed
“neurogenic claudication”). On examination, patients often exhibit
limited extension of the lumbar spine, which may reproduce the
symptoms radiating down the legs. A thorough neurovascular
examination is recommended.
 Treatment
Flexion-based exercises as demonstrated by a physical therapist
can help relieve symptoms. Spinal or facet joint corticosteroid
injections can also reduce pain symptoms. Spinal decompression
(widening the spinal canal or laminectomy), nerve root
decompression (freeing a single nerve), and spinal fusion (joining the
vertebra to eliminate motion and diminish pain from the arthritic
joints) have not been shown to be superior to natural history,
placebo treatment, or conservative management of degenerative
lumbar disk disease (spondylosis). Some evidence suggests that
instrumentation (adding surgical hardware to a spinal fusion) leads
to a higher fusion rate, but there is no evidence that it makes any
difference to clinical outcomes.
 When to Refer
 
•    If a patient exhibits radicular or claudication symptoms >
12 weeks.
•    MRI or CT confirmation of significant spinal stenosis.
Atlas SJ et al. Spinal stenosis: surgical versus nonsurgical
treatment. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2006 Feb;443:198–207.
[PMID: 16462443]
 
Genevay S et al. Lumbar spinal stenosis. Best Pract Res Clin
Rheumatol. 2010 Apr;24(2):253–65. [PMID: 20227646]
 
Weinstein JN et al. Surgical versus nonsurgical treatment for
lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis. N Engl J Med. 2007 May
31;356(22):2257–70. [PMID: 17538085]
 
3. Lumbar Disk Herniation
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain with back flexion or prolonged sitting.
 Radicular pain with compression of neural structures.
 Numbness.
 Weakness.
 
 General Considerations
Lumbar disk herniation is usually due to bending or heavy loading
(eg, lifting) with the back in flexion, causing hernia tion or extrusion
of disk contents (nucleus pulposus) into the spinal cord area.
However, there may not be an inciting incident. Disk herniations
usually occur from degenerative disk disease (dessication of the
annulus fibrosis) in patients between 30- and 50-years-old. The
L5–S1 disk is affected in 90% of cases. Compression of neural
structures, such as the sciatic nerve, causes radicular pain. Severe
compression of the spinal cord can cause the cauda equina
syndrome, a surgical emergency (see above).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Discogenic pain typically is localized in the low back at the level of
the affected disk and is worse with activity. “Sciatica” causes
electric shock-like pain radiating down the posterior aspect of the
leg often to below the knee. Symptoms usually worsen with back
flexion such as bending or sitting for long periods (eg, driving). A
significant disk herniation can cause numbness and weakness,
including weakness with plantar flexion of the foot (L5/S1) or
dorsiflexion of the toes (L4/L5). The cauda equina syndrome should
be ruled out if the patient complains of perianal numbness or bowel
or bladder incontinence.
B. Imaging
Plain radiographs are helpful to assess spinal alignment (scoliosis,
lordosis), disk space narrowing, and osteoarthritis changes. MRI is
the best method to assess the level and morphology of the
herniation.
 Treatment
For an acute exacerbation of pain symptoms, bed rest is
appropriate for up to 48 hours. Otherwise, first-line treatments
include modified activities; NSAIDs and other analgesics; and
physical therapy, including core stabilization and McKenzie
exercises. Epidural and transforaminal corticosteroid injections can
be beneficial, especially in relieving acute radicular pain, although
the benefit tends to last only 3 months. These injections may be
effective in delaying surgery for chronic low back pain. Oral
prednisone can reduce inflammation and is useful in reducing
symptoms of acute sciatica; the initial dose is approximately 1
mg/kg once daily with tapering doses over 10 days. Co-analgesics
for neuropathic pain, such as the calcium channel α2-δ ligands (ie,
gabapentin, pregabalin) or tricyclic antidepressants, may be helpful
(see Chapter 5).
A large, ongoing trial has shown that patients who underwent
surgery for a lumbar disk herniation achieved greater improvement
than conservatively treated patients in all primary and secondary
outcomes except return to work status.
 When to Refer
 
•    Cauda equina syndrome.
•    Progressive worsening of neurologic symptoms.
•    Loss of motor function (sensory losses can be followed
in the outpatient clinic).
Gibson JN et al. Surgery for degenerative lumbar spondylosis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Oct 19; (4):CD001352.
[PMID: 16235281]
 
Hadjipavlou AG et al. The pathophysiology of disc degeneration: a
critical review. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2008 Oct;90(10): 1261–70.
[PMID: 18827232]
 
Weinstein JN et al. Surgical versus nonoperative treatment for
lumbar disc herniation: four-year results for the Spine Patient
Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT). Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2008
Dec 1;33(25):2789–800. [PMID: 19018250]
 
4. Neck Pain
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Poor posture is often a factor for persistent neck pain.
 Degenerative disk disease is a typical underlying cause for neck
pain.
 Cervical radiculopathy symptoms can be referred to the shoulder,
arm, or upper back.
 Pain is usually worse with back extension and relieved by sitting.
 
 General Considerations
Most neck pain, especially in older patients, is due to mechanical
degeneration involving the cervical disks, facet joints, and
ligamentous structures and may occur in the setting of degenerative
changes at other sites as well. Pain can also come from the
supporting neck musculature, which often acts to protect the
underlying neck structures. Posture is a very important factor,
especially in younger patients. Many work-related neck symptoms
are due to poor posture and repetitive motions over time. Acute
injuries can also occur secondary to trauma. For example, whiplash
occurs in 15–40% of motor vehicle accidents, with chronic pain
developing in 5–7%. Neck fractures are serious traumatic injuries
acutely and can lead to osteoarthritis in the long term. Ultimately,
many degenerative conditions of the neck result in cervical canal
stenosis or neural foraminal stenosis, sometimes affecting underlying
neural structures. Cervical radiculopathy can cause neurologic
symptoms in the upper extremities usually deriving from disease of
the C5–C7 disks. Patients with neck pain may report associated
headaches and shoulder pain. Thoracic outlet syndrome, in which
there is mechanical compression of the brachial plexus and
neurovascular structures with overhead positioning of the arm,
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of neck pain.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The patient's posture should be assessed, checking for shoulder
rolled forward or head forward posture as well as scoliosis in the
thoracolumbar spine. Patients with discogenic neck pain often
complain of pain with flexion, which causes cervical disks to
herniate posteriorly. Extension of the neck usually affects the neural
foraminal and facet joints of the neck. Rotation and lateral flexion of
the cervical spine should be measured both to the left and the right.
A detailed neurovascular examination of the upper extremities
should be performed, including sensory input to light touch and
temperature; motor strength testing, especially the hand intrinsic
muscles (thumb extension strength [C6], opponens strength (thumb
to pinky) [C7], and finger abductors and adductors strength [C8–
T1]); and upper extremity reflexes (biceps, triceps, brachioradialis).
True cervical radiculopathy symptoms should match an expected
dermatomal or myotomal distribution. The Spurling test involves
asking the patient to rotate and extend the neck to one side (Table
41–3). The clinician can apply a gentle axial load to the neck.
Reproduction of the cervical radiculopathy symptoms is a positive
sign of nerve root compression. Palpation of the neck is best
performed with the patient in the supine position where the clinician
can palpate each level of the cervical spine with the muscles of the
neck relaxed.
B. Imaging
Radiographs of the cervical spine can assist in determining the area
of degenerative changes. Useful views include the anteroposterior
and lateral view of the cervical spine. The odontoid view is usually
added to rule out traumatic fractures and congenital abnormalities.
Oblique views of the cervical spine can provide further information
about arthritis changes and assess the neural foramina for
narrowing.
CT scanning is the most useful method if bony abnormalities,
such as fractures, are suspected. MRI is the best method to assess
the cervical spine since the soft tissue structures (such as the disks,
spinal cord, and nerve roots) can be evaluated. If the patient has
signs of cervical radiculopathy with motor weakness, these more
sensitive imaging modalities should be obtained urgently.
 
Table 41–3. Spine: neck examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Check the patient's posture in the standing
position. Assess for cervical hyperlordosis,
head forward posture, kyphosis, scoliosis,
torticollis.
 
Palpation
Include important landmarks: spinous
process, facet joints, paracervical muscles
(sternocleidomastoid, scalene muscles).
 
Range of
motion
testing
Check range of motion in the cervical spine,
especially with flexion and extension.
Rotation and lateral bending are also helpful
to assess symmetric motion or any
restrictions. Pain and radicular symptoms
can be exacerbated by range of motion
testing.
 
Neurologic
examination
Check motor strength, reflexes and
dermatomal sensation in the upper (and
lower if necessary) extremities.
 
     Spurling
test
Involves asking the patient to rotate and
extend the neck to one side. The clinician
can apply a gentle axial load to the neck.
Reproduction of the cervical radiculopathy
symptoms is a positive sign of nerve root
compression.
 
 Treatment
A course of neck stretching, strengthening and postural exercises in
physical therapy have demonstrated benefit in relieving symptoms.
Chiropractic manual manipulation and mobilization can provide
short-term benefit for mechanical neck pain. Although the rate of
complications is low (5–10/million manipulations), care should be
taken whenever there are neurologic symptoms present. A soft
cervical collar can be useful for short-term use (up to 1–2 weeks) in
acute neck injuries. NSAIDs are commonly used and opioids may
be needed in cases of severe neck pain. Muscle relaxants (eg,
cyclobenzaprine 5–10 mg orally three times daily) can be used
short-term if there is muscle spasm or as a sedative to aid in
sleeping. Acute radicular symptoms can be treated with neuropathic
medications (eg, gabapentin 300–1200 mg orally three times daily),
and a short course of oral prednisone (5–10 days) can be
considered (starting at 1 mg/kg). Cervical foraminal or facet joint
injections can also reduce symptoms. Surgeries are successful in
reducing neurologic symptoms in 80–90% of cases but are still
considered as treatments of last resort.
 When to Refer
 
•    Patients with severe symptoms with motor weakness.
•    Surgical decompression surgery if the symptoms are
severe and there is identifiable, correctable pathology.
Carette S et al. Clinical practice. Cervical radiculopathy. N Engl J
Med. 2005 Jul 28;353(4):392–9. [PMID: 16049211]
 
Eubanks JD. Cervical radiculopathy: nonoperative management of
neck pain and radicular symptoms. Am Fam Physician. 2010 Jan
1;81(1):33–40. [PMID: 20052961]
 
UPPER EXTREMITY
1. Lateral & Medial Epicondylosis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Tenderness over the lateral or medial epicondyle.
 Diagnosis of tendinopathy is confirmed by pain with resisted
strength testing and passive stretching of the affected tendon and
muscle unit.
 Physical therapy and activity modification are more successful
than anti-inflammatory treatments.
 
 General Considerations
Tendinopathy involving the wrist extensors, flexors, and pronators
are very common complaints. The underlying mechanism is chronic
repetitive overuse causing microtrauma at the tendon insertion,
although acute injuries can occur as well if the tendon is strained due
to excessive loading. The traditional term “epicondylitis” is a
misnomer because histologically tendinosis or degeneration in the
tendon is seen rather than acute inflammation. Therefore, these
entities should be referred to as “tendinopathy” or “tendinosis.”
Lateral epicondylosis involves the wrist extensors, especially the
extensor carpi radialis brevis. This is usually caused be lifting with
the wrist and the elbow extended. Medial epicondylosis involves the
wrist flexors and most commonly the pronator teres tendon. Ulnar
neuropathy and cervical radiculopathy should be considered in the
differential diagnosis.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
For lateral epicondylosis, the patient describes pain with the arm
and wrist extended. For example, common complaints include pain
while shaking hands, lifting objects, using a computer mouse, or
hitting a backhand in tennis (“tennis elbow”). Medial epicondylosis
presents with pain during motions in which the arm is repetitively
pronated or the wrist is flexed. This is also known as “golfer's
elbow” due to the motion of turning the hands over during the golf
swing. On examination, tenderness directly over the epicondyle is
present, especially over the posterior aspect where the tendon
insertion occurs. The proximal tendon and musculotendinous
junction can also be sore. To confirm that the pain is due to
tendinopathy, pain can be reproduced over the epicondyle with
resisted wrist extension and third digit extension for lateral
epicondylosis and resisted wrist pronation and wrist flexion for
medial epicondylosis. The pain is also often reproduced with
passive stretching of the affected muscle groups, which can be
performed with the arm in extension. It is useful to check the ulnar
nerve (located in a groove at the posteromedial elbow) for
tenderness as well as to perform a Spurling test for cervical
radiculopathy.
B. Imaging
Radiographs are often normal, although a small traction spur may be
present in chronic cases (enthesopathy). Diagnostic investigations
are usually unnecessary, unless the patient does not improve after
up to 3 months of conservative treatment. At that point, a patient
who demonstrates significant disability due to the pain should be
assessed with an MRI or ultrasound. Ultrasound and MRI can
visualize the tendon and confirm tendinosis or tears.
 Treatment
Treatment is usually conservative, including patient education
regarding activity modification and management of symptoms. Ice
and NSAIDs can help with pain. The most important steps are to
begin a good stretching program followed by strengthening
exercises. Counterforce elbow braces might provide some
symptomatic relief, although there is no published evidence to
support their use. If the patient has severe or long-standing
symptoms, a course of physical therapy should be performed.
Corticosteroid injection offers some short-term improvement.
However, physical therapy and rehabilitative exercises are still the
mainstays of treatment. Treatments such as extracorporeal shock
wave therapy and injectable medications other than corticosteroids
have not shown clear long-term benefit.
 When to Refer
Patients not responding to 6 months of conservative treatment
should be referred for surgical debridement or repair of the tendon.
Bisset L et al. Mobilisation with movement and exercise,
corticosteroid injection, or wait and see for tennis elbow:
randomised trial. BMJ. 2006 Nov 4;333(7575):939. [PMID:
17012266]
 
Calfee RP et al. Management of lateral epicondylitis: current
concepts. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2008 Jan;16(1):19–29.
[PMID: 18180389]
 
2. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain, burning, and tingling in the distribution of the median nerve.
 Initially, most bothersome during sleep.
 Late weakness or atrophy, especially of the thenar eminence.
 Can be caused by repetitive activities using the wrist.
 Commonly seen during pregnancy and in patients with diabetes
mellitus or rheumatoid arthritis.
 
 General Considerations
An entrapment neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome is a painful
disorder caused by compression of the median nerve between the
carpal ligament and other structures within the carpal tunnel. The
contents of the tunnel can be compressed by synovitis of the tendon
sheaths or carpal joints, recent or malhealed fractures, tumors,
tissue infiltration, and occasionally congenital syndromes (eg,
mucopolysaccharidoses). Even though no anatomic lesion is
apparent, flattening or even circumferential constriction of the
median nerve may be observed during operative section of the
overlying carpal ligament. The disorder may occur in fluid retention
of pregnancy, in individuals with a history of repetitive use of the
hands, or following injuries of the wrists. There is a familial type of
carpal tunnel syndrome in which no etiologic factor can be
identified. Carpal tunnel syndrome can also be a feature of many
systemic diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and other rheumatic
disorders (inflammatory tenosynovitis), myxedema, amyloidosis,
sarcoidosis, leukemia, acromegaly, and hyperparathyroidism.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The initial symptoms are pain, burning, and tingling in the distribution
of the median nerve (the palmar surfaces of the thumb, the index
and long fingers, and the radial half of the ring finger). Aching pain
may radiate proximally into the forearm and occasionally proximally
to the shoulder and over the neck and chest. Pain is exacerbated by
manual activity, particularly by extremes of volar flexion or
dorsiflexion of the wrist. It is most bothersome at night. Impairment
of sensation in the median nerve distribution may or may not be
demonstrable. Subtle disparity between the affected and opposite
sides can be shown by testing for two-point discrimination or by
requiring the patient to identify different textures of cloth by rubbing
them between the tips of the thumb and the index finger. A Tinel or
Phalen sign may be positive. A Tinel sign is tingling or shock-like
pain on volar wrist percussion (Table 41–4). The Phalen sign is
pain or paresthesia in the distribution of the median nerve when the
patient flexes both wrists to 90 degrees for 60 seconds (Table 41–
4). The carpal compression test, in which numbness and tingling
are induced by the direct application of pressure over the carpal
tunnel, may be more sensitive and specific than the Tinel and Phalen
tests (Table 41–4). Muscle weakness or atrophy, especially of the
thenar eminence, can appear later than sensory disturbances as
compression of the nerve worsens.
B. Imaging
Ultrasound can demonstrate flattening of the median nerve beneath
the flexor retinaculum. Sensitivity of ultra-sound for carpal tunnel
syndrome is variable but estimated between 54% and 98%.
 
Table 41–4. Wrist examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Examine for the alignment of the wrist and
fingers SEADS*
 
Palpation
Include important landmarks: scaphoid
“snuff box,” distal radius, scapholunate
ligament, hook of hamate, ulnar joint line,
distal radioulnar joint
 
Range of
motion testing
Check range of motion actively (patient
performs) and passively (clinician
performs) especially with flexion and
extension of the wrist. Ulnar and radial
deviation and circumduction of the wrist
can be screened.
 
Neurovascular
examination
Check motor strength and dermatomal
sensation in the fingers in the radial
(thumb), median (3rd finger) and ulnar
distribution (5th finger). Check capillary
refill to digits as well as radial pulse.
 
Tinel sign
Tingling or shock-like pain on volar wrist
percussion. The carpal compression test,
in which numbness and tingling are
induced by the direct application of
pressure over the carpal tunnel, may be
more sensitive and specific than the Tinel
and Phalen tests.
 
Phalen sign
Pain or paresthesia in the distribution of
the median nerve when the patient flexes
both wrists to 90 degrees for 60 seconds.
 
Carpel
compression
test
Performed by applying direct application
of pressure over the carpal tunnel.
 
* Swelling, erythema, atrophy, deformity, and (surgical) scars (SEADS)
C. Special Tests
Electromyography and nerve conduction studies show evidence of
sensory conduction delay before motor delay, which can occur in
severe cases. This syndrome should be differentiated from other
cervicobrachial pain syndromes, from compression syndromes of
the median nerve in the forearm or arm, and from mononeuritis
multiplex. When left-sided, it may be confused with angina pectoris.
 Treatment
Treatment is directed toward relief of pressure on the median nerve.
When a causative lesion is discovered, it should be treated
appropriately. Otherwise, patients in whom carpal tunnel syndrome
is suspected should modify their hand activities and have the
affected wrist splinted in the neutral position for up to 3 months.
Oral corticosteroids or NSAIDs can also be tried. Carpal tunnel
release surgery can be beneficial if the patient has a positive
electrodiagnostic test, at least moderate symptoms, high clinical
probability, unsuccessful nonoperative treatment, and symptoms
lasting longer than 12 months.
 When to Refer
 
•    If symptoms persist > 3 months despite conservative
treatment, including the use of a wrist splint.
•    If thenar muscle (eg, abductor pollicis brevis) weakness
or atrophy develops.
Bickel KD. Carpal tunnel syndrome. J Hand Surg Am. 2010
Jan;35(1):147–52. [PMID: 20117319]
 
Jarvik JG et al. Surgery versus non-surgical therapy for carpal
tunnel syndrome: a randomised parallel-group trial. Lancet. 2009
Sep 26;374(9695):1074–81. [PMID: 19782873]
 
Keith MW et al. Treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. J Am Acad
Orthop Surg. 2009 Jun;17(6):397–405. [PMID: 19474449]
 
HIP
1. Hip Fractures
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Internal rotation of the hip is the best provocative diagnostic
maneuver.
 Hip fractures should be surgically repaired as soon as possible
(within 24 hours).
 Delayed treatment of hip fractures in the elderly leads to
increased complications and mortality.
 
 General Considerations
Approximately 4% of the 7.9 million fractures that occur each year
in the United States are hip fractures. There is a high mortality rate
among elderly patients following hip fracture, with death occurring in
8–9% within 30 days and in approximately 25–30% within 1 year.
Osteoporosis, female sex, height > 5-foot 8-inches, and age over
50 years are risk factors for hip fracture. Hip fractures usually occur
after a fall. High velocity trauma is needed in younger patients.
Stress fractures can occur in athletes or individuals with poor bone
mineral density following repetitive loading activities.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients typically report pain in the groin, though pain radiating to
the lateral hip, buttock, or knee can also commonly occur. If a
displaced fracture is present, the patient will not be able to bear
weight and the leg may be externally rotated. Gentle logrolling of the
leg with the patient supine helps rule out a fracture. Examination of
the hip demonstrates pain with deep palpation in the area of the
femoral triangle (similar to palpating the femoral artery). Provided
the patient can tolerate it, the clinician can, with the patient supine,
flex the hip to 90 degrees with the knee flexed to 90 degrees. The
leg can then be internally and externally rotated to assess the range
of motion on both sides. Pain with internal rotation of the hip is the
most sensitive test to identify intra-articular hip pathology. Hip
flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction strength can be tested.
 
Table 41–5. Hip examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Examine for the alignment of the lower
extremity, consider lumbar spine exam
 
Palpation
Include important landmarks: ASIS1 and
AIIS2 (proximal quadriceps muscle
insertions), greater trochanter (gluteal
tendon insertions and bursa), anterior
femoral triangle (hip joint and hip flexion
insertion), ischial tuberosity (hamstring
tendon insertion), sacroiliac joints
 
Range of
motion testing
Check range of motion passively (clinician
performs) especially internal and external
rotation of the hip
 
Hip strength
testing
Test resisted hip flexion, extension,
abduction and adduction strength
manually
 
Trendelenburg
test
The patient balances first on one leg,
raising the non-standing knee toward the
chest. The clinician can stand behind the
patient and observe for dropping of the
pelvis and buttock on the non-stance side.
 
1Anterior superior illiac spine (ASIS).
2Anterior inferior illiac spine (AIIS).
 
Patients with hip stress fractures have less pain on physical
examination than described previously but typically have pain with
weight bearing. The Trendelenburg test can be performed to
examine for weakness or instability of the hip abductors, primarily
the gluteus medius muscle (Table 41–5). Another functional test is
asking the patient to hop or jump during the examination. If the
patient has a compatible clinical history of pain and is unable or
unwilling to hop, then a stress fracture should be ruled out. The
back should be carefully examined in patients with hip complaints,
including examining for signs for sciatica.
Following displaced hip fractures, a thorough medical evaluation
and treatment should be pursued to maximize the patients’ ability to
undergo operative intervention. Patients who are unable to get up
by themselves may have been immobile for hours or even days
following their falls. Thus, clinicians must exclude rhabdomyolysis,
hypothermia, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and
other conditions that can occur with prolonged immobilization.
Delay of operative intervention leads to an increased risk of
perioperative morbidity and mortality.
B. Imaging
Useful radiographic views of the hip include anteroposterior views
of the pelvis and bilateral hips and frog-leg lateral views of the
painful hip. A CT scan or MRI may be necessary to identify the hip
fracture pattern or to evaluate non-displaced fractures. Hip
fractures are generally described by location, including femoral
neck, intertrochanteric, or subtrochanteric.
 Treatment
Almost all patients with a hip fracture will require surgery and may
need to be admitted to hospital for pain control while they await
surgery. Surgery is recommended within the first 24 hours because
studies have shown that delaying surgery 48 hours results in at least
twice the rate of major and minor medical complications, including
pneumonia, decubitus ulcers, and deep venous thrombosis.
Stress fractures in active patients require a period of protected
weight-bearing and a gradual return to activities, although it may
take 4–6 months before a return to normal activities. Femoral neck
fractures are commonly treated with hemiarthroplasty or total hip
replacement. This allows the patient to begin weight-bearing
immediately postoperatively. Peritrochanteric hip fractures are
treated with open reduction internal fixation, where plate and screw
construct or intramedullary devices are used. The choice of implant
will depend on the fracture pattern. Since fracture fixation requires
the fracture to proceed to union, the patient may need to have
protected weight-bearing during the early postoperative period.
Dislocation, periprosthetic fracture, and avascular necrosis of the
hip are common complications after surgery.
Patients should be mobilized as soon as possible postoperatively
to avoid pulmonary complications and decubitus ulcers. Supervised
physical therapy and rehabilitation is important for the patient to
regain as much function as possible. Unfortunately, most patients
following hip fractures will lose some degree of independence.
 Prevention
Bone density screening can identify patients at risk for osteopenia or
osteoporosis, and treatment can be planned accordingly. Nutrition
(calcium and vitamin D intake) and bone health (bone densitometry,
serum calcium and 25-OH vitamin D levels) should be reviewed
with the patient (see Chapter 26). For patients with decreased
mobility, systemic anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight
heparin or warfarin should be considered to avoid deep venous
thrombosis (see Table 14–13). Fall prevention exercise programs
are available for elderly patients at risk for falls and hip fractures.
Hip protectors are uncomfortable and have less use in preventing
fractures.
 When to Refer
All patients in whom hip fracture is suspected.
Forte ML et al. Ninety-day mortality after intertrochanteric hip
fracture: does provider volume matter? J Bone Joint Surg Am.
2010 Apr;92(4):799–806. [PMID: 20360501]
 
Lowe JA et al. Optimal treatment of femoral neck fractures
according to patient's physiologic age: an evidence-based review.
Orthop Clin North Am. 2010 Apr;41(2):157–66. [PMID:
20399355]
 
Santaguida PL et al. Patient characteristics affecting the prognosis
of total hip and knee joint arthroplasty: a systematic review. Can J
Surg. 2008 Dec;51(6):428–36. [PMID: 19057730]
 
2. Osteoarthritis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain deep in the groin on the affected side.
 Swelling.
 Degeneration of joint cartilage.
 Loss of active and passive range of motion in severe
osteoarthritis.
 
 General Considerations
In the United States, the prevalence of osteoarthritis will grow as
the number of persons over age 65 years doubles to more than 70
million by 2030. Cartilage loss and osteoarthritis symptoms are
preceded by damage to the collagen-proteoglycan matrix. The
etiology of osteoarthritis is often multifactorial, including previous
trauma, prior high-impact activities, genetic factors, obesity, and
rheumato-logic or metabolic conditions.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Osteoarthritis usually causes pain in the affected joint with loading of
the joint or at the extremes of motion. Mechanical symptoms—such
as swelling, grinding, catching, and locking—suggest internal
derangement, which is indicated by damaged cartilage or bone
fragments that affect the smooth range of motion expected at an
articular joint. Pain can also produce the sensation of “buckling” or
“giving way” due to muscle inhibition. As the joint degeneration
becomes more advanced, the patient loses active range of motion
and may lose passive range of motion as well.
Patients complain of pain deep in the groin on the affected side
and have problems with weight-bearing activities such as walking,
climbing stairs, and getting up from a chair. They may limp and
develop a lurch during their gait, leaning toward the affected side as
the walk to reduce pressure on the hip.
B. Imaging
Weight-bearing radiographs of the affected hip are preferred for
evaluation of hip osteoarthritis. To reduce radiation exposure,
obtain an anteroposterior weight-bearing radiograph of the pelvis
with a lateral view of the symptomatic hip. Joint space narrowing
and sclerosis suggest early osteoarthritis, while osteophytes near the
femoral head or acetabulum and subchondral bone cysts are more
advanced changes.
 Treatment
A. Conservative
Changes in the articular cartilage are irreversible. Therefore, a cure
for the diseased joint is not possible, although symptoms or
structural issues can be addressed to try to maintain activity level.
Conservative treatment for patients with osteoarthritis includes
activity modification, therapeutic exercises, weight loss, and use of
assistive devices (such as a cane). Lifestyle modifications also
include proper footwear and avoidance of high impact activities.
Analgesics may be effective in some cases. Corticosteroid
injections can be considered for short-term relief of pain; however,
hip injections are best performed under fluoroscopic, ultrasound, or
CT guidance to ensure accurate injection in the joint. Use of
viscosupplementation in the hip has been studied with modest
improvements; however, it remains an off-label use at this time.
B. Surgical
Two published randomized trials demonstrate that arthroscopy does
not improve outcomes at 1 year over placebo or routine
conservative treatment of osteoarthritis. Arthroscopic surgery is
indicated in patients with osteoarthritis if, rather than pain, they have
mechanical symptoms and internal derangement symptoms that can
be removed as the main complaint. Such surgical treatments are
useful to restore range of motion by removing osteophytes, cartilage
fragments, or loose bodies.
Joint replacement surgeries are effective and cost-effective for
patients with significant symptoms and functional limitations,
providing improvements in pain, function, and quality of life.
Minimally invasive surgeries and computer-assisted navigation
during operation are being investigated as methods to improve
techniques (eg, accurate placement of the hardware implant) and to
reduce complication rates.
Hip resurfacing surgery is a newer joint replacement technique.
Rather than use a traditional artificial joint implant of the whole neck
and femur, only the femoral head is removed and replaced.
Concerns following resur-facing surgery include the risk of femoral
neck fracture and collapse of the head. The cumulative survival rate
of this implant at 10 years from recent studies is estimated to be
94%. Evidence so far suggests that hip resurfacing is comparable to
total hip replacement and is a viable alternative for younger patients.
 When to Refer
Patients with sufficient disability, limited benefit from conservative
therapy, and evidence of severe osteoarthritis can be referred for
joint replacement surgery.
Lee YH et al. Effect of glucosamine or chondroitin sulfate on the
osteoarthritis progression: a meta-analysis. Rheumatol Int. 2010
Jan;30(3):357–63. [PMID: 19544061]
 
Zhang W et al. OARSI recommendations for the management of
hip and knee osteoarthritis, Part II: OARSI evidence-based,
expert consensus guidelines. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2008
Feb;16(2):137–62. [PMID: 18279766]
 
KNEE
1. Knee Pain
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Effusion can occur with intra-articular pathology, such as
osteoarthritis, and meniscus and cruciate ligament tears.
 Acute knee swelling (hemarthrosis) within 2 hours may indicate
ligament injuries or patellar dislocation or fracture.
 
 General Considerations
The knee is the largest joint in the body and is susceptible to injury
from trauma, inflammation, infection, and degenerative changes. The
knee is a hinge joint. The joint line exists between the femoral
condyles and tibial plateaus. Separating and cushioning these bony
surfaces is the lateral and medial meniscal cartilage, which functions
as a shock absorber during weight bearing, protecting the articular
cartilage. The patella is a large sesamoid bone anterior to the joint.
It is embedded in the quadriceps tendon, and it articulates with the
trochlear groove of the femur. Poor patellar tracking in the trochlear
groove is a common source of knee pain especially when the cause
is atraumatic in nature. The knee is stabilized by the collateral
ligaments against varus (lateral collateral ligament) and valgus
(medial collateral ligament) stresses. The tibia is limited in its anterior
movement by the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and in its
posterior movement by the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL). The
bursae of the knee are located between the skin and bony
prominences. They are sac-like structures with a synovial lining.
They act to decrease friction of tendons and muscles as they move
over adjacent bony structures. Excessive external pressure or
friction can lead to swelling and pain of the bursae. The prepatellar
bursae (located between the skin and patella), and the pes anserine
bursa (which is medial and inferior to the patella, just below the
tibial plateau) are most commonly affected. Joint fluid, when
excessive due to synovitis or trauma, can track posteriorly through a
potential space, resulting in a popliteal cyst (also called a Baker
cyst). Other structures that are susceptible to overuse injury and
may cause knee pain following repetitive activity include the
patellofemoral joint and the iliotibial band. Osteoarthritis of the
knees is common after 50 years of age and can develop due to
previous trauma, aging, activities, alignment issues, and genetic
predisposition.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
A careful history, coupled with a physical examination that includes
observation, palpation and range of motion testing, as well as
specific tests for particular anatomic structures is frequently
sufficient to establish a diagnosis. When there is a knee joint effusion
caused by increased fluid in the intra-articular space, physical
examination will demonstrate swelling in the hollow or dimple
around the patella and distention of the suprapatellar space.
 
Table 41–6. Differential diagnosis of knee pain.
 
Mechanical dysfunction or disruption
    Internal derangement of the knee: injury to the menisci or
ligaments
    Degenerative changes caused by osteoarthritis
    Dynamic dysfunction or misalignment of the patella
    Fracture as a result of trauma
Increased intra-articular pressure or inflammation
    Internal derangement of the knee: injury to the menisci or
ligaments
    Inflammation or infection of the knee joint
    Ruptured popliteal (Baker) cyst
Peri-articular inflammation
    Internal derangement of the knee: injury to the menisci or
ligaments
    Prepatellar or anserine bursitis
    Ligamentous sprain
Table 41–6 shows the differential diagnosis of knee pain, and
Table 41–7 outlines possible diagnoses based on the location of
pain.
B. Laboratory Findings
Laboratory testing of aspirated joint fluid, when indicated, can lead
to a definitive diagnosis in most patients.
 
Table 41–7. Location of common causes of knee pain.
 
Medial knee pain
    Medial compartment osteoarthritis
    Medial collateral ligament strain
    Medial meniscal injury
    Anserine bursitis (pain over the proximal medial tibial
plateau)
Anterior knee pain
    Patellofemoral syndrome (often bilateral)
    Osteoarthritis
    Prepatellar bursitis (associated with swelling anterior to
the patella)
    “Jumper's knee” (pain at the inferior pole of the patella)
    Septic arthritis
    Gout or other inflammatory disorder
Lateral knee pain
    Lateral meniscal injury
    Iliotibial band syndrome (pain superficially along the
distal iliotibial band near lateral femoral condyle or lateral
tibial insertion)
    Lateral collateral ligament sprain
Posterior knee pain
    Popliteal (Baker) cyst
    Osteoarthritis
    Meniscal tears
    Hamstring or calf tendinopathy
C. Imaging
Knee pain is evaluated with plain (weight-bearing) radio-graphs and
MRI most commonly, but CT and ultrasound are sometimes useful.
An acute hemarthrosis represents bloody swelling that usually
occurs within the first 1–2 hours following trauma. In situations
where the trauma may be activity-related and not a result of a fall or
collision, the differential diagnosis most commonly includes ACL
tear (responsible for almost 50% of hemarthrosis in children and >
70% in adults), fracture (patella, tibial plateau, femoral
supracondylar, growth plate [physeal]), and patellar dislocation.
Meniscal tears are unlikely to cause large hemarthrosis.
Silvis ML et al. Clinical inquiries. What is the best way to evaluate
an acute traumatic knee injury? J Fam Pract. 2008
Feb;57(2):116–8. [PMID: 18248732]
 
2. Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 An injury involving an audible pop when the knee buckles.
 Acute swelling immediately (or within 4 hours).
 Instability occurs with lateral movement activities and going down
stairs.
 
 General Considerations
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) connects the posterior aspect
of the lateral femoral condyle to the anterior aspect of the tibia. Its
main function is to control anterior translation of the tibia on the
femur. It also provides rotationally stability of the tibia on the femur.
ACL tears are common with sporting injuries. They can result from
both contact (valgus blow to the knee) and non-contact (jumping,
pivoting, and deceleration) activities. The patient usually falls down
following the injury, has acute swelling and difficulty with weight-
bearing, and complains of instability. ACL injuries are common in
skiing, soccer, football, and basketball among young adolescents
and middle-age patients. Pre-pubertal and older patients usually
sustain fractures instead of ligamentous injuries.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Acute ACL injuries usually lead to acute swelling of the knee,
causing difficulty with motion. After the swelling has resolved, the
patient can walk with a ‘stiff-knee’ gait or quadriceps avoidance
gait because of the instability. More importantly, patients describe
symptoms of instability while performing side-to-side maneuvers or
descending stairs. Stability tests assess the amount of laxity of the
knee while performing side-to-side maneuvers or descending stairs.
The Lachman test (84–87% sensitivity and 93% specificity) is
performed with the patient lying supine and the knee flexed to 20–
30 degrees (Table 41–8). The clinician grasps the distal femur from
the lateral side and the proximal tibia with the other hand on the
medial side. With the knee in neutral position, stabilize the femur,
and pull the tibia anteriorly using a similar force to lifting a 10- to
15-pound weight. Excessive anterior translation of the tibia
compared with the other side indicates injury to the ACL. The
anterior drawer test (48% sensitivity and 87% specificity) is
performed with the patient lying supine and the knee flexed to 90
degrees (Table 41–8). The clinician stabilizes the patient's foot by
sitting on it and grasps the proximal tibia with both hands around the
calf and pulls anteriorly. A positive test finds ACL laxity compared
with the unaffected side. The pivot shift test is used to determine
the amount of rotational laxity of the knee (Table 41–8). The patient
is examined while lying supine with the knee in full extension. It is
then slowly flexed while applying internal rotation and a valgus
stress. The clinician feels for a subluxation at 20–40 degrees of
knee flexion. The patient must remain very relaxed to have a
positive test.
B. Imaging
Plain radiographs are usually negative in ACL tears but are useful to
rule out fractures. A small avulsion injury can sometimes be seen
over the lateral compartment of the knee. This is called a “segond”
fracture and is pathognomonic of an ACL injury. MRI is the best
method to diagnose ACL tears. It has > 95% sensitivity and
specificity for ACL tears. MRI also allows evaluation of other
associated structures, such as menisci and cartilages.
 Treatment
Most young and active patients will require surgical reconstruction
of the ACL. Common surgical techniques use the patient's own
tissues, usually the patellar or hamstring tendons (autograft) or a
cadaver graft (allograft) to arthroscopically reconstruct the torn
ACL. Recovery from surgery usually requires 6 months.
Nonoperative treatments are usually reserved for older patients
or those with a very sedentary lifestyle. Physical therapy can focus
on hamstring strengthening and core stability. An ACL brace can
help stability. Longitudinal studies have demonstrated that
nonoperative management of an ACL tear can lead to a higher
incidence of meniscus tears.
 When to Refer
 
•    Almost all ACL tears should be referred to an
orthopedic surgeon for evaluation.
•    Individuals with instability in the setting of a chronic ACL
tear (> 6 months) should be considered for surgical
reconstruction.
•    Patients with an ACL tear and associated meniscus or
articular injuries may benefit from surgery to address the
other injuries.
 
Table 41–8. Knee examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Examine for
the alignment
of the lower
extremities
(varus, valgus,
knee
recurvatum),
ankle
eversion and
foot
pronation,
gait, SEADS
 
Palpation
Include
important
landmarks:
patellofemoral
joint, medial
and lateral
joint lines
(especially
posterior
aspects), pes
anserine
bursa, distal
iliotibial band
and Gerdy
tubercle
(iliotibial band
insertion)
 
Range of motion testing
Check range
of motion
actively
(patient
performs) and
passively
(clinician
performs),
especially
with flexion
and extension
of the knee
normally 0–10
degrees of
extension and
120–150
degrees of
flexion
 
 
Knee strength testing
Test resisted
knee
extension and
knee flexion
strength
manually
 
Ligament stress tests
Performed
Lachman test
with the
patient lying
supine, and
the knee
flexed to 20–
30 degrees.
The examiner
grasps the
distal femur
from the
lateral side,
and the
proximal tibia
with the other
hand on the
medial side.
With the knee
in neutral
position,
stabilize the
femur, and
pull the tibia
anteriorly
using a
similar force
to lifting a 10–
15 pound
weight.
Excessive
anterior
translation of
the tibia
compared
with the other
side indicates
injury to the
anterior
cruciate
ligament.
 
 
Anterior drawer
Performed
with the
patient lying
supine and
the knee
flexed to 90
degrees. The
clinician
stabilizes the
patient's foot
by sitting on it
and grasps
the proximal
tibia with both
hands around
the calf and
pulls
anteriorly. A
positive test
finds anterior
cruciate
ligament laxity
compared
with the
unaffected
side.
 
 
Pivot shift
Used to
determine the
amount of
rotational
laxity of the
knee. The
patient is
examined
while lying
supine with
the knee in full
extension. It is
then slowly
flexed while
applying
internal
rotation and a
valgus stress.
The clinician
feels for a
subluxation at
20–40
degrees of
knee flexion.
The patient
must remain
very relaxed
to have a
positive test.
 
 
Performed
with the
patient
supine. The
clinician
should stand
on the outside
of the
patient's
knee. With
one hand, the
clinician
should hold
the ankle
while the
other hand is
Valgus stress
supporting the
leg at the level
of the knee
joint. A valgus
stress is
applied at the
ankle to
determine
pain and laxity
of the medial
collateral
ligament. The
test should be
performed at
both 30
degrees and
at 0 degrees
of knee
extension.
 
 
Varus stress
The patient is
again placed
supine. For
the right knee,
the clinician
should be
standing on
the right side
of the patient.
The left hand
of the
examiner
should be
holding the
ankle while
the right hand
is supporting
the lateral
thigh. A varus
stress is
applied at the
ankle to
determine
pain and laxity
of the lateral
collateral
ligament. The
test should be
performed at
both 30
degrees and
at 0 degrees
of knee
flexion.
 
 
The sag sign
The patient is
placed supine
and both hips
and knees
are flexed up
to 90
degrees.
Because of
gravity, the
posterior
cruciate
ligament-
injured knee
will have an
obvious set-
off at the
anterior tibia
which is
“sagging”
posteriorly.
 
Posterior drawer
The patient is
placed supine
with the knee
flexed at 90
degrees (see
Anterior
drawer figure
above). In a
normal knee,
the anterior
tibia should
be positioned
about 10 mm
anterior to the
femoral
condyle. The
clinician can
grasp the
proximal tibia
with both
hands and
push the tibia
posteriorly.
The
movement,
indicating
laxity and
possible tear
of the
posterior
cruciate
ligament, is
compared
with the
uninjured
knee.
 
Meniscal signs
Performed
with the
patient lying in
supine. The
clinician
flexes the
knee until the
patient
McMurray test
reports pain.
For this test to
be valid, it
must be
flexed pain-
free beyond
90 degrees.
The clinician
externally
rotates the
patient's foot
and then
extends the
knee while
palpating the
medial knee
for “click” in
the medial
compartment
of the knee or
pain
reproducing
pain from a
meniscus
injury. To test
the lateral
meniscus, the
same
maneuver is
repeated
while rotating
the foot
internally
(53%
sensitivity and
59–97%
specificity).
 
Performed
with the hip
flexed to 90
degrees. The
knee is then
flexed
maximally
with internally
or externally
Modified McMurray
rotation of the
lower leg. The
knee can then
be rotated
with the lower
leg in internal
or external
rotation to
capture the
torn meniscus
underneath
the condyles.
A positive test
is pain over
the joint line
while the knee
is being
flexed and
internally or
externally
rotated.
 
 
Thessaly test
Performed
with the
patient
standing on
one leg with
knee slightly
flexed. The
patient is
asked to twist
the knee while
standing on
one leg. Pain
can be
elicited during
twisting
motion.
 
 
Patellofemoral joint test
Apprehension sign
Suggests
instability of
the
patellofemoral
joint and is
positive when
the patient
becomes
apprehensive
when the
knee is
deviated
laterally.
 
Giaconi JC et al. Anterior cruciate ligament graft reconstruction:
clinical, technical, and imaging overview. Top Magn Reson
Imaging. 2009 Jun;20(3):129–50. [PMID: 20410802]
 
Peeler J et al. Accuracy and reliability of anterior cruciate ligament
clinical examination in a multidisciplinary sports medicine setting.
Clin J Sport Med. 2010 Mar;20(2):80–5. [PMID: 20215888]
 
3. Collateral Ligament Injury
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Caused by a valgus or varus blow or stress to the knee.
 Pain and instability in the affected area.
 Limited range of motion.
 
 General Considerations
The medial collateral ligament (MCL) is the most commonly injured
ligament in the knee. It is usually injured with a valgus stress to the
partially flexed knee. It can also occur with a blow to the lateral leg.
The MCL is commonly injured with acute ACL injuries. The lateral
collateral ligament (LCL) is less commonly injured, but this can
occur with a medial blow to the knee. Since both collateral
ligaments are extra-articular, injuries to these ligaments may not lead
to any intra-articular effusion. Affected patients may have difficulty
walking initially, but this can improve when the swelling decreases.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The main clinical findings for patients with collateral ligament injuries
are pain along the course of the ligaments. The patient may have
limited range of motion due to pain, especially during the first 2
weeks following the injury. The best tests to assess the collateral
ligaments are the varus and valgus stress tests. The sensitivity of the
tests is as high as 86–96%.
The valgus stress test is performed with the patient supine
(Table 41–8). The clinician should stand on the outside of the
patient's knee. With one hand, the clinician should hold the ankle
while the other hand is supporting the leg at the level of the knee
joint. A valgus stress is applied at the ankle to determine pain and
laxity of the MCL. The test should be performed at both 30
degrees and at 0 degrees of knee extension.
For the varus stress test, the patient is again placed supine
(Table 41–8). For the right knee, the clinician should be standing on
the right side of the patient. The clinician's left hand should be
holding the ankle while the right hand is supporting the lateral thigh.
A varus stress is applied at the ankle to determine pain and laxity of
the LCL. The test should be performed at both 30 degrees and at 0
degrees of knee flexion.
The test results can be graded from 1–3. Grade 1 is when the
patient has pain with varus/valgus stress test but no instability. With
grade 2 injuries, the patient has pain, and the knee shows instability
at 30 degrees of knee flexion. In grade 3 injuries, the patient has
marked instability but not much pain. The knee is often unstable at
both 30 degrees and 0 degrees of knee flexion.
B. Imaging
Radiographs are usually nondiagnostic except for avulsion injuries.
However, radiographs should be used to rule out fractures that can
occur with collateral ligament injuries. Isolated MCL injuries usually
do not require evaluation by MRI, but MRI should be used to
evaluate possible associated cruciate ligament injuries. LCL or
posterolateral corner injuries should have MRI evaluation to
exclude associated injuries and to determine their significance.
 Treatment
The majority of MCL injuries can be treated with protected weight-
bearing and physical therapy. For grade 1 and 2 injuries, the patient
can usually bear weight as tolerated with full range of motion. A
hinged knee brace can be given to patients with grade 2 MCL tears
to provide stability. Early physical therapy is recommended to
protect range of motion and muscle strength. Grade 3 MCL injuries
require long leg braces to provide stability. Patients can weight-bear
but only with the knee locked in extension with a brace. The motion
can then be increased with the brace unlocked. Grade 3 injuries can
take up to 6–8 weeks to heal. MCL injuries rarely need surgery.
LCL injuries usually require surgical repair or reconstruction.
 When to Refer
 
•    Symptomatic instability with chronic MCL tears or acute
MCL tears with other ligamentous injuries.
•    LCL or posterolateral corner injuries require urgent
surgical repair or reconstruction (within 1 week).
Phisitkul P et al. MCL injuries of the knee: current concepts
review. Iowa Orthop J. 2006;26:77–90. [PMID: 16789454]
 
Ricchetti ET et al. Acute and chronic management of posterolateral
corner injuries of the knee. Orthopedics. 2008 May;31(5):479.
[PMID: 19292312]
 
4. Posterior Cruciate Ligament Injury
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Usually follows an anterior trauma to the tibia, such as a
dashboard injury during a motor vehicle accident.
 The knee may freely dislocate and reduce.
 One-third of multi-ligament injuries involving the PCL have
neurovascular injuries.
 
 General Considerations
The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) is the strongest ligament in
the knee. PCL injuries usually represent significant trauma and are
highly associated with multi-ligament injuries and knee dislocations.
More than 70–90% of PCL injuries have associated injuries to the
posterolateral corner, MCL, and ACL. There should be high
suspicion for neurovascular injuries and a thorough neurovascular
examination of the limb should be performed.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Most patients with acute injuries have difficulty with ambulation.
Patients with chronic PCL injuries can ambulate without gross
instability but may complain of subjective “looseness” and often
report pain and dysfunction, especially with bending. Clinical
examinations of PCL injuries include the “sag sign” (Table 41–8).
The patient is placed supine and both hips and knees are flexed up
to 90 degrees. Because of gravity, the PCL-injured knee will have
an obvious set-off at the anterior tibia which is “sagging” posteriorly.
The PCL ligament can also be examined using the posterior
drawer test (90% sensitivity and 99% specificity) (Table 41–8).
The patient is placed supine with the knee flexed at 90 degrees. In a
normal knee, the anterior tibia should be positioned about 10 mm
anterior to the femoral condyle. The clinician can grasp the proximal
tibia with both hands and push the tibia posteriorly. The movement,
indicating laxity and possible tear of the PCL, is compared with the
uninjured knee. A PCL injury is sometimes mistaken for an ACL
injury during the anterior drawer test since the tibia is subluxed
posteriorly in a sagged position and can be abnormally translated
forward, yielding a false-positive test for an ACL injury.
B. Imaging
Radiographs are often nondiagnostic but are required to diagnose
any fractures. MRI is used to diagnose PCL and other associated
injuries.
 Treatment
Isolated PCL injuries can be treated nonoperatively. Acute injuries
are usually immobilized using a knee brace with the knee extension;
the patient uses crutches for ambulation. Physical therapy can help
achieve increased range of motion and improved ambulation. Many
PCL injuries are associated with other injuries and may require
operative reconstruction. Neurovascular injuries occur in up to one-
third of all knee dislocations or PCL injuries.
 When to Refer
 
•    The patient should be seen urgently within 1–2 weeks.
•    If the lateral knee is also unstable with varus stress
testing, the patient should be assessed for a posterolateral
corner injury, which may require an urgent surgical
reconstruction.
•    Isolated PCL tears may require surgery if the tear is
complete (grade 3) and the patient is symptomatic.
McAllister DR et al. Diagnosis and treatment of posterior cruciate
ligament injuries. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2007 Oct;6(5): 293–9.
[PMID: 17883964]
 
5. Meniscus Injuries
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Patient may or may not report an injury.
 Joint line pain and pain with deep squatting are the most sensitive
signs.
 Difficulty with knee extension suggests an internal derangement
that should be evaluated urgently with MRI.
 
 General Considerations
The menisci act as shock absorbers within the knee. Injuries to a
meniscus can lead to pain, clicking, and locking sensation. Most
meniscus injuries occur with acute injuries (usually in younger
patients) or repeated microtrauma, such as squatting or twisting
(usually in older patients).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The patient may have an antalgic (painful) gait and difficulty with
squatting. Physical findings can include effusion or joint line
tenderness. Patients can usually point out the area of maximal
tenderness along the joint line. Swelling usually occurs during the
first 24 hours after the injury or later. Meniscus tears rarely lead to
the immediate swelling that is commonly seen with fractures and
ligament tears. Meniscus tears are commonly seen in arthritic knees.
However, it is often unclear whether the pain is coming from the
meniscus tear or the arthritis.
Provocative tests, including the McMurray test, the modified
McMurray test, and the Thessaly test, can be performed to
confirm the diagnosis (Table 41–8). Most symptomatic meniscus
tears cause pain with deep squatting and when waddling
(performing a “duck walk”).
B. Imaging
Radiographs are usually normal but may show joint space
narrowing, early osteoarthritis changes, or loose bodies. MRI of the
knee is the best diagnostic tool for meniscal injuries (93% sensitivity
and 95% specificity). High signal through the meniscus (bright on T2
images) represents a meniscal tear.
 Treatment
Conservative treatment can be used for degenerative tears in older
patients. The treatment is similar for patients with mild knee
osteoarthritis, including analgesics and physical therapy for
strengthening and core stability. Acute tears in young and active
patients can be best treated arthroscopically with meniscus repair or
debridement. Recent randomized controlled studies have
demonstrated no benefit with arthroscopic meniscectomy in patients
with advanced osteoarthritis.
 When to Refer
 
•    If the patient has symptoms of internal derangement
suspected as meniscus injury. The patient should receive
an MRI to confirm the injury.
•    If the patient cannot extend the knee due to a
mechanical block, the patient should be evaluated as soon
as possible. Certain shaped tears on MRI, such as bucket
handle tears, are amenable to meniscal repair surgery.
Konan S et al. Do physical diagnostic tests accurately detect
meniscal tears? Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2009
Jul;17(7):806–11. [PMID: 19399477]
Sohn DH et al. Meniscal debridement: current concepts. J Knee
Surg. 2008 Apr;21(2):145–53. [PMID: 18500068]
 
6. Patellofemoral Pain
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Pain experienced with bending activities (kneeling, squatting,
climbing stairs).
 Lateral deviation or tilting of the patella in relation to the femoral
groove.
 
 General Considerations
Patellofemoral pain, also known as anterior knee pain or “runner's
knee,” describes any pain involving the patellofemoral joint. The
pain affects any or all of the anterior knee structures, including the
medial and lateral aspects of the patella as well as the quadriceps
and patellar tendon insertions. The patella engages the femoral
trochlear groove with approximately 30 degrees of knee flexion.
Forces on the patellofemoral joint increase up to three times body
weight as the knee flexes to 90 degrees (eg, climbing stairs), and
five times body weight when going into full knee flexion (eg,
squatting). Abnormal patellar tracking during flexion can lead to
abnormal articular cartilage wear and pain. When the patient has
ligamentous hyperlaxity, the patella can sublux out of the groove,
usually laterally. Patellofemoral pain is also associated with muscle
strength and flexibility imbalances as well as altered hip and ankle
biomechanics.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Patients usually complain of pain in the anterior knee with bending
movements and less commonly in full extension. Pain may
sometimes be referred to the posterior knee or over the medial or
lateral inferior patella. Symptoms may begin after a trauma or after
repetitive physical activity, such as running and jumping. When
maltracking, palpable and sometimes audible crepitus can occur.
The apprehension sign suggests instability of the patellofemoral
joint and is positive when the patient becomes apprehensive when
the knee is deviated laterally (Table 41–8).
Evaluation of the quadriceps strength and hip stabilizers can be
accomplished by having the patient perform a one-leg squat without
support. Patients who are weak may display poor balance, with
dropping of the pelvis (similar to a positive hip Trendelenburg sign)
or excessive internal rotation of the knee medially. Normally, with a
one-leg squat, the knee should align over the second metatarsal ray.
Pain from this condition is localized under the kneecap. Intra-
articular swelling usually does not occur unless there are articular
cartilage defects or if osteoarthritis changes develop. On physical
examination, it is important to pal-pate the articular surfaces of the
patella. For example, the clinician can use one hand to move the
patella laterally, and use the fingertips of the other hand to palpate
the lateral undersurface of patella. Patellar mobility can be assessed
by medially and laterally deviating the patella (deviation by one-
quarter of the diameter of the kneecap is consider normal; greater
than one-half the diameter suggests excessive mobility). There are
two common presentations: (1) Patients whose ligaments and
patella are too loose (hypermobility); (2) and patients who have soft
tissues that are too tight leading to excessive pressure on the joint.
B. Imaging
Diagnostic imaging has limited use in younger patients and is more
helpful in older patients to assess for osteoarthritis or to evaluate
patients who do not respond to conservative treatment.
Radiographs may show lateral deviation or tilting of the patella in
relation to the femoral groove. MRI may show thinning of the
articular cartilage but is not clinically necessary, except prior to
surgery or to exclude other pathology.
 Treatment
A. Conservative
For symptomatic relief, use of local modalities such as ice and anti-
inflammatory medications can be beneficial. If the patient has signs
of patellar hypermobility, physical therapy exercises are useful to
strengthen the quadriceps (especially the vastus medialis obliquus
muscle) to help stabilize the patella and improve tracking. Support
for the patellofemoral joint can be provided by use of a patellar
stabilizer brace or special taping techniques (McConnell taping).
Correcting lower extremity alignment (with appropriate footwear or
over-the-counter orthotics) can help improve symptoms, especially
if the patient has pronation or high arched feet. If the patient
demonstrates tight peripatellar soft tissues, special focus should be
put on stretching the hamstrings, iliotibial band, quadriceps, calves
and hip flexors. Strengthening exercises should include the
quadriceps and hip abductors.
B. Surgical
Surgery is rarely needed and is considered a last resort for
patellofemoral pain. Procedures performed include lateral release or
patellar realignment surgery.
 When to Refer
Patients with persistent symptoms.
Dixit S et al. Management of patellofemoral pain syndrome. Am
Fam Physician. 2007 Jan 15;75(2):194–202. [PMID: 17263214]
 
van Linschoten R et al. Supervised exercise therapy versus usual
care for patellofemoral pain syndrome: an open label randomised
controlled trial. BMJ. 2009 Oct 20;339:b4074. [PMID:
19843565]
 
7. Osteoarthritis
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Degeneration of joint cartilage.
 Pain with bending or twisting activities.
 Swelling.
 Loss of active and passive range of motion in severe
osteoarthritis.
 
 General Considerations
In the United States, the prevalence of osteoarthritis will grow as
the number of persons over age 65 years double to more than 70
million by 2030. The incidence of knee osteoarthritis in the United
States is 240 per 100,000 person-years.
Cartilage loss and osteoarthritis symptoms are preceded by
damage to the collagen-proteoglycan matrix. The etiology of
osteoarthritis is often multifactorial including previous trauma, prior
high-impact activities, genetic factors, obesity, and rheumatologic or
metabolic conditions.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Osteoarthritis usually causes pain in the affected joint with loading of
the joint or at the extremes of motion. Mechanical symptoms—such
as swelling, grinding, catching, and locking—suggest internal
derangement, which is indicated by damaged cartilage or bone
fragments that affect the smooth range of motion expected at an
articular joint. Pain can also produce the sensation of “buckling” or
“giving way” due to muscle inhibition. As the joint degeneration
becomes more advanced, the patient loses active range of motion
and may lose passive range of motion as well.
As the condition worsens, patients with knee osteoarthritis have
an increasingly limited ability to walk. Symptoms include pain with
bending or twisting activities, and going up and down stairs.
Swelling, limping, and pain while sleeping are common complaints
with osteoarthritis, especially as it progresses.
B. Imaging
The most commonly recommended radiographs include bilateral
weight-bearing 45-degree bent knee posteroanterior, lateral, and
patellofemoral joint views (Merchant view). Radiographic findings
include diminished width of the articular cartilage causing joint space
narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, presence of osteophytes, and
cystic changes in the subchondral bone.
 Treatment
A. Conservative
Changes in the articular cartilage are irreversible. Therefore, a cure
for the diseased joint is not possible, although symptoms or
structural issues can be addressed to try to maintain activity level.
Conservative treatment for all patients with osteoarthritis includes
activity modification, therapeutic exercises, and weight loss.
Lifestyle modifications also include proper footwear and avoidance
of high impact activities.
Use of a cane in the hand opposite to the affected side is
mechanically advantageous. Knee sleeves or braces provide some
improvement in subjective pain symptoms most likely due to
improvements in neuromuscular function. If patients have
unicompartmental osteoarthritis in the medial or lateral
compartment, joint unloader braces are available to offload the
degenerative compartment. Cushioning footwear and appropriate
orthotics or shoe adjustments are useful for reducing impact to the
lower extremities.
The initial drugs of choice for the treatment of pain in knee
osteoarthritis are oral acetaminophen and topical capsaicin. If a
traditional NSAID is indicated, the choice should be based on cost,
side-effect profile, and compliance. The cyclooxygenase (COX)-2
inhibitor, celecoxib, is no more effective than traditional NSAIDs; it
may offer short-term, but probably not long-term, advantage in
preventing gastrointestinal complications. Due to its cost and
potential cardiovascular risk, celecoxib should be reserved for
carefully selected patients. The role of topical NSAIDs are being
considered in the osteoarthritis treatment algorithm, as they do
avoid many of the traditional NSAID complications. Opioids can be
used appropriately in patients with severe osteoarthritis (see
Chapter 5). Glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate are supplements
that have been widely used and marketed for osteoarthritis.
Evidence for their effectiveness in slowing or reversing cartilage loss
is limited and any effect present appears to be small. Despite some
initial promise, the best-controlled studies indicate these
supplements are ineffective as analgesics in osteoarthritis. However,
they have minimal side effects and may be appropriate if the patient
experiences subjective benefit.
Knee joint corticosteroid injections are options to help reduce
pain and inflammation and can provide short-term pain relief, usually
lasting about 6–12 weeks. Viscosupplementation by injections of
hyaluronic acid-based products improves synovial fluid viscosity by
increasing the molecular weight and quantity of hyaluronic acid
beyond that naturally synthesized by the synovium. Laboratory
studies also demonstrate that hyaluronic acid injections decrease
inflammatory cytokines and free radicals. A review of five meta-
analysis studies of viscosupplementation demonstrates a modest
benefit. Studies also demonstrate more prolonged effects of
viscosupplementation products compared with corticosteroid
injection with symptom improvement for > 6 months in some
patients with mild knee osteoarthritis.
B. Surgical
Two published randomized trials demonstrate that arthroscopy does
not improve outcomes at 1 year over placebo or routine
conservative treatment of osteoarthritis. Arthroscopic surgery is
indicated in patients with osteoarthritis if, rather than pain, they have
mechanical symptoms and internal derangement symptoms. Such
surgical treatments are useful to restore range of motion by
removing osteophytes, cartilage fragments, or loose bodies.
Joint replacement surgeries are effective and cost-effective for
patients with significant symptoms or functional limitations, providing
improvements in pain, function, and quality of life. Minimally
invasive surgeries and computer-assisted navigation during
operation are being investigated as methods to improve techniques
(eg, accurate placement of the hardware implant) and to reduce
complication rates.
Knee realignment surgery, such as high tibial osteotomy or partial
knee replacement surgery, is indicated in patients younger than age
60 with unicompartmental osteoarthritis, who would benefit from
delaying total knee replacement. Knee joint replacement surgery
has been very successful in improving outcomes for patient with
end-stage osteoarthritis. Recent long-term series describe > 95%
survival rate of the implant at 15 years.
 When to Refer
Patients with sufficient disability, limited benefit from conservative
therapy, and evidence of severe osteoarthritis can be referred for
joint replacement surgery.
Altman RD. New guidelines for topical NSAIDs in the
osteoarthritis treatment paradigm. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010
Dec;26(12):2871–6.[PMID: 21070097]
 
Bellamy N et al. Viscosupplementation for the treatment of
osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006 Apr
19; (2):CD005321. [PMID: 16625635]
 
Lee YH et al. Effect of glucosamine or chondroitin sulfate on the
osteoarthritis progression: a meta-analysis. Rheumatol Int. 2010
Jan;30(3):357–63. [PMID: 19544061]
 
Santaguida PL et al. Patient characteristics affecting the prognosis
of total hip and knee joint arthroplasty: a systematic review. Can J
Surg. 2008 Dec;51(6):428–36. [PMID: 19057730]
 
Zhang W et al. OARSI recommendations for the management of
hip and knee osteoarthritis, Part II: OARSI evidence-based,
expert consensus guidelines. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2008
Feb;16(2):137–62. [PMID: 18279766]
 
ANKLE INJURIES
1. Inversion Ankle Sprains
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Localized pain and swelling.
 The majority of ankle injuries involve inversion injuries affecting
the lateral ligaments.
 Consider chronic ankle instability or associated injuries if pain
persists for > 3 months following an ankle sprain.
 
 General Considerations
Ankle sprains are the most common sports injuries seen in
outpatient clinics. Patients usually report “turning the ankle” during a
fall or after landing on an irregular surface such as a hole or an
opponent's foot. The most common mechanism of injury is an
inversion and plantarflexion sprain, which injures the anterior
talofibular ligament (ATF) ligament rather than the calcaneofibular
ligament (CF) ligament. Other injuries that can occur with inversion
ankle injuries are listed in (Table 41–9).
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
The usual symptoms following a sprain include localized pain and
swelling over the lateral aspect of the ankle, difficulty weight
bearing, and limping. The patient's ankle may feel unstable. On
examination, there may be swelling or bruising over the lateral
aspect of the ankle. The anterior, inferior aspect below the lateral
malleolus is most often the point of maximal tenderness consistent
with ATF and CF ligament injuries. The swelling may limit motion of
the ankle. Special stress tests for the ankle include the anterior
drawer test (Table 41–10) and subtalar tilt test (Table 41–10).
In order to grade the severity of ankle sprains, no laxity on stress
tests is considered a grade 1 injury, laxity of the ATF ligament on
anterior drawer testing but a negative tilt test is a grade 2 injury, and
both positive drawer and tilt tests signify a grade 3 injury.
 
Table 41-9. Injuries associated with ankle sprains.
 
Ligaments
    Subtalar joint sprain
    Sinus tarsi syndrome
    Syndesmotic sprain
    Deltoid sprain
    Lisfranc injury
Tendons
    Posterior tibial tendon strain
    Peroneal tendon subluxation
Bones
    Osteochondral talus injury
    Lateral talar process fracture
    Posterior impingement (os trigonum)
    Fracture at the base of the fifth metatarsal
    Jones fracture
    Salter fracture (fibula)
    Ankle fractures
 
Table 41-10. Ankle examination.
 
Maneuver
Description
Inspection
Examine for the alignment of the wrist and
fingers SEADS
 
Palpation
Include important landmarks: Ottawa Ankle
Rules (medial and lateral malleolus, base of
fifth metatarsal and navicular area), anterior
tibiofibular ligament, posterior talus; tendons
(Achilles, peronelas, posterior tibialis, flexor
hallucis longus)
 
Range of
motion
testing
Check range of motion actively (patient
performs) and passively (clinician performs),
especially with flexion and extension of the
spine. Rotation and lateral bending are also
helpful to assess symmetric motion or any
restrictions.
 
Ankle
strength
testing
Test resisted ankle dorsiflexion, plantarflexion,
inversion and eversion strength manually
 
Ankle
anterior
drawer
The clinician keeps the foot and ankle in the
neutral position with the patient sitting, then
uses one hand to fix the tibia and the other to
hold the patient's heel and draw the ankle
forward. Normally, there may be approximately
3 mm of translation until an endpoint is felt. A
positive test includes increased translation of
one foot compared to the other with loss of the
endpoint of the anterior talofibular ligament.
 
Subtalar
tilt test
Performed with the foot in the neutral position
with the patient sitting. The clinician uses one
hand to fix the tibia and the other to hold and
invert the calcaneus. Normal inversion at the
subtalar joint is approximately 30 degrees. A
positive test consists of increased subtalar
joint inversion greater than 10 degrees on the
affected side with loss of endpoint for the
calcaneofibular ligament ligament.
 
External
rotation
stress
test
Performed when the clinician fixes the tibia
with one hand and grasps the foot in the other
with the ankle in the neutral position and then
dorsiflexes and externally rotates the ankle,
reproducing the patient's pain.
 
B. Imaging
Routine ankle radiographic views include the anteroposterior,
lateral, and oblique (mortise) views. Less common views requested
include the calcaneal view and subtalar view. Ottawa Ankle Rules
are clinical prediction rules to guide the need for radiographs and
have a 97% sensitivity and 99% negative predictive value. If the
patient is unable to bear weight immediately in the office setting or
emergency department for four steps, then the clinician should
check for (1) bony tenderness at the posterior edge of the medial or
lateral malleolus and (2) bony tenderness over the navicular (medial
midfoot) or at the base of the fifth metatarsal. If either malleoli
demonstrates pain or deformity, then ankle radiographs should be
obtained. If the foot has bony tenderness, obtain foot radiographs.
An MRI is helpful when considering the associated injuries.
 Treatment
Immediate treatment of an ankle sprain follows the MICE
mnemonic: m odified activities, i ce, c ompression, and e levation.
Subsequent treatment involves protected weight bearing with
crutches and use of an ankle stabilizer brace, especially for grade 2
and 3 injuries. Early motion is essential, and patients should be
encouraged to do home exercises or physical therapy.
Proprioception and balance exercises (eg, “wobble board”) are
useful to restore function to the ankle and prevent future ankle
sprains. Regular use of an ankle support with activities can reduce
the risk of lateral ankle sprains.
 When to Refer
 
•    Ankle fractures.
•    Recurrent ankle sprains or signs of chronic ligamentous
ankle instability.
•    No response after more than 3 months of conservative
treatment.
•    Suspicion of associated injuries.
Jones MH et al. Acute treatment of inversion ankle sprains:
immobilization versus functional treatment. Clin Orthop Relat Res.
2007 Feb;455:169–72. [PMID: 17279044]
 
Lamb SE et al. Mechanical supports for acute, severe ankle sprain:
a pragmatic, multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2009
Feb 14;373(9663):575–81. [PMID: 19217992]
 
van Rijn RM et al. What is the clinical course of acute ankle
sprains? A systematic literature review. Am J Med. 2008
Apr;121(4):324–331.e6. [PMID: 18374692]
 
2. Eversion (“High”) Ankle Sprains
 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
 
 Severe and prolonged pain.
 Limited range of motion.
 Mild swelling.
 Difficulty with weight bearing.
 
 General Considerations
A syndesmotic injury or “high ankle” sprain involves the anterior
tibiofibular ligament in the anterolateral aspect of the ankle, superior
to the anterior talofibular (ATF) ligament. The injury mechanism
often involves the foot being turned out or externally rotated and
everted (eg, when being tackled). This injury is commonly missed or
misdiagnosed as an ATF ligament sprain on initial visit.
 Clinical Findings
A. Symptoms and Signs
Symptoms of a high ankle sprain include severe and prolonged pain
over the anterior ankle at the anterior tibiofibular ligament, worse
with weight bearing. This is often more painful than the typical ankle
sprain. The point of maximal tenderness involves the anterior
tibiofibular ligament, which is higher than the ATF ligament. It is also
important to palpate the proximal fibula to rule out any proximal
syndesmotic ligament injury and associated fracture known as a
“maisonneuve fracture.” There is often some mild swelling in this
area, and the patient may or may not have an ankle effusion. The
patient usually has limited range of motion in all directions. The
external rotation stress test reproduces the mechanism of injury
(Table 41–10). (Note: The patient's foot should have an intact
neurovascular examination before undertaking this test.)
B. Imaging
Radiographs of the ankle should include the anteroposterior,
mortise, and lateral views. The mortise view may demonstrate loss
of the normal overlap between the tibia and fibula, which should be
at least 1–2 mm. Asymmetry in the joint space around the tibiotalar
joint suggests disruption of the syndesmotic ligaments. If there is
proximal tenderness in the lower leg especially around the fibula, an
anteroposterior and lateral view of the tibia and fibula should be
obtained to rule out a proximal fibula fracture. MRI is the best
method to visualize injury to the tibiofibular ligament and to assess
status of the other ligaments and the articular cartilage.
 Treatment
Whereas most ankle sprains are treated with early motion and
weight bearing, treatment for a high ankle sprain should be
conservative with a cast or walking boot for 4–6 weeks. Thereafter,
protected weight bearing with crutches is recommended until the
patient can walk pain-free. Physical therapy can start early to regain
range of motion and maintain strength with limited weight-bearing
initially.
 When to Refer
If there is widening of the joint space and asymmetry at the tibiotalar
joint, the patient should be referred urgently to a foot and ankle
surgeon. Severe or prolonged persistent cases that do not heal may
require internal fixation to avoid chronic instability at the tibiofibular
joint.
Lin CF et al. Ankle syndesmosis injuries: anatomy, biomechanics,
mechanism of injury, and clinical guidelines for diagnosis and
intervention. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2006 Jun;36(6): 372–84.
[PMID: 16776487]
 
Molinari A et al. High ankle sprains (syndesmotic) in athletes:
diagnostic challenges and review of the literature. Iowa Orthop J.
2009;29:130–8. [PMID: 19742102]
 
Appendix: Therapeutic Drug Monitoring,
Pharmacogenetic Testing, & Laboratory
Reference Intervals
 
C. Diana Nicoll, MD, PhD, MPA
Chuanyi Mark Lu, MD, PhD
 
Table 1. Therapeutic drug monitoring.
 
 
Table 2. Selected pharmacogenetic tests: clinical relevance.1
 
 
Table 3. Reference intervals for commonly used tests.1,2
 
 
Table 4. Commonly used blood specimen collection tubes.
 
Index
 
NOTE: Page numbers in boldface type indicate a major
discussion. A t following a page number indicates tabular material,
and f following a page number indicates a figure. Drugs are listed
under their generic names. When a drug trade name is listed, the
reader is referred to the generic name.
 
A antigen, in compatibility testing
A-C ventilation. See Assist-control (A-C) ventilation
A cells, pancreatic
a wave
in AV junctional rhythm
in cardiomyopathy
palpitations and
in pulmonary stenosis
in tetralogy of Fallot
in tricuspid stenosis
A3243G mutation, in diabetes mellitus
AA (Alcoholics Anonymous)
AA (secondary) amyloidosis. See also Amyloidosis
A–a Do2> (alveolar-arterial oxygen difference)
in asthma
in COPD
in pulmonary embolism
AAA. See Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Abacavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with lamivudine
with zidovudine and lamivudine
Abatacept, for rheumatoid arthritis
ABCB4 gene, in idiopathic adulthood ductopenia
ABCD/ABCDE rule/features, in melanoma
ABCD score, in transient ischemic attacks
Abciximab. See also Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors, drugs
blocking
for acute coronary syndromes
for myocardial infarction
PCI and
platelet function affected by
Abdominal abscess/infection
actinomycosis
anaerobic
in Crohn disease
in diverticulitis
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
screening for
smoking and
Abdominal compartment syndrome, in burn patient
Abdominal distention
in 
acute 
colonic 
pseudo-obstruction 
(Ogilvie
syndrome)
in acute paralytic ileus
in chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction/gastroparesis
gastrointestinal gas causing
Abdominal fistulas, in Crohn disease
Abdominal pain/tenderness. See also Dyspepsia
in actinomycosis
in acute angle-closure glaucoma
in 
acute 
colonic 
pseudo-obstruction 
(Ogilvie
syndrome)
in acute paralytic ileus
in aortic aneurysm
in appendicitis
in ascites
in biliary tract carcinoma
in cholecystitis
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
in cholelithiasis/gallstones
in cirrhosis
in Crohn disease
in diverticulitis
in ectopic pregnancy
in erosive/hemorrhagic gastritis (gastropathy)
in familial Mediterranean fever
in GI disorders
in Henoch-Schönlein purpura
in hepatitis
in irritable bowel syndrome
in mesenteric artery insufficiency
in mesenteric vein occlusion (acute)
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
in peptic ulcer disease
perforation and
in PID
in polyarteritis nodosa
in polycystic kidney disease
in porphyria
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in ulcerative colitis
in visceral artery insufficiency/intestinal angina
Abdominal paracentesis. See Paracentesis
Abdominal radiographs, in poisoning/drug overdose
Abelcet. See Amphotericin B lipid complex
Abetalipoproteinemia, vitamin E deficiency and
Aβ2M (renal failure type) amyloidosis
ABI/ABPI. See Ankle-brachial index
ABIC score, in alcoholic liver disease
Abilify. See Aripiprazole
Abiraterone, for prostate cancer
abl gene, in chronic myeloid leukemia
ABLC. See Amphotericin B lipid complex
Abnormal illness behaviors
Abnormal movements. See Movement disorders
ABO system
compatibility testing for transfusion and
hemolytic transfusion reactions and
Abortion
elective/induced
breast cancer during pregnancy and
C sordellii infection after
gestational trophoblastic disease and
heart disease during pregnancy and
hypertension during pregnancy and
rubella infection and
toxoplasmosis testing and
infection after
anaerobic
IUD insertion after
recurrent (habitual)
spontaneous. See Spontaneous abortion
Abortive poliomyelitis
A B P A . See 
Allergic 
bronchopulmonary
mycosis/aspergillosis
ABPI. See Ankle-brachial index
Abraxane. See Paclitaxel, protein-bound
Abruptio placentae, third-trimester bleeding caused by
Abscesses. See also specific type and organ or
structureaffected
in actinomycetoma
in actinomycosis
anaerobic
abdominal
of lung
in bacterial rhinosinusitis
brain
deep neck
in drug users
in HIV infection/AIDS
intravascular (septic superficial thrombophlebitis). See
also Septic thrombophlebitis
liver
amebic
pyogenic
mycobacteria causing
occult, fever/FUO and
perforated appendicitis and
perianal
peritonsillar
staphylococcal
Absence (petit mal) seizures. See also Seizures
Absidia infection
Absorption (digestion), disorders of. See Malabsorption
Absorptive hypercalciuria
Abulia, in stroke
Abuse
aggression/violence/impulse control disorders and
child. See Child abuse
drug/alcohol. See Alcohol use/dependency/abuse;
Substance use disorders
elder
partner/spousal (domestic violence)
prevention of
PTSD and
ABVD regimen, for Hodgkin disease
AC regimen, for breast cancer
AC-T regimen, for breast cancer
AC-TH regimen, for breast cancer
Acamprosate, for alcohol use/abuse
Acanthamoeba (acanthamoeba infections)
encephalitis/meningoencephalitis
keratitis
Acanthosis nigricans
cancer-related
insulin resistance/diabetes and
Acarbose
for hepatic encephalopathy
overdose/toxicity of
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
in myocardial infarction
Acceptance 
and 
commitment 
therapy, 
for
schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Accessory atrioventricular pathways, supraventricular
tachycardia caused by
Accessory muscles of respiration, in asthma
Accidental injury. See Trauma
Acclimitization
heat-related disorders and
high-altitude–related disorders and
Accommodation, aging affecting (presbyopia)
ACCORD study
Accupril. See Quinapril
Accuretic. See Quinapril, with hydrochlorothiazide
Accutane. See Isotretinoin
ACE. See Angiotensin converting enzyme
ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors
Acebutolol
overdose/toxicity of
Acellular pertussis vaccine, with tetanus-diphtheria toxoid
(DTaP/Tdap vaccines)
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
Aceon. See Perindopril
Acesulfame potassium, for diabetics
Acetadote. See Acetylcysteine
Acetaldehyde, in alcoholic liver disease
Acetaminophen
in analgesic nephropathy
with codeine
for fever
for osteoarthritis
overdose/toxicity of
classification of severity of
for pain management
reference values for
Acetazolamide
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
in head injury
for high altitude-related illness
for pseudotumor cerebri
renal tubular acidosis caused by
Acetoacetate
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in diabetic ketoacidosis
reference values for
Acetohexamide
Acetone, in diabetic coma/ketoacidosis
Acetone breath odor, in diabetic ketoacidosis
Acetonitrile, cyanide formed by metabolism of
Acetylcholine
aminoglycosides affecting
in botulism
in Huntington disease
in myasthenic (Lambert-Eaton) syndrome
Acetylcholine receptor antibodies
in cancer-related neuropathy
in myasthenia gravis
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. See Anticholinesterases
Acetylcysteine
for acetaminophen overdose/toxicity
contrast media nephrotoxicity mediated by
Achalasia
herpes simplex infection and
Achlorhydria
in bacterial overgrowth
in pernicious anemia gastritis
Achromycin. See Tetracycline
Acid, caustic/corrosive
esophageal injury caused by
eye injury caused by
Acid-antisecretory agents. See also Antacids; H2 receptor
blocking drugs; Proton pump inhibitors
for dyspepsia
for GI bleeding
for peptic ulcer disease
bleeding control and
Acid-base disorders. See also Acidosis; Alkalosis
genetic
in heat exposure syndromes
in hypothermia
in kidney disease/renal failure
mixed
in near drowning
step-by-step analysis and
Acid-fast rods, treatment of infections caused by
Acid refluxate. See Gastric acid refluxate
Acidosis. See also Ketoacidosis
anion gap. See Anion gap/anion gap acidosis
dilutional
dyspnea and
in heat exposure syndromes
treatment of
hyperkalemia and
in hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
hypokalemia and
hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronemic
in hypothermia
in kidney disease/renal failure
lactic. See also Lactic acidosis
metabolic. See also Metabolic acidosis
in near drowning
parenteral nutritional support and
in poisoning/drug overdose
with methanol or ethylene glycol
with salicylates
posthypocapnia
renal tubular. See also Renal tubular acidosis
respiratory. See also Respiratory acidosis
in respiratory failure
rewarming
uremic
Aciduria, paradoxic
in metabolic alkalosis
in salicylate overdose/toxicity
Acinetobacter infections
Acitretin
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for psoriasis
teratogenicity of
ACL. See Anterior cruciate ligament
Aclovate. See Alclometasone
Acne
antibiotics for
folliculitis and
hyperandrogenism and
inversa (hidradenitis suppurativa)
oral contraceptive use and
rosacea
steroid (steroid acne/folliculitis)
testosterone replacement therapy and
vulgaris
Acoustic 
neuroma/neurinoma 
(vestibular
schwannoma/eighth nerve tumors)
hearing loss and
in neurofibromatosis
Acoustic trauma. See Noise trauma
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). See HIV
infection/AIDS
Acral erythema (hand-foot syndrome), chemotherapy-
induced
Acral-lentiginous melanoma
Acrocyanosis
Acrodermatitis chronicum atrophicans
Acromegaly
Acromioclavicular joint
in impingement syndrome
in rotator cuff disorders
Acropachy, thyroid
ACS. See Acute coronary syndromes
ACT. See Activated clotting time
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Actin, in hereditary spherocytosis
Actinic (ultraviolet) keratitis
Actinic keratoses
squamous cell carcinoma arising from
Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans
(Aggregatibacteractinomycetemcomitans). See HACEK
organisms
Actinomadura species, actinomycotic mycetoma caused
by
Actinomyces/Actinomyces israelii (actinomycosis)
Actinomycetoma
Actinomycotic mycetoma
Actiq. See Fentanyl
Activated charcoal, for poisoning/drug overdose
repeat-dose
Activated clotting time (ACT), reference values for
Activated 
partial 
thromboplastin 
time. See Partial
thromboplastin time
Activated protein C. See Protein C, activated
Activella. See Estrogens, with progestins
Activin-like kinase-type (ALK-1) gene
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
in idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
Activities of daily living–instrumental activities of daily living
(ADL–IADL), assessment of ability to perform in elderly
Activity. See Exercise/activity
ACTOplus Met. See Pioglitazone, with metformin
Actos. See Pioglitazone
Acuity, visual. See Visual acuity
Acular. See Ketorolac
Acupuncture, for headache
Acute 
angle-closure 
glaucoma. See 
Angle-closure
glaucoma
Acute coronary syndromes
chest pain in
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
preoperative 
risk 
assessment/perioperative
management and
without ST segment elevation
angiography/revascularization 
in. See 
also
Revascularization procedures
medical management of
pharmacologic
Acute flaccid paralysis (AFP)
coxsackievirus causing
enterovirus 71 causing
poliomyelitis and
Acute 
idiopathic 
polyneuropathy. See Guillain-Barré
syndrome
Acute intermittent porphyria
Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP)
Acute kidney injury (acute renal failure). See also Kidney
disease
ACE inhibitor use and
acute tubular necrosis causing
cardiorenal syndrome and
cirrhosis and (hepatorenal syndrome)
glomerulonephritis causing
interstitial nephritis causing
intrinsic disorders causing
postoperative
postrenal causes of
prerenal causes of
in tumor lysis syndrome
Acute leukemia. See also specific type
chemotherapy choices for
stem cell transplantation for
Acute lymphoblastic/lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)
Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN)
Acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN)
Acute mountain sickness
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation for
Acute paralytic ileus. See Paralytic (adynamic) ileus
Acute-phase response, bisphosphonates causing
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation score.
See APACHE system
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
DIC associated with
Acute radiation syndrome
Acute renal failure. See Acute kidney injury
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). See also
Respiratory failure
acute gastric aspiration and
in burn injury
influenza A H1N1 and
in pancreatitis
in SARS
smoke inhalation and
Acute respiratory failure. See also Acute respiratory
distress syndrome; Respiratory failure
Acute retinal necrosis
Acute tubular necrosis. See Tubular necrosis
Acute vaccinia syndrome
Acyclovir
for herpes simplex infections
keratitis
for herpes zoster
during pregnancy
for exacerbations
for varicella
AD. See Alzheimer disease
ADA diet recommendations for diabetes
ADACEL. See Tdap vaccine
Adalat. See Nifedipine
Adalimumab. See also Anti-TNF agents
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
for psoriasis
for rheumatoid arthritis
Adamantanes 
(amatadine 
and 
rimantadine),
influenza/influenza resistance and
ADAMTS-13 (von Willebrand factor cleaving protease), in
thrombotic microangiopathies
Adapalene gel, for acne
Addiction 
(drug). See also Poisoning/drug overdose;
Substance use disorders
pain management in terminally ill/dying patient and
Addison disease (adrenocortical insufficiency)
acute adrenal crisis and
hypercalcemia and
hyperkalemia and
hyperpigmentation and
hypoglycemia in
hyponatremia and
Adefovir, for hepatitis B
Adenitis. See Lymphadenitis
Adenocarcinoma. See specific type and Cancer
Adenoid cystic carcinoma, salivary
Adenoma sebaceum
Adenomas. See specific type or structure ororgan affected
Adenomatous polyposis coli gene. See APC gene
Adenomatous polyps
colonoscopy in identification/treatment of
colorectal cancer and
familial. See also Familial adenomatous polyposis
FOBT in patients with
gastric
nonfamilial
Adenomyomatosis, biliary tract/gallbladder
Adenomyosis, uterine
Adenopathy. See Lymphadenopathy
Adenosine
for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
Adenosine deaminase, ascitic fluid, in tuberculous
peritonitis
Adenosine triphosphatase, copper-transporting (ATP7B),
in Wilson disease
Adenosylcobalamin. See also Vitamin B12
Adenovirus infections
bronchiolitis
conjunctivitis/keratoconjunctivitis
diarrhea/gastroenteritis
ADH. See Antidiuretic hormone
Adherence/nonadherence, patient
antipsychotic drug administration and
antiretroviral therapy and
diabetic ketoacidosis and
in elderly
hearing amplification and
medication regimen and
lifestyle changes and
lithium therapy and
refractory ulcers and
status epilepticus and
tuberculosis therapy and
Adhesion molecules, autoantibodies to, in pemphigus
Adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder)
in diabetes
AD HH. See Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with
hypercalciuria
Adiana, for tubal interruption
Adipokines, insulin action in obesity and
Adiponectin, insulin action in obesity and
Adipose tissue. See Body fat
Adjustment (situational) disorders
with depressed mood
posthospital
suicide risk and
Adjuvant chemotherapy. See also Chemotherapy
for bladder cancer
for breast cancer
in older women
for colorectal cancer
for esophageal cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
for lung cancer
Adjuvant pain medications/treatments
ADL–IADL. See Activities of daily living–instrumental
activities of daily living
Adnexal masses. See Ovarian cancer/tumors
Adnexectomy, for tubo-ovarian abscess
ADPKD1/ADPKD2 genes
Adrenal cortex
diseases of. See also specific disorder
in hypopituitarism
in HIV infection/AIDS
hyperplasia of
aldosteronism caused by
congenital
Cushing syndrome caused by
hirsutism/virilization and
in MEN
hypoplasia of, congenital
tumors of. See Adrenal tumors
Adrenal crisis
Adrenal hemorrhage
Adrenal insufficiency. See Adrenocortical insufficiency
Adrenal tumors
amenorrhea caused by
cancer
cortical
aldosterone-secreting
androgen-secreting
cortisol-secreting
medullary. See Pheochromocytoma
in MEN
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
Adrenal vein sampling, in aldosteronism
Adrenalectomy/medical adrenalectomy
adrenal crisis and
for aldosteronism
for breast cancer
in male
for congenital adrenal hyperplasia
for Conn syndrome
y
for Cushing syndrome
Adrenergic drugs. See Alpha-adrenergic agonists; Alpha-
adrenergic blocking drugs; Beta-adrenergic agonists;
Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs
Adrenocortical insufficiency
acute
chronic. See also Addison disease
congenital
in HIV infection/AIDS
hypercalcemia and
hyperkalemia and
hyponatremia and
perioperative corticosteroid replacement and
Adrenocorticosteroids. See Corticosteroids
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
deficiency of. See also Adrenocortical insufficiency
ectopic/hypersecretion of
in hypertension
petrosal sinus levels of, in Cushing syndrome
pituitary adenoma secreting
plasma levels of
in acute adrenal insufficiency
in Addison disease
in hypercortisolism/Cushing syndrome
reference values for
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Adriamycin. See Doxorubicin
Adrucil. See Fluorouracil
Adson test
Adult respiratory distress syndrome. See Acute respiratory
distress syndrome
Adult Still disease
Adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia (ATL). See also Human T
cell lymphotropic/leukemia virus
Advance care planning
Advance directives
ADVANCE study
Advil. See Ibuprofen
Adynamic bone disease
Adynamic ileus. See Paralytic (adynamic) ileus
Aedes mosquitoes. See Mosquitoes
Aeroallergens. See also Allergens
in allergic rhinitis
asthma caused by
atopy and
avoidance therapy and
desensitization therapy/immunotherapy and
AeroBid. See Flunisolide
Aerodigestive tract. See also specific structure
foreign bodies in
Aeromonas, diarrhea caused by
Aerophagia
Aerophobia, in rabies
Aerosols, sniffing
Affect, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Affordable Care Act
Afibrinogenemia, congenital
Afinitor. See Everolimus
Aflatoxin exposure, hepatocellular carcinoma and
AFP. See Acute flaccid paralysis; Alpha-fetoprotein
AFP-L3, in hepatocellular carcinoma
African American patients. See Black patients
African tick bite fever
African trypanosomiasis
Age/aging. See also Older adults
accommodative loss and (presbyopia)
benign prostatic hyperplasia and
breast cancer risk and
burn injury survival and
colorectal cancer risk and
fever/FUO and
foreign body aspiration and
hearing loss and (presbyacusis)
maternal, Down syndrome and
paternal, mutations and
postoperative delirium and
postoperative pulmonary complications and
prostate cancer and
PSA reference ranges and
radiation-related carcinogenesis and
sleep changes and
testosterone deficiency/hypogonadism and
in postmenopausal women
vision impairment and
weight loss and
Age-related macular degeneration
Age-related maculopathy
Agenerase. See Amprenavir
Agglutinins
cold
febrile
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. See HACEK
organisms
Aggregatibacter aphrophilus. See HACEK organisms
Aggression. See also Violence
alcohol use/abuse and
anabolic steroid use and
in dementia
phencyclidine use/abuse and
suicide and
Aggrestat. See Tirofiban
Aging. See Age/aging
Agitation
in dementia patients, treatment of
palliation of in terminally ill/dying patient
Agnogenic myeloid metaplasia (myelofibrosis)
Agnosia
in dementia
intracranial tumors causing
Agoraphobia
Agranulocytosis. See also Neutropenia
drug-induced
clozapine causing
mirtazapine causing
thiourea therapy causing
AI. See Aromatase inhibitors
AIDS. See HIV infection/AIDS
AIDS cholangiopathy
AIDS dementia complex (HIV-associated cognitive/motor
complex)
AIDS enteropathy
AIDS wasting syndrome
AIP. See Acute intermittent porphyria; Acute interstitial
pneumonia
Air bronchogram
in ARDS
in bronchial obstruction
Air travel
dysbarism/decompression sickness and
eustachian tube dysfunction/barotrauma and
lower extremity edema and
medical safety/patient selection and
during pregnancy
retinal detachment and
SARS transmission and
venous thromboembolism and
Airway disorders. See also specific type
allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis
asthma
bronchiectasis
bronchiolitis
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
cystic fibrosis
glaucoma treatment and
lower airway
obstruction
in diphtheria
drowning/near drowning and
dyspnea and
by food (café coronary)
foreign body causing
in hypoparathyroidism
of lower airways
occupational disorders and
in recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
during sleep (obstructive sleep apnea)
tracheostomy and cricothyrotomy for
of upper airways
respiratory failure caused by
stridor and
thermal injury, smoke inhalation and
upper airway
Airway management. See also Intubation
burn injury and
for coma
in hypoparathyroidism
tracheostomy and cricothyrotomy in
Akathisia
antipsychotic drugs causing
SSRIs causing
AKIN criteria, in acute kidney injury
Akinesia, in Huntington disease
Akinetic mutism (persistent vegetative state)
Akineton. See Biperiden
AL (primary) amyloidosis. See also Amyloidosis
Al-Anon
Ala-Ala. See Teplizumab
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
in alcoholic liver disease
in liver disease/jaundice
monitoring, in tuberculosis therapy
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
olanzapine affecting
reference/normal values for
in viral hepatitis
Alarm response
Albendazole
for ascariasis
for clonorchiasis/opisthorchiasis
for cutaneous larva migrans
for cysticercosis
for enterobiasis/pinworms
for filariasis
for giardiasis
for gnathostomiasis
for hookworm disease
for hydatid disease
for microsporidiosis
for strongyloidiasis
for trichinosis
for trichuriasis/whipworm
Albinism
Albinism-associated storage pool disease
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy
Albumin
ascitic fluid. See also Serum-ascites albumin gradient
in cirrhosis
serum levels of
anion gap and
calcium levels and
in liver disease/jaundice
in myeloma staging
in nephrotic syndrome
postoperative pulmonary complications and
in protein-losing enteropathy
reference/normal values for
urinary. See Albuminuria
Albuminuria. See also Proteinuria
in diabetes/diabetic nephropathy
glycemic control and
Albuterol
for asthma
with ipratropium
for cystic fibrosis
for hyperkalemia
Alclometasone
Alcohol 
addiction. See 
also 
Alcohol
use/dependency/abuse
Alcohol use/dependency/abuse (alcoholism)
acute intoxication/poisoning
metabolic acidosis/osmolar gap and
aggressive/violent behavior and
amnestic syndrome and
anxiety self-treatment and
atrial fibrillation and
breast cancer and
in cardiomyopathy
cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
coma in diabetic patient and
comorbid conditions and
complications associated with
Cushing syndrome/hypercortisolism and
delirium caused by
depression and
differential diagnosis of
drug therapy for
Dupuytren contracture and
esophageal cancer and
fatty liver and
folic acid deficiency and
gastritis and
gout/hyperuricemia and
hepatitis and
hyperosmolality caused by
hypertension and
exacerbation management and
hypophosphatemia and
immunization recommendations and
ketoacidosis and
lipid abnormalities and
liver cancer and
liver disease associated with
Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears and
management of
myopathy associated with
neuropathy associated with
oral cancer and
in pancreatitis
in panic disorder
platelet function affected by
porphyria cutanea tarda and
pregnancy and
prevalence of
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of injury related to
prevention of/screening tests for
psychotic 
behavior 
associated 
with 
(alcoholic
hallucinosis)
sleep disorders and
suicide and
thiamine deficiency and
trauma outcome/incidence affected by
Wernicke 
encephalopathy/Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome and
withdrawal and
delirium caused by
differential diagnosis of
drug therapy for
seizures caused by
Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT)
Alcoholic brain syndromes, chronic
Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
Alcoholic (organic) hallucinosis
Alcoholic hepatitis
postoperative complications associated with
Alcoholic hyaline
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Alcoholics Anonymous
Aldactazide. See Spironolactone, for hypertension, with
hydrochlorothiazide
Aldactone. See Spironolactone
Aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, alcohol use/abuse
and
Aldesleukin
for cancer chemotherapy
Aldicarb poisoning
Aldolase, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Aldomet. See Methyldopa
Aldosterone. See also Aldosteronism; Hypoaldosteronism
adrenal adenoma secreting
drugs blocking receptors for. See also Spironolactone
for heart failure
for hypertension
for myocardial infarction
in asthma
resistant disease and
potassium balance/hypokalemia and
in renal tubular acidosis
serum/urine levels of
in primary aldosteronism
reference values for
Aldosterone:renin ratio
Aldosteronism (hyperaldosteronism)
glucocorticoid-remediable
for asthma therapy
hypokalemia and
primary
renal tubular acidosis and
saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis and
saline-unresponsive metabolic alkalosis and
Alefacept. See also Anti-TNF agents for psoriasis
Alemtuzumab
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Alendronate. See also Bisphosphonates
adverse ophthalmic effects of
in hyperparathyroidism
for osteoporosis prevention/management
for Paget disease of bone
Aleukemic leukemia
Aleve. See Naproxen
Alfieri procedure
Alfuzosin, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
adverse ophthalmic effects of
Alimentary hypoglycemia, functional
Alimentary tract cancers. See also specific type orstructure
affected
Alimta. See Pemetrexed
Aliskiren
with hydrochlorothiazide
with valsartan
ALK inhibitors, for lung cancer
ALK-1 (activin-like kinase-type) gene
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
in idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
Alkali administration. See Bicarbonate
Alkalies, caustic/corrosive
esophageal injury caused by
eye injury caused by
Alkaline phosphatase
in alcoholic liver disease
in biliary cirrhosis
in cholecystitis
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
in cirrhosis
in hemochromatosis
in hepatitis A
in hepatocellular carcinoma
in hypophosphatasia
in liver disease/jaundice
in osteomalacia
in Paget disease of bone
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
reference/normal values for
Alkalinization, urine. See Urine, alkalinization of
Alkalosis
contraction
in heat exposure syndromes
metabolic. See also Metabolic alkalosis
posthypercapnia
respiratory. See also Respiratory alkalosis
salicylate overdose/toxicity causing
saline-responsive
saline-unresponsive
Alkaptonuria
Alkeran. See Melphalan
Alkylating agents
breastfeeding and
ALL. See Acute lymphoblastic/lymphocytic leukemia
All-Trans-Retinoic Acid. See Tretinoin
Allergens. See also Allergies/allergic reactions
anaphylaxis/urticaria/angioedema caused by
asthma caused by
desensitization therapy/immunotherapy for
avoidance of
for allergic contact dermatitis
for allergic rhinitis
Allergic alveolitis, extrinsic (hypersensitivity pneumonitis)
Allergic angiitis and granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss
syndrome)
leukotriene modifiers for asthma and
pulmonary involvement in
renal involvement in
Allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis/aspergillosis
Allergic conjunctivitis
Allergic contact dermatitis
impetigo differentiated from
topical medications causing
urticaria in
Allergic eye disease
Allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
conjunctivitis and
nasal polyps and
Allergic vasculitis, drugs causing
Allergies/allergic reactions
anaphylactic
angioedema and
antibody-mediated (cytotoxic)
asthma and
desensitization therapy/immunotherapy for
atopic. See also under Atopic
to drugs. See Drug allergy
eosinophilic esophagitis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
IgE-mediated (immediate)
immune complex-mediated
serum sickness and
to insulin
pseudoallergic (anaphylactoid)
radiocontrast media causing
T-cell mediated (delayed/cell-mediated)
in topical dermatologic therapy
in topical ophthalmic therapy
urticaria caused by
Allergy testing
in asthma
Allgrove (triple A) syndrome
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation. See also Bone
marrow/stem cell transplantation
Alloimmunization
platelet transfusion and
stem cell transplantation and
Allopurinol
drug interactions of
for hyperuricemia/gout
in cancer patients
stone formation and
in transplant patients
for tumor lysis syndrome
Almonds (bitter), odor of in cyanide poisoning
Almotriptan, for migraine headache
Alocril. See Nedocromil
Aloe vera, for burn injury
Alomide. See Lodoxamide
Alopecia
androgenetic/androgenic (pattern)
in women
areata
chemotherapy-induced
nonscarring
scarring (cicatricial)
in SLE
in syphilis
totalis
universalis
Alora. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Alosetron, for irritable bowel syndrome
Alpha-adrenergic agonists
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
for retrograde ejaculation
for Tourette syndrome
Alpha-adrenergic blocking drugs
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
for hypertension
in urgencies/emergencies
pheochromocytoma surgery and
for urinary incontinence
Alpha2-antiplasmin deficiency
Alpha1-antiprotease/antitrypsin
in COPD/emphysema
replacement therapy and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
in protein-losing enteropathy
reference values for
Alpha-delta storage pool disease
Alpha-fetoprotein
in Down syndrome
in hepatocellular carcinoma
prenatal testing for
reference values for
testicular tumors producing
Alpha-globin gene
in alpha thalassemia syndromes
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
for diabetes mellitus
overdose/toxicity of
Alpha interferon. See Interferon-α
5-Alpha-reductase, deficiency of
5-Alpha-reductase inhibitors. See also Finasteride
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Alpha-synuclein gene/inclusions, in parkinsonism/Lewy
body dementia
Alpha thalassemia syndromes
sickle cell disease and
Alpha thalassemia trait
Alphagan. See Brimonidine
ALPL gene, in hypophosphatasia
Alprazolam
overdose/toxicity of
for panic attacks
Alprenolol, overdose/toxicity of
Alprostadil, for erectile dysfunction
ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase
Altace. See Ramipril
Alteplase (tissue plasminogen activator/t-PA/rtPA). See
also Thrombolytic therapy
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for myocardial infarction
for pulmonary embolism
Altered mental status. See Mental status, altered
Alternaria, phaeohyphomycosis caused by
Alternating current (AC) electrical injury
Altitude-related illness. See High altitude-related illness
Altretamine
Aluminum preparations
for hyperphosphatemia
mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
and
osteomalacia caused by
Alveolar-arterial oxygen difference (A–a Do2)
in asthma
in COPD
in pulmonary embolism
Alveolar hemorrhage syndromes
Alveolar hydatid disease
Alveolar hyperventilation
Alveolar hypoventilation
central
obesity and (Pickwickian syndrome)
primary (Ondine curse)
Alveolar proteinosis
Alveolitis
extrinsic allergic (hypersensitivity pneumonitis)
Alvimopan, for acute paralytic ileus
Alzheimer disease. See also Dementia
clinical features of
estrogen replacement therapy and
herpes simplex infection and
hypertension and
prognosis for
seizures in
treatment of
Alzheimer's Association/Alzheimer's Disease and Related
Disorders Association
AMAN. See Acute motor axonal neuropathy
Amanita mushroom poisoning
Amanitin toxin (amatoxin), poisoning with mushrooms
containing
Amantadine. See also Antiparkinsonism drugs
for extrapyramidal side effects of antipsychotics
influenza/influenza resistance and
for neuroleptic malignant syndrome
for parkinsonism
Amaryl. See Glimepiride
Amatoxin (amanitin toxin), poisoning with mushrooms
containing
Amaurosis fugax
Ambien. See Zolpidem
Ambiguous genitalia, in steroidogenic enzyme defects
AmBisome. See Liposomal amphotericin B
Amblyomma ticks. See Ticks
Ambrisentan, for pulmonary hypertension
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
Ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring
in angina
in atrial fibrillation
in palpitation evaluation
in seizure evaluation
in syncope evaluation
Ambulatory esophageal pH monitoring. See Esophageal
pH monitoring
Ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, continuous
Amcinonide
Amebas, pathogenic free-living
encephalitis/meningoencephalitis caused by
Amebiasis (entamoeba infection)
extraintestinal
hepatic (amebic liver abscess)
intestinal
Amebic encephalitis/meningoencephalitis
Amebic liver abscess (hepatic amebiasis)
Amebic ulcers
Amebicides
adverse ophthalmic effects of
Ameboma
Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
Amen. See Progesterone
Amenorrhea
in anorexia nervosa
in hyperprolactinemia
in polycystic ovary syndrome
pregnancy/lactation causing
primary
secondary. See also Menopause; Pregnancy
in Turner syndrome
American Diabetes Association diet recommendations
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease)
achalasia and
heart disease/myocarditis in
Amevive. See Alefacept
Amicar. See -Aminocaproic acid
Amifostine, for chemotherapy/radiation-induced toxicity
cisplatin therapy and
Amikacin
Amikin. See Amikacin
Amiloride
for heart failure
hyperkalemia caused by
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
lithium interactions and
-Aminocaproic acid (EACA), for bleeding disorders
Aminoglutethimide, for prostate cancer
Aminoglycosides
contraindications to in myasthenia gravis
nephrotoxicity/acute kidney injury and
neuromuscular transmission affected by
ototoxicity of
for pneumonia
Aminolevulinic acid, urinary, in porphyria
Aminophylline
for asthma
lithium interactions and
for lithium overdose/toxicity
5-Aminosalicylic acid, for inflammatory bowel disease
colorectal cancer risk and
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
Aminotransferase 
levels. See 
also 
Alanine
aminotransferase; Aspartate aminotransferase
in acetaminophen toxicity
in alcoholic liver disease
in autoimmune hepatitis
in cholecystitis
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
in liver disease/jaundice
in liver failure
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
postoperative
in viral hepatitis
zileuton affecting
Amiodarone
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
atrial flutter
infarct-related
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
ventricular tachycardia
epididymitis and
hyperthyroidism/Graves disease caused by
hyponatremia caused by
hypothyroidism caused by
levothyroxine therapy affected by
Amitriptyline. See also Antidepressants
for interstitial cystitis
for migraine prophylaxis
for neuropathic pain/painful diabetic neuropathy
for postherpetic neuralgia
AML. See Acute myeloid leukemia
Amlodipine. See also Calcium channel blocking drugs
for angina
for heart failure
for hypertension
with atorvastatin
with benazepril
with hydrochlorothiazide and valsartan
with olmesartan
with telmisartan
with valsartan
lower extremity edema caused by
overdose/toxicity of
Ammonia
in hepatic encephalopathy
in hyperchloremic normal anion gap metabolic
acidosis/renal tubular acidosis
in liver failure
reference values for
Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate, for Wilson disease
Amnesia
in delirium
dissociative
in head injury
Amnestic syndrome
Amniocentesis
CMV infection and
Amodiaquine
with artesunate (ASAQ)
with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
Amoxapine
Amoxicillin/amoxicillin-clavulanate
for anaerobic pleuropulmonary infection
for anthrax
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for endocarditis
in H pylori eradication therapy
for Lyme disease
for pneumonia
resistance to, pneumococcal pneumonia and
for rosacea
“AMP” (marijuana soaked in formaldehyde)
Amphetamines
abuse/overdose of
psychotic behavior caused by
adverse ophthalmic effects of
during pregnancy
Amphotericin B
for aspergillosis
for blastomycosis
for candidiasis
for coccidioidomycosis
for cryptococcal meningitis
for histoplasmosis
for leishmaniasis
lipid-based preparations of. See also Lipid-based
amphotericin B
for mucormycosis
nephrotoxicity/acute kidney injury and
for ophthalmic disorders
Amphotericin B (cont.)
for P marneffei infection
prophylactic
for sporotrichosis
Amphotericin B lipid complex. See also Lipid-based
amphotericin B
Ampicillin
allopurinol interactions and
for endocarditis
for pneumonia
rash caused by
in mononucleosis
for urinary tract infection
Ampicillin-sulbactam, for pneumonia
Amprenavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Ampulla of Vater, carcinoma of (ampullary/periampullary
carcinoma)
Ampullary adenomas
Ampullary carcinoma
Amputation
in acute arterial occlusion of limb
in electrical burns
for frostbite
in lower leg/foot occlusive disease
AMS. See
Acute mountain sickness
AMSAN. See Acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy
Amyl nitrite
abuse of
for cyanide poisoning
Amylase
ascitic fluid
in pancreatitis
pleural fluid
p
serum levels of
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in liver failure
in mumps
in pancreatitis
reference values for
Amyloid angiopathy, cerebral
Amyloid protein. See also Amyloidosis
in dementia
Amyloidosis
cardiomyopathy and
familial Mediterranean fever and
hereditary (transthyretin/TTR)
localized
myeloma and
nephrotic spectrum disorders and
neuropathy and
primary (AL)
renal failure type (β2-microglobulin)
secondary (AA)
senile (atrial natriuretic peptide)
systemic
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
dementia and
enterovirus infection and
Amyotrophy
diabetic
neuralgic (idiopathic brachial plexus neuropathy)
ANA. See Antinuclear antibody
Anabolic steroids
abuse of
aggression/violence and
gynecomastia and
for AIDS wasting
Anacetrapib
Anaerobic infections
pleuropulmonary (pneumonia/lung abscess)
Anafranil. See Clomipramine
Anagrelide
for essential thrombocytosis
for polycythemia
Anakinra
for gout
for Still disease
Anal dysplasia/cancer
in HIV infection/AIDS
Anal fissures
in Crohn disease
Anal fistulas
Anal gonorrhea. See also Anorectal disorders, gonococcal
Anal sphincter, disorders of, fecal incontinence and
Anal syphilis
Analgesia/analgesics. See also specific type or disorder
and Pain management
breastfeeding and
caffeine-containing
for migraine headache
for chronic pain/chronic pain disorders
in end-of-life care
patient-controlled
thrombocytopenia caused by
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Analgesic nephropathy
ureteral/renal pelvis cancer and
Analgesic rebound headache
Anaphylactoid (pseudoallergic) reactions
Anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock
insect stings causing
insulin allergy causing
penicillin allergy causing
transfusion causing
Anaplasma (anaplasmosis)
babesiosis coinfection and
equi
Lyme disease coinfection and
phagocytophilum
Anaprox. See Naproxen
Anasarca
Anastrozole
for breast cancer
for gynecomastia
ANCA. See Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
Ancef. See Cefazolin
Ancobon. See Flucytosine
Ancylostoma
braziliense
caninum
cutaneous larva migrans caused by
duodenale
Andes virus
Androderm. See Testosterone replacement therapy
Androgel. See Testosterone replacement therapy
Androgen deprivation, for prostate cancer
Androgen insensitivity/resistance
male hypogonadism caused by
pseudohermaphroditism/amenorrhea in
Androgenetic (androgenic/pattern) baldness
in women
Androgens. See also Antiandrogens; Testosterone
deficiency of
in women, replacement and
excess of. See Hyperandrogenism
Androstenedione, in hirsutism/virilization
Anejaculation
Anemias. See also specific cause or type
antiretroviral therapy and
in cancer chemotherapy
supportive care agents for
in celiac disease
of chronic disease
in cirrhosis
classification of
in colorectal cancer
fish tapeworm infection and
in gastric adenocarcinoma
in hairy cell leukemia
hemolytic. See Hemolytic anemias/hemolysis
in hookworm disease
in kidney disease
macrocytic
malabsorption and
in malaria
microcytic
in myelodysplastic syndromes
in myelofibrosis
in myeloma
during pregnancy
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
refractory
retinal disease associated with
in SLE
thiazolidinediones causing
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Anergy, skin test. See Skin test anergy
Anesthesia/anesthetics
liver function affected by
local, for eye disorders, precautions for use of
Aneuploidy screening, in prenatal testing
Aneurysms. See also specific type and artery involved
mycotic
y
drug use and
intracranial
Angiitis
allergic, granulomatosis and. See Allergic angiitis and
granulomatosis
with granulomatosis (Wegener granulomatosis). See
Granulomatosis, with polyangiitis
primary, of central nervous system
Angina
intestinal (visceral artery insufficiency)
Ludwig
pectoris. See also Coronary heart disease
alteration in before myocardial infarction
aortic regurgitation and
aortic stenosis and
in apathetic hyperthyroidism
chest pain in
   change in before myocardial infarction
chronic stable
coronary vasospasm and
diagnosis/differential diagnosis of
jaw pain and
with normal arteriogram
postinfarction
preoperative 
risk 
assessment/perioperative
management and
prevention of further attacks and
   trial results in
Prinzmetal (variant)
prognosis for
in pulmonary embolism
risk reduction and
thiazolidinedione use and
treatment of
unstable. See Acute coronary syndromes; Unstable
angina
Vincent (necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis)
Angiodysplasias (vascular ectasias), GI bleeding and
Angioedema
ACE inhibitor/angiotensin II receptor antagonist
therapy and
Angiofibroma
juvenile
in MEN
Angiogenesis, drugs targeting, in breast cancer therapy
Angiography/arteriography. See also specific disorder
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
Angiography/arteriography (cont.)
cardiac/coronary. See also Cardiac catheterization
in acute coronary syndromes
in angina
   normal findings and
in chest pain evaluation
in myocardial infarction
cerebral. See Cerebral angiography/arteriography;
Neuroimaging
CT. See Computed tomography; Helical (spiral) CT
in GI bleeding
diagnostic
therapeutic
in insulinoma diagnosis
interventional. See Embolization
left ventricular, in angina
magnetic 
resonance. See Magnetic resonance
angiography
in polyarteritis nodosa
pulmonary, in pulmonary embolism
chest pain evaluation and
helical CT
radionuclide
in angina
in cardiomyopathy
in heart failure
in postinfarct pseudoaneurysm
in renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
Angiomas/angiomatosis
bacillary
spider, in cirrhosis
in Sturge-Weber syndrome
Angiomyolipomas, of kidney
Angioplasty. See also Endovascular surgery/prostheses
carotid
coronary
for angina
for myocardial infarction
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd- Chiari syndrome)
for renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
for superior vena caval obstruction
for visceral artery insufficiency/intestinal angina
Angiostrongylus 
cantonensis/costaricensis
(angiostrongyliasis)
Angiotensin II, in hypertension
Angiotensin II receptor blocking agents
angioedema/urticaria and
for aortic regurgitation
for chronic kidney disease
for diabetic nephropathy
for heart failure
infarct-related
hyperkalemia caused by
for hypertension
in chronic kidney disease/renal failure
in combination regimen
in diabetics
for myocardial infarction
for nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
preoperative discontinuation of
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
in hypertension
reference values for
in sarcoidosis
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
for acute coronary syndromes
acute kidney injury/renal failure and
angioedema/urticaria and
for aortic regurgitation
breastfeeding and
for chronic kidney disease
cough and
for diabetic nephropathy
for heart failure
chronic kidney disease and
infarct-associated
hyperkalemia caused by
for hypertension
in chronic kidney disease
in combination regimen
contraindications to in pregnancy
in diabetics
in urgencies/emergencies
hypoglycemia caused by
hyponatremia caused by
lithium interactions and
for myocardial infarction
for nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
pregnancy and
preoperative discontinuation of
Angle closure, pupillary dilation and
Angle-closure glaucoma
acute
pupillary dilation precipitating
chronic
Angular cheilitis
candidiasis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Anhedonia. See also Depression
Anhidrosis and asthenia (tropical)
Anicteric leptospirosis
Anidulafungin
for candidiasis
Aniline, methemoglobinemia caused by
Animal bites. See also Insect bites/stings
anaerobic skin infections and
poisonous snake
rabies and
Anion gap/anion gap acidosis. See also Urinary anion gap
in acute kidney injury
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
decreased
increased
diabetic ketoacidosis and
lactic acidosis and
normal. See also Hyperchloremic normal anion gap
acidosis
with osmolar gap
in poisoning/drug overdose
with methanol or ethylene glycol
with salicylates
in renal failure (uremic)
in renal tubular acidosis
Anisakiasis (Anisakis marina)
gastritis caused by
Anismus (pelvic floor dyssynergia)
Ankle
examination of
injuries/sprains of
eversion (high)
inversion
range of motion of
in eversion (high) ankle sprains
in inversion ankle sprains
Ankle-brachial index (ABI/ABPI)
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
in lower leg/foot occlusive disease
in venous insufficiency
leg ulcers and
Ankylosing spondylitis
back pain caused by
inflammatory bowel disease and
reactive arthritis and
ANNA-1. See Antineuronal nuclear antibodies
Annuloplasty, for tricuspid regurgitation
Anocutaneous reflex, fecal continence and
Anogenital/perianal pruritus
in enterobiasis/pinworms
Anogenital warts. See Venereal (genital) warts
Anopheles mosquitoes. See Mosquitoes
Anorectal disorders. See also Genital ulcers
anal cancer
bleeding in. See also Rectal bleeding
candidal infection
chlamydial
constipation and
in Crohn disease
fecal incontinence and
fissures/abscesses/fistula
gonococcal
in granuloma inguinale
hemorrhoids
in herpes simplex infection
infections
in lymphogranuloma venereum
in syphilis
venereal warts
Anorexia
in cirrhosis
folic acid deficiency and
in HIV infection/AIDS
nervosa
bulimia and
Cushing syndrome and
Anorexia-cachexia syndrome, in terminally ill/dying patient
Anorgasmia. See Orgasm, loss of
Anoscopy
in GI bleeding
in hemorrhoids/fecal incontinence
Anosmia
in Kallmann syndrome
Anosognosia, intracranial tumors causing
Anovulation
differential diagnosis of
dysfunctional uterine bleeding and
infertility and
ovulation induction and
in polycystic ovary syndrome
Ansaid. See Flurbiprofen
Anserine (pes anserine) bursa/bursitis
Antacids. See also Acid-antisecretory agents
antidepressant drug interactions and
benzodiazepine interactions and
diarrhea caused by
for GERD
hypermagnesemia and
for peptic ulcer disease
Anterior blepharitis
Anterior chest wall syndrome
Anterior communicating artery, occlusion of in stroke
Anterior cruciate ligament
assessment of
injury of
Anterior drawer sign/test
ankle sprain and
knee stability/ACL injury and
Anterior hypopituitarism
Anterior interosseous syndrome
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy
in giant cell arteritis
Anterior talofibular ligament, ankle sprains involving
Anterior tibiofibular ligament, in ankle sprains
Anterior uveitis. See also Uveitis
Anthracyclines
for acute myeloid leukemia
for breast cancer
toxicity of
dexrazoxane for
Anthrax
Anthrax vaccine
Anti-155/140, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Anti-200/100-kd, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Anti-AMPA 
receptor 
antibody, 
in 
autoimmune
paraneoplastic disorders
Antiandrogens
for cancer chemotherapy
for hirsutism/virilization
pregnancy and
for prostate cancer
Antianginal drugs
preoperative management for patient taking
Anti-angiogenesis agents, for breast cancer
Antianxiety drugs. See also specific type
Antiarrhythmic drugs. See also specific agent and specific
arrhythmia
for arrhythmias in poisoning/drug overdose
in heart failure
for infarct-associated arrhythmias
prophylaxis/postinfarction management and
overdose/toxicity of
Antibacterial agents. See also Antibiotics; Antimicrobial
therapy
adverse ophthalmic effects of
ophthalmic
Antibiotic-associated colitis/diarrhea
C difficile causing
Antibiotics. See also specific type or disorder and
Antimicrobial therapy
for acid-fast rod infections
for acne
adverse reactions/toxicity and
dermatitis medicamentosa
ophthalmic
for asthma
for bacterial overgrowth
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for bite wounds
for brain abscess
breastfeeding and
in burn care
C difficile colitis/diarrhea and
for chlamydial infections
colitis associated with use of. See Antibiotic-
associated colitis/diarrhea
for COPD
cost of
for Crohn disease
for cystic fibrosis
for diarrhea
diarrhea 
caused 
by. See Antibiotic-associated
colitis/diarrhea
for diverticulitis
in fever management
for gram-negative infections
for gram-positive infections
in H pylori eradication therapy
for hepatic encephalopathy
hypersensitivity tests/desensitization and
in immunocompromised host
for impetigo
infection in cancer patient and
intravenous administration of
for irritable bowel syndrome
for malaria
for meningitis
partial treatment and
for mycoplasma infection
in neutropenic patient
ophthalmic
oral contraceptive failure and
perioperative
pulmonary complications and
for surgical site infections
for pharyngitis
for PID
platelet function affected by
for pneumonia
anaerobic
community-acquired
nosocomial
principles of use of
prophylactic. See Antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis
resistance to. See Drug resistance
for rickettsial infections
routes of administration for
for shock
for skin and soft tissue infections
for spirochetal infections
for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
thrombocytopenia caused by
topical
for acne
for impetigo
tubulointerstitial nephritis caused by
Antibodies. See also Immunoglobulins
infections associated with defects in
Antibody-mediated (cytotoxic/type II) hypersensitivity
Anticancer drugs. See Chemotherapy
Anticardiolipin antibodies
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
pregnancy loss and
in SLE
Anti-CCP antibodies, in rheumatoid arthritis
Anti-CD3 antibodies, in diabetes delay/prevention
Anticentromere antibody
in CREST syndrome/scleroderma
Anticholinergic agents
for allergic disorders/rhinitis
antidepressant drug interactions and
for asthma
breastfeeding and
for COPD
for irritable bowel syndrome
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for parkinsonism
Anticholinergic delirium
Anticholinergic syndrome/effects
antidepressants causing
antipsychotic drugs causing
hallucinogens causing
Anticholinergic-type mushroom poisoning
Anticholinesterases/acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
for Alzheimer disease/dementia
for myasthenia gravis
overdose/toxicity/poisoning with
Anticipatory anxiety, in panic disorders
Anticoagulants, lupus. See Lupus anticoagulant
for asthma therapy
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for acute coronary syndromes
antidepressant drug interactions and
for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
in pregnancy
in SLE
for atrial fibrillation
in hyperthyroidism
in mitral stenosis
for atrial flutter
bleeding and
after cardiac valve replacement
endocarditis and
pregnancy and
for deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
(venous thromboembolic disease)
drug selection and
duration of
patient selection and
prevention and
for asthma
in endocarditis
epistaxis and
for heart failure
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
for intracranial venous thrombosis
investigational oral agents in
for myocardial infarction
after thrombolytic therapy
for nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
overdose/toxicity and
peptic ulcer disease and
perioperative management of
for pulmonary hypertension
for stroke
thrombocytopenia caused by
for transient ischemic attacks
Anticochlear antibodies, autoimmune audiovestibular
dysfunction and
Anticonstipation agents. See Fiber, dietary; Fiber laxatives;
Laxatives
Anticonvulsant therapy
breastfeeding and
corticosteroid interactions and
discontinuing
drug selection and
for glossopharyngeal neuralgia
for migraine prophylaxis
monitoring serum levels during
for myoclonus
overdose/toxicity and
for postherpetic neuralgia
during pregnancy
for PTSD
for status epilepticus
thyroid testing affected by
for trigeminal neuralgia
vitamin D affected by
Anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibody, in autoimmune paraneoplastic
disorders
Anti-D, for immune thrombocytopenia
Anti-D antibodies, transfusion producing
Antidepressants. See also specific type and agent
with antipsychotic agents
for anxiety
aripiprazole with
atypical
breastfeeding and
buspirone as augmenting agent for
combination therapy and
in dementia
dispensing
dose tapering and
drug interactions of
for dyspepsia
in elderly
for irritable bowel syndrome
lithium augmentation/interaction and
maintenance therapy with
for migraine prophylaxis
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). See also
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
for neuropathic pain/painful diabetic neuropathy
for OCD
overdose/toxicity of
arrhythmias and
hypotension caused by
seizures and
suicide and
for panic attacks
for personality disorder
for phobic disorder
during pregnancy
for psychotic depression
for PTSD
selection of
sexual dysfunction caused by
S S RIs . See also 
Serotonin-selective 
reuptake
inhibitors
switching agents and
thyroid medication/liothyronine as augmenting agent
for
tricyclic. See also Tricyclic antidepressants
Antidiabetic agents. See also specific type and agent and
Insulin therapy
adverse ophthalmic effects of
combination regimens and
with insulin therapy
intensive therapy with
intraoperative requirements/administration of
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
during pregnancy
in prevention/delay of diabetes
Antidiarrheal agents
for Crohn disease
for fecal incontinence
for irritable bowel syndrome
for microscopic colitis
for traveler's diarrhea
for ulcerative colitis
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH). See also Vasopressin
in diabetes insipidus/hypernatremia
in hyponatremia
inappropriate secretion of (SIADH). See Syndrome of
inappropriate ADH secretion
volume overload and
Anti-DNase B, in rheumatic fever/heart disease
Antidotes. See also specific agent
Anti-double-stranded (anti-ds)-DNA
in hyperthyroidism
in lupus/SLE
Antidromic reentrant tachycardia
Antiemetics
for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
for hyperemesis gravidarum
for opioid-induced nausea and vomiting
Antiendomysial antibodies, in celiac disease
Antiepilepsy drugs. See Anticonvulsant therapy
Antifolates, for malaria
Antifreeze. See Ethylene glycol poisoning
Antifungal agents. See also specific agent or disorder
for candidiasis
invasive disease
oral disease
for dermatologic disorders
for invasive sinusitis
in neutropenia
for ophthalmic disorders
prophylactic
for systemic disorders
Anti-GABA2 
receptor 
antibody, 
in 
autoimmune
paraneoplastic disorders
Anti-GalNAC-CD1a antibodies, in Guillain-Barré syndrome
Anti-GBM 
antibodies. See Anti-glomerular basement
membrane antibodies
Anti-GD1a/GD1b antibodies, in Guillain-Barré syndrome
Antigen-antibody complexes. See also Immune complex-
mediated hypersensitivity
in glomerulonephritis
membranous nephropathy and
serum sickness and
in SLE
Antigenic drift/shift
influenza epidemics/pandemics and
norovirus vaccine development and
Antiglaucoma agents
Antigliadin antibody, in celiac disease
Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, in
glomerulonephritis/Goodpasture syndrome
Anti-GM1/GM1b antibodies, in Guillain-Barré syndrome
Anti-GQ1b antibodies, in Guillain-Barré syndrome
Anti-HAV
Anti-HBc
hepatocellular carcinoma and
screening blood for
Anti-HBe
Anti-HBs
Anti-HCV
in hepatocellular carcinoma
screening blood for
Anti-HDV
Antihistamines
abuse/overdose/toxicity of
for allergic eye disease
for allergic rhinitis
breastfeeding and
for desensitization reactions
for insomnia
MAOI interactions and
for nausea and vomiting
nefazodone interactions and
for ophthalmic disorders
in OTC medications
for pruritus
for scombroid poisoning
for urticaria
Anti-Hu antibody
achalasia and
in autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
in cancer-related neuropathy
Antihypertensive drug therapy. See also specific class or
agent
aldosterone receptor antagonists in
α-adrenoceptor antagonists in
angiotensin II receptor blocking agents in
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in
in diabetics
for urgencies/emergencies
in aortic dissection
arteriolar dilators in
for urgencies/emergencies
β-adrenergic blocking agents in
for urgencies/emergencies
exacerbation classification/management and
breastfeeding and
calcium channel blocking drugs in
for urgencies/emergencies
combination regimens and
in congestive heart failure
depression caused by
developing regimen for
in diabetes mellitus
complication rate/diabetic nephropathy affected by
diuretics in
in combination products
during pregnancy
for urgencies/emergencies
follow-up and
goals of
heart disease prevention and
patient selection for
peripheral sympathetic inhibitors in
pheochromocytoma surgery and
for preeclampsia/eclampsia
during pregnancy
for prehypertension
preoperative/perioperative
in renal disease/failure
renin inhibitors in
stroke/stroke prevention and
in urgencies/emergencies
sympatholytics in
overdose/toxicity of
for urgencies/emergencies
vasodilators in
for urgencies/emergencies
Anti-IgA antibodies
Anti-inflammatory 
drugs. See also 
Corticosteroids;
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
for asthma
ophthalmic
for osteoarthritis
Anti-insulin antibodies
in autoimmune/immunopathologic hypoglycemia
in factitious hypoglycemia
in immune insulin resistance
insulin therapy causing
in type 1 diabetes
Anti-insulin receptor antibodies, in hypoglycemia
Anti-integrins, in inflammatory bowel disease
Anti-intrinsic factor antibodies, in pernicious anemia
,
p
gastritis
Anti-Itch lotion. See Pramoxine
Anti-Jo-1 antibody, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Antileukocyte antibodies, transfusion-related acute lung
injury caused by
Antileukotriene agents
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
Anti-liver cytosol type 1, in autoimmune hepatitis
Anti-LKM1, in autoimmune hepatitis
Anti-Ma2 antibody, achalasia and
Anti-MAG antibodies, in cancer-related neuropathy
Antimalarial agents
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for lupus/SLE
for malaria
chemoprophylaxis
combination therapies
non-falciparum
nonimmune populations
self-treatment
severe disease
treatment
uncomplicated falciparum
for porphyria cutanea tarda
rabies vaccination and
resistance to
for rheumatoid arthritis
Antimania therapy
Antimetabolites, in cancer chemotherapy
breastfeeding and
Anti-Mi-2 antibody, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis. See also specific agent
and Antimicrobial therapy
for anthrax
for aspergillosis
for bite wounds
in bronchiectasis
for candidiasis
for CMV infection
in COPD
for cryptococcosis
for cystitis
for endocarditis
in Marfan syndrome
during pregnancy
for esophageal varices
for filariasis
for group B streptococcal infection, in pregnancy
for herpes simplex infection
in HIV infection/AIDS/immunocompromised host
for influenza
for Lyme disease
for MAC infections
for malaria. See also Antimalarial agents
rabies vaccination and
for meningococcal meningitis
g
g
in neutropenia
for opportunistic infections
for P jiroveci infection
for P marneffei infection
for peritonitis
for pertussis
for plague
for Pneumocystis infection
in rape/sexual assault
for relapsing fever
for rheumatic fever
for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
for surgical site infections
for toxoplasmosis
for traveler's diarrhea
for tuberculosis
in HIV infection/AIDS
Antimicrobial therapy. See also specific type or disorder
and Antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis
adverse reactions/toxicity and
for asthma
breastfeeding and
in burn care
clinical response to
promptness of
cost of agents and
duration of
empiric
in fever management
   in drug user
in immunocompromised host
for pneumonia
   community-acquired
   in immunocompromised host
   nosocomial
in fever management
hypersensitivity tests/desensitization and
in immunocompromised host
for meningitis
in neutropenic patient
for opportunistic infection
principles of
resistance to. See Drug resistance
routes of administration for
for shock
for skin and soft tissue infections
susceptibility testing and
thrombocytopenia caused by
Antimicrotubule agents, in cancer chemotherapy
Antimigrainous agents
Antimitochondrial antibodies, in biliary cirrhosis
Antimitochondrial 
antibody-negative 
primary 
biliary
cirrhosis
Antimonials, pentavalent, for leishmaniasis
Antimony. See Stibogluconate
Antimotility drugs. See Antidiarrheal agents
Anti-nAChR, in cancer-related neuropathy
,
p
y
Antinative DNA antibody
Antineoplastic agents. See Chemotherapy
Antineuronal nuclear antibodies (ANNA-1), neurologic
paraneoplastic syndromes/achalasia and
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)
in autoimmune hepatitis
in Churg-Strauss syndrome
in Crohn disease
in glomerulonephritis (pauci-immune)
dyspnea in
in microscopic polyangiitis
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
Anti-NMDA receptor-associated encephalitis
Antinuclear antibody (ANA)
in autoimmune hepatitis
in biliary cirrhosis
in CREST syndrome
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
in lupus/SLE
in mixed connective tissue disease/overlap syndrome
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in rheumatoid arthritis
in scleroderma
in Sjögren syndrome
Antioxidants. See also Vitamin C; Vitamin E
for age-related macular degeneration
in chemoprevention
Antiparkinsonism drugs
for antipsychotic-induced side effects/parkinsonism
Antiphlebitic stockings. See Compression stockings
Antiphospholipid 
antibody 
syndrome/antiphospholipid
antibodies
factor II antibodies and
false-positive syphilis tests and
livedo reticularis in
pregnancy loss and
in SLE
Anti-physin antibody, in autoimmune paraneoplastic
disorders
α2-Antiplasmin deficiency
Antiplatelet antibody
heparin-associated
reference values for
in immune thrombocytopenia
in posttransfusion purpura
Antiplatelet therapy. See also Aspirin
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for myocardial infarction
peptic ulcer disease and
perioperative discontinuation of
for stroke
thrombocytopenia caused by
for transient ischemic attacks
α1-Antiprotease/antitrypsin
in COPD/emphysema
replacement therapy and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
in protein-losing enteropathy
reference values for
Antiproteinase-3 ANCA. See Proteinase-3 ANCA
Antipruritic agents
systemic
topical
Antipsychotic drugs (neuroleptics). See also specific type
and agent
abnormal movements caused by
adherence/nonadherence and
for aggressive/violent behavior
for alcoholic hallucinosis
with antidepressants
atypical. See Atypical antipsychotics
for bipolar disease/mania
breast cancer and
clinical indications for
for delirium
for dementia-associated behavior problems
dosage forms and patterns of
in elderly
for hallucinogen overdose/toxicity
for Huntington disease
for mania
neuroleptic malignant syndrome caused by
for OCD
overdose/toxicity/side effects of
for parkinsonism
parkinsonism (reversible) caused by
for personality disorders
in pregnancy
for psychedelic abuse/overdose
for psychotic depression
relative potency of
seizure threshold affected by
for Tourette syndrome
Antipyretic drugs
contraindications to in heat stroke
Antireflux surgery. See Fundoplication
Antiretroviral therapy/HAART. See also specific agent
adherence and
antituberculous drug interactions and
CMV disease control and
combinations/regimens for
drug holidays and
drug resistance and
gynecomastia and
for hepatitis B
immune reconstitution disease and
in COPD
myopathy caused by
neuropathy caused by
opportunistic infection/malignancies and
oral contraceptive drug interaction and
postexposure
after needle stick
after sexual assault/rape
after sexual/drug use exposure
pregnancy/newborn and
prophylactic
after rape/sexual assault
Anti-Rho (D) antibody
in hemolytic disease of newborn
prenatal screening for
Anti-ribonuclear protein (anti-RNP) antibody
Anti-RNA polymerase III antibody, in scleroderma
Anti-SCL-70 antibody
Antisecretory agents. See Acid-antisecretory agents
Antiseizure therapy. See Anticonvulsant therapy
Anti-signal recognition particle (anti-SRP) antibody, in
polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Anti-SLA, in autoimmune hepatitis
Anti-Smith (anti-Sm) antibody, in lupus/SLE
Anti-smooth muscle antibodies, in autoimmune hepatitis
Antisocial personality disorder
Antispasmodic agents, for irritable bowel syndrome
Anti-SRP antibody, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Anti-SS-A/Ro antibody
in lupus/SLE
in Sjögren syndrome
Anti-SS-B/La antibody
in lupus/SLE
in Sjögren syndrome
Antistreptolysin O (ASO) titers
in postinfectious glomerulonephritis
in rheumatic fever
Antisynthetase syndrome
Antithrombin, reference values for
Antithrombotic therapy. See also Anticoagulation therapy;
Antiplatelet therapy; Thrombolytic therapy
for immobilized patient
for myocardial infarction
PCI and
Antithymocyte globulin
for aplastic anemia
for myelodysplastic syndromes
Antithyroid 
(antithyroglobulin/antithyroperoxidase)
antibodies
in goiter
in hepatitis C
in hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
thiourea treatment and
in hypothyroidism
in thyroid nodules
in thyroiditis
Hashimoto
postpartum
Anti-TNF agents. See also specific agent
adverse effects of
for ankylosing spondylitis
antibodies to
for gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
for psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis
for rheumatoid arthritis
in combination regimen
tuberculosis reactivation and
Antitoxin
botulinus
diphtheria
Anti-Tr antibody, in autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
α1-Antitrypsin/antiprotease
in COPD/emphysema
replacement therapy and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
in protein-losing enteropathy
reference values for
Anti-tTG 
(transglutaminase/tissue 
transglutaminase)
antibody, in celiac disease/dermatitis herpetiformis
Antituberculous drugs
antiretroviral drug interactions and
directly observed therapy (DOT) and
drug-resistant disease and
for extrapulmonary disease
in fixed dose combinations
hepatotoxicity of
in HIV-negative persons
in HIV-positive persons
prophylactic
in latent disease/chemoprophylactic
for meningitis
monitoring therapy with
during pregnancy/lactation
for tuberculous pericarditis
Anti-VEGF therapy
for age-related macular degeneration
for breast cancer
for renal cell carcinoma
for retinal vein occlusion
Antivenin
for black widow spider bites
for scorpion stings
for snake bites
Antiviral agents. See also specific agent or infection
for ophthalmic disorders
Anti-voltage-gated 
calcium 
channel 
antibody, 
in
autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
Anti-voltage-gated 
potassium 
channel 
antibody, 
in
autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
Anti-Yo antibody, in autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
Anti-Zic antibody, in autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
Antizol. See Fomepizole
Anton syndrome
Anus. See also under Anal
carcinoma of
in HIV infection/AIDS
rectum protruding through (rectal prolapse)
Anxiety/anxiety disorders
anticipatory
chronic pain and
drugs for management of
generalized
hospitalization/illness and
hyperventilation/respiratory alkalosis and
palpitations in
personality disorder and
in pheochromocytoma
pre- and postsurgical
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Anxiolytic drugs. See also specific type
Aorta. See also under Aortic
atherosclerotic/occlusive disease of
coarctation of. See Coarctation of aorta
in Marfan syndrome
traumatic injury to
Aortic aneurysms
abdominal
screening for
smoking and
atherosclerosis and
back pain caused by
inflammatory
in Marfan syndrome
ruptured
in syphilis
thoracic
giant cell arteritis and
Aortic arch
abnormalities of in tetralogy of Fallot
aneurysm of
superior vena caval obstruction and
narrowing of in coarctation of aorta
Aortic dissection
aortic regurgitation and
chest pain in
hypertension and
in Marfan syndrome
in pregnancy
in Turner syndrome
Aortic regurgitation
in Marfan syndrome
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
Aortic root dilation
aortic regurgitation and
aortic stenosis and
in Marfan syndrome
mitral valve prolapse and
Aortic sclerosis
Aortic stenosis
atherosclerosis and
calcific (“degenerative”)
interventions affecting murmur in
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
syncope and
Aortic valve rupture
Aortitis, in rheumatoid arthritis
Aortoenteric fistula, GI bleeding and
Aorto-femoral bypass, for aortoiliac occlusive disease
Aortoiliac occlusive disease
Aorto-visceral bypass, for visceral ischemia
APACHE system
in pancreatitis
prognosis at end of life and
septic shock and
Apallic state (persistent vegetative state)
Apathetic hyperthyroidism
Apathy, in dementia
APC gene
screening for
A P E C E D . See 
Autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-
candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
Aphasia
dementia and
intracranial tumors casing
progressive nonfluent
stroke causing
Aphonia, in conversion disorder
Aphthous ulcer
in Behçet syndrome
in Crohn disease
in HIV infection/AIDS
API2-MALT1 gene translocation, in gastric lymphoma
Apical 
ballooning 
syndrome. See 
Tako-Tsubo
(stress/catecholamine-induced) cardiomyopathy
Apical impulse
in aortic regurgitation
in cardiomyopathy
Apicitis, petrous
Apidra. See Insulin glulisine
APL. See Acute promyelocytic leukemia
APLAS. See Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Aplastic anemia
stem cell transplantation for
thrombocytopenia in
Aplastic crises
in hereditary spherocytosis
in sickle cell disease
Apnea, sleep. See Sleep apnea
Apnea test
Apneustic breathing, in coma or stupor
ApoE genotyping, in Alzheimer disease
APOL-1 gene
in chronic kidney disease
in HIV-associated nephropathy
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
genetic mutation in
hypertension and
Appearance, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Appendectomy
carcinoid tumors and
during pregnancy
ulcerative colitis risk and
Appendiceal carcinoids
Appendicitis
amebic
in pregnancy
Appetite, genes affecting control of
Apprehension test
for knee
for shoulder
Apraclonidine, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Apraxia
in dementia
intracranial tumors causing
Aprepitant
Apresoline. See Hydralazine
Apriso. See Mesalamine
APS. See Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Aptivus/Norvir. See Tipranavir, with ritonavir
aPTT. See Partial thromboplastin time
Aqua glycolic
Aquaphor
Aquaporin-4, in neuromyelitis optica
Aqueous tear deficiency
Aquinil. See Hydrocortisone
Ara-C. See Cytarabine
Arachnodactyly, in Marfan syndrome
Aranesp. See Darbepoetin alfa
Arbovirus encephalitides
ARBs. See Angiotensin II receptor blocking agents
Arch aneurysms
superior vena caval obstruction and
Arcing (flash) burns
ARDS. See Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Aredia. See Pamidronate
Arfonad. See Trimethaphan
Arg133Trp (PAX-4) mutation, in idiopathic type 1 diabetes
mellitus
Argatroban, for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Arginine/GHRH stimulation testing
Arginine vasopressin, in diabetes insipidus
Argyll Robertson pupils, in tabes dorsalis
Arimidex. See Anastrozole
Aripiprazole
for bipolar disease/mania
for depression
overdose/toxicity of
Arm edema, in breast cancer/postmastectomy
Armadillos, in leprosy testing
Armour thyroid, for hypothyroidism
Arnold-Chiari malformation
cough headache and
syringomyelia and
Aromasin. See Exemestane
Aromatase inhibitors/inactivators
for breast cancer treatment/prevention
in male
for endometriosis
for gynecomastia
Arousal (excitement) stage of sexual activity
disorders related to. See also Sexual dysfunction
in female
Arrhenoblastomas
A rrhythmi as. See 
also 
specific 
type 
and
Electrocardiogram
in angina
antidepressants causing
in atrial septal defect
in cardiomyopathy
in COPD
in electrical injury
in heart failure
in hypocalcemia
in hypothermia
in infectious myocarditis
myocardial infarction and
antiarrhythmic prophylaxis/postinfarction treatment
and
palpitations and
in pheochromocytoma
in poisoning/drug overdose. See also specific agent
with antiarrhythmic drugs
with antidepressants
with antipsychotic drugs
with digitalis glycosides
with phenothiazines
with solvents
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management of
seizures differentiated from cerebral hypoperfusion
caused by
sinus
in sleep apnea
syncope caused by
in tetralogy of Fallot
treatment of. See Antiarrhythmic drugs
in valvular heart disease
ARS. See Acute radiation syndrome
Arsenic poisoning
Arsenic trioxide
toxicity of
Arsenical melanosis
A R T . See 
Antiretroviral 
therapy/HAART; 
Assisted
reproductive technologies
Artane. See Trihexyphenidyl
Artemether
for malaria
with lumefantrine (Coartem/Riamet)
for schistosomiasis
Artemisinins (qinghaosu)/artemisinin derivatives
in combination regimens
self-treatment and
Arterial aneurysms. See specific type and Aneurysms
Arterial blood gases
in acid-base disorders
in asthma
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
in dyspnea
home oxygen therapy and
in near drowning
in Pneumocystis pneumonia
preoperative
in pulmonary embolism
in respiratory failure
Arterial 
embolism. See 
also 
Thromboembolism;
Thrombosis
acute occlusion of limb caused by
atrial fibrillation/cardiac sources and
carotid sources of
gas, in decompression sickness
in transient ischemic attacks
in transient monocular blindness
Arterial graft/prosthesis. See Bypass grafting
Arterial lines
in burn care
health care-associated infection and
in shock management
Arterial occlusion
acute. See also Arterial embolism; Arterial thrombosis
atherosclerotic. See also Atherosclerosis
Arterial thrombosis. See also Thrombosis
acute occlusion of limb caused by
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
in homocystinuria
Arteriography. See specific type and Angiography
Arteriolar dilators. See also Vasodilator therapy
for hypertension
Arteriopathy, plexogenic pulmonary (idiopathic/primary
pulmonary hypertension)
Arteriovenous fistulae, spinal dural
Arteriovenous malformations
gastrointestinal (vascular ectasias), bleeding from
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
intracranial. See also Stroke
pulmonary
spinal cord
Arteriovenous sheathotomy, for retinal vein occlusion
Arteritis. See also Polyarteritis
coronary artery
in Kawasaki disease
giant cell. See Giant cell (temporal/cranial) arteritis
in thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease)
Artesunate
with amodiaquine (ASAQ)
with mefloquine
for severe malaria
with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
Arthritis/arthralgia
in alkaptonuria
in ankylosing spondylitis
arthroplasty/joint replacement for
osteomyelitis and
back pain caused by
in Behçet syndrome
bursitis differentiated from
cancer-associated
chondroitin/glucosamine for
in coccidioidomycosis
in Crohn disease
crystal deposition
degenerative. See also Osteoarthritis
diagnosis and evaluation of
in erythrovirus (parvovirus) infection
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
exercise/activity in management of
glucosamine/chondroitin for
gonococcal
gouty. See Gout/gouty arthritis
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in hemophilia
in hepatitis
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
of hip
in HIV infection/AIDS
infectious
in drug users
inflammatory intestinal diseases and
joint involvement pattern and
leukemic
Lyme
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
mutilans
neck pain caused by
nongonococcal 
bacterial. See Arthritis/arthralgia,
septic
pneumococcal
pseudoseptic
psoriatic
reactive. See Reactive arthritis
in rheumatic fever
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
rheumatoid. See Rheumatoid arthritis
rubella/rubella vaccination and
in sarcoidosis
septic (nongonococcal acute bacterial)
in drug users
rheumatoid arthritis and
in SLE
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
in Still disease
streptococcal
surgery for
tophaceous
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
tuberculous
in ulcerative colitis
viral
in Whipple disease
Arthrocentesis. See also Synovial fluid examination
Arthropathy, neurogenic. See Neurogenic arthropathy
Arthroplasty. See Joints, replacement of
Arthropods
in encephalitis
skin lesions caused by. See also specific cause
Arthroscopy
for meniscal injury
in osteoarthritis
Artificial insemination
Artificial nutrition. See Nutritional support
Artificial sweeteners, for diabetics
Artificial tears, for dry eye
Aryepiglottic folds, cancer of
Arytenoid cartilage, contact ulcers/granulomas of
Arzerra. See Ofatumumab
5-ASA. See 5-Aminosalicylic acid
Asacol. See Mesalamine
ASAQ (artesunate-amodiaquine)
Asbestosis (asbestos exposure)
lung cancer and
mesothelioma and
pleural effusion and
smoking and
ASC-US. See Atypical squamous cells of unknown
significance
ASCA. See Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies
Ascaris lumbricoides (ascariasis)
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes and
Ascites. See also specific causative disorder
bile
chylous
in cirrhosis
in constrictive pericarditis
malignant
neutrocytic
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
pancreatic
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and
tuberculous
Ascites albumin gradient, serum (SAAG). See Serum-
ascites albumin gradient
Ascitic fluid analysis/examination. See also Paracentesis
in ascites
in bacterial peritonitis
in bile ascites
in chylous ascites
in cirrhosis
culture/Gram stain
in malignant ascites
in mesothelioma
in pancreatic ascites
in peritoneal carcinomatosis
in tuberculous peritonitis
Ascorbic acid. See Vitamin C
ASD. See Atrial septal defect
Asenapine
Asendin. See Amoxapine
Aseptic meningitis. See also Meningitis
coxsackieviruses causing
echoviruses causing
herpes simplex causing
leptospiral
in Lyme disease
mumps/mumps vaccine and
in syphilis
in tick-borne encephalitis
Ash leaf spots (hypopigmentation), in tuberous sclerosis
Asherman syndrome
ASO titers. See Antistreptolysin O (ASO) titers
Asparaginase
Aspartame, for diabetics
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
in alcoholic liver disease
in cirrhosis
in hemochromatosis
in liver disease/jaundice
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
reference/normal values for
in viral hepatitis
Aspergilloma
Aspergillus/Aspergillus fumigatus (aspergillosis)
allergic bronchopulmonary
chronic necrotizing
in immunocompromised host/HIV
infection/AIDS
invasive
opportunistic mold infection differentiated from
prevention of
sinusitis and
Asphyxia
aspiration of inert material causing
in severe asthma exacerbation
Aspiration
caustic esophageal injury and
in drowning/near drowning
enteral nutritional support and
of food (café coronary)
foreign body
retention of
of gastric contents
acute (Mendelson syndrome)
chronic
in comatose patient
in pneumonia. See Pneumonia, aspiration
of inert material
of toxic material
petroleum distillates
Aspirin. See also Antiplatelet therapy; Salicylates
for acute coronary syndromes
in analgesic nephropathy
for angina
for atrial fibrillation
bleeding caused by
breastfeeding and
after cardiac valve replacement surgery
for chemoprevention
atherosclerosis/cardiovascular/heart 
disease
prevention and
   in diabetics
in colorectal cancer
with codeine
COX-1/COX-2 affected by
coxib coadministration and
for essential thrombocytosis
for fever
GI bleeding associated with
iron deficiency and
for myocardial infarction
after thrombolytic therapy
nasal polyps and asthma as contraindication to
overdose/toxicity of
for pain management
in peptic ulcer disease. See also Peptic ulcer
disease, NSAID-induced
platelet function affected by
for polycythemia
reference values for
Reye syndrome and
for rheumatic fever
for stroke/stroke prevention
for transient ischemic attacks
for transient monocular blindness
Asplenia, immunization recommendations in
Assist-control (A-C) ventilation, for respiratory failure
Assisted reproductive technologies
Assistive devices
fall prevention and
hearing rehabilitation and
stroke rehabilitation and
AST. See Aspartate aminotransferase
Astemizole, antidepressant drug interactions and
Astereognosis, intracranial tumors causing
Asterixis
Asthma
allergic
desensitization therapy/immunotherapy for
allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis/aspergillosis and
aspirin triggering (triad asthma)
β-adrenergic agents for
long-acting
short-acting
bronchial provocation testing in
cardiac
catamenial
classification/diagnosis of
comorbid conditions and
complications of
controller medications for
COPD differentiated from
cough and
differential diagnosis of
drugs causing
dyspnea in
estrogen replacement therapy and
exacerbations of
smoking/smoking cessation and
treatment of
exercise-induced
GERD and
hypophosphatemia and
incidence/prevalence of
mediator inhibitors for
NAEPP 3 diagnosis/management guidelines for
occupational
postoperative pulmonary complications and
during pregnancy
pulmonary function testing in
reliever medications for
severity/control of, assessing/monitoring
smoking/smoking cessation and
desensitization/immunotherapy in
coronary heart disease and
inhalation therapy
long-term control medications for
NAEPP 3 guidelines for
myocardial infarction and
quick relief medications for
stepwise approach to
triad
vaccinations for patients with
Asthma action plan
Astigmatism
Astrocytoma
Astroviruses, diarrhea/gastroenteritis caused by
At-risk 
(problem) 
drinking. See 
also 
Alcohol
use/dependency/abuse
differential diagnosis of
treatment of
Atabrine. See Quinacrine
Atacand/Atacand HCT. See Candesartan
Atactic breathing, in coma or stupor
Ataxia
in acute high-altitude cerebral edema
dementia and
fragile-X tremor-ataxia syndrome and
Friedreich
intracranial tumors causing
in varicella
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutation
breast cancer risk and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Atazanavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with ritonavir
Atelectasis
in airway obstruction
mechanical ventilation and
pleural effusion and
in right middle lobe syndrome
Atenolol
for alcohol withdrawal
for hypertension
in diabetics
for Marfan syndrome
perioperative
ATF ligament. See Anterior talofibular ligament
ATG. See Antithymocyte globulin
Atherogenesis. See also Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis. See also specific artery affected and
Cardiovascular disorders; Vascular disorders
acute limb occlusion and
aneurysms and
aortic valvular disease and
aortoiliac disease and
cerebrovascular occlusive disease and. See also
Stroke
cholesterol/lipoproteins in
screening tests for levels of
coronary artery disease and. See Coronary heart
disease
in diabetes mellitus
femoral/popliteal disease and
homocysteine/hyperhomocysteinemia and
hypertension and
lipid-lowering therapy and. See also Lipid-lowering
therapy
lower leg/foot disease and
myocardial infarction and
renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension and
transient ischemic attacks and
visceral artery insufficiency and
Atherosclerotic plaques. See Atherosclerosis
Athletes
cardiovascular screening of
heat exposure syndromes and
sports medicine injuries and
sudden death of
cardiomyopathy causing
Athlete's foot
cellulitis and
Ativan. See Lorazepam
ATL. See Adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia
Atlantoaxial subluxation, neck pain caused by
ATN1 gene, in dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
Atonic seizures (epileptic drop attacks). See also Seizures
Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
herpes simplex infection (eczema herpeticum) and
smallpox vaccination (eczema vaccinatum) and
vesiculobullous hand (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Atopic disease (atopy). See also specific disorder and
Allergies/allergic reactions
allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis/aspergillosis and
asthma and
COPD and
eosinophilic esophagitis and
Atopic keratoconjunctivitis
Atopic-like dermatitis
Atorvastatin. See also Statin drugs
with amlodipine
in HIV infection/AIDS
Atovaquone
for malaria, with proguanil (Malarone)
chemoprophylaxis and
self-treatment and
for P jiroveci infection
ATP1A2 gene, in familial hemiplegic migraine
ATP7B in Wilson disease
ATRA. See Tretinoin
Atrial fibrillation
arterial emboli and
anticoagulation in prevention/management of
limb occlusion and
retinal artery occlusion and
transient ischemic attacks and
in atrial septal defect
in cardiomyopathy
catheter ablation for
in constrictive pericarditis
in hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
in myocardial infarction
palpitations and
in preexcitation syndromes
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management of
recurrent paroxysmal
refractory
stroke and
Atrial flutter
in COPD
reentry/preexcitation and
Atrial gallop. See Heart sounds
Atrial myxoma
fever/FUO and
herpes simplex virus and
Atrial natriuretic peptide, in senile amyloidosis
Atrial 
(supraventricular) 
premature 
beats 
(atrial
extrasystoles)
in myocardial infarction
Atrial septal aneurysm
Atrial septal defect
Atrial septal lipoma
Atrial tachycardia, multifocal
Atrioventricular (heart) block
in atrial septal defect
intraventricular conduction defects and
lithium use and
in Lyme disease
in myocardial infarction
in poisoning/drug overdose
with antidepressants
sudden death and
Atrioventricular canal defect
Atrioventricular dissociation
Atrioventricular junctional rhythm
Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT)
palpitations in
Atrioventricular pathways, accessory, supraventricular
tachycardia caused by
Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT)
Atripla. See Efavirenz, with tenofovir and emtricitabine
Atrophic age-related macular degeneration
Atrophic gastritis
H pylori infection and
in pernicious anemia
Atrophic urethritis, urinary incontinence and
Atrophic vaginitis
in menopause
urinary incontinence and
Atrophie blanche
Atropine
p
breastfeeding and
for 
cholinesterase 
inhibitor 
(anticholinesterase)
poisoning
with diphenoxylate. See Diphenoxylate with atropine
for infarct-related heart block
overdose/toxicity of
in terminally ill/dying patient
Atypical absences
Atypical antidepressants. See also Antidepressants
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
for bipolar disease/mania
for dementia/dementia-associated behavior problems
in elderly
for Huntington disease
overdose/toxicity/side effects of
for parkinsonism
for Tourette syndrome
Atypical facial pain
Atypical measles
Atypical 
mycobacteria. See Nontuberculous atypical
mycobacteria
Atypical nevi/mole
Atypical psychoses
Atypical squamous cells of unknown significance (ASC-
US)
Audiology
Audiovestibular disorders. See also Vestibular disorders
autoimmune pattern of
AUDIT (Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test)
Auditory canal. See Ear canal
Auditory hallucinations. See also Hallucinations
intracranial tumors causing
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Auer rods, in acute leukemia
Augmentation mammoplasty. See Breast implants
Augmentin. See Amoxicillin/amoxicillin-clavulanate
Aura
migraine headache
pre-seizure
Auricle
Austin Flint murmur
Austrian triad
Autism, vaccines/thimerosal-free vaccines and
Autoimmune cholangitis
Autoimmune disorders. See also specific disease
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
common variable immunodeficiency and
in diabetes
fever/FUO and
hearing loss in
in HIV infection/AIDS
silicone gel breast implants and
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
with thrombocytopenia (Evans syndrome)
Autoimmune hepatitis
Autoimmune (immunopathologic) hypoglycemia
Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism
Autoimmune pancreatitis
Autoimmune paraneoplastic disorders
Autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy
Autoimmune 
thyroiditis. See 
Hashimoto 
(chronic
lymphocytic/autoimmune) thyroiditis; Transient autoimmune
thyroiditis
Autoinflation, for eustachian tube dysfunction/barotrauma
Autologous packed red blood cells, transfusion of. See
also Transfusion
Autologous serum eye drops
Autologous stem cell transplantation. See also Bone
marrow/stem cell transplantation
Autologous tissue flaps, for breast reconstruction
Automatism, postepileptic
focal seizures and
Automobile accidents
cardiac trauma and
prevention of injury caused by
Automobile driving
by patients with dementia
by 
patients 
with 
syncope/ventricular
tachycardia/aborted sudden death
by suicidal patients
Autonomic dysfunction (dysautonomia)
in focal seizures
in Guillain-Barré syndrome
in polyneuropathies
prenatal screening for
Autonomic failure, pure
Autonomic neuropathy
cancer-related
chemotherapy-induced
in diabetes
hypoglycemia and
dysautonomia and
in porphyria
Autonomic testing
in dysautonomia
in syncope
Autophony, patulous eustachian tube and
Autopsy
Autosomal dominant hypocalcemia with hypercalciuria
(ADHH)
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
intracranial aneurysms and
AV block. See Atrioventricular (heart) block
AV dissociation
AV junctional rhythm
AV nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT)
palpitations in
AV reentrant tachycardia (AVRT)
Avalide. See Irbesartan/irbesartan with hydrochlorothiazide
Avandamet. See Rosiglitazone, with metformin
Avandaryl. See Rosiglitazone, with glimepiride
Avandia. See Rosiglitazone
Avapro. See Irbesartan
Avascular necrosis of bone (osteonecrosis)
corticosteroid use and
dysbaric
of jaw, bisphosphonate use and
Avastin. See Bevacizumab
Aveeno
Aveeno Anti-Itch lotion. See Pramoxine
Avelox. See Moxifloxacin
Aventis. See Insulin glargine
Aventyl. See Nortriptyline
Aversive conditioning. See Behavior modification
Avian influenza (H5N1). See also Influenza
Avinza. See Morphine
Avita. See Tretinoin
AVM. See Arteriovenous malformations
AVNRT (AV nodal reentry tachycardia)
palpitations in
Avoidance therapy
for allergic contact dermatitis
for allergic rhinitis
for rosacea
Avoidant personality disorder
AVRT (AV reentrant tachycardia)
Axilla, radial nerve lesions in
Axillary lymph nodes, in breast cancer
dissection of
arm edema and
in breast-conserving therapy
irradiation of
palpation for evaluation of
prognosis and
recurrence and
sentinel node biopsy and
arm edema avoidance and
neoadjuvant therapy and
Axillary vessels, compression of in thoracic outlet/cervical
rib syndromes
Axillo-femoral bypass, for aortoiliac occlusive disease
Axonal injury, diffuse
Axonal 
neuropathies. See also specific type and
Neuropathies
myeloma/paraproteinemias and
Aygestin. See Norethindrone
Azacitidine
for myelodysplastic syndromes
Azactam. See Aztreonam
Azarcon, toxicity of
Azarga. See Brinzolamide/timolol
Azathioprine
for autoimmune hepatitis
for 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
for microscopic polyangiitis
for pemphigus
Azelastine
for allergic eye disease
for allergic/perennial rhinitis
Azidothymidine. See Zidovudine
Azithromycin. See also Macrolides
for endocarditis
for MAC prophylaxis/treatment
for malaria
for pharyngitis
for pneumonia
for syphilis
Azo compounds, for inflammatory bowel disease
Azoospermia
artificial insemination for infertility caused by
in cystic fibrosis
in Klinefelter syndrome
Azopt. See Brinzolamide
Azor. See Olmesartan, with amlodipine
Azotemia. See also Kidney disease/injury
heart failure and
in hepatorenal syndrome
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
pancreatitis and
parenteral nutritional support and
postrenal
prerenal
AZT. See Zidovudine
Aztreonam, for pneumonia
B19 parvovirus infection. See Erythrovirus (parvovirus
B19) infection
B antigen, in compatibility testing
B cell lymphoma. See also Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
gastric
methotrexate causing
small intestine
stem cell transplantation for
B cells, pancreatic
in diabetes mellitus
latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
B lymphocytes
clonal malignancy of (chronic lymphocytic leukemia)
in common variable immunodeficiency
in HIV infection/AIDS
“B” symptoms
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP/beta)
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in dyspnea
heart failure and
in mitral regurgitation
recombinant. See Nesiritide
reference values for
Babesia divergens/microti (babesiosis)
anaplasmosis/ehrlichiosis and
Lyme disease coinfection and
Bacillary angiomatosis
Bacillary dysentery (shigella dysentery/gastroenteritis)
Bacillus
anthracis. See also Anthrax
cereus, 
diarrhea/food 
poisoning/gastroenteritis
caused by
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), for bladder cancer
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine
tuberculin skin test affected by
tuberculosis blood tests and
Bacitracin, for ophthalmic disorders
Back manipulation
Back pain
in alkaptonuria
in ankylosing spondylitis
in aortic aneurysm
in aortic dissection
diagnosis/evaluation of
disk-related
epidural/subdural hemorrhage causing
in osteoporosis
in prostatitis
spinal cord lesions/tumors/compression causing
spinal stenosis causing
spinal tuberculosis causing
vertebral fractures causing
Background retinopathy
Baclofen, for spasticity
Bacteremia. See also Sepsis/septic shock
anaerobic
campylobacter causing
endocarditis and
gram-negative
health care-associated
in listeriosis
in Lyme disease
in neutropenic patient
osteomyelitis from
salmonella
staphylococcal
in streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
transfusion of contaminated blood causing
in typhoid fever
vibrios causing
Bacterial infections. See also specific type
actinomycosis
anaerobic
conjunctivitis
diarrhea in. See also Diarrhea, infectious
drugs for. See Antibiotics; Antimicrobial therapy
endocarditis
gram-negative
gram-positive
keratitis
meningitis
mycobacterial
myocarditis in
nocardiosis
pericarditis
rhinosinusitis (sinusitis)
shock and. See Sepsis/septic shock
vaginosis
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
Bacterial overgrowth
irritable bowel syndrome and
vitamin B12 deficiency and
Bacterial synergistic gangrene
Bacteriuria
asymptomatic, limitations on screening for
catheter-associated
in cystitis
during pregnancy
Bacteroides
fragilis
gastrointestinal strains of
melaninogenicus. See Prevotella, melaninogenica
resistant strains of
Bactrim. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Bactroban. See Mupirocin
Baden-Walker system
Bagassosis
Baker (popliteal) cyst
BAL. See Dimercaprol
Balamuthia mandrillaris
Balance. See Dysequilibrium; Falls; Vestibular disorders
Balanitis
candidal
in chancroid
in reactive arthritis
Balanoposthitis, in diabetes
Balantidium coli (balantidiasis)
Baldness. See also Alopecia
Balint syndrome
Balkan nephropathy, ureteral/renal pelvis cancer and
Balloon angioplasty, coronary. See Angioplasty, coronary;
Percutaneous coronary intervention
Balloon tube tamponade, for esophageal varices
Balloon valvuloplasty. See Valvuloplasty
Balsalazide, for inflammatory bowel disease
ulcerative colitis
Bamboo spine
Band keratopathy, in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
Banding, gastric, for obesity
in type 2 diabetes
Banding (band/variceal ligation)
for esophageal varices
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
prevention of first bleeding episode and
prevention of rebleeding and
for hemorrhoids
Bankart lesion
Barakat syndrome
Barbiturates. See Opioids/opioid analgesics; Sedative-
hypnotics
Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging system
BARD score, in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Bariatric surgery, for obesity
hypoglycemia after
in type 2 diabetes
Baritosis
Barium enema
in cancer screening and evaluation/polyp identification
in diverticular disease
Barium esophagography
in achalasia
in esophageal cancer
in esophageal webs and rings
in GERD
in motility disorders
Barium 
upper 
gastrointestinal 
series. See 
Upper
gastrointestinal series
Baroreceptors, in volume overload
Barotrauma
decompression sickness and
mechanical ventilation and
Barrett esophagus
esophageal carcinoma and
Bartholin duct cyst/abscess
Bartonella henselae/quintana (bartonellosis)
bacillary angiomatosis caused by
in HIV infection/AIDS
prevention and
Bartter syndrome
Basal body temperature charting, in contraception
symptothermal natural family planning and
Basal cell carcinoma
of skin
eyelid involvement and
of vulva
Basal energy expenditure (BEE)
exercise and
nutritional support and
Basedow 
disease. See 
also 
Graves 
disease;
Hyperthyroidism
Basic life support, in near drowning
Basilar artery migraine
Basilar artery occlusion, stroke caused by
Basilar meningitis, in syphilis
Basilar skull fracture
vertigo caused by
Basophil count
Bathing, in dermatologic therapy
Battered elderly
Battered woman
prevention of abuse and
Batteries (disk/button), ingested, alkali injuries caused by
Battle sign
Baylisascaris procyonis, visceral larva migrans caused by
BCG, for bladder cancer
BCG vaccine
tuberculin skin test affected by
tuberculosis blood tests and
bcl-2 expression, in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
BCLC (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer) staging system
bcr/abl fusion gene
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in chronic myeloid leukemia
reference values for
Beano, for gastrointestinal gas
Beau lines
Becaplermin, for leg/foot ulcers
Becker muscular dystrophy
Beclomethasone, for asthma
Bed rest. See also Immobility
back pain and
hazards of
deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and
hypercalcemia and
for preeclampsia-eclampsia
for preterm labor prevention
for third-trimester bleeding
Bedbugs, skin lesions caused by
Bedside Index for Severity in Acute
Pancreatitis (BISAP)
Bedside tracheotomy
Bedsores. See Pressure ulcers
BEE. See Basal energy expenditure
Beef. See Meat
Beef tapeworm (T saginata)
Beer consumption, gout/hyperuricemia and
Beer potomania, hyponatremia caused by
Beger procedure, for pancreatitis
Behavior
abnormal
illness
during sleep (parasomnias)
in dementia patients
insulin-induced hypoglycemia and
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Behavior 
modification. See also Cognitive behavior
therapy
for alcohol use/abuse
for anxiety disorders
for chronic fatigue syndrome
in chronic pain disorders
for dementia/Alzheimer disease
for depression
for obesity management
for personality disorders
for 
psychiatric 
problems 
associated 
with
hospitalization/illness and
in psychosexual dysfunction
for schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
for Tourette syndrome
for urinary incontinence management
Behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia
Behçet syndrome
uveitis in
Bejel (endemic syphilis)
Belching (eructation)
Bell palsy. See also Facial paralysis/palsy
herpes simplex infection and
varicella zoster virus infection and
Belladonna
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
Belly press test
Benazepril/benazepril with hydrochlorothiazide/benazepril
with amlodipine
Bence Jones proteinuria (light chain in urine)
in myeloma
reference values for
renal toxicity and
Bendamustine
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Bends
Benicar/Benicar HCT. See Olmesartan
Benign essential (familial) tremor
parkinsonism differentiated from
Benign mole
Benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo (BPPV)
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
phytotherapy/saw palmetto for
postrenal acute kidney injury and
testosterone replacement therapy and
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
urinary incontinence and
Bentall procedure
for aortic regurgitation
for aortic stenosis
BenzaClin. See Clindamycin, with benzoyl peroxide
Benzalkonium, for hydrofluoric acid burns
Benzamycin. See Erythromycin, with benzoyl peroxide
Benzisothiazolyl piperazine. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Benzisoxazoles. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Benznidazole, for Chagas disease
Benzocaine, methemoglobinemia caused by
Benzodiazepines. See also specific agent
for aggressive/violent patient
for alcohol detoxification/withdrawal
with antipsychotic agents
for anxiety
for delirium
in dementia
drug interactions of
for hallucinogen overdose/toxicity
for nausea and vomiting
in older adult
overdose/toxicity of. See also Flumazenil
for panic attacks
for PTSD
for serotonin syndrome
for sleep disorders/insomnia
withdrawal from
sleep disorders and
Benzoyl peroxide
for acne
with clindamycin
with erythromycin
for rosacea
Benzoylecgonine, in cocaine abuse
Benztropine, for parkinsonism. See also Antiparkinsonism
drugs
Bepotastine, for allergic eye disease
Bepreve. See Bepotastine
Beraprost, for pulmonary hypertension
Berger disease (IgA nephropathy)
Beriberi. See also Thiamine (vitamin B1), deficiency of
neuropathy associated with
Bernard-Soulier syndrome
Berry aneurysms. See also Intracranial aneurysm
Berylliosis
Beta-adrenergic agonists
for asthma
in heart disease/failure
long-acting
short-acting
for COPD
for hyperkalemia
for preterm labor prevention
Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for anxiety/stress disorders
for aortic dissection
for aortic regurgitation
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
   in hyperthyroidism
   infarct-related
in heart failure
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
ventricular tachycardia
for cardiomyopathy
cardioselectivity of
depression caused by
for esophageal varices
prevention of first bleeding episode and
prevention of rebleeding and
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
in heart failure
infarct-related
for hypertension
in aortic dissection
in combination regimen
in diabetics
pregnancy and
in urgencies/emergencies
hypoglycemia caused by
lipid abnormalities associated with use of
for Marfan syndrome
for mitral valve prolapse
for myocardial infarction
overdose/toxicity of
for panic attacks
perioperative
in cardiac patients
pheochromocytoma and
for phobic disorder
Beta-carotene
in chemoprevention
excess intake of
Beta-catenin, hepatic adenoma and
(1-3)-β-D-glucan levels
in aspergillosis
in Pneumocystis pneumonia
Beta-globin gene
in beta thalassemia syndromes
in sickle cell syndromes
Beta-glucocerebrosidase, in Gaucher disease
Beta-hemolytic 
streptococci. See specific type under
Group
p
Beta-hydroxybutyrate/hydroxybutyric acid
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in diabetes mellitus
in diabetic ketoacidosis
Beta interferon. See Interferon-β
Beta-lactam antibiotics, for pneumonia
Beta2-microglobulin
in amyloidosis
in myeloma staging
reference values for
Beta-natriuretic peptide. See B-type natriuretic peptide
Beta thalassemia syndromes
sickle cell disease and
Betagan. See Levobunolol
Betaine, for homocystinuria
Betamethasone/betamethasone valerate
for fetal lung maturity
topical
Betaxolol
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
for systemic hypertension
Bethesda assay
Bethesda criteria, for HNPCC
Bethesda System, for Pap smear classification
Betimol. See Timolol
Betoptic S. See Betaxolol
Bevacizumab
for breast cancer
for colorectal cancer
for diabetic eye disease
for lung cancer
for renal cell carcinoma
for retinal vein occlusion
Bexarotene, TSH affected by
Bexxar. See Tositumomab
Bezafibrate
Bezold-Jarisch reflex, in angina
Biaxin. See Clarithromycin
Bicalutamide
for prostate cancer
Bicarbonate
for acidosis
in chronic kidney disease
diabetic ketoacidosis
increased anion gap acidosis
lactic acidosis
normal anion gap/renal tubular acidosis
arterial
contrast media nephrotoxicity mediated by
in fluid management
gastrointestinal loss of, acidosis caused by
urinary anion gap and
for hyperkalemia
lithium interactions and
plasma/serum levels of
in acid-base disorders
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis/renal
tubular acidosis
in lactic acidosis
in metabolic acidosis
in metabolic alkalosis
in respiratory acidosis
in respiratory alkalosis
reference values for
for salicylate poisoning
for shock
for tricyclic antidepressant overdose
venous
Bicarbonaturia, in hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis/renal
tubular acidosis
Bicuspid aortic valve
in Turner syndrome
Bicycle riding, injury prevention and
Bifascicular block
Bifidobacterium infantis probiotic, for irritable bowel
syndrome
“Big gastrin,” gastrinoma secreting
“Big prolactin”
Bigeminy
Biguanides
for diabetes mellitus
overdose/toxicity of
Bilateral fold paralysis
Bile acid-binding resins, for lipid modification
g
,
p
in pregnancy
Bile ascites
Bile ducts. See also under Biliary
carcinoma of. See Cholangiocarcinoma
common, stones in. See Choledocholithiasis
Bile salts, decreased concentration of, in short bowel
syndrome
Bilharziasis. See also Schistosoma
Biliary cirrhosis
Biliary colic. See Abdominal pain/tenderness
Biliary obstruction
biliary tract carcinoma causing
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
jaundice caused by
Biliary pain. See Abdominal pain/tenderness
Biliary pancreatitis
Biliary sludge (microlithiasis)
pancreatitis and
Biliary stricture
cholangitis and
Biliary tract disease. See also specific disease
carcinoma
cholecystitis
choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
cholelithiasis (gallstones)
CMV infection and
dyspepsia and
in fascioliasis
in HIV infection/AIDS
inflammation. See Cholangitis
pancreatitis and
pre- and postcholecystectomy
syndromes
primary sclerosing cholangitis
strictures
Biliopancreatic diversion/duodenal switch, for obesity, in
type 2 diabetes
Bilirubin levels. See also Hyperbilirubinemia
in alcoholic liver disease
ascitic fluid
in autoimmune hepatitis
in biliary tract carcinoma
in cholecystitis
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
in cirrhosis
in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
in hemolytic anemia
in liver disease/jaundice
reference/normal values for
urine
in viral hepatitis
in vitamin B12 deficiency
Bilirubinate, calcium, in gallstones
Bilivist. See Ipodate sodium
Billowing mitral valve. See Mitral valve prolapse
Biloma
Bimatoprost, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Bimatoprost/timolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Binge eating, in bulimia nervosa
Biofeedback
for chronic pain
for fecal incontinence
for somatoform disorders
for urinary incontinence
Biologic response modifiers. See also specific agent
for renal cell carcinoma
Biologic therapies, for inflammatory bowel disease
Biomarkers
in breast cancer. See also Hormone receptor sites
prognosis and
cardiac. See also Cardiac biomarkers/enzymes
Bioprostheses, for cardiac valve replacement. See also
Valve replacement
Bioterrorism
anthrax and
botulinum toxin and
chemical warfare agents and
nerve agents
skin decontamination for
Coxiella burnetii and
plague and
smallpox/smallpox vaccination and
tularemia (Francisella tularensis) and
Biperiden, for parkinsonism. See also Antiparkinsonism
drugs
Bipolar disorders. See also Depression; Mania
lithium for
suicide risk and
Bipolaris, phaeohyphomycosis caused by
Bird-fancier's lung (pigeon-breeder's disease)
Bird mites. See Mites
Birds
avian influenza and
histoplasmosis and
hypersensitivity pneumonitis and
psittacosis (ornithosis) and
West Nile virus in
Birth classes
Birth control pills. See Oral contraceptives
Bisacodyl
BISAP score, in pancreatitis
Bisferiens pulse, in cardiomyopathy
Bismuth compounds
for diarrhea
in H pylori eradication therapy
for peptic ulcer disease
Bisoprolol
for heart failure
with hydrochlorothiazide, for hypertension
perioperative
Bisphosphonates. See also specific agent
adverse ophthalmic effects of
in breast cancer management
hypercalcemia associated with use of
for hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
hypocalcemia associated with use of
for myeloma-related bone disease
osteonecrosis of jaw and
for osteoporosis
androgen deprivation therapy and
chronic corticosteroid treatment and
for Paget disease of bone
Bite 
cells, 
in 
glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase
deficiency
Bites. See Animal bites; Human bite wounds; Insect bites
Bithionol, for fascioliasis
Bitolterol, for asthma
Bitot spots, in vitamin A deficiency
Bitter almonds, odor of in cyanide poisoning
Bivalirudin
for acute coronary syndromes
for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
for myocardial infarction
Biventricular pacing (resynchronization), for heart failure
in cardiomyopathy
Black eye
in nasal trauma
Black fever. See Visceral leishmaniasis
Black molds
chromoblastomycosis caused by
phaeohyphomycosis caused by
Black patients. See also Racial/ethnic background
atopic dermatitis in
cardiomyopathy in
colorectal cancer risk in
diuretics in
glaucoma in
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in
HIV-associated nephropathy in
hypertension in
in black patients
Kaposi sarcoma in
PSA reference values in
sarcoidosis in
sickle cell anemia/syndromes in
Black plague
Black widow spider bite
Blackwater fever, in malaria
Bladder
biopsy of, in bladder cancer
cancer of
hematuria in
thiazolidinedione use and
disorders/dysfunction of. See also specific type and
Urinary incontinence
postrenal acute kidney injury and
spinal trauma causing
infection of. See Cystitis
neuropathic
chemotherapy-induced
in diabetes
painful. See Interstitial cystitis
paraganglioma of
Bladder catheterization
intermittent, for incontinence management
urinary tract infection and
Bladder toxicity
cyclophosphamide/ifosfamide causing
mesna for
neuropathies, chemotherapy-induced
Bladder training, for urinary incontinence
Blalock/Blalock-Taussig shunt, for tetralogy of Fallot
Blast cells
in acute leukemia
in chronic myeloid leukemia
in myelodysplastic syndromes
refractory anemia with (RAEB)
Blastomycosis
South American (paracoccidioidomycosis)
Bleach. See Hypochlorite
Bleeding/blood loss. See also specific cause or structure
affected and Thrombocytopenia
in acute leukemia
anticoagulation and
in chronic kidney disease
in cirrhosis
coagulation disorders causing
acquired
congenital
in DIC
in essential thrombosis
evaluation of
gastrointestinal. See Gastrointestinal bleeding
iron deficiency and
in liver disease
malabsorption and
miscellaneous causes of
ovulation
perioperative risk evaluation/management and
platelet disorders causing
acquired
congenital
qualitative
thrombocytopenia
in polycythemia
during pregnancy
ectopic pregnancy and
in gestational trophoblastic disease
third-trimester
premenopausal/postmenopausal. See 
Vaginal
bleeding
rectal. See Rectal bleeding
g
retinal disorders and
thrombolytic therapy for myocardial infarction and
vaginal. See Menstruation; Vaginal bleeding
Bleeding history, directed, preoperative
Blenoxane. See Bleomycin
Bleomycin
Raynaud phenomenon caused by
for testicular cancer
toxicity of
for wart removal
Blepharitis
Blepharospasm
Blind loop syndrome
bacterial overgrowth and
vitamin B12 deficiency in
Blind spot, enlargement of in papilledema
Blindness. See also disorders causing and Visual
impairment/loss
age-related macular degeneration causing
in basilar artery migraine
cataract causing
cortical, occipital lobe lesions causing
diabetic eye disease and
fleeting (amaurosis fugax)
in giant cell arteritis
glaucoma causing
river (onchocerciasis)
snow
trachoma causing
transient monocular
vitamin A deficiency and
Blister, burn
Blister cells, in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency
Blistering (bullous) skin disorders. See also specific type
Blocadren. See Timolol
Blood. See also Bleeding/blood loss
contaminated, transfusion of
disorders of. See also Hematologic disorders
screening
for drugs/toxins
for erythrovirus (parvovirus B19)
for hepatitis
for HIV
for HTLV
for West Nile virus
in stool. See Diarrhea, bloody; Dysentery; Fecal occult
blood testing
for toxicology testing
transfusion of. See Transfusion
in urine. See Hematuria; Hemoglobinuria
Blood alcohol level
in acute intoxication/poisoning
reference values for
Blood culture
central venous catheter sepsis and
in disseminated candidiasis
in endocarditis
in fever/FUO
in gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
in health care-associated infection
in Lyme disease
in nongonococcal acute bacterial (septic) arthritis
in pneumonia
in staphylococcal osteomyelitis
in travel-related infectious disease
in typhoid fever
Blood dyscrasias. See also Bleeding
retinal disorders associated with
Blood flukes, schistosomiasis caused by
Blood gases. See Arterial blood gases; Venous blood
gases
Blood glucose levels. See Glucose, blood levels of
Blood glucose meters
Blood loss. See Bleeding
Blood pressure. See also Hypertension; Hypotension
cardiovascular/heart disease risk and
classification/management and
exercise/activity affecting
in GI bleeding
in hypertension
treatment goals and
   in chronic kidney disease
in hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
in hypotension
measurement of
orthostatic changes in. See Orthostatic (postural)
hypotension
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in prehypertension
in shock
in ventricular heart disease
Blood pressure screening, in cardiovascular/heart disease
prevention
Blood specimen, tubes for collection of
Blood transfusion. See Transfusion
Blood (compatibility) typing, for transfusions
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
in acute kidney injury
in chronic kidney disease
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in hyperglycemia hyperosmolar state
in pancreatitis
preoperative levels of, postoperative pulmonary
complications and
reference values for
in SIADH
Blood urea nitrogen:creatinine ratio
in acute tubular necrosis
in glomerulonephritis
Blood vessels. See specific type and under Vascular
Blowout fracture, of orbital floor
Blue bloaters
Blue nevi
melanoma and
Blue sclera, in osteogenesis imperfecta
Blue top tubes
Blumer shelf
Blunt trauma, cardiac
Blurred vision. See Visual impairment/loss
BMI. See Body mass index
BMPR1A gene, in familial juvenile polyposis
BMPR2 gene, in idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
BNP. See B-type natriuretic peptide
Bocavirus
Boceprevir, for hepatitis C
BODE index
Body cavity (primary effusion) lymphoma
Body dysmorphic disorder
Body fat. See also Obesity
distribution of in obesity
diabetes and
Body fluid precautions (universal). See Body substance
isolation
Body image disturbances
in anorexia nervosa
postsurgical anxiety states and
surgery proneness and
Body lice. See also Lice
Body mass index
coronary heart disease risk and
genetic factors affecting
preventable disease/deaths and
Body ringworm
Body substance isolation/universal precautions
in H1N1 influenza
in hemorrhagic fevers
in herpes simplex prevention
HIV infection/AIDS prevention and
in monkeypox
in SARS
Body surface area, in burns, estimating
Body temperature
basal. See Basal body temperature
in burn injury, maintaining
elevated. See also Fever; Hyperthermia
cholinergic urticaria caused by
in hyperthermia/heat exposure syndromes
in hypothermia
in near drowning, resuscitation efforts and
normal
in pulmonary embolism
Body water
fluid management and
water deficit calculation and
Body weight. See Weight
Boerhaave syndrome
Boils (furunculosis)
in HIV infection/AIDS
Bone
adynamic disease of
avascular necrosis of (osteonecrosis)
corticosteroid use and
dysbaric
of jaw, bisphosphonate use and
blastomycosis involving
coccidioidomycosis involving
defective mineralization of, in
osteomalacia
in diabetes
in histoplasmosis
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
infections of. See also Osteomyelitis
metabolic disease of. See also specific disorder
in chronic kidney disease (renal osteodystrophy)
mycotic infection of
myeloma involving
Paget disease of
in syphilis
tuberculosis of
Bone density measurements/bone densitometry
in hyperparathyroidism
in male hypogonadism
in osteomalacia
in osteoporosis. See also Osteoporosis
screening for, in osteoporosis prevention
Bone marrow
depression/failure of
in aplastic anemia
in cancer chemotherapy
infections and
methotrexate causing
in myelodysplastic syndromes
in myelofibrosis
in myeloma
in neutropenia
radiation exposure and
thrombocytopenia caused by
examination/morphology of
in acute leukemia
in aplastic anemia
in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia
in chronic myeloid leukemia
in essential thrombocytosis
in Gaucher disease
in hairy cell leukemia
in leishmaniasis
in myelodysplastic syndromes
in myelofibrosis
in myeloma
in neutropenia
in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in polycythemia
in sideroblastic anemia
in vitamin B12 deficiency
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
infiltration of, thrombocytopenia caused by
stem cells in, for transplantation
Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation
for acute leukemia
adenovirus infection and
allogeneic
for amyloidosis
for aplastic anemia
aspergillosis after
autologous
for breast cancer
for cancer
chemotherapy and
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
for chronic myeloid leukemia
CMV infection and
for Hodgkin disease
immunizations and
infection and
for lymphoma
for mantle cell lymphoma
for myelodysplastic syndromes
for myelofibrosis
for myeloma
for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
for sickle cell anemia/syndromes
for thalassemia
Bone-modifying agents, for chemotherapy-induced toxicity
Bone morphogenic receptor protein 1A (BMPR1A) gene,
in familial juvenile polyposis
Bone morphogenic receptor protein 2 (BMPR2) gene, in
idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
Bone pain
adjuvant modalities for
bisphosphonates causing
in Gaucher disease
in hyperparathyroidism
malabsorption and
in mineral bone disorders of chronic
kidney disease
in myeloma
in osteomalacia
in Paget disease
Bone scanning
for breast cancer metastases
in musculoskeletal evaluation
in Paget disease
for prostate cancer metastases
BOOP (bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia).
See Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia/pneumonitis
Boosting, tuberculin skin testing and
BOOSTRIX. See Tdap vaccine
Borderline personality disorder
Bordetella infection
bronchiseptica
pertussis (whooping cough)
cough in
prevention/immunization and. See also Pertussis
vaccine
Boredom, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Bornholm disease (epidemic pleurodynia)
Borrelia (borreliosis)
afzelii
burgdorferi. See also Lyme disease
myopericarditis caused by
senu strictu
garinii
lonestari
recurrentis
relapsing fever caused by
tick-borne encephalitis coinfection and
Bortezomib
for myeloma
neuropathy caused by
Bosentan, for pulmonary hypertension
Botanical (herbal) medicines, toxicity of
Botulinum toxin
Botulinum toxin therapy
for achalasia
for diabetic autonomic neuropathy
for focal torsion dystonias
for migraine prophylaxis
for spasticity
for Tourette syndrome
Botulinus antitoxin
Botulism
Bouchard nodes
Bougie dilators. See Esophageal dilation
Boutonneuse fever
Boutonnière deformity
Bouveret syndrome
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease)
Bowel irrigation, for poisoning/drug overdose
Bowen disease
BPH. See Benign prostatic hyperplasia
BPPV. See Benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo
Brachial plexus
lesions of
in thoracic outlet/cervical rib syndromes
Brachial plexus neuropathy
Brachytherapy. See also Radiation therapy
for breast cancer
for lung cancer
for prostate cancer
Braden scale, for pressure ulcers
Bradycardia/bradyarrhythmias
in myocardial infarction
palpitations and
persistent (sick sinus syndrome)
in poisoning/drug overdose
sinus. See Sinus bradycardia
in sleep apnea
Bradykinesia
in Lewy body dementia
in parkinsonism
BRAF gene
colorectal cancer and
in papillary thyroid carcinoma
Brain abscess
anaerobes causing
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
in nocardiosis
otitis media and
seizures and
Brain biopsy
in primary angiitis of central nervous system
in toxoplasmosis
Brain cancer. See also Intracranial masses/tumors
metastatic
primary
Brain death
organ donation and
Brain edema. See Cerebral edema
Brain imaging. See Neuroimaging
Brain natriuretic peptide. See B-type
natriuretic peptide
Brain stimulation
for idiopathic torsion dystonia
for parkinsonism
for Tourette syndrome
Brain 
tumors. See also Brain cancer; Intracranial
masses/tumors
Brainstem
arteriovenous malformations in
ischemia of, seizures differentiated from
lesions/tumors/infarction of
coma or stupor caused by
gliomas
vertigo caused by
Bran, dietary (bran powder). See also Fiber, dietary
Branch retinal artery occlusion
Branch retinal vein occlusion
Branchial cleft cysts
deep neck infections and
Brandt-Daroff exercises
BRCA1/BRCA2 genes
breast cancer and
in male
ovarian cancer and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Breast
abscess of
nipple discharge caused by
puerperal mastitis and
augmented. See also Breast implants
disorders of
benign disorders of
biopsy of
in breast mass evaluation
in fat necrosis
in fibroadenoma
in fibrocystic condition
mammographic localization
stereotactic
cancer of. See Breast cancer
examination of
in cancer follow-up
in cancer screening/early detection
fat necrosis of
fibroadenoma of
fibrocystic condition and
breast cancer risk and
nipple discharge in
male, disorders of. See Breast cancer, in male;
Gynecomastia
mass/lump in. See Breast cancer; Lump (breast)
nipple discharge and
phyllodes tumor of
pregnancy affecting
reconstruction of after mastectomy
local recurrence and
self-examination of
in cancer follow-up
in cancer screening
Breast cancer
anatomic locations of
antipsychotic drug use and
p y
g
arm edema and
bilateral
biomarkers/gene expression profiling and
prognosis and
treatment and
biopsy in diagnosis of
breast reconstruction/implants and
clinical examination in detection/evaluation of
clinical findings in early detection of
cytology in evaluation of
diet and
differential diagnosis of
ductal
invasive/infiltrating
in situ
early detection/screening for
clinical findings and
genetic testing and
pregnancy and
endometrial cancer and
estrogen replacement therapy and
exercise affecting risk of
fibrocystic condition and
genetic 
mutations 
associated 
with. See also
BRCA1/BRCA2 genes
HER-2/neu oncogene overexpression in
prognosis and
therapy and
incidence/risk/mortality of
in male
inflammatory
in situ
lactation and
lobular
invasive
in situ
in male
in Klinefelter syndrome
mammography in detection/evaluation of
biopsy and
breast implants and
metastatic
imaging for
laboratory findings and
lymph node assessment and
   prognosis and
treatment of
nipple discharge in
noninvasive
oral contraceptive use and
Paget
nipple involvement and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
pathologic types of
prognosis and
pregnancy affecting risk of
pregnancy and
prevention of
chemoprevention and
genetic risk factors and
prognosis for
adjuvant systemic therapy and
in male
recurrence of
adjuvant systemic therapy and
biomarkers/gene expression profiling and
breast reconstruction/implants and
Oncotype Dx assay in assessment of
self-examination in prevention/screening of
smoking/passive smoking and
staging of
choice/timing of primary therapy and
prognosis and
survivorship issues and
treatment of
adjuvant systemic
   in older women
biomarkers/hormone receptor status and
breast-conserving
chemotherapy in
   adjuvant/neoadjuvant
   palliative
   pregnancy and
choice/timing of primary therapy and
curative
endocrine therapy in. See also Hormone therapy, for
breast cancer
   adjuvant/neoadjuvant
follow-up
in male
neoadjuvant
palliative
during pregnancy/lactation
radiation therapy in
surgical 
resection. See 
also 
Lumpectomy;
Mastectomy
targeted therapy in
“triple-negative”
ultrasonography in evaluation of
Breast-conserving therapy, for breast cancer
local recurrence and
during pregnancy/lactation
Breast implants
breast cancer in patient with
for breast reconstruction
disorders associated with
rupture of
Breast milk. See Lactation
Breast pain
in cancer
in fibrocystic condition
Breast surgery. See also Lumpectomy; Mastectomy
Breastfeeding. See Lactation
Breath odor
in cyanide poisoning
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in uremia
Breath sounds
in asthma
in bronchial obstruction
in heart failure
in pneumonia
Breath tests
in bacterial overgrowth
in H pylori
infection
in lactose intolerance
in nausea and vomiting
Breathing. See also under Respiratory
abnormalities of in coma or stupor
assessment/support of
in burn injury
in coma
muscles/accessory muscles of
in asthma exacerbation
in myasthenia gravis
sleep-related disorders of. See also Sleep apnea
Breathing exercises
for COPD
prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications
and
Brevibloc. See Esmolol
Brief psychotic disorders
Brill-Zinsser disease
Brimonidine
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
overdose/toxicity of
Brimonidine/timolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Brinzolamide, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Brinzolamide/timolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Briquet syndrome
British anti-Lewisite (BAL). See Dimercaprol
Brodifacoum poisoning
“Broken 
heart 
syndrome,” See 
also 
Tako-Tsubo
(stress/catecholamine-induced) cardiomyopathy
Bromfenac, for ophthalmic disorders
Bromocriptine. See also Dopamine agonists
for cocaine withdrawal
for hyperprolactinemia
for neuroleptic malignant syndrome
for ovulation induction
for parkinsonism
Brompheniramine, for allergic/perennial rhinitis
Bronchi, foreign body in
Bronchial carcinoid tumors (bronchial adenomas)
Bronchial gland carcinoma
Bronchial obstruction
Bronchial provocation testing, in asthma
Bronchiectasis
COPD differentiated from
cystic fibrosis and
in measles
nontuberculous mycobacterial infection and
Bronchiolitis
acute
adenoviruses causing
constrictive (obliterative/bronchiolitis obliterans)
with organizing pneumonia (BOOP/cryptogenic
organizing pneumonia/pneumonitis/COP)
silo-filler's disease and
follicular
measles causing
proliferative
respiratory
interstitial lung disease associated with (RB-ILD)
RSV
Bronchioloalveolar cell carcinoma. See also Lung cancer
Bronchitis
chlamydial
chronic. See also Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
complications of
imaging findings in
industrial
management of
cough in
Bronchoalveolar lavage, for respiratory secretion analysis
in eosinophilic pneumonia
in immunocompromised host
in interstitial (diffuse parenchymal) lung disease
in Pneumocystis pneumonia
in pneumonia
in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
in sarcoidosis
in tuberculosis
Bronchoconstriction. See Asthma; Bronchospasm
Bronchodilators
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for asthma
diagnosis/classification and
exacerbation management and
long-acting
short-acting
for COPD
for cystic fibrosis
Bronchogenic carcinoma. See also Lung cancer
Bronchopneumonia, in measles
Bronchoprovocation testing. See Bronchial provocation
testing
Bronchopulmonary mycosis/aspergillosis, allergic
Bronchoscopy. See also Bronchoalveolar lavage
in bronchial carcinoid tumors
in hemoptysis
in lung cancer
in pneumonia
in solitary pulmonary nodule
in tuberculosis
Bronchospasm/bronchoconstriction. See also Asthma
adenosine causing
in COPD
in desensitization therapy
exercise-induced. See Asthma, exercise-induced
perioperative
in pulmonary edema
transfusion causing
Broth technique, for drug susceptibility testing
Brown recluse spider bites
Brown-Séquard syndrome
Brown tumors of bone, in hyperparathyroidism
Bruce protocol, for exercise testing
Brucella abortus/melitensis/suis (brucellosis)
Brudzinski sign
Brugia
malayi
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes and
timori
Bruits
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
carotid
in cerebral arteriovenous malformation
in occlusive cerebrovascular disease
Bruxism, earache and
BSE. See Bovine spongiform encephalopathy; Breast, self-
examination of
BSS. See Bernard-Soulier syndrome
Buboes
in lymphogranuloma venereum
in plague
Budd-Chiari syndrome (hepatic vein obstruction)
Budesonide
for asthma
with formoterol
for autoimmune hepatitis
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
microscopic colitis
Buerger disease (thromboangiitis obliterans)
Raynaud phenomenon and
Bufotenin, toxicity of
Bulbar palsy, progressive
Bulbar poliomyelitis
Bulbospinal neuronopathy, X-linked
Bulimia nervosa
with anorexia nervosa
Bullectomy, for emphysema
Bullous impetigo
in HIV infection/AIDS
Bullous pemphigoid
Bullous (blistering) skin disorders. See also specific type
Bumetanide
for heart failure
infarct-related
for hypertension
in urgencies/emergencies
lithium interactions and
for pulmonary edema
Bumex. See Bumetanide
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen
Bundle branch block
in atrial septal defect
in myocardial infarction
in tetralogy of Fallot
Buprenorphine
for heroin/opioid addiction/withdrawal
overdose/toxicity of
Bupropion
for drug-induced erectile dysfunction
for obesity
overdose/toxicity of
for smoking cessation
Burin variant MEN
Burkholderia
mallei (glanders)
pseudomallei (melioidosis)
Burkitt lymphoma
Epstein-Barr virus in
Burkitt type ALL
Burn blister
Burn dressings
Burn surface area, estimating
Burning mouth syndrome
Burns
abdominal compartment syndrome and
chemical. See Chemical injury
classification of
depth of
electric
fasciotomy in
extent of
flame (clothing)
flash (arcing)
infection and
injuries/illnesses associated with
Joule
patient assessment and
radiation
smoke inhalation and
survival and
survival after
systemic reactions to
treatment of
fluid resuscitation in
initial
patient support and
Stevens 
Johnson 
syndrome/toxic 
epidermal
necrolysis treatment and
surgical/wound care
Bursa/bursitis. See also specific type
in diabetes
of knee
Buruli ulcer
Buspar. See Buspirone
Buspirone
for aggressive/violent behavior
antidepressant drug augmentation and
for anxiety
for OCD
Busulfan
Butane, toxicity of
Butanediol, overdose/toxicity of
Butenafine
Butoconazole, for vulvovaginal candidiasis
Butorphanol
Butterfly rash, in SLE
Button batteries, ingested, alkali injuries caused by
γ-Butyrolactone, overdose/toxicity of
Butyrophenones. See 
also 
Antipsychotic 
drugs;
Haloperidol
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
Byetta. See Exenatide
Bypass grafting
for aortic dissection
for aortoiliac occlusive disease
coronary artery. See Coronary artery bypass grafting
for erectile dysfunction
for femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
for lower leg/foot occlusive disease
for superior vena caval syndrome
for visceral artery insufficiency/intestinal angina
Bypass surgery, for obesity
hypoglycemia after
in type 2 diabetes
Byssinosis
Bystolic. See Nebivolol
C3
in bullous pemphigoid
in IgA nephropathy
in membranous nephropathy
in postinfectious glomerulonephritis
reference values for
C3b
in autoimmune hemolytic anemia
in cold agglutinin disease
C3 
nephritic 
factor, 
in 
membranoproliferative
glomerulonephropathy
C4, reference values for
C5A, in familial Mediterranean fever
C282Y mutation, in hemochromatosis. See also HFE gene
hepatocellular carcinoma and
Ccr. See Creatinine clearance
c-erb B-2. See HER-2/neu overexpression
c-myc gene, in Burkitt lymphoma
13C-octanoic acid breath test, in nausea and vomiting
C-peptide
in factitious hypoglycemia
insulinoma secreting
reference values for
C-reactive protein
coronary heart disease and
in Crohn disease
reference values for
C-telopeptide, in Paget disease of bone
C-urea breath testing. See Urea breath testing
c-v wave
in pulmonary stenosis
in tetralogy of Fallot
14C-xylose test, in bacterial overgrowth
Ca. See Calcium
CA, in breast cancer
CA 19
in cholangiocarcinoma
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
CA, in breast cancer
CA, in ovarian tumors
C A -MRS A . See 
Community-associated 
methicillin-
resistant Saureus
Cabazitaxel
for prostate cancer
Cabergoline
for GH-secreting tumors
for hyperprolactinemia
CABG. See Coronary artery bypass grafting
Cachectin. See Tumor necrosis factor
Cachexia
diabetic neuropathic
in protein–energy malnutrition
in terminally ill/dying patient
CACN1A gene, in familial hemiplegic migraine
CACNA1S gene, in periodic paralysis
CACNL1A3 gene, in periodic paralysis
CAD. See Computer-assisted detection
CAD (coronary artery disease). See Coronary heart
disease
Cadherin cell adhesion protein, gastric cancer and
Cadmium, tubulointerstitial disease caused by
CADP test
Caduet. See Atorvastatin, with amlodipine
Café au lait spots
Café coronary
Cafergot, for migraine headache
Caffeine
fibrocystic breast condition and
for migraine headache
overdose/toxicity of
during pregnancy
Caffeinism
cagA gene, in H pylori gastritis
CAGE screening test
Cajal, interstitial cells of, gastrointestinal stromal tumors
and
Calabar swellings, in loiasis
Calan. See Verapamil
Calcaneofibular ligament, ankle sprains and
Calcifediol (25-hydroxyvitamin D3)
for hypoparathyroidism/tetany
for osteomalacia
reference values for
serum levels of in osteoporosis
for vitamin D deficiency
Calciferol. See Ergocalciferol
Calcific (“degenerative”) aortic stenosis
Calcimar. See Calcitonin
Calcimimetic agents. See Cinacalcet
Calcinosis
cardiac
tumoral, in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney
disease
Calciphylaxis
Calcipotriene, for psoriasis
Calcitonin
reference values for
in thyroid cancer
Calcitonin/nasal calcitonin-salmon
for hypercalcemia
for osteoporosis
for Paget disease of bone
Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol)
for hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism/tetany
for mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
for osteomalacia/rickets
for parathyroid hyperplasia
after parathyroidectomy
reference values for
Calcitriol ointment, for psoriasis
Calcium
coronary, tomographic assessment of, in chest pain
evaluation
deficiency of in osteomalacia/rickets
dietary/supplementary
for calcium channel blocker overdose
in colorectal cancer prevention
high-calcium diet and
hypercalcemia caused by
hypercalciuria and
for hyperkalemia
for hypermagnesemia
for hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis
for hyperphosphatemia
for hypertension
for hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism/tetany
milk-alkali syndrome and
for mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney
disease
for osteomalacia
for osteoporosis prevention/management
after parathyroidectomy
during pregnancy/lactation
requirements for in nutritional support
urinary stone formation and
disorders of concentration/metabolism of. See also
Hypercalcemia; Hypocalcemia
in chronic kidney disease (renal osteodystrophy)
genetic disorders associated with
intracellular, in hypertension
reference/normal values for
serum levels of
albumin levels and
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
in hypercalciuria
in hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
magnesium serum levels and
management and
phosphorus/phosphate metabolism and
reference/normal values for
urinary excretion of. See also Hypercalciuria
in hypocalcemia
reference value for
in urinary stones. See also Calcium nephrolithiasis;
Hypercalciuria
Calcium acetate. See Calcium, dietary/supplementary
Calcium bilirubinate, in gallstones
Calcium carbonate. See Calcium, dietary/supplementary
Calcium channel α2-δ ligands, for neuropathic pain
Calcium channel blocking drugs
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
for cardiomyopathy
in heart failure
for hypertension
in combination regimen
in diabetes
during pregnancy
in urgencies/emergencies
lower extremity edema caused by
for myocardial infarction
overdose/toxicity of
pheochromocytoma surgery and
for pulmonary hypertension
for Raynaud phenomenon
for subarachnoid hemorrhage
Calcium chloride. See Calcium, dietary/supplementary
Calcium citrate. See Calcium, dietary/supplementary
Calcium disodium edetate (EDTA), for lead poisoning
Calcium 
gluconate. See 
also 
Calcium,
dietary/supplementary
for calcium channel blocker overdose
for hydrofluoric acid burns
for hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism/tetany
Calcium nephrolithiasis
hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria/hyperparathyroidism and
yp
yp
yp p
y
Calcium polycarbophil. See also Fiber, dietary
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease
(pseudogout)
Calcium-sensing receptor
mutations in gene for
in hypercalcemia
in hypocalcemia
in hypoparathyroidism
Calcium-stimulated 
angiography, 
in 
insulinoma
diagnosis
Calculus formation. See specific type orstructure or organ
affected
Calderol. See Calcifediol
Calendar method of contraception
Caliciviruses, gastroenteritis caused by
California encephalitis
California flea rickettsiosis
Callosities of feet or toes
in diabetes/vascular disorders
Caloric testing
in coma or stupor
in Ménière syndrome
Calorie requirements, in nutritional support
Calorie restriction, in obesity management
Calorimetry, for energy expenditure measurement
Calprotectin, in Crohn disease
Calretinin, in mesothelioma
Calymmatobacterium (Donovania) granulomatis
Cameron erosions/lesions
Campath. See Alemtuzumab
Camphor/menthol preparations
Camptosar. See Irinotecan
Campylobacter
diarrhea/gastroenteritis caused by
Guillain-Barré syndrome and
fetus subsp fetus
jejuni
Campylobacter-like organisms
Canasa. See Mesalamine
Canavan disease, prenatal testing for
Cancer. See also specific type and under Malignant
back pain in
cognitive disorders/delirium and
complications of
DIC in
early detection/screening tests for
effusions associated with
emergencies associated with
Epstein-Barr virus infection and
etiology of
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma and
fever/FUO and
HIV infection/AIDS and
hypercalcemia associated with
hyperuricemia associated with
allopurinol for
rasburicase for
incidence/risk/mortality of
obesity and
infectious complications of
lipid abnormalities associated with
neuropathies associated with
nonmetastatic neurologic complications of
oral contraceptive use and
paraneoplastic syndromes and
pericarditis associated with
pleural effusions in (malignant pleural effusions)
polymyositis/dermatomyositis and
prevention 
of. See 
also 
Cancer, 
early
detection/screening tests for
chemoprevention and
prognosis for
radiation exposure and
rheumatic manifestations of
SIADH and
smoking/smoking cessation and
spinal cord compression and
staging of
stem cell transplants for
treatment 
of. See also Chemotherapy; Radiation
therapy
systemic. See also Chemotherapy
tumor lysis syndrome and
venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and
Cancidas. See Caspofungin
Cancuas. See Caspofungin
Candesartan
for heart failure
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
for migraine prophylaxis
Candida (candidiasis)
albicans
disseminated
endocarditis in
esophageal
in HIV infection/AIDS
glabrata
hepatic
hepatosplenic
in HIV infection/AIDS
invasive
krusei
mucocutaneous/mucosal
nail infection and
non-albicans
oral (thrush)
esophagitis and
in blacks
osteomyelitis caused by
parapsilosis
prevention of
resistant strains of
tinea cruris differentiated from
in urine
vulvovaginal
in diabetes mellitus
in HIV infection/AIDS
rape/sexual assault and
Candida antigen, for wart removal
Candidal funguria (candiduria)
Candidemia
Canker sore (aphthous ulcer)
in Behçet syndrome
in Crohn disease
in HIV infection/AIDS
Cannabinoids
for nausea and vomiting. See also Dronabinol
in pain management
Cannabis sativa. See also Marijuana
Cannon A waves
in AV junctional rhythm
palpitations and
CAP. See Community-acquired pneumonia
CAPD. See Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
Capecitabine
for breast cancer
for colorectal cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
Capillary angiomas, in Sturge-Weber syndrome
Caplan syndrome
Capoten. See Captopril
Capozide. See 
Captopril, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
hydrochlorothiazide
CAPRA nomogram, for prostate cancer assessment
Capsaicin
for anogenital pruritus
for neuropathic itch
for osteoarthritis
for painful diabetic neuropathy
for postherpetic neuralgia
Capsule imaging/endoscopy
in colon polyp identification
in Crohn disease
in GI bleeding
obscure bleeding and
Captopril
in diabetics
for heart failure
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
in urgencies/emergencies
for myocardial infarction
Car accidents. See Automobile accidents
Car driving
by patients with dementia
by 
patients 
with 
syncope/ventricular
tachycardia/aborted sudden death
by suicidal patients
y
p
Carac. See Fluorouracil
Carbamate poisoning
Carbamazepine. See also Anticonvulsant therapy
for alcohol withdrawal
for bipolar disease/mania
breastfeeding and
overdose/toxicity of
hemodialysis for
for personality disorder
during pregnancy
for seizures
Carbapenems, allergy to, penicillin allergy cross-reactivity
and
Carbaryl poisoning
Carbidopa
Carbidopa/levodopa
with entacapone
Carbimazole, for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
Carbohydrate deficient transferrin, alcohol use/abuse and
Carbohydrates, dietary. See also High-carbohydrate diet;
Low-carbohydrate diets
in diabetic diet
for hypoglycemia
for islet cell tumors/insulinomas
malabsorption of
diarrhea and
flatus and
in porphyria
Carbon dioxide
partial pressure of. See Paco2; Pco2
reference values for
respiratory failure and
venous. See also Bicarbonate
Carbon dioxide laser therapy
for CIN
for condylomata acuminata
for wart removal
Carbon monoxide, diffusing capacity for (DlCO) . See
Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide poisoning
dyspnea in
headache in
smoke inhalation and
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
renal tubular acidosis caused by
Carboplatin
for testicular cancer
toxicity of
Carboxyhemoglobin levels
in carbon monoxide poisoning
reference values for
in smoke inhalation
Carbuncles
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
in breast cancer
in colorectal cancer
reference values for
in thyroid cancer
Carcinoid heart disease
pulmonic regurgitation and
tricuspid stenosis and
Carcinoid syndrome
Carcinoid tumors
bronchial
gastric
intestinal
in MEN
pancreatic
pernicious anemia gastritis and
Carcinoma in situ
of breast
of cervix
endometrial
of vulva
Carcinomatosis
lymphangitic
peritoneal
Carcinomatous meningitis (leptomeningeal metastases)
Card agglutination test (CATT), in African trypanosomiasis
Cardene/Cardene SR. See Nicardipine
Cardiac 
angiography. See Angiography/arteriography,
cardiac/coronary
Cardiac arrhythmias. See Arrhythmias
y
y
Cardiac asthma
Cardiac biomarkers/enzymes
in acute MI (STEMI)
in infectious myocarditis
in non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes
Cardiac calcinosis
Cardiac catheterization
in acute coronary syndromes
in aortic stenosis
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
in cardiomyopathy
in constrictive pericarditis
in coronary artery disease
in heart failure
in myocardial infarction
in patent ductus arteriosus
in pulmonary stenosis
in Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy
in ventricular septal defect
Cardiac cirrhosis
Cardiac dysrhythmias. See Arrhythmias
Cardiac failure
acute
congestive. See also Congestive heart (cardiac)
failure
Cardiac friction rub. See also Pericardial friction rub
in chest pain evaluation
Cardiac glycosides. See Digitalis/digitalis glycosides
Cardiac index
in myocardial infarction
in shock
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. See Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), cardiac
Cardiac murmurs. See Heart murmurs
Cardiac output
in aortic stenosis
in pregnancy
prerenal acute kidney injury and
in shock liver
Cardiac risk assessment
in postinfarction management
preoperative
Cardiac Risk Index, Revised
Cardiac rupture
Cardiac-specific markers (cardiac enzymes). See Cardiac
biomarkers
Cardiac tamponade. See Tamponade
Cardiac transplantation, for heart failure
Cardiac trauma
sudden death of athlete and
Cardiac tumors
Cardiac valves. See also Prosthetic heart valves; Valve
replacement; Valvular heart disease
endocarditis affecting. See also Endocarditis
Cardiobacterium hominis. See HACEK organisms
Cardioembolism
stroke and
transient ischemic attacks and
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema
perioperative
management of
in heat stroke
in infectious myocarditis
Cardiogenic syncope
Cardiomegaly
in heart failure
in hypothyroidism (myxedema heart)
Cardiomyopathy
adenovirus infection and
amyloid
catecholamine-induced. See Cardiomyopathy, Tako-
Tsubo
cirrhotic
coxsackieviruses causing
in diabetes
dilated
genetic factors in
heart failure and
in hyperthyroidism
hypertrophic/hypertrophic obstructive
heart murmurs in
sudden death and
   of athlete
infiltrative
ischemic
mitral regurgitation and
palpitations and
of 
pregnancy 
(peripartum 
cardiomyopathy/heart
failure)
restrictive
constrictive pericarditis differentiated from
Tako-Tsubo (stress/catecholamine-induced)
myocardial infarction mimicked by
pheochromocytoma and
trastuzumab causing
Cardiomyoplasty, for heart failure
Cardiomyotomy, Heller, for achalasia
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in electrical injury
for hypothermia
in near drowning
orders regarding in end-of-life care
Cardiorenal syndrome
Cardiotoxicity, anthracycline
dexrazoxane for
Cardiovascular 
disorders. See also under Cardiac;
Coronary;Myocardial and Heart disease; Stroke
adverse ophthalmic effects of drugs used in
in athletes, screening for
in Chagas disease
chemoprevention in
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
cocaine abuse and
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
g
y
coxibs (COX-2 inhibitors) and
in diabetes mellitus
glycemic control and
hypertension control and
estrogen replacement therapy and
homocysteine/hyperhomocysteinemia/homocystinuria
and
in hypercalcemia
hypertension/hypertension control and
in hyperthyroidism
in hypothyroidism
immobility/bed rest and
lipid disorders and
in Lyme disease
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
pregnancy and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
prevention of
abdominal aortic aneurysm screening in
chemoprevention/aspirin use and
cholesterol screening and
exercise/activity and
hypertension prevention/management and
lipid disorder prevention/management and. See
also Lipid-lowering therapy
smoking/smoking cessation and
radiation causing
syphilis and
in Turner syndrome
Cardiovascular system
abnormal development of, hypertension and
thiamine deficiency affecting
Cardioversion
electrical
for atrial fibrillation
   in hyperthyroidism
   infarct-related
   rate control compared with
for atrial flutter
in hypothermia
for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
for ventricular arrhythmias/tachycardia/fibrillation
   infarct-related
pharmacologic
for atrial fibrillation
for atrial flutter
transesophageal echocardiography-guided, for atrial
fibrillation
Cardioverter defibrillator, implantable. See Implantable
cardioverter defibrillator
Carditis, rheumatic
Cardizem. See Diltiazem
Cardura. See Doxazosin
Caregiver issues
in care of elderly
terminally ill/dying patient and
y
y g p
Carey-Coombs murmur, in rheumatic carditis
Carisoprodol, overdose/toxicity of
Carmol
Carney complex/syndrome
Cushing syndrome and
thyroid cancer and
L-Carnitine, for hepatic encephalopathy
β-Carotene/carotenoids
in chemoprevention
excess intake of
Carotid angioplasty
Carotid artery dissection
headache and
retinal artery occlusion and
Carotid 
artery 
occlusive 
disease 
(carotid
stenosis/insufficiency)
headache associated with
recurrent
retinal artery occlusion and
stroke/transient ischemic attacks caused by
postoperative stroke and
transient monocular blindness and
Carotid bruits
postoperative stroke and
Carotid endarterectomy/thromboendarterectomy
prophylactic
preoperative
transient monocular blindness and
stroke as complication of
p
for transient ischemic attacks and stroke
Carotid insufficiency. See Carotid artery occlusive disease
Carotid pulse
in cardiomyopathy
in heart failure
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, syncope in
Carotid sinus massage/pressure
for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
in syncope evaluation
Carotid stenosis. See Carotid artery occlusive disease
Carotid stenting
Carpal compression test
Carpal spasm. See Trousseau sign
Carpal tunnel syndrome
in acromegaly/gigantism
Raynaud phenomenon and
Carrier (genetic)
for acute intermittent porphyria
for cystic fibrosis
for fragile X mental retardation
for Gaucher disease
for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
for hemophilia
for hypophosphatasia
for sickle cell disease
for thalassemia
Carrier state (infection)
for amebiasis
furunculosis and
for giardiasis
in group B streptococcal infection
in hepatitis B
in hepatitis C
in meningococcal meningitis
staphylococcal
impetigo and
nasal vestibulitis and
surgical site infection associated with
in trench fever
in trichomoniasis
in typhoid fever
Carteolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Cartia. See Diltiazem
Carvedilol
for esophageal varices, prevention of first bleeding
episode and
for heart failure
for hypertension
for myocardial infarction
Cascara
Case management, in heart failure
Casodex. See Bicalutamide
Caspofungin
for aspergillosis
for candidiasis
for mucormycosis
CaSR. See Calcium-sensing receptor
g
p
Castleman disease
Castration, for breast cancer in male
Casts, urinary. See Urinary casts
Cat bites
cat-scratch disease and
Cat exposure
bacillary angiomatosis and
tinea corporis/circinata and
Cat feces, toxoplasmosis and
Cat fleas. See Fleas
Cat hookworm, cutaneous larva migrans caused by
Cat roundworm (T cati)
Cat-scratch disease
in HIV infection/AIDS
lymphadenitis/lymphadenopathy in
Cataflam. See Diclofenac
Catamenial asthma
Catamenial pneumothorax
Cataplexy
Catapres. See Clonidine
Cataract
diabetic
hypoparathyroidism and
quetiapine use and
Cataract surgery
α-blocker use and
Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome
Catatonic schizophrenia
Catatonic syndrome (catatonia)
neuroleptic-induced
Catcher's mitt hand
Catecholamine-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors, for
parkinsonism
Catecholamine myocarditis, pheochromocytoma and
Catecholamines
in pheochromocytoma
reference values for
Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy and
tumors secreting, diabetes and
β-Catenin, hepatic adenoma and
Caterpillars, skin lesions caused by
Cathartics
abuse of in bulimia nervosa
for poisoning/drug overdose
Catheter ablation techniques, for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
atrial flutter
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
preexcitation syndromes
ventricular premature beats
ventricular tachycardia
Catheterization
bladder/urinary. See Bladder catheterization
cardiac. See Cardiac catheterization
Catheters/intravenous lines
in burn care
candidiasis and
coagulase-negative staphylococcal infection and
GI bleeding and
health care-associated infection and
for parenteral nutritional support
complications and
leg ulcers and
CATT (card agglutination test), in African trypanosomiasis
Cauda equina syndrome/tumor, back pain caused by
Cauliflower ear (auricular hematoma)
Caustic/corrosive agents
acids
alkalies
esophageal injury caused by
eye injury caused by
Cauterization, for CIN
Cavernoma, portal
Cavernous hemangioma, of liver
Cavernous sinus thrombosis, bacterial rhinosinusitis and
Cbir 1 antibodies, in Crohn disease
CCFA (Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America)
cCJD. See Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
CCLE. See Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus
CCNU. See Lomustine
CCP antibodies, in rheumatoid arthritis
CCPD. See Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis
Ccr. See Creatinine clearance
CCR 5
in HIV infection/AIDS
in tick-borne encephalitis
in West Nile virus
CCR5 co-receptor antagonist, for HIV infection/AIDS
CD markers. See also specific marker
in hematologic neoplasia
acute leukemia
chronic lymphocytic leukemia
hairy cell leukemia
CD2, in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
CD3 antibodies, in diabetes delay/prevention
CD4/CD8 cell ratio, in sarcoidosis
CD4 T cells
Cardiogenic shock
absolute count
antiretroviral therapy initiation/monitoring and
CMV infection and
immune reconstitution and
MAC infections and
cardiogenic
percentage of
Pneumocystis pneumonia and
syphilis and
reference values for
CD5
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia/mantle cell lymphoma
CD7, in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
CD10, in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
CD11c, in hairy cell leukemia
CD13, in acute myeloid leukemia
CD19
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia/mantle cell lymphoma
CD20
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in hairy cell leukemia
in mantle cell lymphoma
CD22, in hairy cell leukemia
CD23, in mantle cell lymphoma
CD25, in hairy cell leukemia
CD33, in acute myeloid leukemia
CD34, in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
CD38, in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
CD55 deficiency, in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
CD56, in nasal/paranasal lymphoma
CD59 deficiency, in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
CD103, in hairy cell leukemia
CD117, in gastrointestinal stromal tumors
CD123, in hairy cell leukemia
CdA. See Cladribine
CDH-1 mutation, gastric cancer and
CDKAL1 gene, in type 2 diabetes
CDKN2A gene
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
in type 2 diabetes
CDKN2B gene, in type 2 diabetes
CEA. See Carcinoembryonic antigen
Cecum, dilation of, in colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie
syndrome)
CEE. See Conjugated equine estrogens
Cefazolin
for endocarditis
for ophthalmic disorders
Cefdinir, for pharyngitis
Cefepime
for abdominal infections
for pneumonia
Cefotaxime
for Lyme disease
for pneumonia
Cefpodoxime
for pharyngitis
for pneumonia
Ceftazidime
for abdominal infections
for pneumonia
Ceftin. See Cefuroxime
Ceftriaxone
for abdominal infections
for endocarditis
for Lyme disease
for pneumonia
for syphilis
for urinary tract infection
Cefuroxime/cefuroxime axetil
for Lyme disease
for pharyngitis
for pneumonia
Ceiroarthropathy/cheiropathy, diabetic
Celebrex. See Celecoxib
Celecoxib. See also Coxibs
cardiovascular complications and
for familial adenomatous polyposis
gastritis and
for gout
in hemophilia
for osteoarthritis of knee
for pain management
peptic ulcers/peptic ulcer prevention and
for rheumatoid arthritis
Celexa. See Citalopram
Celiac disease/sprue (gluten-sensitive enteropathy)
dermatitis herpetiformis and
hypothyroidism/Hashimoto's
thyroiditis and
microscopic colitis and
osteoporosis and
pancreatitis and
Celiac plexus block, for pain management
Cell-mediated (delayed/type IV) hypersensitivity
Cell-mediated (cellular) immunity, infections associated
with defects in
Epstein-Barr virus
Cell surface antigens, immune cell. See under CD
Cellophane tape test, in enterobiasis/pinworms
Cellulitis
anaerobic
of auricle
in chronic venous insufficiency
deep venous thrombosis differentiated from
in drug users
leg ulcers and
lymphangitis/lymphadenitis and
lymphedema and
necrotizing fasciitis differentiated from
nonclostridial crepitant
orbital
in bacterial rhinosinusitis
peritonsillar
sublingual/submaxillary space (Ludwig angina)
superficial (erysipelas)
synergistic necrotizing
tinea pedis and
vibrios causing
Cellulose phosphate, for absorptive hypercalciuria
Cenesthetic hallucinations. See also Hallucinations
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Cenestin. See Estrogens, oral
Centor criteria, for streptococcal pharyngitis
Central alveolar hypoventilation
Central cord syndrome
Central nervous system disorders. See also Neurologic
disorders
infections. See also Encephalitis; Meningitis
anaerobic
otitis media and
primary angiitis
Central neurogenic hyperventilation, in coma or stupor
Central pontine myelinolysis, hyponatremia treatment and
Central retinal artery occlusion
Central retinal vein occlusion
Central sleep apnea
Central 
vein 
nutritional 
support 
(total 
parenteral
nutrition/hyperalimentation)
acidosis caused by
in burn injury
catheter-associated infection and
complications of
in Crohn disease
in HIV infection/AIDS
patient monitoring during
in short bowel syndrome
solutions for
for ulcerative colitis
Central venous catheters
in GI bleeding management
infection/infection prevention and
in shock management
superficial thrombophlebitis and
Central venous pressure, in shock
Centruroides (scorpion) stings
Cephalexin
for endocarditis
for urinary tract infection
Cephalosporins
allergy to, penicillin allergy cross-reactivity and
for pharyngitis
Cephalothin, platelet function affected by
CEPI test
Ceratopic
Cercariae/metacercariae
in clonorchiasis/opisthorchiasis
in fascioliasis
in fasciolopsiasis
in paragonimiasis
in schistosomiasis
Cercarial dermatitis, in schistosomiasis
Cerclage
for incompetent cervix
for preterm birth prevention
Cerebellar arteriovenous malformations
Cerebellar artery obstruction
Cerebellar degeneration
paraneoplastic
vertigo in
Cerebellar hemorrhage, stroke and
Cerebellar tonsils, herniation of, intracranial tumors causing
Cerebellar tumors
hemangioblastoma
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Cerebral aneurysm. See Intracranial aneurysm
Cerebral 
angiography/arteriography. See 
also
Neuroimaging
in arteriovenous malformations
in brain death determination
in carotid occlusive disease
in intracranial aneurysm
in primary angiitis of central nervous system
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
Cerebral arteriovenous malformations
Cerebral artery occlusion, in stroke
Cerebral contusions/lacerations
Cerebral edema
high-altitude
hypernatremia treatment and
in liver failure
in stroke
Cerebral hemorrhage. See Intracerebral hemorrhage
Cerebral hypoperfusion, arrhythmias causing, seizures
differentiated from
Cerebral infarction/ischemia. See also Stroke
coma or stupor caused by
Cerebral injury
in near drowning
Cerebral 
ischemia. See Cerebral infarction; Transient
ischemic attacks
Cerebral lymphoma
in HIV infection/AIDS
Cerebral malaria
Cerebral metastases
Cerebral salt wasting
Cerebral sparganosis
Cerebral toxoplasmosis, in HIV infection/AIDS. See also
Toxoplasma
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
in African trypanosomiasis
in amebic encephalitis/meningoencephalitis
in angiostrongyliasis
in anthrax
in arbovirus encephalitides
in CNS infections
in CNS lymphoma
in cryptococcosis
in cysticercosis
in 
eosinophilic 
meningoencephalitis
(angiostrongyliasis)
in Guillain-Barré syndrome
in headache evaluation
in herpes simplex encephalitis/meningitis
in 
leptomeningeal 
metastases 
(carcinomatous
meningitis)
in listeriosis
in lymphocytic choriomeningitis
in meningitis
in meningococcal meningitis
in multiple sclerosis
in neuroborreliosis
in pneumococcal meningitis
in poliomyelitis
in purulent/bacterial meningitis
in rabies
in spinal tumors
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
in syphilis
in HIV infection/AIDS
indications for
treatment failure and
in tick-borne encephalitis
in tuberculous meningitis
Cerebrospinal fluid leakage, in head injury
Cerebrovascular accident. See Stroke
Cerebrovascular disorders
cancer-related
headache in
hypertensive
occlusive. See also Stroke; Transient ischemic
attacks
homocysteine/hyperhomocyteinemia in
oral contraceptive use and
Certolizumab
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
for rheumatoid arthritis
Cerubidine. See Daunorubicin
Ceruloplasmin
reference values for
in Wilson disease
Cerumen impaction
Ceruminous gland adenoma
Cervarix. See Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine
Cervical band
Cervical cap
Cervical carcinoma. See Cervix (uterine), cancer of
Cervical collar, for neck pain
Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN/dysplasia of cervix)
cytologic (Pap smear) testing for
in HIV infection/AIDS
HPV tests in screening for
HPV vaccination in prevention of
oral contraceptive use and
Cervical lymphadenopathy, reactive
Cervical mucus/secretions, evaluation of
in symptothermal natural family planning
in TwoDay method of contraception
Cervical musculotendinous strain, acute
Cervical radiculopathy
Cervical rib syndrome
Cervical spine/disk disease. See also Spine
arthritic/degenerative
chest pain in
herniation/protrusion
Thalassemias
vertigo and
Cervical spondylosis
Cervical vertigo
Cervical warts. See also Venereal (genital) warts
Cervicitis
chlamydial
gonococcal
postgonococcal
Cervicocolpopexy, for pelvic organ prolapse
Cervicofacial actinomycosis
Cervix (uterine)
anaerobic flora/infection of
biopsy of
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in CIN/cervical cancer
cancer of
HIV infection/AIDS and
HPV infection and
   screening tests for
   vaccine in prevention of
invasive
oral contraceptive use and
Pap smears in screening for
preinvasive (carcinoma in situ)
cauterization of, for CIN
conization of, for CIN/cervical cancer
dysplasia (CIN) of. See also Cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia
incompetent
cerclage/activity restriction for
polyps of
stenosis of, pain and
Cesarean section
for cardiac patient
for 
prevention 
of 
disease 
transmission 
to
fetus/newborn
herpes genitalis
HIV
Cestode infections. See also specific type
invasive
noninvasive
Cetirizine
for allergic/perennial rhinitis
breastfeeding and
for urticaria
Cetuximab
for colorectal cancer
for lung cancer
for Ménétrier disease (hypertrophic gastropathy)
CFTR. See Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) protein
CgA. See Chromogranin A
CH50 (complement)
in gonococcal arthritis
reference values for
CHADS2 Risk Score
Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis)
achalasia and
heart disease/myocarditis in
Chagoma
Chalazion
Chancre
differential diagnosis of
syphilitic
anal/anorectal
trypanosomal
Chancroid
Channelopathies, periodic paralysis
Charcoal, activated, for poisoning/drug overdose
repeat-dose
Charcot joint (neurogenic arthropathy)
in diabetes mellitus
in tabes dorsalis
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Charcot triad
CHD. See Coronary heart disease
Cheilitis, angular
candidiasis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Chelation therapy. See also specific type
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for arsenic poisoning
for heavy metal poisoning
for hemochromatosis/iron poisoning/overload
for lead poisoning
for mercury poisoning
for Wilson disease
Chemical injury
acids causing
alkalies causing
of esophagus
of eye (conjunctivitis/keratitis)
of lung
aspiration and
smoke inhalation and
wound management in
Chemical warfare agents. See also Bioterrorism
nerve agents
skin decontamination and
Chemiluminescence assay (CLIA) algorithm, for syphilis
diagnosis/screening
Chemoembolization, 
transarterial, 
for 
hepatocellular
carcinoma
Chemoinfusion, transarterial, for hepatocellular carcinoma
Chemokine co-receptors, in HIV infection/AIDS
Chemoprevention/chemoprophylaxis. See also specific
agent
antibiotic/antimicrobial. See 
Antimicrobial
chemoprophylaxis
for cancer
breast cancer and
colorectal cancer and
for cardiovascular disease
for stress gastritis
for venous thromboembolic disease
Chemoprotection, ototoxic
Chemoradiation therapy
for bladder cancer
for colorectal cancer
for esophageal cancer
for laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
Chemoreceptor trigger zone
Chemosclerosis, for malignant effusions
Chemosis
in allergic eye disease
in dysthyroid eye disease
Chemotherapy (cancer). See also specific agent and
cancer type
adverse ophthalmic effects of
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation
after
cancers responsive to
dosages/modifications of agents used in
fever and
hyperuricemia/tumor lysis syndrome and
leukemia caused by
nausea and vomiting caused by
neurologic disorders associated with
neutropenia caused by
infections and
ototoxicity and
with radiation therapy. See Chemoradiation therapy
supportive agents/care and
thrombocytopenia and
toxicity of agents used in
ophthalmic effects and
Chen sign
Chenodeoxycholic acid, for cholelithiasis/gallstones
Chest pain
in acute coronary syndromes
in angina
alteration in before myocardial infarction
coronary vasospasm causing
Prinzmetal (variant)
in aortic dissection
in aortic stenosis/regurgitation
in cardiomyopathy
in cervical/thoracic spine disease
dyspnea and
in esophageal disorders
achalasia
GERD
infectious esophagitis
motility disorders
pill-induced esophagitis
ischemic. See also Acute coronary syndromes;
Angina
in myocardial infarction
in myocarditis
noncardiac. See also Chest pain, in esophageal
disorders
palpitations and
in panic disorders
in pericarditis
pleuritic (pleuritis)
in epidemic pleurodynia (Bornholm disease)
in pericarditis
in thoracic actinomycosis
in pneumothorax
psychologic causes of
in pulmonary embolism
in thoracic outlet syndrome
in uremia
visceral sensitivity causing
Chest pain observation units
Chest percussion
in bronchiectasis
in chronic bronchitis
in cystic fibrosis
Chest tube drainage (tube thoracostomy)
for empyema
for hemothorax
for malignant effusions
for parapneumonic effusion
for pneumothorax
Chest wall
breast cancer recurrence in
disorders of, chest pain in
anterior chest wall/Tietze syndrome
respiratory failure caused by disorders of
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, in coma or stupor
CHF. See Congestive heart (cardiac) failure
Chibroxin. See Norfloxacin
Chickenpox. See Varicella
Chiggers
scrub typhus transmitted by
skin lesions caused by
Chikungunya fever
Chilblain (erythema pernio)
Child abuse
aggression/violence/impulse control disorders and
incest
Munchausen by proxy and
y p
y
PTSD and
Child-Turcotte-Pugh classification for cirrhosis
hepatocellular carcinoma and
postoperative complications and
variceal hemorrhage and
Childbirth preparation classes
Chimera, allogeneic stem cell transplantation producing
Chinese liver fluke infection
Chiropractic manipulation
for back pain
for neck pain
Chlamydia 
(chlamydial 
infections). See 
also
Chlamydophila
diarrhea caused by
dysuria in
gonococcal coinfection and
inclusion conjunctivitis
keratoconjunctivitis
screening for
trachoma
trachomatis
anorectal involvement and
epididymitis
lymphogranuloma venereum
pelvic infection/PID
during pregnancy
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
urethritis and cervicitis
Chlamydophila. See also Chlamydia
pneumoniae
pneumonia caused by
psittaci
Chloasma (melasma)
oral contraceptive use and
Chloral hydrate
Chlorambucil
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Chloramphenicol
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for ophthalmic disorders
Chlordane, poisoning caused by
Chlordiazepoxide
overdose/toxicity of
Chlorguanide. See Proguanil
Chloride
in fluid management
reference values for
requirements for in nutritional support
serum levels of, in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
transport of, defects of in cystic fibrosis
urinary, in metabolic alkalosis
2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine. See Cladribine
Chloromethyl methyl ether, lung cancer caused by
Chlorophenothane (DDT), poisoning caused by
Chloroquine
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for amebiasis
arrhythmias caused by
erythrovirus (parvovirus)-associated anemia and
for lupus
for malaria
for chemoprophylaxis
for non-falciparum malaria
in pregnancy
resistance to
for uncomplicated falciparum malaria
rabies vaccination affected by
Chlorpheniramine, for allergic/perennial rhinitis
Chlorpromazine. See also Antipsychotic drugs
overdose/toxicity of
for serotonin syndrome
Chlorpropamide
adverse ophthalmic effects of
intensive therapy with
Chlorthalidone
for heart failure
for hypertension
with clonidine
Chokes
Cholangiocarcinoma
in clonorchiasis/opisthorchiasis
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
Cholangiography. See 
Endoscopic 
retrograde
cholangiopan-creatography; Percutaneous transhepatic
cholangiography
Cholangiopancreatography. See Endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopan-creatography; 
Magnetic 
resonance
cholangiopancreatography
Cholangiopathy, AIDS
Cholangitis
autoimmune
biliary stricture and
choledocholithiasis and
drugs/toxins causing
liver abscess and
during pregnancy
primary sclerosing
cholangiocarcinoma and
in HIV infection/AIDS
pyogenic
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3)
in hypercalcemia
for hypoparathyroidism
Cholecystectomy
for cholecystitis
for choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
for cholelithiasis/gallstones
cirrhosis and
for gallbladder cancer
pancreatitis and
for precholecystectomy syndrome
pregnancy and
symptom persistence after (postcholecystectomy
syndrome)
Cholecystitis
acalculous
in HIV infection/AIDS
parenteral nutritional support and
acute
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
chronic
in HIV infection/AIDS
during pregnancy
xanthogranulomatous
Cholecystostomy
pancreatitis and
Choledocholithiasis
pancreatitis and
during pregnancy
Cholelithiasis (gallstones)
cholecystitis and
choledocholithiasis (bile duct stones) and
in Crohn disease
gallbladder cancer and
in hereditary spherocytosis
pancreatitis and
during pregnancy
in short bowel syndrome
Cholera
prevention/immunization and
Cholestasis
in biliary cirrhosis
drugs/toxins causing
in hepatitis
hereditary/intrahepatic
of pregnancy
Cholestatic jaundice
Cholesteatoma
Cholesterol. See 
also 
specific 
lipoprotein 
and
Lipoproteins
in 
atherogenesis/cardiovascular/coronary 
heart
disease
in diabetes mellitus
dietary
elevated levels of. See also Hypercholesterolemia;
Lipid disorders
screening tests for
   cardiovascular disease prevention and
in older adults
in women
estrogen replacement affecting
in gallstones
lowering levels of. See Lipid-lowering therapy
protease inhibitors affecting
reference/normal values for
thiazolidinedione therapy and
Cholesterol-lowering diet
in diabetes
in nephrotic syndrome
Cholesterolosis of gallbladder
g
Cholestyramine
for diarrhea
in Crohn disease
in short bowel syndrome
for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
for lipid modification
Choline magnesium salicylate
Cholinergic rebound
Cholinergic syndrome
Cholinergic urticaria
Cholinesterase inhibitors. See Anticholinesterases
Chondritis. See Polychondritis
Chondrocalcinosis
Chondroitin/chondroitin plus glucosamine sulfate, in
osteoarthritis
Chordae tendineae
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
rupture of
Chorea
drug-induced
in Huntington disease
Sydenham
Chorioamnionitis
Choriocarcinoma. See also Gestational trophoblastic
disease
hyperthyroidism and
paraneoplastic syndrome associated with
testicular
Choriomeningitis, lymphocytic
Chorionic 
gonadotropin. See 
Human 
chorionic
gonadotropin
Chorionic villus sampling
Chorioretinitis
in lymphocytic choriomeningitis
toxoplasmic, in HIV infection/AIDS
Choroidal angioma, in Sturge-Weber syndrome
Choroidal 
circulation, 
hypertension 
affecting
(hypertensive retinochoroidopathy)
Choroidal neovascularization, in age-related macular
degeneration
Chromoblastomycosis (chromomycosis)
Chromoendoscopy, in ulcerative colitis
Chromogranin A (CgA)
in carcinoid tumors
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pheochromocytomas
Chronic cluster headache
Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Chronic disease
anemia of
mood disorders and
Chronic fatigue syndrome
fibromyalgia and
Q fever
Chronic inflammatory polyneuropathy
Chronic kidney disease (CKD). See also Renal failure
acid-base disorders and
alkalosis in alkali administration and
anemia in
cardiorenal syndrome and
cardiovascular complications and
coagulopathy of
complications of
congestive heart failure and
diabetes and. See also Diabetic nephropathy
dietary management in
endocrine disorders and
gout and
hematologic complications and
hepatitis C infection and
hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism and
hyperkalemia and
hypermagnesemia and
hyperphosphatemia in
hypertension/hypertension management and
hypocalcemia and
hypoglycemia and
hyponatremia in
immunization recommendations in
lipid abnormalities and
mineral bone disorders of (renal osteodystrophy)
in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
neurologic complications of
neuropathy associated with
pericarditis and (uremic pericarditis)
p
(
p
)
protein-restricted diet for
reversible causes of
in SLE
stages of
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
stem cell transplantation for
Chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis. See Hashimoto (chronic
lymphocytic/autoimmune) thyroiditis
Chronic mountain sickness (Monge disease)
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation for
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
acidosis in
atrial flutter in
cough in
Anticoagulation therapy
hypophosphatemia and
immunization recommendations in
postoperative pulmonary complications and
pulmonary function tests in
pulmonary heart disease (cor pulmonale) and
respiratory failure in
smoking and
surgery for
Chronic pain disorders. See also Pain
biofeedback/hypnosis for
opioids in management of
Chronic pelvic pain syndrome/nonbacterial prostatitis)
Chronic prolymphocytic leukemia
Chronic renal failure. See also Chronic kidney disease
Chronic 
venous 
insufficiency. See 
Venous
insufficiency/stasis
Churg-Strauss 
syndrome 
(allergic 
angiitis 
and
granulomatosis)
leukotriene modifiers for asthma and
pulmonary involvement in
renal involvement in
Chvostek sign
in hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
malabsorption and
Chylomicronemia. See Hyperchylomicronemia
Chylous ascites
Chylous pleural effusion
Cialis. See Tadalafil
Cicatricial alopecia
Ciclopirox
Cidofovir
for CMV infection
for herpes simplex infection
for recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
Cigarette/cigar smoking. See Smoking
Ciguatera poisoning
Ciloxan. See Ciprofloxacin
Cimetidine. See also H2 receptor blocking drugs
antidepressant drug interactions and
benzodiazepine interactions and
for scombroid poisoning
Cimex lectularius bites
CIN. See Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
Cinacalcet
for hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
for mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
for parathyroid carcinoma
Cingulotomy, for OCD
Cipro. See Ciprofloxacin
Ciprofibrate
Ciprofloxacin. See also Fluoroquinolones
for abdominal infections
for anthrax
breastfeeding and
for Crohn disease
for cyclosporiasis
for ophthalmic disorders
for pneumonia
for urinary tract infection
Circadian rhythm
asthma symptoms and
sleep and
Circadian rhythm dysfunction, in seasonal affective
disorder
Circulation assessment/support
in burn injury
in comatose patient
Circumcision, HIV infection risk and
Cirrhosis
alcoholic liver disease/hepatitis and
biliary
cardiac
cholecystectomy and
drugs/toxins causing
Dupuytren contracture and
esophageal varices in. See also Esophageal varices
prevention of first bleeding episode and
GI bleeding in
hemochromatosis and
hepatic coagulopathy and
hyponatremia in
Laennec
lipid abnormalities and
liver cancer and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
treatment and
postoperative complications and
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and
viral hepatitis and
Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy
CIS. See Clinically isolated syndrome
Cisapride, antidepressant drug interactions and
Cisplatin
for bladder cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
for laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
for lung cancer
for testicular cancer
toxicity of
amifostine for
ophthalmic
ototoxicity
Citalopram
in elderly
overdose toxicity of
during pregnancy
Citracal 
(calcium 
citrate). See 
Calcium,
dietary/supplementary
Citrate, in hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
CJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
CK. See Conductive keratoplasty; Creatine kinase
CK-MB. See Creatine kinase-MB
CKD. See Chronic kidney disease
CKD-EPI formula, for GFR estimation
Cl−. See Chloride
Cladophialophora/Cladophialophoracarrionii
chromoblastomycosis caused by
phaeohyphomycosis caused by
Cladribine (2-chlorodeoxyadenosine)
for hairy cell leukemia
Clarithromycin. See also Macrolides
for anthrax
for endocarditis
in H pylori eradication therapy
for MAC treatment/prophylaxis
for pneumonia
Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See also Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease
Claudication
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
jaw (masticatory), in giant cell arteritis
neurogenic
spinal stenosis/disk herniation and
Clcr. See Creatinine clearance
Clean-catch urine specimen, for dysuria evaluation
Cleaning 
agents, 
poisoning 
caused 
by. See
Caustic/corrosive agents
Clear liquid diet
Clemastine, for allergic/perennial rhinitis
Cleocin T. See Clindamycin
Clevidipine, for hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
Cleviprex. See Clevidipine
CLIA. See Chemiluminescence assay
Clicks. See also Heart murmurs
in aortic stenosis
in mitral valve prolapse
in pulmonic regurgitation
in pulmonic stenosis
Climacteric. See also Menopause
Climara. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Clindamycin
for acne
for anaerobic pleuropulmonary infection
for anthrax
for bacterial vaginosis
with benzoyl peroxide
for endocarditis
for malaria
for Pneumocystis pneumonia
for rosacea
for toxoplasmosis
Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS), multiple sclerosis and
Clinician–patient 
relationship. See 
Doctor–patient
relationship
Clinoril. See Sulindac
Clitocybe (muscarine) mushroom poisoning
CLL. See Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Clobetasol
Clock draw, in dementia screening
Clocortolone
Cloderm. See Clocortolone
Clofarabine
Clolar. See Clofarabine
Clomiphene
for male infertility
for ovulation induction
Clomipramine. See also Antidepressants
for OCD
Clonazepam. See also Benzodiazepines
for bipolar disease/mania
for burning mouth syndrome
for panic attacks
for seizures
Clonic seizures. See also Seizures
Clonidine
for alcohol withdrawal
antidepressant drug interactions and
for diarrhea
for heroin/opioid withdrawal
for hypertension
with chlorthalidone
in urgencies/emergencies
for menopausal symptoms
overdose/toxicity of
for Tourette syndrome
Clonorchis sinensis (clonorchiasis)
cholangiocarcinoma and
Clonus, in serotonin syndrome
Clopidogrel
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for atrial fibrillation
for myocardial infarction
peptic ulcer disease and
platelet function affected by
proton pump inhibitor interaction and
Clorazepate
p
Clorpres. See 
Clonidine, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
chlorthalidone
Clostridium (clostridial infections)
bifermentans
botulinum (botulism)
treatment of
histolyticum
myonecrosis/gas gangrene
novyi
perfringens
diarrhea/food poisoning/gastroenteritis caused by
ramosum
sordellii (endometritis/toxic shock)
tetani. See also Tetanus
Clothing (flame) burns, electrical
Clotrimazole
for oral candidiasis
for vulvovaginal candidiasis
Clotting factors. See Coagulation factors
Clotting time, activated (ACT), reference values for
Clozapine. See also Antipsychotic drugs
agranulocytosis caused by
diabetes and
neuroleptic malignant syndrome and
overdose/toxicity of
in parkinsonism
Clozaril. See Clozapine
Clubbed fingers (digital clubbing)
in bronchiectasis
in lung cancer
Clue cells, in bacterial vaginosis
Cluster headache
Clusters of differentiation. See CD markers
CMF regimen, for breast cancer
CML. See Chronic myeloid leukemia
CMML. See Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
CMV. See Controlled mechanical ventilation
CMV disease. See Cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease
CMV immune globulin
CMV inclusion disease
CO2 laser therapy. See Carbon dioxide laser therapy
Coagulase-negative staphylococci
burn-associated infection caused by
endocarditis caused by
Coagulation disorders. See also Bleeding; Coagulopathy;
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Coagulation factors. See also specific type under Factor
for anticoagulant overdose
deficiencies of
in congenital coagulation disorders
in liver disease
transfusion and
Coagulative necrosis techniques, for benign prostatic
hyperplasia
Coagulopathy. See also specific type and Bleeding
acquired disorders causing
cancer-related
of chronic kidney disease
congenital disorders causing
consumptive 
(DIC). See 
also 
Disseminated
intravascular coagulation
in gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
of liver disease
in cirrhosis
liver failure and
variceal hemorrhage and. See Esophageal varices
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
Coal worker's pneumoconiosis
Coarctation of aorta
hypertension and
in Turner syndrome
Coartem (artemether-lumefantrine/Riamet)
Cobalamin. See Vitamin B12Cocaine. See also Cocaine
abuse
toxicity and
cardiac
Cocaine abuse
epistaxis and
heroin abuse and
myocardial ischemia/infarction/myocarditis and
during pregnancy
psychotic behavior caused by
pulmonary disorders caused by
Coccidioides immitis/posadasii (coccidioidomycosis)
bone and joint infection in
Coccidiosis. See also specific causative organism
Cochlea
hearing loss caused by disorders of
noise trauma affecting
recruitment/hyperacusis caused by disorders of
tinnitus caused by disorders of
Cochlear implants
Cochlear otosclerosis
Cockcroft-Gault formula
Codeine
with aspirin or acetaminophen
for diarrhea
overdose/toxicity of
in pain management
Coffee grounds emesis/aspirate
in erosive/hemorrhagic gastritis (gastropathy)
in GI bleeding
in peptic ulcer disease
Cogan syndrome
Cogentin. See Benztropine
Cognitive ability
estrogen replacement therapy and
impairment in. See Cognitive disorders
Cognitive 
behavior 
therapy. See 
also 
Behavior
modification
for anxiety disorders
for chronic fatigue syndrome
for depression
in elderly
for insomnia
for irritable bowel syndrome
for schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
for Tourette syndrome
Cognitive disorders. See also specific type and Delirium;
Dementia
assessment of
breast cancer treatment and
decision-making capacity and
anticoagulation in
in elderly
in migraine headache
mild impairment
postoperative
psychiatric disorders and
screening for
seizures and
treatment of
Cognitive remediation therapy, for schizophrenia/psychotic
disorders
Coin lesion. See Solitary pulmonary nodule
Coitus. See Sexual intercourse
Colchicine
for familial Mediterranean fever
for gout
neuropathy/myopathy caused by
p
y
y p
y
y
Cold (common cold/viral rhinosinusitis)
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
cough in
Cold agglutinin disease
Waldenström macroglobulinemia and
Cold exposure
hypothermia caused by
extremities
rhabdomyolysis and
systemic
Raynaud phenomenon and
Cold/fever sore (herpes simplex). See also Herpes simplex
infection
Cold urticaria
Colectomy
for colorectal cancer
in familial adenomatous polyposis
for GI bleeding
for HNPCC
prophylactic
in ulcerative colitis
Colesevelam
for diarrhea in Crohn disease
for lipid modification
Colestid. See Colestipol
Colestipol
for diarrhea in Crohn disease
for lipid modification
Colic. See Abdominal pain/tenderness; Renal colic
Colitis. See also Diarrhea
amebic (intestinal amebiasis)
postdysenteric
severe (dysentery). See also Dysentery
antibiotic-associated
C difficile
causing
collagenous
Crohn. See also Crohn disease
ischemic
lymphocytic
microscopic
postdysenteric
pseudomembranous. See also Colitis, antibiotic-
associated
ulcerative. See Ulcerative colitis
Collagen
in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
type I, mutations in gene for in osteogenesis
imperfecta
Collagenomas, in MEN
Collagenous colitis
Collateral ligaments of knee
injury of
Colloids, for fluid management/volume replacement
in burn injuries
in shock
Colography, CT (virtual colonoscopy). See Colonoscopy,
virtual
Colon
anaerobic flora of
biopsy of, in diarrhea
cancer of. See also Colorectal cancer
adjuvant therapy for
exercise affecting risk of
GI bleeding and
neoadjuvant therapy for
surgical excision and
carcinoid tumors of
dilation of. See also Megacolon
in acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie
syndrome)
disorders of. See also specific disorder
constipation and. See Constipation
diverticular. See also Diverticulosis
fecal impaction and
GI bleeding and
polyps of
Colon cutoff sign, in pancreatitis
Colonic inertia (slow colonic transit), constipation and
Colonic pseudo-obstruction
acute (Ogilvie syndrome)
chronic
Colonic transit time
Colonography, CT (virtual colonoscopy). See Colonoscopy,
virtual
Colonoscopy
in amebiasis
for colon decompression in acute colonic pseudo-
obstruction (Ogilvie syndrome)
in colorectal cancer screening/evaluation
after surgery
in Crohn disease
in diarrhea
in diverticular disease
in GI bleeding
diagnostic
obscure bleeding and
occult bleeding and
therapeutic
in HNPCC
hyponatremia after
in irritable bowel syndrome
in ischemic colitis
in polyp identification/removal
bleeding after
surveillance
in ulcerative colitis
virtual
in colorectal cancer screening and evaluation/polyp
identification
in diverticular disease
Color flow Doppler ultrasound. See Echocardiography;
Ultrasonography
Color perception, loss of
in intracranial tumors
in optic neuritis
Colorado tick fever
Colorectal cancer
adjuvant therapy for
aspirin/NSAIDs in prevention of
calcium supplements in prevention of
chemoprevention and
chemotherapy for
constipation and
Crohn disease and
diet and
familial adenomatous polyposis/family history and
genetic mutations associated with
fecal DNA assay in identification of
GI bleeding and
hamartomatous polyposis syndromes and
hereditary
hereditary nonpolyposis (HNPCC)
endometrial carcinoma and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
incidence/risk/mortality of
inflammatory bowel disease and
nonfamilial adenomatous polyps and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
polyps/polyposis and
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
screening for
staging of
surgery for
follow-up after
ulcerative colitis and
Colorectal surgery
adjuvant therapy and
follow-up after
Colostomy
after colorectal surgery
diverting, for rectal cancer
Colostrum
Colpocleisis, for pelvic organ prolapse
Colpopexy, for pelvic organ prolapse
Colposcopy
in CIN
CoLYTE. See Polyethylene glycol
Coma
assessment/emergency management of
diabetic/hyperglycemic. See also specific cause
diabetic ketoacidosis and
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state and
lactic acidosis and
hypoglycemic
in poisoning/drug overdose
hypothermia and
metabolic disturbances causing. See also Metabolic
encephalopathy
myxedema
in poisoning/drug overdose
reversible, brain death differentiated from
in stroke
structural lesions causing
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
Coma vigil (persistent vegetative state)
Combigan. See Brimonidine/timolol
Combination antiretroviral therapy
Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD)
Combipatch. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Combivir. See Zidovudine (AZT), with lamivudine
Comedones, in acne
Comfrey, toxicity of
Commissurotomy
mitral
for pulmonary stenosis
Common ALL antigen
Common cold. See Cold (common cold/viral rhinosinusitis)
Common duct stones. See Choledocholithiasis
Common femoral artery, atherosclerotic/occlusive disease
of
Common peroneal nerve palsy
Common variable immunodeficiency
Commotio cordis
Communicating artery
anterior, occlusion of in stroke
posterior, disorders of in third nerve paralysis
in gastroesophageal/laryngopharyngeal reflux
chlamydial
in coccidioidomycosis
cough in
in HIV infection/AIDS
Community-associated methicillin-resistant S aureus (CA-
MRSA)
cellulitis caused by
impetigo/ecthyma caused by
pneumonia caused by
Compartment syndrome
abdominal, in burn patient
in electrical burns
Compatibility testing, for transfusion
Complement. See also specific component
in antibody-mediated/cytotoxic hypersensitivity
in autoimmune hemolytic anemia
in cold agglutinin disease
in familial Mediterranean fever
in glomerulonephritis
in gonococcal arthritis
immunization recommendations in deficiencies and
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
reference values for
in SLE
in urticaria
Complement fixation tests, in coccidioidomycosis
Complete abortion
Complete 
mole. See also Gestational trophoblastic
disease
Complete (third-degree) heart block
in atrial septal defect
in myocardial infarction
sudden death and
Complex 15
Complex drug eruptions
Complex partial seizures. See also Seizures
schizophrenia differentiated from
Complex regional pain syndrome (reflex sympathetic
dystrophy)
Compliance. See Adherence/nonadherence
Compound nevi
Compression chambers/centers. See Hyperbaric oxygen
therapy; Recompression
Compression 
fractures. See 
Vertebral/compression
fracture
Compression neuropathy. See Entrapment/compression
neuropathy; Neuropathies
Compression sclerotherapy, for varicose veins
Compression stockings/therapy
for lymphedema
for varicose veins
for venous insufficiency/leg ulcers
for venous thromboembolic disease
Compromised host. See Immunocompromised host
Compulsions. See also Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Compulsive water drinking. See Psychogenic polydipsia
Computed tomography (CT scans). See also specific
disorder and Neuroimaging
in abdominal aortic aneurysms
in angina
in aortic dissection
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in appendicitis
cardiac, in constrictive pericarditis
in carotid occlusive disease
in chest pain evaluation
in colorectal cancer evaluation/screening
in constrictive pericarditis
in dysuria evaluation
electron beam (EBCT)
in angina
in heart disease screening
in headache
in hemoptysis
in liver disease/jaundice
in lung cancer screening
in lung cancer staging
in musculoskeletal evaluation
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in pulmonary embolism
radiation exposure/cancer risk and
in renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
in renal cell carcinoma
in solitary pulmonary nodule
in thoracic aortic aneurysm
in thyroid cancer
in urinary stone disease
in visceral artery insufficiency
Computed tomography colography/colonography (virtual
colonoscopy)
in colorectal cancer screening and evaluation/polyp
identification
in diverticular disease
Computer-assisted detection (CAD), in breast cancer
screening
Computerized stereotactic guided core needle breast
biopsy
COMT (catecholamine-O-methyltransferase) inhibitors, for
parkinsonism
Concussion
hearing loss and
labyrinthine, vertigo caused by
Condoms
for contraception
genital herpes prevention and
for gonorrhea prevention
for HIV infection/AIDS prevention
for syphilis prevention
Conduction disturbances. See also specific type and
Arrhythmias
in endocarditis
in hyperkalemia
intraventricular
in myocardial infarction
in restrictive cardiomyopathy
Conduction velocity studies
in back pain evaluation
in carpal tunnel syndrome
in motor neuron diseases
in neuropathies
Conductive-based cooling, for heat stroke
Conductive hearing loss. See also Hearing loss
in chronic otitis media/cholesteatoma
ossicular disruption causing
in otosclerosis
Conductive keratoplasty
Condylomas (condylomata)
in gastroesophageal/laryngopharyngeal reflux
anorectal involvement and
cervical/vaginal/vulvar
HPV vaccination in prevention of
imiquimod for removal of
podophyllum resin for removal of
lata
anorectal involvement and
Conformal radiation therapy, three-dimensional, for
prostate cancer
Confusion. See also Cognitive disorders; Delirium
ECT causing
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia
Congenital afibrinogenemia
Congenital heart disease. See also specific disorder
pregnancy and
Congenital isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Congenital rubella syndrome
Congestive heart (cardiac) failure (CHF)
acute
in acute coronary syndromes
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors for
angiotensin II receptor blockers for
antiarrhythmic therapy in
anticoagulation therapy for
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
asthma/wheezing caused by (cardiac asthma)
atrial fibrillation and
in atrial septal defect
β-blocker therapy in
biventricular pacing (resynchronization) for
calcium channel blockers for
cardiac transplantation for
cardiomyopathy and
cardiorenal syndrome and
case management in
chemotherapy-induced
chronic kidney disease and
cirrhosis and
classification of
in coarctation of aorta
combination therapies in management of
in cor pulmonale
coronary revascularization for
cough in
in coxsackievirus myocarditis
diet in management of
digitalis glycosides for
diuretic therapy for
chronic kidney disease and
drug management of
dyspnea in
edema in
evolution/prevention/treatment of
exercise/activity in management of
hypertension/hypertension management and
in hyperthyroidism
hyponatremia in
in hypothyroidism/myxedema
implantable cardioverter defibrillators for
in infectious myocarditis
liver in
management of
in hepatitis
nonpharmacologic management of
palliative care in
in patent ductus arteriosus
in pneumococcal pneumonia
positive inotropic agents for
postoperative pulmonary complications and
in 
pregnancy/postpartum 
period 
(peripartum
cardiomyopathy)
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
prognosis for
pulmonary edema in
in pulmonary heart disease (cor pulmonale)
pulmonary hypertension and
in pulmonic stenosis
refeeding in protein–energy malnutrition and
reversible causes of, correction of
rheumatic fever and
shock and. See Cardiogenic shock
in SLE
spironolactone for
statin therapy in
surgical interventions in
thiamine deficiency and
thiazolidinedione use and
in toxic myocarditis
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
vasodilator therapy for
in ventricular septal defect
Congo-Crimean hemorrhagic fever
Conivaptan, for hyponatremia/SIADH
Conization of cervix, for CIN/cervical cancer
Conjugated equine estrogens
Conjunctiva
foreign body of
lacerations of
Conjunctival hemorrhage, in mononucleosis
Conjunctivitis. See also Keratoconjunctivitis
adenovirus
allergic
bacterial
chemical
chlamydial
coxsackievirus infection and
differential diagnosis of
dry eyes and
enterovirus 70 causing
gonococcal
inclusion
viral
Conn syndrome
Connective tissue disorders
cardiac/pericardial involvement in
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
interstitial (diffuse parenchymal) lung disease and
mixed/overlap syndrome
Connexin-26 mutation, hearing loss and
Consciousness
in absence seizures
in focal seizures
inconsistent evidence of, in minimally
conscious state
level of, in head injury
in tonic-clonic (“grand mal”) seizures
Constipation
alarm symptoms in
anogenital pruritus and
in chemotherapy-induced neuropathy
colorectal cancer and
in diabetic autonomic neuropathy
fecal impaction and
in irritable bowel syndrome
opioids causing
overflow incontinence and
palliation of
in terminally ill/dying patient
in typhoid fever
Constrictive bronchiolitis. See also Bronchiolitis
Constrictive pericarditis
cirrhosis and
restrictive cardiomyopathy differentiated from
superior vena caval obstruction and
Contact dermatitis
allergic
impetigo differentiated from
topical medications causing
urticaria in
irritant
tinea differentiated from
Contact lenses
corneal infections/ulcers/acanthamoeba keratitis and
for orthokeratology
gy
Contact 
photosensitivity. See 
also
Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
Contact ulcers, of arytenoid cartilage
Contagious pustular dermatitis (orf)
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
nasal
for sleep apnea
for snoring
for near drowning
prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications
and
Continuous 
renal 
replacement 
therapy 
(continuous
venovenous/venovenous 
hemodiafiltration), 
for
poisoning/drug overdose
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII). See also
Insulin infusion pumps
Contraception. See also specific method
antibiotic use affecting efficacy of
emergency/postcoital
IUD for
fertility awareness and
after gestational trophoblastic disease
sickle cell disease and
sterilization for
Contraceptive foam/cream/film/sponge/jelly/suppository
Contraceptive injections/implants
Contraceptive-related hypertension
Contraceptive transdermal patch
Contraceptive vaginal ring
Contraction alkalosis
Contrast media
iodinated, for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
nephrotoxicity/acute kidney injury and
reactions to
Contrast nephropathy
Contrast 
venography, 
in 
deep 
venous
thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
Controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV), for respiratory
failure
Contusions
cerebral
of eye
myocardial
Conversion disorder (hysterical conversion)
psychogenic nonepileptic/pseudoepileptic seizure and
Convulsions. See Seizures
Cooling, for hyperthermia
in heat exposure syndromes
in poisoning/drug overdose
Coombs test/micro-Coombs test
in autoimmune hemolytic anemia
in cold agglutinin disease
in SLE
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
CO-oximetry. See Pulse oximetry/CO-oximetry
COP. See Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia/pneumonitis
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Copepods
in dracunculiasis
in gnathostomiasis
in sparganosis
Copper
accumulation of in Wilson disease
parenteral nutritional support and
Copper TCu380A intrauterine device
for emergency/postcoital contraception
Coprine (Coprinus) mushroom poisoning
Coprolalia, in Tourette syndrome
Coproporphyrins, in porphyria cutanea tarda
Cor pulmonale
in COPD
in pulmonary hypertension
Coral snake envenomation
Cord blood, stem cells in, for transplantation
Cord cavitation (syringomyelia)
Corditis, polypoid
Cordran. See Flurandrenolide
Core-binding factor leukemias
Core needle (large-needle) biopsy, for breast lump
evaluation
Core rewarming, for systemic hypothermia
Core temperature
in burn injury, maintaining
in hyperthermia/heat exposure syndromes
in hypothermia
in near drowning, resuscitation efforts and
normal
Coreg. See Carvedilol
Corgard. See Nadolol
Corlopam. See Fenoldopam
Cornea
calcium precipitation in
exposure of, in dysthyroid eye disease
foreign body of
infection of. See Keratitis; Keratoconjunctivitis
trauma to
abrasions
keratitis and
lacerations
ulcers of. See also Keratitis
contact lens wear and
ultraviolet burns of (ultraviolet/actinic keratitis)
Corneal transplantation, rabies transmission and
Corns, of feet or toes
Coronary 
angiography. See Angiography/arteriography,
cardiac/coronary
Coronary angioplasty
for angina
for myocardial infarction
Coronary arteries
disorders of. See also Coronary heart disease
in Kawasaki syndrome
in pregnancy
radiation exposure causing
sudden death of athlete and
in tetralogy of Fallot
traumatic injury to
Coronary artery aneurysm, in Kawasaki syndrome
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
platelet function affected by
postoperative stroke and
prophylactic/preoperative
for traumatic injuries
Coronary artery disease (CAD). See Coronary heart
disease
Coronary artery revascularization procedures. See specific
type and Revascularization procedures
Coronary 
heart 
disease. See also Acute coronary
syndromes; Angina; Myocardial infarction
acute coronary syndromes without ST segment
elevation and
portal hypertension and
angina pectoris (chronic stable) and
antihypertensive drug therapy and
aortic stenosis and
cholesterol/lipoproteins in
screening tests for levels of
chronic kidney disease and
in diabetes mellitus
heart failure and
in HIV infection/AIDS
homocysteine/hyperhomocysteinemia in
hypertriglyceridemia and
lipid disorders and
metabolic syndrome (syndrome X) and
myocardial hibernation/stunning and
in pregnancy
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
prevention of
chemoprevention/aspirin use and
cholesterol screening and
exercise/activity in
hypertension prevention/management and
lipid disorder prevention/management and. See
also Lipid-lowering therapy
cirrhosis and
revascularization 
procedures 
for. See 
also
Revascularization procedures
risk factors for
cirrhosis and
modification/risk reduction and
sudden death and
in athletes
vasospasm and
Coronary reperfusion. See Reperfusion therapy
Coronary sinus atrial septal defect
Coronary 
stents. See also Percutaneous coronary
intervention
subsequent perioperative risks/management and
Coronary vasospasm
Coronaviruses
diarrhea caused by
SARS caused by
Corpus luteum cyst
Corrigan pulse
Corrosive agents. See Caustic/corrosive agents
Corti, organ of, hearing loss caused by disorders of
Cortical blindness, occipital lobe lesions causing
Corticobasal degeneration, parkinsonism and
Corticospinal lesions, coma or stupor caused by
Corticosteroids. See also specific agent and disease
acne/folliculitis caused by
for ACTH deficiency
for adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder)
adverse effects of
ophthalmic
for alcoholic liver disease
for allergic conjunctivitis/keratoconjunctivitis
for allergic rhinitis
for alopecia
amebiasis in patients taking
for ARDS
for asthma
exacerbation management and
inhaled
systemic
for atopic dermatitis
for back pain
for Bell palsy
for bronchiolitis
in cancer chemotherapy
for cancer-related hypercalcemia
for chronic inflammatory polyneuropathy
clinical use of
for contact dermatitis
for COPD
Cushing syndrome caused by
for cysticercosis
Corticosteroids (cont.)
for dysthyroid eye disease
in erythema multiforme
for exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma
for fetal lung maturity
for giant cell arteritis
for gout
in transplant patient
for gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
for herpes zoster
in HIV infection/AIDS
for hypopituitarism
for immune thrombocytopenia
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
intra-articular, for osteoarthritis
intranasal
for lateral and medial epicondylosis
for lichen planus
for lichen simplex chronicus
lipid abnormalities associated with use of
for lumbar disk herniation
for lupus/SLE
management of patient receiving
for minimal change disease
for multiple sclerosis
for myasthenia gravis
for nausea and vomiting
for ophthalmic disorders
precautions for use of
osteoporosis/osteoporosis prevention and
in pain management
for pemphigus
perioperative
insulin requirements and
for polyarteritis nodosa
for polymyositis/dermatomyositis
for pompholyx
for prostate cancer
for psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis
relative potencies of
for rheumatic fever/heart disease
for rheumatoid arthritis
rosacea exacerbated by
for shock
for skin disorders
for spinal stenosis
for spinal trauma/compression
strongyloidiasis in patients taking
for sudden sensory hearing loss
surgery in patients taking
insulin requirements and
perioperative replacement and
topical
ophthalmic
for urticaria
CORTICUS trial, in shock management
Cortinarius mushroom poisoning
Cortisol. See also Corticosteroids
excess of. See also Cushing syndrome
familial resistance to
in hypertension
insufficiency of. See also Adrenocortical insufficiency
acute
chronic. See also Addison disease
in HIV infection/AIDS
salivary, in Cushing syndrome
serum levels of
in ACTH deficiency
in acute adrenal insufficiency
in Addison disease
in Cushing syndrome
reference values for
urine free
in Cushing syndrome
reference values for
Cortisol withdrawal syndrome
Cortisone
Corynebacterium
diphtheriae. See also Diphtheria
jeikeium
Cosmegen. See Dactinomycin
Cosopt. See Dorzolamide/timolol
Cosyntropin test
in adrenal insufficiency/Addison disease
adrenal vein sampling in, in aldosteronism
in hirsutism/virilization
Cotton dust, byssinosis caused by inhalation of
Cotton wool spots
in retinal artery occlusion
in retinal vein occlusion
in SLE
Cough
angiotensin-converting 
enzyme 
(ACE) 
inhibitors
causing
in asthma
blood production and (hemoptysis)
in Bordetella pertussis infection (whooping cough)
in bronchiectasis
in COPD
drugs causing
dyspnea and
in GERD
headache associated with
in heart failure
in lung cancer
in pneumonia
anaerobic pneumonia/lung abscess
community-acquired
postnasal drip causing
in pulmonary embolism
in tuberculosis
Counterpulsation, extracorporeal, for angina
Courvoisier law/sign
Covera. See Verapamil
Cowden syndrome/disease
thyroid disease and
COX-1/COX-2, aspirin/NSAIDs affecting
peptic ulcer disease and
COX-2 inhibitors. See Coxibs
Coxibs (COX-2 inhibitors)
aspirin coadministration and
cardiovascular complications associated with
for familial adenomatous polyposis
gastritis and
for gout
in hemophilia
lithium interactions and
in pain management
peptic ulcers/peptic ulcer prevention and
for rheumatoid arthritis
Coxiella burnetii
Coxsackievirus infections
herpetic stomatitis differentiated from
myocarditis
pericarditis
Cozaar. See Losartan
CPAP. See Continuous positive airway pressure
CPHD. See Combined pituitary hormone deficiency
CPPD. See Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition
disease
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Cr. See Creatinine
“Crab yaws”
Crabs (pubic lice). See also Lice
Crack cocaine. See Cocaine abuse
Crackles (rales)
in heart failure
in interstitial (diffuse parenchymal) lung disease
in pulmonary embolism
CRAG (cryptococcal antigen) test
Cramps. See Dysmenorrhea; Muscle cramps
Cranial arteritis. See Giant cell (temporal/cranial) arteritis
Cranial 
nerve 
VIII 
(acoustic 
nerve) 
lesions. See
Schwannoma, vestibular
Cranial nerve palsies. See also specific type
brainstem lesions causing
in diabetes
in head injury
in malignant external otitis
ocular motor palsies and
in Paget disease of bone
in sarcoidosis
in syphilis
Craniopharyngioma
Creatine, toxicity of
Creatine kinase
in acute coronary syndromes/STEMI
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in psychogenic nonepileptic/pseudoepileptic seizure
identification
reference values for
in rhabdomyolysis
Creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB)
in acute coronary syndromes/STEMI
in infectious myocarditis
reference values for
Creatinine
ascitic fluid
serum levels of
in acute kidney injury
in chronic kidney disease
conditions affecting
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in glomerulonephritis
in hepatorenal syndrome
monitoring in methotrexate therapy
reference values for
urinary
in pheochromocytoma
ratio of to urinary protein. See also Proteinuria
Creatinine:blood urea nitrogen ratio
Creatinine clearance
GFR measurement and
in hepatorenal syndrome
reference/normal values for
Creeping eruption
Crepitus
CREST syndrome. See also Scleroderma
autoantibodies in
GI bleeding in
Crestor. See Rosuvastatin
Cretinism. See also Hypothyroidism
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
myoclonus in
parkinsonism and
Cricothyrotomy
Crigler-Najjar syndrome
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
Critical illness
diabetes management and
fever/health care-associated infection and
hypercalcemia and
neuropathy associated with
psychosis associated with
stress gastritis associated with
thyroid function affected in
Crixivan. See Indinavir
CroFab, for snake bites
Crohn disease. See also Inflammatory bowel disease
arthritis in
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
colorectal cancer and
diarrhea in
drug therapy for
extraintestinal manifestations of
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
small intestine adenocarcinoma and
social support and
Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America (CCFA)
Crolom. See Cromolyn
Cromolyn
for allergic eye disease
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
Cross-dressing
Cross-reactivity, in drug allergies
Cross-resistance, in antiretroviral therapy
Crossed straight leg sign
Crossmatching, in blood compatibility testing
Crotalid antivenin (CroFab)
CRP. See C-reactive protein
CRT. See Conformal radiation therapy
Cruciate ligaments of knee
injury of
anterior cruciate
posterior cruciate
Crush injuries, rhabdomyolysis/renal failure and
Crusted/weeping skin lesions. See also specific type
drying agents for
Cryoglobulins/cryoglobulinemia
glomerulonephritis and
in hepatitis C
neuropathies and
Raynaud phenomenon and
reference values for
Cryoplasty, for femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
Cryoprecipitate
for DIC
Cryotherapy/cryosurgery. See also Liquid nitrogen
for chromoblastomycosis
for CIN/cervical cancer
for condylomata acuminata
for fibroadenoma of breast
for prostate cancer
for retinal detachment
for tetralogy of Fallot
for wart removal
Cryptococcal antigen (CRAG) test
Cryptococcomas
Cryptococcus gattii/neoformans (cryptococcosis)
in HIV infection/AIDS
prophylaxis of
meningitis caused by
Cryptogenic 
organizing 
pneumonia/pneumonitis
(COP/idiopathic bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing
pneumonia/BOOP)
Cryptogenic stroke. See Stroke
Cryptorchism
pseudohermaphroditism and
testicular cancer and
Cryptosporidium hominis/parvum (cryptosporidiosis)
Crystal deposition arthritis
Crystalloids, for fluid management/volume replacement
in burn injuries
in shock
CSF-VDRL test
in HIV infection/AIDS
CSII. See Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
CT 
angiography. See Computed tomography; Helical
(spiral) CT
CT scans. See Computed tomography
CTCL. See Cutaneous T cell lymphoma
Cubicin. See Daptomycin
Cubital tunnel, ulnar nerve lesions and
Culdocentesis
in ectopic pregnancy
in PID
Culex mosquitoes. See Mosquitoes
Cultural issues, in end-of-life care
Culture-negative endocarditis
Cultured grafts
for burn wound closure
for leg ulcers
Cunninghamella infection
Cup-disk ratio
in chronic glaucoma
normal
Cupping, optic disk, in chronic glaucoma
Cupulolithiasis, vertigo associated with
Curative efforts, withdrawal of, in terminally ill/dying patient
advance directives and
CURB-65
Curettage. See D&C; Endocervical curettage; Endometrial
biopsy
Curettage and electrodesiccation
for basal cell carcinoma
for squamous cell carcinoma
Curvularia, phaeohyphomycosis caused by
Cushing disease. See also Cushing syndrome
Cushing syndrome (hypercortisolism)
amenorrhea in
cancer-related
corticosteroid-induced
hypertension and
lipid abnormalities associated with
in MEN
obesity in
Cutaneous anthrax
Cutaneous candidiasis
Cutaneous drug reactions
Cutaneous larva migrans
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
post-kala azar
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus, discoid/subacute/chronic
Cutaneous T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma and
Cutaneous tests. See specific type and Skin tests
c-v wave
in pulmonary stenosis
in tetralogy of Fallot
CVP. See Central venous pressure
CXCR4, in HIV infection/AIDS
Cyanide antidotes
Cyanide poisoning
dyspnea in
smoke inhalation and
Cyanocobalamin. See Vitamin B12
Cyanokit
Cyanosis
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
digital, in Raynaud phenomenon
in pulmonary embolism
Cyberknife radiosurgery
for lung cancer
for pituitary adenoma
Cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody, in rheumatoid
arthritis
Cyclic thrombocytopenia
Cyclin D1, in mantle cell lymphoma
Cycling, in bipolar disease
lithium use and
Cyclocort. See Amcinonide
Cyclooxygenase-1 and 2 (COX-1/COX-2), aspirin/NSAIDs
affecting
peptic ulcer disease and
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors. See Coxibs
Cyclophosphamide. See also Immunosuppressive therapy
for aplastic anemia
for breast cancer
breastfeeding and
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
for 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
hemorrhagic cystitis caused by
mesna for amelioration of
for microscopic polyangiitis
Cycloserine (DCS), for phobic disorder
Cyclospora cayetanensis (cyclosporiasis)
Cyclosporine
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for aplastic anemia
hyperkalemia caused by
nefazodone interaction and
nephrotoxicity/acute 
kidney 
injury/graft 
rejection
caused by
for ophthalmic disorders
for psoriasis
for ulcerative colitis
Cyclothymic disorders
Cycrin. See Progesterone
Cymbalta. See Duloxetine
CYP. See Cytochrome P450 (CYP) system
CYP17 deficiency
CYP17a1 inhibition, for prostate cancer
Cyproheptadine
for drug-induced anorgasmia
for serotonin syndrome
for urticaria
Cyproterone, for hirsutism/virilization
Cystadenocarcinoma, of liver
Cystadenoma
of liver
pancreatic
Cystathionine β-synthase deficiency, in homocystinuria
Cystatin C
in acute tubular necrosis
in GFR estimation
Cystectomy, for bladder cancer
Cysteine, supplementary, for homocystinuria
Cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis and
COPD differentiated from
genetic/prenatal testing for
g
p
g
vas deferens absence and
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR) protein
genetic/prenatal testing for mutations of
in pancreatitis
Cystic hydatid disease
Cystic inflammatory acne
Cysticercosis
Cystine urinary stones
Cystinuria
Cystitis
in epididymitis
in female
hemorrhagic. See Hemorrhagic cystitis
interstitial
in male
Cystocele
Cystoscopy
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
in bladder cancer
in interstitial cystitis
Cystourethroscopy, in bladder cancer
Cytadren. See Aminoglutethimide
Cytarabine
for acute myeloid leukemia
Cytarabine liposome
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) system
alcoholic liver disease and
antibodies to, in autoimmune hepatitis
fentanyl and
hepatotoxicity and
nefazodone affecting
protease inhibitors affecting
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 variants, testing for
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 variants, testing for
Cytokeratin 8 gene, cirrhosis and
Cytokines
in ARDS
in fever
Cytolytic snake venom
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease
esophageal
gastritis/diarrhea
in immunocompetent host
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
prophylaxis of
mononucleosis
perinatal/congenital
posttransplant
prevention of
retinitis
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) immune globulin
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) inclusion disease
Cytomel. See Triiodothyronine
Cytopenia, methotrexate causing
Cytosar-U. See Cytarabine
Cytotoxic drugs. See specific agent and Chemotherapy
y
g
p
g
py
Cytotoxic (antibody-mediated/type II) hypersensitivity
Cytotoxicity assay, in antibiotic-associated colitis
Cytovene. See Ganciclovir
Cytoxan. See Cyclophosphamide
d4T. See Stavudine
D antigen, in compatibility testing
D&C
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for postmenopausal bleeding
D cells, pancreatic
D-cycloserine (DCS), for phobic disorder
D-dimer fibrin
anticoagulation duration and
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
chest pain evaluation and
in DIC
reference values for
D state sleep
Dabigatran
for atrial fibrillation
after cardiac valve replacement surgery
Dacarbazine
Dacogen. See Decitabine
Dacryocystitis
Dacryocystorhinostomy
Dactinomycin
Dairy intolerance. See Lactose (milk) intolerance
Dalfopristin/quinupristin. See Quinupristin/dalfopristin
“Dallas” criteria, in infectious myocarditis
Dalmane. See Flurazepam
Dalrymple sign
Dalteparin
Danazol
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
breastfeeding and
for endometriosis
for fibrocystic condition
Dandruff
Dantrolene
for 
neuroleptic 
malignant 
syndrome/malignant
hyperthermia
for spasticity
Dapsone
for actinomycetoma
for dermatitis herpetiformis
G6PD deficiency and
methemoglobinemia caused by
for P jiroveci infection
prophylactic
for toxoplasma prophylaxis
Daptomycin, for staphylococcal skin infections
Darbepoetin alfa
for anemia of chronic kidney disease
for chemotherapy-induced anemia
Darifenacin, for urinary incontinence
Darkfield microscopic examination
in leptospirosis
in syphilis
Darunavir
with ritonavir
Dasatinib
for acute lymphoblastic leukemia
for chronic myeloid leukemia
DASH diet, in hypertension/hypertension prevention
“Date-rape” drug (γ-hydroxybutyrate/GHB)
Cushing syndrome and
Datril. See Acetaminophen
Datura stramonium, toxicity of
Daunorubicin/daunomycin
liposomal
toxicity of
Daunoxome. See Liposomal daunorubicin
Dawn phenomenon
DAX-1 
gene 
mutation, 
in 
congenital 
adrenal
hypoplasia/hypogonadism/azoospermia
Daypro. See Oxaprozin
Daytime somnolence. See Somnolence
DBE. See Deep breathing exercises
DC cardioversion. See Cardioversion, electrical
DCC gene, in colorectal cancer
DCCT (Diabetes Control and Complications Trial)
DCIS. See Ductal carcinoma in situ
DCS. See D-cycloserine; Decompression sickness
DDAVP. See Desmopressin
ddC. See Zalcitabine
ddI. See Didanosine
DDT (chlorophenothane), poisoning caused by
de Morsier syndrome (septo-optic dysplasia)
De Quervain (subacute) thyroiditis
hypothyroid phase in
“Deadly quartet.” See Metabolic syndrome
Deafness. See Hearing loss
Death. See also End of life; Sudden death
Kübler-Ross’ stages of
leading causes of
patient expectations about
preventable causes of. See also Preventive care
tasks after
Death certificate
Debridement, in burn wound care
Decerebrate posturing
Decision making, medical
advance directives and
determination of older patient's capacity for
at end of life
Decitabine
for myelodysplastic syndromes
Decompression sickness
barotrauma and
Decompressive laminectomy
for spinal trauma
for spinal tumors/cord compression
Decongestants
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for viral rhinosinusitis (common cold)
Decontamination
eye
for caustic/corrosive burns
gastrointestinal
caustic/corrosive agent ingestion and
skin
for caustic/corrosive burns
chemical warfare agents and
Decorticate posturing
Decubitus ulcers. See Pressure ulcers
De-efferented state (locked-in syndrome)
Deep brain stimulation
for idiopathic torsion dystonia
for parkinsonism
for Tourette syndrome
Deep breathing exercises, prevention of postoperative
pulmonary complications and
Deep neck infections
Deep sulcus sign, in pneumothorax
Deep 
venous 
thrombosis. See 
also 
Venous
thromboembolic disease
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Baker cyst differentiated from
cellulitis differentiated from
detection of
pulmonary embolism diagnosis and
estrogen replacement therapy and
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
hypercoagulability and
lower extremity edema and
prevention of
pulmonary embolism and. See also Pulmonary venous
thromboembolism
risk stratification for
superficial thrombophlebitis and
superior vena caval obstruction and
treatment of
venous insufficiency/stasis and
Deer tick virus
Deer ticks. See Ticks
Defecation, dyssynergic (pelvic floor dyssynergia)
Deferasirox, for hemochromatosis/iron toxicity
Deferoxamine
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for hemochromatosis/iron toxicity
Defibrillator cardioverter, implantable. See Implantable
cardioverter defibrillator
Defibrotide, for sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
Deflazacort. See also Corticosteroids
Degarelix
for prostate cancer
“Degenerative” (calcific) aortic stenosis
Degenerative 
joint 
disease/arthritis. See 
also
Osteoarthritis
in alkaptonuria
Dehydration
calculating water deficit in
in cholera
in diabetes insipidus
in diabetic ketoacidosis
diarrhea and
chemotherapy-induced
in heat exposure syndromes
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
hypernatremia and
enteral nutritional support and
hyperosmolar nonketotic, parenteral nutritional support
and
kidney injury and
management of. See Fluid management/hydration
saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis and
vomiting and
Dehydroemetine, for amebiasis
Dehydroepiandrosterone/dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
(DHEA/DHEAS)
for adrenal insufficiency/Addison disease
hirsutism/virilization and
for hypopituitarism and hypogonadism
serum levels of, in Addison disease
for SLE
Déjà vu
in focal seizures
intracranial tumors causing
Dejerine-Sottas disease
Delavirdine. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Delayed adolescence/puberty. See Puberty
Delayed (T-cell mediated/type IV) hypersensitivity
Delirium
alcohol use/abuse and
anticholinergic. See 
also 
Anticholinergic
syndrome/effects
clinical findings in
dementia and
in elderly
dementia and
at end of life
postoperative
urinary incontinence and
hospitalization/illness and
lithium-induced
palliation of
postoperative
in terminally ill/dying patient
treatment of
Delirium tremens
Delivery. See Labor and delivery
Delta agent (hepatitis D virus/HDV). See also Hepatitis D
Delta sleep
Delta wave, in preexcitation syndromes
Delusional disorders
Delusions, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Demadex. See Torsemide
Demeclocycline, for hyponatremia
Dementia. See also Alzheimer disease
assessment of/screening for
automobile driving and
behavior-variant frontotemporal
behavioral problems and
clinical findings in
cognitive impairment assessment/treatment and
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
decision-making capacity and
delirium and
depression and (pseudodementia)
differential diagnosis of
in Down syndrome
in elderly
estrogen replacement therapy and
frontotemporal
in HIV infection/AIDS
in Huntington disease
hypertension and
with Lewy bodies
mood disorders and
motor findings and
in niacin deficiency
nonpharmacologic approaches to management of
psychiatric disorders and
rapidly progressive
semantic
subcortical
treatment of
vascular
vitamin B12 deficiency and
Demerol. See Meperidine
Demyelinating neuropathies/polyneuropathies. See also
specific type and Neuropathies
chronic inflammatory
Guillain-Barré syndrome and
in HIV infection/AIDS
myeloma/paraproteinemias and
optic neuritis and
D e m ye l i na t i o n. See 
also 
Demyelinating
neuropathies/polyneuropathies
in Guillain-Barré syndrome
hypernatremia and
hyponatremia complications/treatment and
in multiple sclerosis
in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Dengue/dengue hemorrhagic fever
Dengue shock syndrome
Denial, at-risk drinking and
Denial of illness
Denileukin diftitox
Denosumab
for breast cancer
for chemotherapy-induced toxicity
for osteoporosis
Dental disorders
actinomycosis and
anaerobic pleuropulmonary infections and
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
bisphosphonate use and
deep neck infections and
earache and
facial pain caused by
in Sjögren syndrome
Dental procedures, endocarditis prophylaxis and
Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
Dentition, poor. See Dental disorders
Dentures, foreign body aspiration and
Deoxyribonuclease, human (rhDNase), for cystic fibrosis
Dependency (drug). See also specific drug and Substance
use disorders
in opioid therapy
physiologic
psychologic
Dependent personality disorder
Depersonalization
intracranial tumors causing
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Depigmentation 
disorders. See 
also
Hypopigmentation
yp p g
DepoCyt. See Cytarabine liposome
Depression
adjustment disorder with
alcohol dependency and
with atypical features
bipolar disorder and
chronic pain and
complications of
in cyclothymic disorders
dementia and (pseudodementia)
differential diagnosis of
dispensing medications and
drug-induced
drug therapy for. See also Antidepressants
dysthymia
ECT for
in elderly
caregiver issues and
screening for
stimulants for
urinary incontinence and
experimental treatments for
hospitalization/illness and
hypercortisolism in
lithium for
major depressive disorder
OCD and
oral contraceptive use and
panic disorder and
parkinsonism differentiated from
perimenopausal, estrogen replacement therapy and
personality disorder and
phototherapy for
with postpartum onset
in premenstrual dysphoric disorder
PTSD and
reserpine causing
schizophrenic/psychotic disorders/ideation and
with seasonal onset
sleep disorders and
somatization disorder and
suicide and
in terminally ill/dying patient
treatment of. See also Antidepressants
Dermabrasion, for acne scars
Dermacentor ticks. See Ticks
Dermatitis. See also Skin disorders
atopic. See Atopic dermatitis
cercarial, in schistosomiasis
contact
allergic
   impetigo differentiated from
   topical medications causing
   urticaria in
irritant
tinea differentiated from
contagious pustular (orf)
drugs causing
exfoliative (exfoliative erythroderma)
drugs causing
psoriatic. See also Psoriasis
hand, vesiculobullous (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
herpetiformis
celiac disease/gluten sensitivity and
medicamentosa (drug eruption)
in niacin deficiency
seborrheic. See Seborrheic dermatitis
stasis. See also Venous insufficiency/stasis
leg ulcers and
Dermatologic disorders. See Skin disorders
Dermatologic therapy
adverse ophthalmic effects of
complications of
Dermatomal herpes zoster
Dermatomyositis
autoantibodies in
cancer-related
sine myositis
Dermatop. See Prednicarbate
Dermatopathic lymphadenopathy
Dermatophytosis. See also Tinea
drugs for treatment of
furunculosis differentiated from
nail changes in
Dermopathy
in Graves disease (pretibial myxedema)
nephrogenic fibrosing
Dermoscopy, in melanoma evaluation
DES. See Diethylstilbestrol
Des-gamma-carboxy 
prothrombin, 
in 
hepatocellular
carcinoma
Desensitization techniques
for phobic disorder
for 
psychiatric 
problems 
associated 
with
hospitalization/illness
for PTSD
Desensitization therapy. See also Immunotherapy
for asthma
for drug allergies
to penicillin
Designer drugs
Desipramine. See also Antidepressants
for neuropathic pain/painful diabetic neuropathy
Desloratadine, for allergic/perennial rhinitis
Desmoid tumors, in familial adenomatous polyposis
Desmopressin (DDAVP)
for bleeding in chronic kidney disease/uremia
in diabetes insipidus diagnosis
in diabetes insipidus treatment
for hemophilia
for von Willebrand disease
Desogestrel, in combination oral contraceptives
g
,
p
thromboembolism and
Desonide
Desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP)
Desvenlafaxine
Desynchronization sleep disorder
Desyrel. See Trazodone
Detergent worker's lung
Detrusor muscle disorders, urinary incontinence and. See
also Overflow incontinence; Urge incontinence
DeVega annuloplasty
Devic disease/syndrome (neuromyelitis optica)
optic neuritis in
Dexamethasone. See also Corticosteroids
in cancer chemotherapy
for fetal lung maturity
for high altitude-related illness
for nausea and vomiting
for ophthalmic disorders
in pain management
for pneumococcal meningitis
for spinal tumors/cord compression
Dexamethasone suppression test, in Cushing syndrome
diagnosis
Dexlansoprazole. See also Proton pump inhibitors
Dexrazoxane, for chemotherapy-induced cardiac toxicity
Dextroamphetamine
abuse/overdose of
for depression
for narcolepsy
for opioid-induced sedation
Dextromethorphan
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
Dextrose
for coma
in diabetes management of hospitalized patient
for drug-induced hypoglycemia
in fluid management
for hypernatremia
for hyperglycemia hyperosmolar state
for shock
for status epilepticus
D
H
E
A
/
D
H
E
A
S
. See
Dehydroepiandrosterone/dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
DHFR gene, TMP-SMZ resistance and
Diaβeta. See Glyburide
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)
Diabetes insipidus
craniopharyngioma and
hypernatremia in
nephrogenic
hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism and
lithium causing
after pituitary microsurgery
in Wolfram syndrome
Diabetes mellitus. See also under Diabetic
antipsychotic drug use and
aspirin in chemoprevention and
atrial fibrillation and
β-blocker use in
blood glucose levels in diagnosis of
blood glucose self-monitoring in
blood-testing procedures in
cardiovascular complications of
glycemic control and
hypertension control and
chronic kidney disease and. See also Diabetic
nephropathy
cirrhosis and
classification and pathogenesis of
clinical findings in
clinical trials in
coma in patient with
complications of
clinical studies of glycemic control and
hypoglycemia and
insulin therapy causing
continuous glucose monitoring systems in
diagnostic examination in
emphysematous pyelonephritis in
epidemiologic considerations in
erectile dysfunction in
estrogen replacement affecting
exercise and
insulin requirements and
foot disorders/foot care in
gastroparesis in
hypoglycemia and
gestational
glaucoma in
glucose tolerance test in
glucosuria/glycosuria in
glycated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1) measurements
in
glycemic control in
acceptable levels of
blood glucose self-monitoring in
clinical studies in evaluation of
glycated 
hemoglobin 
(hemoglobin 
A1)
measurements in evaluation of
intensive insulin therapy for. See Insulin therapy,
intensive
pregnancy and
surgery and
heart disease in
HLA in
hypernatremia and
hypertension/hypertension management in
in breast lump evaluation
antihypertensive therapy regimens for
benefits of control and
calcium channel blocking agents for
immunization recommendations in
insulin 
resistance 
and. See 
also 
Insulin
resistance/insulin 
insensitivity; 
Insulin 
resistance
syndrome
ketonuria in
laboratory findings in
latent autoimmune of adulthood (LADA)
lipid/lipoprotein abnormalities in
maturity-onset of young (MODY)
mitochondrial DNA mutations and
mucormycosis in
mutant insulin receptors causing
mutant insulins causing
nephrotic 
syndrome 
and. See also 
Diabetic
nephropathy
neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint) in
neuropathy and. See also Diabetic neuropathy
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
occult
ocular complications of. See also Diabetic retinopathy
ocular examinations in
osteomyelitis in
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
patient education (self-management training) in
polycystic ovary syndrome and
prebreakfast hyperglycemia in
during pregnancy
continuous glucose monitoring and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
prevention/delay of
clinical trials studying
exercise and
immune intervention therapy and
prognosis for
screening for
cardiovascular disease prevention and
pregnancy and
secondary
self-monitoring of blood glucose and
serum fructosamine levels in
skin/mucous membrane disorders and
surgery in patients with
tibial atherosclerosis and
treatment of
clinical studies in evaluation of
combination regimens and
diet in. See also Diet
drugs in. See also Antidiabetic agents
for hospitalized patient
insulin in. See also Insulin therapy
steps in
transplantation in
type 1
clinical trials in
HLA in
idiopathic (type 1B)
immune-mediated (type 1A)
( yp
)
acuminata (venereal/genital warts)
prognosis for
surgery in patient with
symptoms/signs of
type 2
clinical trials in
drugs for management of. See also Antidiabetic
agents
hepatitis C and
insulin therapy for
management of
in nonobese patients
in obese patients
prognosis for
surgery in patient with
symptoms/signs of
urinalysis findings in
vascular disorders in
glycemic control and
hypertension control and
weight loss (unintended) in
diabetic neuropathic cachexia and
in Wolfram syndrome
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP)
Diabetes Prevention Trial-1 (DPT-1)
Diabetic amyotrophy
Diabetic cataracts
Diabetic cheiroarthropathy/cheiropathy
Diabetic coma. See also specific cause
diabetic ketoacidosis and
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state and
lactic acidosis and
Diabetic diarrhea
Diabetic dyslipidemia
Diabetic ketoacidosis
coma caused by
hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis and
hypophosphatemia in
increased anion gap acidosis and
insulin infusion pump use and
Diabetic maculopathy/macular edema
Diabetic nephropathy
dialysis for
glycemic control and
hypertension/hypertension control and
Diabetic neuropathic cachexia
Diabetic neuropathy
foot disorders/ulcers/gangrene and
glycemic control and
neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint) and
Diabetic retinopathy
glycemic control and
hypertension control and
Diabetic shin spots
Diabinese. See Chlorpropamide
Diagnostic/laboratory tests. See also specific disorder
in poisoning/drug overdose
p
g
g
in prenatal care. See also Prenatal testing
reference values for
tubes for specimen collection and
Dialectical behavioral therapy, for personality disorders
Dialysis
for bleeding in chronic kidney disease
“gut” (repeat-dose charcoal)
for heat stroke
for hypercalcemia
hypercalcemia/hyperphosphatemia associated with
for hyperkalemia
for hypermagnesemia
for hypernatremia
for hyperphosphatemia
hypocalcemia/hyperphosphatemia associated with
for hyponatremia
for kidney disease/injury
acute injury/acute tubular necrosis
chronic
coagulopathy and
in diabetic
postoperative
neuropathies in chronic kidney disease and
for poisoning/drug overdose
with carbamazepine
with lithium
with methanol or ethylene glycol
with phenobarbital
with salicylates
with theophylline
with valproic acid
prognosis for patient undergoing
pruritus associated with
renal cysts and
renal cell carcinoma and
skin lesions and (porphyria cutanea tarda-like)
surgery in patient receiving
for uremic pericarditis
Diaphragm, respiratory failure caused by disorders of
Diaphragm (contraceptive)
DIAPPERS mnemonic
Diarrhea. See also specific cause and 
Colitis;
Gastroenteritis
acidosis associated with
acute
antibiotic-associated
antibiotics for
in bacterial overgrowth
bloody. See also Dysentery
Venereal (genital) warts
campylobacter causing
Guillain-Barré syndrome and
in celiac disease
chemotherapy/radiation-induced
in cholera
chronic
clostridial
coccidial and microsporidial
in Crohn disease
in cryptosporidiosis
in cyclosporiasis
in diabetic autonomic neuropathy
diet in management of
drugs in management of. See also Antidiarrheal
agents
E coli causing
endoscopy/mucosal biopsy in
enteral nutritional support and
factitious
fecal impaction and
fluid management in
in giardiasis
in hyperoxaluric calcium
nephrolithiasis
in hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
hypokalemia caused by
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
infectious
acute
chronic
inflammatory. See also Dysentery
acute
chronic
in intestinal amebiasis
in irritable bowel syndrome
in isosporiasis
in lactase deficiency/lactose (milk) intolerance
in malabsorption
in measles
in microscopic colitis
motility disorders and
in niacin deficiency
noninflammatory
noroviruses/Norwalk virus causing
osmotic
rotaviruses causing
salmonella causing
secretory
shigella causing
in short bowel syndrome
staphylococcal
stool analysis in
traveler's. See also Traveler's diarrhea
in typhoid fever
in ulcerative colitis
cardiovascular complications and
VIP/VIPoma causing
viral. See also specific virus
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma)
Diastolic blood pressure. See also Blood pressure
in congestive heart failure
in hypertension
treatment goals and
in hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
yp
g
g
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in prehypertension
Diastolic dysfunction/heart failure. See also Congestive
heart (cardiac) failure
hypertension and
Diastolic murmurs. See Heart murmurs
Diazepam. See also Benzodiazepines
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for aggressive/violent patient
for alcohol withdrawal
for anxiety
breastfeeding and
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
for seizures
status epilepticus and
for spasticity
Diazoxide
for hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
for islet cell tumors/insulinomas
Dibenzodiazepines. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Dibenzo-oxepino pyrrole. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Dibenzothiazepine. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Dibenzoxazepines. See also Antipsychotic drugs
DIC. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Dichuchwa (endemic syphilis)
Diclofenac
for arthritis
for ophthalmic disorders
proton pump coadministration and
neuropathy caused by
DIDMOAD (Wolfram syndrome)
Dienestrol
Dientamoeba fragilis
Diet. See also Nutrition
acne and
for alcohol use/abuse patient
breast cancer risk and
in cancer prevention
cardiovascular disease prevention and
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
cholesterol/lipid-lowering
in diabetes
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
in chronic kidney disease
in cirrhosis
colorectal cancer and
consistency alterations and
constipation and
in Crohn disease
in diabetes mellitus
for obese type 2 diabetic
pregnancy and
prevention and
in diarrhea control
in fibrocystic condition
flatus and
gastric adenocarcinoma and
in GERD management
gluten-free, for celiac disease/dermatitis herpetiformis
in gout
in heart failure management
in hemochromatosis
in hypertension/hypertension prevention
in hypertriglyceridemia
in irritable bowel syndrome
for islet cell tumors/insulinomas
lactation and
lactose-free
MAOI interactions and
Mediterranean
in nephrotic syndrome
nutrient-restricting. See also specific type
nutrient-supplementing
obesity management/prevention and
in osteoporosis
in pancreatitis
in porphyria
during pregnancy
diabetes mellitus and
preventable disease/deaths and
therapeutic
in ulcerative colitis
urinary stone formation and
in Wilson disease
Diet therapy. See also Diet; Nutrition
Dietary supplements
oral nutritional supplements
in HIV infection/AIDS
for undernourished elderly
toxicity of
Diethylcarbamazine
for filariasis
for loiasis
Diethylene glycol, toxicity of
Diethylpropion, for obesity
Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
for breast cancer
in male
for prostate cancer
Dieulafoy lesion
Difenacoum poisoning
Diffuse axonal injury
Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis
Diffuse esophageal spasm
Diffuse gastric cancer
Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)
Diffuse panbronchiolitis
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease. See also specific
disorder and Interstitial lung disease
Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO), in
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Diflorasone
Diflucan. See Fluconazole
Diflunisal
DiGeorge syndrome, hypoparathyroidism in
Digestion, disorders of. See Malabsorption
Digibind. See Digoxin-specific Fab antibody
DigiFab. See Digoxin-specific Fab antibody
Digital clubbing
in bronchiectasis
in lung cancer
Digital cyanosis, in Raynaud phenomenon
Digital gangrene, in polyarteritis nodosa
Digital ischemia
in Raynaud phenomenon
in scleroderma
Digital mammography
Digital rectal examination. See Rectal examination
Digitalis/digitalis glycosides. See also Digoxin
antidepressant drug interactions and
for heart failure
overdose/toxicity of
hypokalemia and
ophthalmic effects and
Digoxin. See also Digitalis/digitalis glycosides
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
   in hyperthyroidism
   in myocardial infarction
benzodiazepine interactions and
for cardiomyopathy
for heart failure
overdose/toxicity of
perioperative management for patient taking
Digoxin-specific Fab antibody (digoxin immune Fab), for
digitalis toxicity
Dihydroartemisinin
with piperaquine
Dihydroergotamine
for cluster headache
for migraine headache
Dihydrofolate reductase, antimalarial drugs affecting
Dihydroindolones. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Dihydropteroate synthase, antimalarial drugs affecting
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol. See Calcitriol
Diiodohydroxyquin. See Iodoquinol
Dilacor. See Diltiazem
Dilated cardiomyopathy. See Cardiomyopathy
Dilation and curettage. See D&C
Dilaudid. See Hydromorphone
Diloxanide, for amebiasis
Diltiazem. See also Calcium channel blocking drugs
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
infarct-related
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
for hypertension
overdose/toxicity of
Dilutional acidosis
Dimenhydrinate
Dimercaprol (BAL)
for arsenic poisoning
for lead poisoning
for mercury poisoning
Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA). See Succimer
1,1-Dimethylbiguanide hydrochloride. See Metformin
Dimethyltryptamine
Diovan/Diovan HCT. See Valsartan
DIP. See Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP 4) inhibitors
Diphenhydramine. See also Antihistamines
breastfeeding and
for insomnia
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
for scombroid poisoning
Diphenoxylate with atropine. See also Antidiarrheal agents
overdose/toxicity of
Diphtheria
myocarditis in
neuropathy in
pharyngitis in
prevention/immunization and. See also Diphtheria and
tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine
Diphtheria antitoxin
Diphtheria-tetanus toxoid. See Tetanus-diphtheria toxoid
Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and pertussis vaccine
(DTaP/Tdap vaccines)
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
Diphtheria toxoid. See also Tetanus-diphtheria toxoid
Diphyllobothrium latum (fish tapeworm)
vitamin B12 deficiency and
Dipiperazines. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Dipivefrin, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Diplopia
in dysthyroid eye/Graves disease
in fourth nerve paralysis
vertigo and
Diprolene. See Betamethasone
Dipstick urinalysis. See also specific disorder
in dysuria evaluation
in proteinuria evaluation
Dipylidium caninum (dog tapeworm)
echinococcosis and
Dipyridamole, platelet function affected by
Dipyridamole-thallium 
scintigraphy. See 
Myocardial
perfusion scintigraphy
Direct current (DC) electrical injury
Direct thrombin inhibitors
for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
for venous thromboembolism
Directed bleeding history, preoperative
Directly observed therapy (DOT), for tuberculosis
in drug-resistant tuberculosis
in HIV-positive persons
Disability assessment, in burn injury
Discogenic disease. See Cervical spine/disk disease;
Lumbar spine/disk disease; Sacral spine/disk disease;
Thoracic spine/disk disease
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
biologic
combination regimens for
synthetic
Disease prevention. See Preventive care
DISH. See Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
Disipal. See Orphenadrine
Disk batteries, ingested, alkali injuries caused by
Disk diffusion tests, drug susceptibility
Disk disease. See Cervical spine/disk disease; Lumbar
spine/disk disease; Sacral spine/disk disease; Thoracic
spine/disk disease
Dislocated shoulder
assessment of
Disopyramide
for cardiomyopathy
overdose/toxicity of
Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia
Dissection. See Aortic dissection
Disseminated cutaneous leishmaniasis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
in acute leukemia
in cancer
in gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
in meningococcal meningitis
Dissociated sensory loss
in spinal cord infarction
Dissociative disorder
Dissociative 
identity 
disorder 
(multiple 
personality
disorder)
Distal muscular dystrophy
Distal renal tubular acidosis. See also Renal tubular
acidosis
genetic defects associated with
in hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
urinary stone formation and
Distal symmetric polyneuropathy, diabetic
Distributive shock
Disulfiram
for alcohol use/abuse
antidepressant drug interactions and
benzodiazepine interactions and
Diulo. See Metolazone
Diuresis. See also Urine output
forced
in poisoning/drug overdose
urinary stones and
Diuretics. See also specific agent
abuse of in bulimia nervosa
for acute tubular necrosis
adverse effects of
for cardiomyopathy
for cirrhotic ascites
for constrictive pericarditis
contraction alkalosis and
for diabetes insipidus
for heart failure
chronic kidney disease and
left ventricular (infarct-related)
hypercalcemia and
for hypercalciuria
for hyperkalemia
for hypernatremia
for hypertension
in chronic kidney disease
in combination products
in combination regimen
during pregnancy
in urgencies/emergencies
hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism and
hypokalemia and
for hyponatremia
hyponatremia caused by
lipid abnormalities associated with use of
lithium interactions and
ototoxicity of
perioperative management for patient taking
for pulmonary edema
tubulointerstitial nephritis caused by
Divalproex. See Valproic acid/valproate
Diverticula
colonic
esophageal/Zenker
Diverticular bleeding
Diverticulectomy, for Zenker diverticulum
Diverticulitis
Diverticulosis
GI bleeding in
infection and (diverticulitis)
Diving (underwater). See Scuba/deep sea diving
Dix-Hallpike testing
Dizziness. See also Dysequilibrium (imbalance); Vertigo;
Vestibular disorders falls/gait abnormalities in elderly and
DJ1 gene, in parkinsonism
DKA. See Diabetic ketoacidosis
DlCO (diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide), in
Pneumocystis pneumonia
DLE. See Discoid lupus erythematosus
DMARDs. See Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs
DML
DMP1 mutations, in osteomalacia/rickets
DMPA. See Medroxyprogesterone
DMPS. See Unithiol
DMSA. See Succimer
DNA
double-stranded, 
antibodies 
to. See Anti-double-
stranded (anti-ds)-DNA
hepatitis B virus
native, antibodies to
DNA amplification tests, in tuberculosis
DNA analysis/diagnosis/probes (molecular genetics). See
also Genetic testing
in colorectal cancer screening/polyp identification
in muscular dystrophy
in tuberculosis
“Do not attempt resuscitation” (DNAR) orders
Dobrava virus
Dobutamine
for cardiogenic shock
for heart failure
left ventricular (infarct-related)
Dobutamine 
stress 
echocardiography. See
Echocardiography
Docetaxel
for breast cancer
neuropathy caused by
for prostate cancer
Docosanol cream, for herpes simplex infection
Doctor-patient communication, in end-of-life care
Doctor–patient relationship
adherence and
chronic pain disorders and
psychiatric 
problems 
associated 
with
hospitalization/illness and
smoking cessation and
somatoform disorders and
Docusate sodium
Dofetilide
for atrial fibrillation
for atrial flutter
Dog bites
rabies and
Dog feces
echinococcosis and
toxocariasis/visceral larva migrans and
Dog fleas. See Fleas
Dog hookworm
cutaneous larva migrans caused by
Dog roundworm (T canis)
Dog tapeworm (D caninum)
echinococcosis and
Dog ticks. See Ticks
Dolasetron. See also Antiemetics
Doll's-head eye response, in coma or stupor
Dolobid. See Diflunisal
Dolophine. See Methadone
Domestic violence
elder abuse and
prevention of
Domperidone, for gastroparesis
Donepezil, for dementia
Donovan bodies
Dopamine
depletion of in parkinsonism
in Huntington disease
for hypotension/shock
cardiogenic
in poisoning/drug overdose
for left ventricular (infarct-related) failure
positive and negative schizophrenic symptoms and
Dopamine agonists
for acromegaly/gigantism
for cocaine withdrawal
for hyperprolactinemia
for neuroleptic malignant syndrome
for parkinsonism
for restless legs syndrome
Dopamine antagonists. See also Antipsychotic drugs
for nausea and vomiting
Doppler 
ultrasound. See 
Echocardiography;
Ultrasonography
Dor procedure
Doral. See Quazepam
Doripenem, for abdominal infections
Dornase alpha (rhDNase), for cystic fibrosis
Dorzolamide, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Dorzolamide/timolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Dose-dense/dose-intense 
chemotherapy. See
Chemotherapy
DOT. See Directly observed therapy
Double-stranded DNA antibodies
in hyperthyroidism
in lupus/SLE
Double vision. See Diplopia
Down syndrome (trisomy 21)
prenatal screening for
Doxazosin
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
for hypertension
Doxepin. See also Antidepressants
for anogenital itching
topical
for urticaria
Doxercalciferol, for hyperparathyroidism
Doxil. See Liposomal doxorubicin
Doxorubicin
for bladder cancer
for breast cancer
liposomal
for Kaposi sarcoma
toxicity of
Doxycycline
for acne
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for anthrax
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for Lyme disease
for malaria
for chemoprophylaxis
for malignant pleural effusion
for pneumonia
for rosacea
for syphilis
for urinary tract infection
for Wolbachia eradication
in filariasis
in onchocerciasis
DPI. See Dry powder inhalers
DPOA-HC. See Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care
DPP-4 inhibitors
DPP (Diabetes Prevention Program)
DPT-1 (Diabetes Prevention Trial-1)
Dracunculus medinensis (dracunculiasis)
Drawer sign/test
anterior
ankle sprain and
knee stability/ACL injury and
posterior
DRE (digital rectal examination). See Rectal examination
Dream sleep
DRESS mnemonic
Dressler 
syndrome 
(postmyocardial
infarction/postcardiotomy pericarditis)
Drinking. See also Alcohol use/dependency/abuse
at-risk/problem
differential diagnosis of
treatment of
Driving (automobile)
by patients with dementia
by 
patients 
with 
syncope/ventricular
tachycardia/aborted sudden death
by suicidal patients
Dronabinol (@del9-tetrahydrocannabinol), for nausea and
vomiting
AIDS wasting and
Dronedarone
Drooling, in esophageal foreign body
Drop attacks, epileptic (atonic seizures). See also
Seizures
Droperidol
for migraine headache
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
torsades de pointes caused by
Drospirenone, in combination oral contraceptives
Drotrecogin 
alfa 
(activated 
protein 
C), 
for
bacteremia/sepsis/shock
Drowning
Drug abuse. See also Substance use disorders
Drug addiction. See also Substance use disorders
pain management in terminally ill/dying patient and
Drug allergy. See also specific agent
anaphylaxis and
cross-reactivity and
desensitization therapy for
testing for
in topical dermatologic therapy
Drug dependency. See also specific drug and Substance
use disorders
in opioid therapy
physiologic
psychologic
Drug-eluting stents
Drug eruptions
complex
fixed
simple
Drug-induced disorders/side effects
abnormal movements
acute tubular necrosis
agranulocytosis
allergic reactions. See Drug allergy
anion gap acidosis
aseptic meningitis
asthma
cholestasis
cognitive disorders/delirium
constipation
depression
p
dermatitis (dermatitis
medicamentosa)
diarrhea
dyspepsia
dystonia
in elderly
depression
falls
incontinence
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes
erectile/sexual dysfunction
erythema multiforme
erythema nodosum
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma
fatty liver disease (hepatic steatosis)
fetotoxicity
fever
gastritis/gastropathy
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
goiter
gout/hyperuricemia
gynecomastia
hallucinations/hallucinosis
Hashimoto thyroiditis
headache (analgesic rebound/medication overuse
headache)
heart failure
hepatitis
hyperglycemia
yp g y
hyperkalemia
hyperpigmentation
nail
hypoglycemia
hyponatremia
hypothyroidism
interstitial lung disease
interstitial nephritis
lichenoid/lichen planus-like
liver disease/failure
long QT syndrome
lower leg edema
lung disease
lupus/SLE
male infertility
meningeal irritation
microscopic colitis
microscopic polyangiitis
myocarditis
nail hyperpigmentation
nausea and vomiting
neutropenia
olfactory disorders
ototoxicity
overdoses. See Poisoning/drug overdose
palpitations
pancreatitis
parkinsonism
pemphigus
pheochromocytoma attacks/paroxysms and
photosensitivity/photodermatitis
pigmentary changes
pityriasis rosea-like eruption
platelet dysfunction
porphyria
cutanea tarda
psychotic behavior
pulmonary disorders
pure red cell aplasia
Raynaud phenomenon
rhabdomyolysis/myopathy/myositis
rhinitis (rhinitis medicamentosa)
SIADH
sick sinus syndrome
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
teratogenicity
thrombocytopenia
torsades de pointes
toxic epidermal necrolysis
tubulointerstitial nephritis
urticaria
Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndromes (complex drug
eruptions)
Drug monitoring (therapeutic). See also specific agent
Drug overdose. See Poisoning/drug overdose
Drug resistance. See also specific agent
in anaerobic infections
in anthrax
in antiretroviral therapy
in cryptococcosis
in enterococcal infections
in gonococcal infection
in H pylori infection
health care-associated infections and
in HIV infection/AIDS
in influenza
in leishmaniasis
in leprosy
in malaria
in meningococcal infection
pharyngitis treatment and
in pneumococcal infections
in Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
Salmonella infection and
in staphylococcal infections
susceptibility testing and
in HIV infection/AIDS
in nontuberculous mycobacterial infection
in tuberculosis
in syphilis
in tuberculosis
Drug susceptibility testing. See also Drug resistance
in HIV infection/AIDS
in nontuberculous mycobacterial infection
in tuberculosis
Drug tolerance. See also Substance use disorders
in opioid therapy
in stimulant abuse
“Drugs of abuse” toxicology screen
Drusen
in age-related macular degeneration/maculopathy
optic disk
Dry drowning
Dry eye (keratoconjunctivitis sicca), in Sjögren syndrome
Dry mouth. See Xerostomia
Dry powder inhalers, for asthma therapy
Dry skin
atopic dermatitis and
emollients for
Drying agents, for weepy dermatoses
DTaP vaccines. See also Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
and pertussis vaccine
DTI. See Direct thrombin inhibitors
DTIC-Dome. See Dacarbazine
Dual-chamber pacing
for cardiomyopathy
for heart block
for sick sinus syndrome
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry, in osteoporosis
Dubin-Johnson syndrome
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
cardiomyopathy in
Ductal carcinoma in situ
Paget carcinoma and
Ductal lavage, in breast mass evaluation
Ductography, in nipple discharge/breast cancer
Ductopenia, idiopathic adulthood
Ductoscopy, in nipple discharge/breast cancer
Ductus arteriosus, patent
Duetact. See Pioglitazone, with glimepiride
Duke criteria (modified), for endocarditis
Duke Treadmill Score
Duloxetine
for anxiety
for neuropathic pain/diabetic neuropathy
overdose/toxicity of
for postherpetic neuralgia
for urinary incontinence
Duncan disease
Duodenal neuroendocrine tumors
Duodenal ulcers. See also Peptic ulcer disease
Duodenotomy, for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma)
Duodenum. See also Small intestine
disorders of
DuoTrav. See Travoprost/timolol
Duplex ultrasonography. See Ultrasonography
Dupuytren contracture
in cirrhosis
Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care (DPOA-HC)
Duroziez sign
Dust mites, atopic dermatitis (eczema) caused by
Dutasteride, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
DVT. See Deep venous thrombosis
Dwarf tapeworm (H nana)
Dwarfism, in GH deficiency
DXA. See Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry
Dyazide. See Triamterene, with hydrochlorothiazide
Dying patient, care of. See End of life, provision of care at
Dymelor. See Acetohexamide
DynaCirc/DynaCirc CR. See Isradipine
Dysarthria, in motor neuron disease
Dysautonomia (autonomic dysfunction)
in Guillain-Barré syndrome
in polyneuropathies
prenatal screening for
Dysbarism
Dysbetalipoproteinemia
Dysentery
amebic
colitis after (postdysenteric colitis)
bacillary (Shigella). See Bacillary dysentery
enteroinvasive E coli causing
reactive arthritis and
Trichuris
Dysequilibrium (imbalance). See also Vertigo
falls/gait disorders in elderly and
in multiple sclerosis
posttraumatic headache and
in vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma)
Dysesthesias
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding
estrogen replacement therapy and
Dysgeusia
Dyshidrosis/dyshidrotic eczema. See Vesiculobullous hand
eczema
Dyskinesia
in Huntington disease
levodopa-induced
tardive
Dyslipidemia. See also Hyperlipidemia
antiretroviral therapy and
in diabetes mellitus
exercise affecting
Dysmenorrhea
endometriosis and
IUD use and
oral contraceptive use and
Dysmotility. See Motility disorders
Dysnomia, intracranial tumors causing
Dysorgasmia. See Orgasm, loss of
Dyspareunia (painful intercourse)
Dyspepsia. See also Abdominal pain/tenderness
functional
in gastric cancer
GERD and
in NSAID gastritis
in peptic ulcer disease
Dysphagia
in achalasia
barium esophagography in
in eosinophilic esophagitis
in esophageal cancer
in esophageal stricture
in esophageal webs and rings
in GERD
in infectious esophagitis
in motility disorders
in motor neuron disease
in pill-induced esophagitis
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in scleroderma
in Zenker diverticulum
Dysphasia, in stroke
Dysphonia
in laryngopharyngeal reflux
in vocal fold paralysis
Dysphoric disorder, premenstrual
Dysplastic nevi. See Atypical nevi/mole
Dyspnea
in acute respiratory failure
in ARDS
in asthma
in cardiomyopathy
for NSAID gastritis/toxicity mitigation
cough and
in heart failure
in hepatopulmonary syndrome
in interstitial (diffuse parenchymal) lung disease
in malignant pleural effusion
palliation of
in pneumothorax
psychogenic
in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
in pulmonary edema
in pulmonary embolism
in terminally ill/dying patient
Dysrhythmias. See Arrhythmias
Dyssomnias. See also Insomnia
Dyssynergia, pelvic floor (dyssynergic defecation)
Dysthymia. See also Depression
Dysthyroid eye disease
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
Dystonia
drug-induced
antipsychotics
oromandibular
torsion
focal
idiopathic
Dystrophin, in muscular dystrophy
Dysuria (painful voiding). See also Irritative voiding
symptoms
DYT1 gene, in idiopathic torsion dystonia
DYT6/DYT7 genes, in focal torsion dystonia
E-cadherin cell adhesion protein, gastric cancer and
E coli. See Escherichia coli
E-tests, drug susceptibility
EACA. See -Aminocaproic acid
Ear. See also Hearing; Hearing loss
barotrauma affecting
cauliflower
in HIV infection/AIDS
inner
middle
painful. See Earache
Ear canal
bony overgrowths (exostoses/osteomas) of
foreign body in
neoplasia of
pruritus of
Ear drops
for cerumen removal
for external otitis
ototoxic, avoidance of with perforated tympanic
membrane
Earache (otalgia)
in acute otitis media
barotrauma and
in external otitis/malignant external otitis
East African trypanosomiasis
Eastern (equine) encephalitis
Eating disorders
OCD and
Eaton-Lambert 
syndrome. See 
Lambert-Eaton
(myasthenic) syndrome
Ebastine, for allergic/perennial rhinitis
EBCT. See Electron beam CT
Ebola hemorrhagic fever
Ebstein anomaly
lithium use during pregnancy and
EBV. See Epstein-Barr virus
EC regimen, for breast cancer
Ecchymosis, of eye (black eye)
in nasal trauma
ECG. See Electrocardiogram
Echinacea purpurea, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Echinocandins. See also specific agent
Echinococcus granulosus/multilocularis (echinococcosis)
Echocardiography. See also Ultrasonography
in angina
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
in cardiac tumors
in cardiomyopathy
cardioversion for atrial fibrillation and
in coarctation of aorta
in constrictive pericarditis
in cor pulmonale
in endocarditis
in heart failure
in hypertension
in infectious myocarditis
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
in mitral valve prolapse
in myocardial infarction
in patent ductus arteriosus
in pericardial effusion/tamponade
in pulmonary hypertension
in pulmonary stenosis
in shock
stress/dobutamine stress
in angina
in heart failure
preoperative
in Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy
in tetralogy of Fallot
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
in valvular heart disease
in ventricular septal defect
Echolalia
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
in Tourette syndrome
Echopraxia, in Tourette syndrome
Echovirus 1, in cancer treatment
Echovirus infections
pericarditis
Eclampsia. See also Preeclampsia-eclampsia
hypermagnesemia associated with treatment of
Econazole
ECP. See Extracorporeal counterpulsation
“Ecstasy”
“herbal” (ephedrine)
hyponatremia caused by
seizures caused by
ECT. See Electroconvulsive therapy
Ectasias, vascular. See Vascular ectasias
Ecthyma
contagiosa (orf)
Ectopia lentis
in homocystinuria
in Marfan syndrome
Ectopic pregnancy
elective abortion and
hCG levels in
IUDs and
PID and
ruptured, appendicitis differentiated from
Ectropion
Eculizumab, for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Eczema. See also Atopic dermatitis
dyshidrotic. See Eczema, vesiculobullous hand
herpeticum
vaccinatum
vesiculobullous hand (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Edecrin. See Ethacrynic acid
Edema
arm, in breast cancer/postmastectomy
in burn injury
in cirrhosis
in filariasis
in glomerulonephritis
in heart failure
hyponatremia and
lower extremity. See also Lower extremity edema
malabsorption and
in nephrotic syndrome
optic disk. See Optic disk, swelling of
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
refeeding
Reinke
in superior vena caval obstruction
thiazolidinediones causing
in venous insufficiency
leg ulcers and
volume overload and
Edetate calcium disodium (EDTA), for lead poisoning
EDIC (Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications) study
EDTA. See Edetate calcium disodium
Efalizumab, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
caused by
Efavirenz. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
fetal anomalies caused by
with tenofovir and emtricitabine
Effexor. See Venlafaxine
Effusions. See Malignant effusions; Pericardial effusions;
Pleural effusions
Eflornithine
for African trypanosomiasis
for hirsutism/virilization
Egatin. See Triclabendazole
eGFR. See Estimated glomerular filtration rate
EGFR (epidermal growth factor) mutations, in lung cancer
EHEC. See Escherichia coli, enterohemorrhagic
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
aortic disorders/aneurysm in
pregnancy and
mitral valve prolapse in
Ehrlichia canis/chaffeensis/ewingii (ehrlichiosis)
babesiosis coinfection and
Lyme disease coinfection and
EIA. See Enzyme immunoassay
EIC. See Epidermal inclusion cysts
EIEC. See Escherichia coli, enteroinvasive
Eighth nerve lesions. See Schwannoma, vestibular
Eikenella corrodens. See HACEK organisms
Eisenmenger physiology
in atrial septal defect
in patent ductus arteriosus
in ventricular septal defect
Ejaculate, for semen analysis. See Semen analysis
Ejaculation 
disturbances. See 
also 
Erectile
dysfunction/impotence
antidepressants causing
antipsychotics causing
in infertility
Ejaculatory ducts, obstruction of, in infertility
Ejection clicks. See Clicks
Ektacytometry, in hereditary spherocytosis
Elapid (coral snake) envenomation
Elastic 
compression 
stockings. See 
Compression
stockings
Elastography, in liver disease/cirrhosis
Elavil. See Amitriptyline
Elbow
tennis or golf
ulnar nerve lesions at
Elder abuse
Elderly patients. See Geriatric medicine; Older adults
Electric burns
fasciotomy in
Electrical alternans, in pericardial effusion
Electrical cardioversion. See Cardioversion, electrical
Electrical injury
Electrocardiogram (ECG). See also specific disorder
in acute coronary syndromes
in acute kidney injury
ambulatory monitoring of
in angina
in atrial fibrillation
in seizure evaluation
in syncope evaluation
in ventricular premature beats
in angina
antidepressants affecting
antipsychotic drugs affecting
in aortic dissection
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in atrial fibrillation
in atrial flutter
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
in cardiomyopathy
in chest pain evaluation
in coarctation of aorta
in COPD
in cor pulmonale
exercise/stress
in angina
g
before exercise program initiation
in heart failure
in hyperkalemia
in hypertension
in hypokalemia
in hypothermia
in infectious myocarditis
lithium affecting
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
in myocardial infarction
in palpitations
in paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
in patent ductus arteriosus
in pericardial effusion
in pericarditis
uremic
preoperative
in pulmonary embolism
in pulmonary hypertension
in pulmonary stenosis
in syncope
in tetralogy of Fallot
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
in valvular heart disease
in ventricular premature beats
in ventricular septal defect
Electrocautery, radiofrequency wave (HALO), for Barrett
y,
q
y
(
),
esophagus
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
for catatonia
for neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Electrodesiccation and curettage
for basal cell carcinoma
for squamous cell carcinoma
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
in epilepsy
absence (petit mal) seizures and
nonconvulsive status epilepticus and
solitary seizure and
in intracranial tumors
isoelectric, in brain death determination
in 
psychogenic 
nonepileptic/pseudoepileptic 
seizure
identification
Electrolytes. See also specific type
disorders of concentration of. See also Fluid and
electrolyte disorders
genetic disorders and
replacement guidelines for
requirements for in nutritional support
Electromyography
in back pain evaluation
in carpal tunnel syndrome
in motor neuron disease
in muscular dystrophy
in myasthenia gravis
in myotonic dystrophy
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Electron beam CT (EBCT)
in angina
for heart disease screening
Electronystagmography (ENG), in vertigo
Electrophoresis. See 
Hemoglobin 
electrophoresis;
Immunofixation 
electrophoresis; 
Serum 
protein
electrophoresis
Electrophysiologic testing
in multiple sclerosis
in myasthenia gravis
in syncope evaluation
Electrovaporization of prostate, transurethral, for benign
prostatic hyperplasia
Elemental nutritional support solutions
Elephantiasis
in chromoblastomycosis
in filariasis
Elestat. See Epinastine
Eletriptan, for migraine headache
Elidel. See Pimecrolimus
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Elitek. See Rasburicase
Ellence. See Epirubicin
Elmiron. See Pentosan
Elocon. See Mometasone
Elongation factor, diphtheria and
Eloxatin. See Oxaliplatin
Elspar. See Asparaginase
Eltrombopag
for myelodysplastic syndromes
for thrombocytopenia
chemotherapy-induced
immune
Elvitegravir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Emadine. See Emedastine
Embolectomy
in acute arterial occlusion of limb
pulmonary
Embolism. See also Thromboembolism
acute occlusion of limb caused by
arterial. See Arterial embolism
atrial fibrillation and
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
cerebrovascular occlusion and. See also Stroke
in endocarditis
in mitral stenosis
paradoxic. See Paradoxic embolism
pulmonary. See Pulmonary venous thromboembolism
in retinal artery occlusion
in transient ischemic attacks
in transient monocular blindness
Embolization
for GI bleeding
for hemoptysis
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Embryo. See Fetus
Embryonal cell carcinoma, of testis
Emcyt. See Estramustine
Emedastine, for allergic eye disease
Emergencies
hypertensive. See Hypertensive emergencies
in-flight (air travel)
Emergency/postcoital contraception
IUD for
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
Emesis. See also Nausea and vomiting
for poisoning/drug overdose
Emetine, for amebiasis
Emission, loss of (anejaculation). See also Erectile
dysfunction/impotence
EML4-ALK fusion gene product, in lung cancer
Emmetropia
Emollients
for atopic dermatitis
Emotional challenges, for terminally ill/dying patient
Emotional laryngeal wheezing
Emotive imagery, in anxiety disorders
Emphysema. See also Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
α1-antiprotease deficiency in
replacement therapy and
bullectomy for
complications of
imaging findings in
lung volume reduction surgery for
panacinar bibasilar
Emphysematous pyelonephritis
Empyema
anaerobes causing
group A streptococci causing
middle ear. See also Otitis, media
chronic kidney disease/renal failure and
in pneumococcal pneumonia
subdural
Emsam. See Selegiline, transdermal
Emtricitabine. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
for hepatitis B
resistance to
with tenofovir
prophylactic
with tenofovir and efavirenz
with tenofovir and rilpivirine
Emtriva. See Emtricitabine
Enalapril
for heart failure
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
Enalaprilat, for hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
Enbrel. See Etanercept
Encainide, toxicity of
Encephalitis. See also Meningoencephalitis
acanthamoeba
amebic
anti-NMDA receptor-associated
arbovirus
CMV
in coxsackievirus infection
enterovirus 71 causing
herpes simplex
inclusion body
limbic
in loiasis
measles/measles vaccination and
mumps
parkinsonism after
rabies
tick-borne
toxoplasma
in varicella
West Nile
yellow fever vaccine-associated
Encephalitozoon/Encephalitozoon intestinalis
Encephalomyelitis
cancer-related
in Lyme disease
measles/measles vaccine and
optic neuritis and
yellow fever vaccine-associated
Encephalomyocarditis, neonatal, coxsackieviruses causing
Encephalopathy
alcohol use/abuse and (chronic alcoholic brain
syndromes)
bovine spongiform (mad cow disease)
in cancer
hepatic. See Hepatic encephalopathy
hypertensive
hyponatremic
in hypophosphatemia
in influenza
lead
gasoline sniffing and
in Lyme disease
melarsoprol causing
metabolic. See Metabolic encephalopathy
in Reye syndrome. See Reye syndrome
in rubella
spongiform
bovine (mad cow disease)
transmissible
uremic
Wernicke
End of life
Kübler-Ross’ stages of
patient expectations about
prognosis at
provision of care at. See also Palliative care
advance care planning/advance directives and
care of family and
clinician self-care and
communicating with patient and
cultural issues in
decision-making and
DNAR orders and
in hospice/palliative care program
nutrition/hydration needs and
pain management
patient's wishes regarding
psychologic/social/spiritual issues and
tasks after death and
withdrawal/withholding curative efforts and
   advance directives and
End-stage renal disease (ESRD). See also Chronic kidney
disease; Renal failure
GFR calculation in
hepatitis C infection and
immunization recommendations in
kidney function decline and
kidney transplantation for. See Kidney transplantation
pregnancy and
Endarterectomy
c
a
r
o
t
i
d
. See 
Carotid
endarterectomy/thromboendarterectomy
visceral artery, for visceral ischemia
Endemic flea-borne (murine) typhus
Endemic goiter
Endemic syphilis
yp
Endocarditis
infective
anaerobic
anticoagulation and
antimicrobial chemoprophylaxis and
   in Marfan syndrome
   during pregnancy
aortic regurgitation and
back pain in
C psittaci causing
candidal
in drug user
fever/FUO in
gonococcal
HACEK organisms causing
in mitral regurgitation
native valve
pneumococcal
prosthetic valve
   anticoagulation and
in Q fever
staphylococcal
   coagulase-negative organisms causing
streptococcal
   viridans streptococci causing
surgical management of
tricuspid regurgitation and
valve replacement for
in ventricular septal defect
Libman-Sacks, in SLE
Endocervical curettage
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in CIN/cervical cancer
in endometrial carcinoma
Endoclips, for GI bleeding
for Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears
in peptic ulcer disease
Endocrine disorders. See also specific gland and specific
disorder
cancer-related
in chronic kidney disease
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
in HIV infection/AIDS
in MEN. See also Multiple endocrine neoplasia
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
radiation exposure and
Endocrine therapy. See Hormone therapy
Endogenous unipolar disorder. See also Depression
Endoglin (ENG) gene
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
in idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
Endoleaks, after abdominal aneurysm repair
Endolymphatic hydrops (Ménière syndrome)
hearing loss and
Endometrial ablation, for abnormal premenopausal
bleeding
Endometrial biopsy
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in endometrial carcinoma
in postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
Endometrial carcinoma/cancer of uterus
breast cancer and
estrogen replacement therapy and
HNPCC and
oral contraceptive use and
polycystic ovary syndrome and
postmenopausal bleeding and
Endometrial curettage. See Endometrial biopsy
Endometrial hyperplasia
estrogen replacement therapy and
postmenopausal vaginal bleeding caused by
Endometriosis
dysmenorrhea and
infertility and
Endometritis. See also Pelvic inflammatory disease
amenorrhea and
C sordellii causing
postpartum
streptococcal
Endomyocardial biopsy, in infectious myocarditis
Endomyocardial fibrosis
Endomyometritis. See also Endometritis
Endomysial antibodies, in celiac disease
Endophthalmitis, globe injuries causing
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
in biliary stricture
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
in liver disease/jaundice
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
pancreatitis after
during pregnancy
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
Endoscopic ultrasonography. See also Ultrasonography
in gastric adenocarcinoma
in gastric lymphoma
in gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors
in liver disease/jaundice
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Endoscopy
in achalasia
in celiac disease
in colorectal cancer screening/polyp identification. See
also Colonoscopy; Sigmoidoscopy
in Crohn disease
in diarrhea
in dyspepsia
in erosive/hemorrhagic gastritis (gastropathy)
in esophageal disorders
Barrett esophagus
p
g
benign neoplasms
bleeding varices
   prevention of first bleeding episode and
cancer
caustic injury
eosinophilic esophagitis
GERD
infectious esophagitis
motility disorders
pill-induced esophagitis
stricture
in gastric adenocarcinoma
in gastric lymphoma
in gastric outlet obstruction
in gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors
in GI bleeding
obscure bleeding and
in peptic ulcer disease
in H pylori detection/assessment
in Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears
in pancreatitis
in peptic ulcer disease
bleeding management and
in pernicious anemia gastritis
in polyp identification
in ulcerative colitis
in Whipple disease
Endotracheal aspiration cultures, in pneumonia
Endotracheal intubation. See Intubation
Endovaginal ultrasound. See Ultrasonography
Endovascular surgery/prostheses. See also Angioplasty;
Stents/stent grafts
for abdominal aortic aneurysm
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for aortoiliac occlusive disease
for carotid occlusive disease
for femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
for lower leg/foot occlusive disease
for renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
for subarachnoid hemorrhage
for thoracic aortic aneurysm
for visceral artery insufficiency/intestinal angina
Endovascular warming, for hypothermia
Endovenous ablation, for varicose veins
Endurance exercise. See also Exercise/activity
hyponatremia after
Enemas
barium. See Barium enema
for constipation
Energy deficiency (protein–energy malnutrition)
Energy requirements, in nutritional support
Enfuvirtide. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
ENG. See Electronystagmography
ENG (endoglin) gene
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
in idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
Engerix B. See Hepatitis B vaccine
Enolase, neuron-specific
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
in pheochromocytoma
Enoxaparin
for acute coronary syndromes
after thrombolytic therapy for myocardial infarction
for 
venous 
thromboembolic 
disease
prevention/treatment
Entacapone, with levodopa and carbidopa
Entamoeba. See also Amebiasis
dispar
histolytica
stool antigen tests for
moshkovskii
Entecavir, for hepatitis B
Enteral nutritional support (tube feedings). See also
Nutritional support
in burn injury
complications of
for Crohn disease
for elderly
in pancreatitis
patient monitoring during
for protein–energy malnutrition
solutions for
for terminally ill/dying patient
Enteric (typhoid) fever
prevention/immunization and
Enteric infection. See also Gastroenteritis
irritable bowel syndrome after
Enteritis. See Gastroenteritis
Enterobacter infections
Enterobius vermicularis (enterobiasis/pinworms)
Enterocele
Enterococcus faecalis/faecium (enterococcal infection)
burn-associated infection
endocarditis
Enterocolitis. See also Diarrhea; Gastroenteritis
in HIV infection/AIDS
salmonella
Enterocytozoon/Enterocytozoon bieneusi
Enteropancreatic tumors, in MEN
Enteropathy
AIDS
gluten-sensitive. See Celiac disease
protein-losing. See Protein-losing enteropathy
Enteroscopy, in GI bleeding
Enterostomies, tube. See also Enteral nutritional support
Enterovirus 70/enterovirus 71
Enterovirus 72. See Hepatitis A virus
Enterovirus infections
Enthesopathy/enthesitis
in ankylosing spondylitis
in psoriatic arthritis
in reactive arthritis
Entocort. See Budesonide
Entrapment/compression 
neuropathy. See 
also
Neuropathies
in amyloidosis
common peroneal nerve
femoral nerve
lateral 
femoral 
cutaneous 
nerve 
(meralgia
paresthetica)
median nerve (carpal tunnel syndrome)
pronator teres or anterior interosseous nerve
radial nerve/Saturday night palsy
in rheumatoid arthritis
sciatic nerve
tibial nerve (tarsal tunnel syndrome)
ulnar nerve
Entropion
in trachoma
Entry 
inhibitors, 
for 
HIV 
infection/AIDS. See also
Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Enuresis
in diabetes insipidus
in diabetes mellitus
Environmental factors. See also Home environment
in asthma
control of
in diabetes mellitus
disorders caused by
burn injury
cold causing
dysbarism/decompression sickness
electrical injury
heat (hot environment) causing
high altitude-related
lung disease
near drowning
radiation exposure causing
in obesity
Environmental lung disorders. See also specific disorder
Environmental tobacco smoke. See Passive smoking
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) algorithm, for syphilis
diagnosis/screening
Enzyme inhibitors, in cancer chemotherapy
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). See also
specific disorder
in HIV infection/AIDS
blood screening and
in Lyme disease
Eosinophil count
in asthma
Eosinophilia
in allergic angiitis and granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss
syndrome)
in filariasis
in interstitial nephritis
in pulmonary disorders. See Eosinophilic pulmonary
syndromes
sputum, in asthma
in toxocariasis/visceral larva migrans
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Eosinophilic folliculitis
pustular, in HIV infection/AIDS
Eosinophilic gastritis
Eosinophilic meningitis/meningoencephalitis
in angiostrongyliasis
in gnathostomiasis
in toxocariasis
Eosinophilic pneumonia. See also Löffler syndrome
Eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes
ascariasis causing
drugs causing
filariasis and
Eosinophiluria
Ependymoma
Ephedrine (“herbal ecstasy”)
Ephelides (freckles)
Epicondylosis, lateral and medial
Epidemic encephalitis, enterovirus 71 causing
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
adenovirus
coxsackievirus
Epidemic louse-borne typhus
Epidemic pleurodynia
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications
(EDIC) study
Epidermal growth factor (EGFR) mutations, in lung cancer
Epidermal inclusion cysts (EIC)
furuncles differentiated from
Epidermoid cyst, testicular
Epididymitis
chlamydial
in filariasis
gonococcal
Epididymo-orchitis, in mumps
Epidural abscess
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
otitis media and
vertebral osteomyelitis and
Epidural hemorrhage
cerebral
spinal
Epifrin. See Epinephrine
Epigastric 
pain. See 
Abdominal 
pain/tenderness;
Dyspepsia
Epiglottis, cancer of
Epiglottis thumb sign
Epiglottitis (supraglottitis)
Haemophilus causing
Epi-LASIK
Epilepsia partialis continua
Epilepsy. See also Seizures
drug therapy for. See also Anticonvulsant therapy
genetic
myoclonic ragged red fiber (MERRF)
myoclonus/myoclonic jerks and
photosensitive
posttraumatic
pregnancy and
structural/metabolic
surgical management of
vagal nerve stimulation in management of
Epileptic drop attacks (atonic seizures). See also Seizures
Epinastine, for allergic eye disease
Epinephrine
deficiency of
for desensitization reactions
endoscopic injection of
for GI bleeding/peptic ulcer
for Mallory-Weiss syndrome
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
in pheochromocytoma
for scombroid poisoning
for shock
Epi-pen. See Epinephrine
Epirubicin
for breast cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
toxicity of
Episodic dyspnea
Episodic laryngeal dyskinesis
Epistaxis
cocaine abuse and
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
juvenile angiofibroma and
nasal trauma and
in polycythemia
Epithelial cells/casts, in urine
Epithelial LASIK (epi-LASIK)
Epivir. See Lamivudine
Eplerenone
for adrenal hyperplasia/Conn syndrome
for heart failure
for hypertension
for myocardial infarction
Epley maneuver
EPO. See Erythropoietin
Epoetin alfa. See Erythropoietin
Epogen (epoetin alfa). See Erythropoietin
Epoprostenol, for pulmonary hypertension
Epothilones, in cancer chemotherapy
Eprosartan/eprosartan with hydrochlorothiazide
Epsom salts. See Magnesium sulfate
Epstein-Barr virus
Burkitt lymphoma and
hairy leukoplakia caused by
mononucleosis caused by
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and
Epstein-Barr virus DNA
in Burkitt lymphoma/nasopharyngeal carcinoma
in CNS lymphoma
Eptifibatide
for acute coronary syndromes
for myocardial infarction
platelet function affected by
Epzicom. See Abacavir, with lamivudine
Equianalgesic dosing
Equine encephalitis
Equine rabies antiserum
Erb (limb-girdle) muscular dystrophy
Erbitux. See Cetuximab
E R C P . See 
Endoscopic 
retrograde
cholangiopancreatography
Erec-Aid System. See Vacuum erection device
Erectile 
dysfunction/impotence. See 
also 
Sexual
dysfunction
in chronic kidney disease
in diabetes mellitus
drugs causing
antidepressants
antipsychotics
endocrine causes/hypogonadism and
phosphodiesterase inhibitors/sildenafil for
psychologic/psychogenic
vascular disease and
Erections
loss of. See also Erectile dysfunction/impotence
prolonged painful. See Priapism
Ergocalciferol (vitamin D2). See also Vitamin D
for hypoparathyroidism
for osteomalacia
Ergosterol. See Ergocalciferol
Ergotamine
for migraine headache
Raynaud phenomenon and
Erlotinib
for lung cancer
Erosive esophagitis. See Esophagitis
Erosive gastritis. See Gastritis
Erosive skin disorders
Ertaczo. See Sertaconazole
Ertapenem
for abdominal infections
for pneumonia
Eructation (belching)
Eruptive psoriasis. See also Psoriasis
Eruptive xanthoma
in diabetes mellitus
Erysipelas
Erysipeloid
Erythemas. See also specific type
acral (hand-foot syndrome), chemotherapy-induced
in dermatomyositis
figurate (shaped)
induratum
infectiosum
infectious
marginatum, in rheumatic fever
with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis)
multiforme
drugs causing
herpes-associated
major. See Stevens-Johnson syndrome; Toxic
epidermal necrolysis
nodosum
in coccidioidomycosis
drugs causing
leprosum
in sarcoidosis
palmar
in cirrhosis
in rheumatoid arthritis
pernio (chilblain)
reactive
in rosacea
toxic, drugs causing
Erythrasma
Erythroblastosis fetalis, prevention of
Erythrocyte count
in pleural fluid
reference values for
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Erythrocytes. See also under Red cell
in myeloproliferative disorders
in pleural fluid
in polycythemia
preparation of for transfusion
in urine. See Hematuria; Red cell casts
Erythrocytosis
cancer-related
in polycythemia
testosterone replacement therapy and
Erythroderma, exfoliative
drugs causing
psoriatic. See also Psoriasis
Erythrogenic toxin (pyrogenic erythrotoxin)
Erythromelalgia
in essential thrombocytosis
Erythromycin. See also Macrolides
for acne
for amebiasis
for anthrax
with benzoyl peroxide
for diabetic autonomic neuropathy
for ophthalmic disorders
for pharyngitis
Erythroplakia
Erythropoiesis-stimulating 
agents, 
for 
chemotherapy-
associated anemia
Erythropoietin (EPO)
in polycythemia
reference values for
Erythropoietin (epoetin alfa)
for anemia of chronic disease
for anemia of chronic kidney disease
for chemotherapy-induced anemia
for HIV infection/AIDS
for myelodysplastic syndromes
Erythrotoxin, pyrogenic (erythrogenic toxin)
Erythrovirus (parvovirus B19) infection
arthritis in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
erythema infectiosum and
ESAs. See Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents
Eschar formation
in burn injury
in frostbite
Escharotomy, in burn care
Escherichia coli
antibodies to, in Crohn disease
diarrhea/gastroenteritis/food poisoning caused by
enterohemorrhagic (EHEC)
enteroinvasive (EIEC)
enterotoxigenic (ETEC)
Escherichia coli O145
Escherichia coli O157:7
Wegener granulomatosis (granulomatosis with polyangiitis)
antibiotics contraindicated in
hemolytic-uremic syndrome caused by
Escitalopram
Esclim. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Esidrix. See Hydrochlorothiazide
Esmolol
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
infarct-related
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
for hypertension
in aortic dissection
in urgencies/emergencies
Esomeprazole. See also Proton pump inhibitors
Esophageal clearance, abnormal, in GERD
Esophageal dilation
for achalasia
for esophageal webs and rings
for stricture
Esophageal diverticula
Esophageal dysphagia. See also Dysphagia
Esophageal manometry. See Manometry
Esophageal motility disorders
chest pain in
dysphagia in
Esophageal pH monitoring
Glomerulonephritis
Esophageal (Schatzki) rings
Esophageal spasm, diffuse
Esophageal sphincter, lower
in achalasia
chronic aspiration of gastric contents and
in GERD
Esophageal varices
p
g
cirrhosis and
GI bleeding from
portal hypertension and
noncirrhotic portal hypertension and
prevention of first bleeding episode and
prevention of rebleeding from
Esophageal webs
iron 
deficiency 
anemia 
and 
(Plummer-Vinson
syndrome)
Esophagectomy
for Barrett esophagus
for caustic esophageal injury
for esophageal cancer
Esophagitis
bisphosphonates and
candidal
in HIV infection/AIDS
chest pain in
CMV
eosinophilic
erosive/reflux. See also Gastroesophageal reflux
disease
chest pain in
GERD and
GI bleeding and
refractory
strictures and
herpetic
in HIV infection/AIDS
infectious
pill-induced
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, in cirrhosis
Esophagography, barium. See Barium esophagography
Esophagus
Barrett
esophageal carcinoma and
benign tumors of
cancer of
adenocarcinoma
Barrett esophagus and
bisphosphonate use and
dysphagia in
squamous cell
disorders 
of. See also under Esophageal and
Esophagitis
benign
caustic injury
chest pain in
GERD
motility and. See also Esophageal motility disorders
in scleroderma
foreign body in
nutcracker
resection of, for cancer
rupture of
pleural effusion in
vomiting and (Boerhaave syndrome)
g
(
y
)
sigmoid
strictures of
caustic injury causing
dysphagia in
peptic
Espundia (mucocutaneous leishmaniasis)
ESRD. See End-stage renal disease
Essential fatty acids, in nutritional support
Essential hypertension. See also Hypertension
in pregnancy
Essential thrombocytosis
Essure, for tubal interruption
Estazolam
Estimated glomerular filtration rate
reference value for
Estrace. See Estrogen vaginal creams
Estraderm. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Estradiol. See also Ethinyl estradiol
in estrogen replacement therapy
transdermal
reference values for
serum levels of, in menopause
Estradiol transdermal systems (skin patches)
Estradiol vaginal ring
contraceptive
in estrogen replacement therapy
Estradiol vaginal tablets
Estramustine
Estratab. See Estrogens, oral
Estratest. See Estrogens, with methyltestosterone
Estring. See Estradiol vaginal ring
EstroGel. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Estrogen-progesterone therapy. See Estrogen (hormone)
replacement therapy
Estrogen receptor modulators, selective (SERMs). See
Selective estrogen receptor modulators
Estrogen (hormone) replacement therapy. See also
Estrogens; Selective estrogen receptor modulators
adverse ophthalmic effects of
agents used in
for atrophic urethritis/vaginitis
benefits of
breast cancer/breast cancer risk and
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
endometrial hyperplasia/carcinoma and
growth hormone replacement and
hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism affected by
lipid modification/heart disease and
nipple discharge caused by
oral
for osteoporosis prevention/management
ovarian cancer risk and
without progestins
with progestins
risks of
after surgical menopause
transdermal
in Turner syndrome
vaginal
for vasomotor symptoms of menopause
in XY gonadal dysgenesis
Estrogen vaginal creams
Estrogens. See also Estrogen (hormone) replacement
therapy
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for bleeding in chronic kidney disease
in fibrocystic breast condition
hypertension and
in menopause
with methyltestosterone
oral
in oral contraceptives
plant-derived
without progestins
with progestins
receptors for
antagonist of, in cancer chemotherapy
in breast cancer
   in male
   prognosis and
   therapy and
reference values for
testicular tumors producing
transdermal
in utero exposure to, testicular cancer and
vaginal
Estrone
in estrogen replacement therapy
serum levels of, in menopause
Estropipate
Eszopiclone
Etanercept. See also Anti-TNF agents
for psoriasis
for rheumatoid arthritis
ETEC. See Escherichia coli, enterotoxigenic
Ethacrynic acid
lithium interactions and
Ethambutol
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for MAC infections
for tuberculosis
in pregnancy
Ethanol 
(ethyl 
alcohol). See 
also 
Alcohol
use/dependency/abuse
blood levels of
in acute intoxication/poisoning
reference values for
for methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning
for thyroid nodules
Ethanol 
intoxication/poisoning. See 
also 
Alcohol
use/dependency/abuse
metabolic acidosis/osmolar gap and
Ethics, principles of care and
Ethinyl estradiol. See also Estradiol; Estrogens
amprenavir/fosamprenavir therapy and
for emergency/postcoital contraception
in estrogen replacement therapy
in oral contraceptives
in transdermal contraceptive patch
in vaginal contraceptive ring
Ethmoiditis/ethmoid sinusitis
Ethnicity. See Racial/ethnic background
Ethosuximide
Ethyl alcohol. See Alcohol use/dependency/abuse; Ethanol
Ethylene glycol poisoning
anion gap/osmolar gap in
hemodialysis for
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid 
(EDTA), 
for 
lead
poisoning
Ethynodiol diacetate, in combination oral contraceptives
Ethyol. See Amifostine
Etodolac
Etonogestrel
in contraceptive implant
in contraceptive vaginal ring
Etopophos. See Etoposide
Etoposide/etoposide phosphate
for lung cancer
for testicular cancer
Etravirine. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Etretinate, adverse ophthalmic effects of
Eucerin
Eulexin. See Flutamide
Eumycetoma (maduromycosis)
Euphoria
marijuana-induced
opioid-induced
EUS. See Endoscopic ultrasonography
Eustachian tube
dysfunction of
barotrauma and
cholesteatoma and
hearing loss and
in HIV infection/AIDS
patulous
Euthyroid sick syndrome
Euvolemic hypernatremia
Euvolemic hypotonic hyponatremia
Evans syndrome
Evaporative cooling, for heat stroke
Event recording
in atrial fibrillation
in palpitation evaluation
in seizure evaluation
in syncope evaluation
Everolimus
Eversion (high) ankle sprain
Evista. See Raloxifene
Exanthema subitum (roseola infantum)
(
)
Exanthems. See also Rashes
rickettsial
viral
Exchange lists, diabetic diet
Exchange transfusion. See also Transfusion
for malaria
for sickle cell crises
for thrombotic microangiopathies
Excitement (arousal) stage of sexual activity
disorders related to. See also Sexual dysfunction
in female
Exclamation hairs, in alopecia areata
Executive function, impaired, dementia causing
Exelderm. See Sulconazole
Exemestane
for breast cancer
Exenatide
overdose/toxicity of
Exendin 4. See Exenatide
Exercise/activity
angina precipitated by
asthma/bronchoconstriction precipitated by. See also
Asthma
back pain and
in cancer prevention
cardiovascular/heart disease prevention and
in constipation management
for COPD
in dementia management
in diabetes
insulin requirements and
prevention/management and
for fatigue/chronic fatigue syndrome
in health maintenance
in heart failure management
heart murmurs affected by
heat exposure syndromes and
hypertension/hypertension management and
hyponatremia and
in obesity management/prevention
for osteoarthritis
for osteoporosis prevention/management
for polycystic ovary syndrome
during pregnancy
prescription for
reduced. See Bed rest; Immobility
ventricular premature beats and
Exercise challenge (bronchial provocation) testing, in
asthma
Exercise-induced asthma. See also Asthma
Exercise-induced hypoglycemia
Exercise testing. See also Stress testing
in asthma
in chest pain/angina
echocardiography
electrocardiography
before exercise program initiation
p g
perfusion scintigraphy
postinfarction
preoperative
radionuclide angiography
in syncope evaluation
Exertional headache, primary
Exertional heat stroke
Exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma
drugs causing
psoriatic. See also Psoriasis
Exforge. See Valsartan, for hypertension, with amlodipine
Exforge 
HCT. See Valsartan, for hypertension, with
amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide
Exhibitionism
Existential challenges, for terminally ill/dying patient
Exon 12/13 mutation
Exophiala, phaeohyphomycosis caused by
Exophthalmos (proptosis), in dysthyroid eye/Graves
disease
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
Exostoses, ear canal
Exposure (cold). See Cold exposure
Exposure keratitis
External hordeolum (sty)
External otitis/malignant external otitis
earache in
External rotation, assessment of, in shoulder
adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder) and
rotator cuff strength and
External rotation stress test, in ankle sprain
Extinction (behavior), personality disorders and
Extracorporeal counterpulsation, for angina
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, in near drowning
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
for renal stones
for ureteral stones
Extramammary Paget disease
Extraocular movements. See Eye (extraocular) movements
Extrapyramidal disorders/effects
antipsychotic drugs and
dementia and
lithium and
SSRIs and
Extrasystoles. See Atrial (supraventricular) premature
beats; Ventricular premature beats
Extrauterine pregnancy. See Ectopic pregnancy
Extremities. See also Lower extremity; Upper extremity
hypothermia of
swelling of, in filariasis
traumatic injury to, complex regional pain syndrome
and
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis (hypersensitivity pneumonitis)
Exubera
Exudates
pleural fluid
tonsillar
Eye. See also under Ocular; Optic; Visual
chemical burns involving
decontamination of
disorders of. See also specific type and Visual
impairment/loss
allergic
in Behçet syndrome
bisphosphonates causing
in blood dyscrasias
chlamydial
diabetes and. See also Diabetic retinopathy
drugs (systemic) causing
dysthyroid
   RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
gonococcal
in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener
granulomatosis)
headache and
herpetic
in HIV infection/AIDS
hypertension and
inflammation. See also Conjunctivitis; Uveitis
in loiasis
management of
   ophthalmic agents in
   precautions in
in microsporidiosis
in onchocerciasis
refractive errors
in rheumatoid arthritis
in SLE
in syphilis
systemic disease associations and
in toxocariasis/visceral larva migrans
traumatic
in vitamin A deficiency
dry (keratoconjunctivitis sicca)
in Sjögren syndrome
examination of
in coma or stupor
after decontamination
in diabetes patients
in glaucoma prevention
in Marfan syndrome
foreign body in
conjunctival/corneal
intraocular
painful. See Ocular/orbital pain
systemic drugs affecting
in uremia
Eye drops. See also Ophthalmic medications
allergic/toxic reaction to
autologous serum
contaminated
Eye (extraocular) movements
in coma or stupor
disorders of
in myasthenia gravis
in ocular motor palsies
“Eye worm” (Loa loa)
Eyelids
blepharitis affecting margins of
disorders of
in dysthyroid eye disease
lacerations of
seborrheic dermatitis affecting margins of
tumors of
Ezetimibe
F cells, pancreatic
Face. See also under Facial
herpes zoster affecting. See also Ramsay Hunt
syndrome
seborrheic dermatitis affecting
Facial neuropathy. See also Bell palsy
Facial pain
atypical
in bacterial rhinosinusitis
in glaucoma
in rhinocerebral mucormycosis
Facial paralysis/palsy. See also Bell palsy
in herpes zoster infection (Ramsay Hunt syndrome)
Lyme disease and
otitis media and
in sarcoidosis
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy
Factitious disorders
diarrhea
fever
hypoglycemia
thyrotoxicosis
Factiv. See Gemifloxacin
Factor II antibodies
Factor II deficiency
Factor V antibodies
Factor V deficiency
Factor V Leiden, deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary
embolism and
Factor VII deficiency
Factor VIII
acquired antibodies to
deficiency of
in hemophilia
in von Willebrand disease
inhibitors of in hemophilia
reference values for
Factor VIII concentrate
for hemophilia
vWF-containing, for von Willebrand disease
Factor IX
deficiency of in hemophilia
inhibitor formation and
Factor IX concentrate, for hemophilia
Factor X deficiency
Factor Xa, fondaparinux affecting
Factor XI deficiency
Factor XII deficiency
Factor XIII deficiency
Factor concentrates, for hemophilia
disease transmission and
Faget sign
Failure to thrive (unintended weight loss), in elderly
Fainting. See also Syncope
Fallot, tetralogy of
Falls, in elderly
fear of
prevention/injury prevention and
Famciclovir
for herpes simplex infections
for herpes zoster
prophylactic/suppressive
Familial adenomatous polyposis
colorectal cancer and
genetic mutations associated with
small intestinal adenocarcinoma and
Familial (benign essential) tremor
parkinsonism differentiated from
Familial combined hyperlipidemia
Familial dysautonomia, prenatal testing for
Familial hemiplegic migraine
Familial hypercholesterolemia
Familial hyperchylomicronemia
Familial hypocalcemia
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
Familial juvenile polyposis
Familial Mediterranean fever
Familial melanoma
Familial paraganglioma
Family/significant others, of patient at end of life
caring for
follow-up/grieving and
Family counseling
for anxiety disorders
chronic pain disorders and
cognitive disorders and
in depression
psychiatric 
problems 
associated 
with
hospitalization/illness and
for schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
for somatoform disorders
Family planning. See also Contraception
symptothermal natural
Famotidine. See also H2 receptor blocking drugs
Famvir. See Famciclovir
Fanapt. See Iloperidone
Fanconi syndrome
Fansidar (pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine)
with amodiaquine
with artesunate
for isosporiasis
for prophylaxis in pregnancy/infants
resistance to
FAP. See Familial adenomatous polyposis
Fareston. See Toremifene
Farmer's lung
Farsightedness (hyperopia)
Fasciitis
eosinophilic
necrotizing
cellulitis differentiated from
palmar
cancer and
   rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
in Dupuytren contracture
plantar
Fasciola hepatica/gigantica (fascioliasis)
Fasciolopsis buski (fasciolopsiasis)
Fasciotomy, in electric burns
Faslodex. See Fulvestrant
Fasting
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
in insulinoma diagnosis
Fasting hypoglycemia. See also Hypoglycemia
postethanol
Fasting plasma glucose, in diabetes
pregnancy and
Fat. See also Lipid disorders/lipids
body. See Body fat; Obesity
dietary. See also Lipid disorders/lipids
colorectal cancer and
gastrointestinal gas and
lowering. See Lipid-lowering therapy
fecal. See Fecal fat
intravenous, in nutritional support
Fat necrosis of breast
Fat-restricted diet. See also Low-fat diet
for pancreatitis
Fatal familial insomnia (FFI)
Fatigue
in Addison disease
in diabetes mellitus
Q fever causing
sleep disorders and
Fatty acids
in nutritional support
omega-3. See Omega-3 fatty acids
trans, preventable disease/deaths associated with
high intake of
Fatty liver (hepatic steatosis)
alcoholic
drugs/toxins causing
hepatitis C and
liver failure and
nonalcoholic
of pregnancy
in Reye syndrome. See Reye syndrome
FBN1 gene mutation, in Marfan syndrome
5-FC. See Flucytosine
Fe. See Fractional excretion
Febrile agglutinins
Febuxostat, for hyperuricemia/gout
in transplant patients
Fecal antigen assay, in H pylori infection
Fecal DNA tests, in colorectal cancer screening/polyp
identification
Fecal examination. See Stool analysis
Fecal fat
in bacterial overgrowth
in diarrhea
reference values for
Fecal immunochemical test (FIT)
in colorectal cancer screening/polyp identification
constipation and
in GI bleeding
in peptic ulcer disease
Fecal impaction
“overflow” fecal incontinence/diarrhea and
urinary incontinence and
Fecal incontinence
fecal impaction and
Fecal leukocytes, in diarrhea
Fecal occult blood testing
in cancer screening/polyp identification
in constipation
in GI bleeding
in Kaposi sarcoma
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in peptic ulcer disease
Fecal osmolality, in diarrhea
Fecal transplant, for antibiotic-associated colitis relapse
Feces. See Stool analysis
Feeding tubes. See also Enteral nutritional support
Feet
atherosclerotic/occlusive disease and
callosities and corns of
in diabetes/vascular disorders
in diabetes mellitus
immersion/trench
mycetoma affecting
plantar fasciitis causing pain in
tinea of
cellulitis and
vesiculobullous dermatitis of (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Felbamate
overdose/toxicity of
Feldene. See Piroxicam
Felodipine
for angina
for hypertension
lower extremity edema caused by
overdose/toxicity of
Felty syndrome
Fem-fem bypass, for aortoiliac occlusive disease
yp
,
Female condom
Female infertility. See Infertility
Female sex hormones. See Estrogens
Femara. See Letrozole
Femhrt. See Estrogens, with progestins
Femoral arteries
atherosclerotic/occlusive disease of
compression of, in DVT detection
Femoral cutaneous nerve, lateral, lesions of (meralgia
paresthetica)
Femoral neuropathy/femoral nerve palsy
Femoral-popliteal bypass
Femoral pulses, in aortoiliac occlusive disease
FemPatch. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Femring. See Estradiol vaginal ring
Femtosecond laser assisted LASIK (IntraLASIK)
Fenofibrate
Fenofibric acid
Fenoldopam, for hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
Fenoprofen
Fentanyl/fentanyl oral transmucosal and buccal/fentanyl
transdermal
methyl analogues of, abuse of
overdose/toxicity of
Fentora. See Fentanyl
FEP. See Free erythrocyte protoporphyrin
Ferric gluconate. See Iron, supplementary
Ferriman-Gallwey scale
Ferritin
in anemia of chronic disease
in anemia of chronic kidney disease
in hemochromatosis
in iron deficiency anemia
reference values for
in Still disease
Ferroportin, in hemochromatosis
Ferrous sulfate. See Iron, supplementary
Fertility awareness, contraception based on
Fertility disorders. See Infertility
Fertilization, in vitro
Fesoterodine, for urinary incontinence
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Fetal fibronectin, in false versus true labor
Fetal hemoglobin. See Hemoglobin F
Fetal lung maturity
delivery in preeclampsia/eclampsia and
preterm labor and
Fetal monitoring
in diabetes
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in third-trimester bleeding
Fetal-placental unit, in preeclampsia-eclampsia
Fetal testing. See Prenatal testing/diagnosis
Fetal varicella infection
α-Fetoprotein. See Alpha-fetoprotein
Fetotoxic drugs
Fetus. See also Pregnancy
electrical injury during pregnancy and
hepatitis transmission to
herpes simplex transmission to
HIV transmission to
Lyme disease transmission to
malaria transmission to
radiation affecting
rubella affecting
syphilis transmission to
thyroid disease affecting
toxoplasmosis transmission to
FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in first second)
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
bronchial provocation testing and
exacerbation classification/management and
in COPD
corticosteroid treatment and
lung cancer surgery and
FEV1/FVC ratio
in asthma
in COPD
Fever
in acute bacterial diarrhea/food poisoning
cancer-related
in critically ill patient
drug user presenting with
factitious (self-induced)
giant cell arteritis and
health care-associated
in HIV infection/AIDS
in malaria
medications causing
in neutropenic patient
antimicrobial therapy and
postoperative
in pulmonary embolism
in serum sickness
in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in Still disease
in thrombotic microangiopathies
travel and
of unknown/undetermined origin (FUO)
in giant cell arteritis
in Whipple disease
Fever/cold sore (herpes simplex). See also Herpes
simplex infection
Fexofenadine
for allergic/perennial rhinitis
for urticaria
FFI. See Fatal familial insomnia
FGF-23. See Fibroblast growth factor 23
FHM. See Familial hemiplegic migraine
Fiber, dietary
for anal fissures
in colorectal cancer prevention
constipation and, in diabetes mellitus
diverticulosis and
for hemorrhoids
for irritable bowel syndrome
lipid-modifying effects of
for urinary stone disease
Fiber laxatives
Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates), for lipid modification
Fibrillation. See Atrial fibrillation; Ventricular fibrillation
Fibrillin gene mutation, in Marfan syndrome
Fibrin D-dimer
anticoagulation duration and
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
chest pain evaluation and
in DIC
reference values for
Fibrinogen
deficiency of in liver disease
in DIC
reference values for
replacement. See Cryoprecipitate
Fibroadenoma of breast
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (phosphatonin)
in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
in osteomalacia/rickets
Fibrocystic breast condition
breast cancer risk and
nipple discharge in
Fibroelastoma, valvular papillary
Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium
Fibroid tumor of uterus
Fibromuscular dysplasia/hyperplasia
renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension and
transient ischemic attacks and
Fibromyalgia
Fibronectin, fetal, in false versus true labor
Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis
FibroSure score, in cirrhosis
Field defects/loss. See Visual field defects/loss; Visual
impairment/loss
Fifth disease (erythema infectiosum)
Figurate (“shaped”) erythema
Filariasis
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes and
loiasis
lymphatic
onchocerciasis
Filgrastim (G-CSF)
for aplastic anemia
for chemotherapy-induced toxicity
for HIV infection/AIDS
for myelodysplastic syndromes
for neutropenia
for stem cell mobilization
Finasteride (5-alpha-reductase inhibitor)
for androgenetic (pattern) baldness
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
g p
yp p
for hirsutism/virilization
for urinary incontinence
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy/cytology
for breast lump evaluation. See also Breast, biopsy of
in cervical lymphadenopathy
in lung cancer
in mycobacterial lymphadenitis
for parotid tumors
thyroid
in thyroid nodules/cancer
in thyroiditis
in visceral leishmaniasis
Fingernails, disorders of. See Nail disorders
Fingers
in polyarteritis nodosa
in pompholyx (vesiculobullous hand eczema)
in Raynaud phenomenon
in rheumatoid arthritis
thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease) involving
Fingolimod, for multiple sclerosis
Firearms, prevention of injury caused by
Firmagon. See Degarelix
First aid. See also Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in near drowning
First-degree burn
First-degree heart block
in myocardial infarction
First heart sound (S1). See Heart sounds
Fish. See also Shellfish
anisakiasis and
clonorchiasis/opisthorchiasis and
gnathostomiasis and
intestinal flukes and
poisoning caused by
tapeworm infection and
FISH. See Fluorescent in situ hybridization
Fish oil/omega-3 fatty acids
platelet function affected by
preventable disease/deaths associated with low
intake of
Fish tapeworm (D latum),
vitamin B12 deficiency and
Fistula in ano
Fistulas
bacterial overgrowth and
in Crohn disease
in diverticulitis
perianal
perilymphatic
FIT. See Fecal immunochemical test
Fitness. See also Exercise/activity functional
Fitz-Hugh and Curtis syndrome
5q–syndrome
Fixed drug eruptions
Flagellates, intestinal. See also specific type
Flagyl. See Metronidazole
Flail leaflet
Flame (clothing) burns, electrical
Flank pain
in polycystic kidney disease
in pyelonephritis
in renal cell carcinoma
in urinary stone disease
Flash (arcing) burns
Flashbacks, psychedelic drug use and
Flashing lights (photopsia), in migraine headache
Flatus
in lactase deficiency
Flavopiridol, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Fleas
in bacillary angiomatosis
in California rickettsiosis
in endemic typhus
in plague transmission
skin lesions caused by
Flecainide
for atrial fibrillation
overdose/toxicity of
FleetsPhospho-soda. See Sodium phosphate
Flexible sigmoidoscopy. See Sigmoidoscopy
Flexion, assessment of, in shoulder
Fliers. See Air travel
Flies
in African trypanosomiasis
in amebiasis
in leishmaniasis
in loiasis
in onchocerciasis
Floaters, in vitreous hemorrhage
Flolan. See Epoprostenol
Floppy iris syndrome
Floppy mitral valve. See Mitral valve prolapse
Flower cells, in adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia
Floxin. See Ofloxacin
FLT3 gene, in acute leukemia
Flu. See Influenza
Flu shots. See Influenza virus vaccine
Fluconazole
for candidiasis
disseminated disease
esophageal
funguria
mastitis
oral
prophylactic
vulvovaginal
for coccidioidomycosis
for cryptococcal meningitis
for onychomycosis
prophylactic
Flucytosine
for cryptococcal meningitis
Fludara. See Fludarabine
Fludarabine
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Fludrocortisone
for Addison disease
for renal tubular acidosis
Fluid and electrolyte disorders. See also specific type
assessment of
in diabetic ketoacidosis
management/replacement guidelines and
Fluid management/hydration. See also Water/fluid intake
in ARDS
in burns
chemotherapy-induced hemorrhagic cystitis and
in cholera
cisplatin therapy and
contrast media nephrotoxicity mediated by
for diabetic ketoacidosis
for diarrhea/gastroenteritis
in GI bleeding/variceal hemorrhage
gout and
heat exposure syndromes and
for hypercalcemia
for hyperemesis gravidarum
for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
for hypernatremia
hyponatremia and
hypotension in poisoning/drug overdose and
lactation and
methotrexate therapy and
in nausea and vomiting
nutritional support and
for pancreatitis
in protein–energy malnutrition
for rhabdomyolysis
for saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis
in shock
cardiogenic
for terminally ill/dying patient
for tumor lysis syndrome/hyperuricemia
in urinary stone disease
water deficit calculation and
Fluid volume alterations. See also Dehydration
hyperosmolality with and without
overload
saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis and
Flukes, infections caused by. See also specific type
blood flukes (schistosomiasis)
liver/lung/intestinal flukes
Flumazenil
for benzodiazepine overdose/coma
for hepatic encephalopathy
FluMist. See Influenza virus vaccine
Flunisolide, for asthma
Fluocinolone
Fluocinonide
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), for HER-2/neu
assessment in breast cancer
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS)
test. See FTA-ABS test
Fluorometholone
for ophthalmic disorders
Fluoroquinolones
adverse ophthalmic effects of
blood glucose in diabetics and
for diarrhea
for pneumonia
Fluorouracil
for actinic keratoses
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for colorectal cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
Fluoxetine. See 
also 
Serotonin-selective 
reuptake
inhibitors
breastfeeding and
in elderly
lithium interactions and
MAOI interactions and
for OCD
overdose/toxicity of
during pregnancy
for psychosexual disorders
Fluoxymesterone
Fluphenazine
enanthate or decanoate forms of
for Tourette syndrome
Fluprednisolone
Flurandrenolide
Flurandrenolone
Flurazepam
Flurbiprofen
for ophthalmic disorders
Flutamide
for hirsutism/virilization
for prostate cancer
Fluticasone, for asthma
with salmeterol
Flutter valve breathing devices
for bronchiectasis
for chronic bronchitis
for cystic fibrosis
Fluvastatin. See also Statin drugs
Fluvoxamine. See also Serotonin-selective reuptake
inhibitors
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
during pregnancy
Fluzone High-Dose. See Influenza virus vaccine, high-dose
Flying. See Air travel
FML/FML Forte/FML S.O.P. See Fluorometholone
FMR1 gene, in fragile X mental retardation
FNA cytology. See Fine-needle aspiration biopsy/cytology
Foam sclerotherapy, for varicose veins
FOBT. See Fecal occult blood testing
Focal nodular hyperplasia of liver
telangiectatic
Focal segmental glomerular sclerosis
Focal (partial) seizures. See also Seizures
differential diagnosis of
drug therapy for
intracranial tumors causing
schizophrenia differentiated from
transient ischemic attack differentiated from
Focal torsion dystonia
Folate. See Folic acid
Foley catheter
fluid resuscitation in burn care and
health care (hospital)-associated urinary tract infection
and
in shock management
FOLFIRI regimen
FOLFOX regimen
Folic acid (folate)
antagonists of in cancer chemotherapy. See also
Methotrexate
deficiency of
hereditary spherocytosis and
in homocystinuria/hyperhomocysteinemia
in pregnancy
thrombocytopenia and
inhibition of synthesis of, for malaria
reference values for
supplementary
for hemoglobin H disease
g
for hereditary spherocytosis
for homocystinuria/hyperhomocysteinemia
in pregnancy
Folinic acid (leucovorin) rescue
with 5-fluorouracil
with methotrexate
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
in amenorrhea
deficiency of. See also Hypogonadism
in hirsutism/virilization
autoantibodies/ANCA in
in infertility workup
for male infertility
in menopause
in polycystic ovary syndrome
recombinant, for ovulation induction
reference values for
in testicular cancer
Follicular bronchiolitis
Follicular lymphoma
stem cell transplantation for
Folliculitis
acne and
eosinophilic
pustular, in HIV infection/AIDS
in HIV infection/AIDS
nasal vestibulitis and
steroid (steroid acne)
Follitropins, for male infertility
Folotyn. See Pralatrexate
Fomepizole, for methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning
Fomivirsen
Fondaparinux
for acute coronary syndromes
coagulopathy caused by
for myocardial infarction
after thrombolytic therapy
for 
venous 
thromboembolic 
disease
prevention/treatment
Fonsecaea pedrosoi, chromoblastomycosis caused by
Food
allergy/intolerance to
anaphylaxis caused by
atopic dermatitis and
dyspepsia caused by
aspiration of (café coronary)
contaminated. See specific disease and Food
poisoning
esophageal foreign body
inadequate, in protein–energy malnutrition
MAOI interactions and
oral antimicrobial administration and
supplementing oral intake and. See also Nutritional
support
withholding, in terminally ill/dying patient
Food poisoning. See also Gastroenteritis
botulism
Cyclospora causing
seafood contamination/toxicity and
renal involvement in
Foot. See Feet
Foramen ovale, patent
Forced diuresis
in poisoning/drug overdose
urinary stones and
Forced expiratory volume in one second. See FEV1
Forced expiratory volume in one second/forced vital
capacity ratio. See FEV1/FVC ratio
Forced vital capacity. See FVC
Foreign body
aspiration of. See also Aspiration
retention and
conjunctival/corneal
in ear canal
esophageal
intraocular
in trachea and bronchi
in upper aerodigestive tract
Formaldehyde, marijuana soaked in (“AMP”)
Formication, stimulant abuse and
Formoterol, for asthma
with budesonide
Fortaz. See Ceftazidime
Forteo. See Teriparatide
Fortovase. See Saquinavir
Fosamprenavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with ritonavir
Fosaprepitant
Foscarnet
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
for herpes simplex infections
for herpes zoster
Foscavir. See Foscarnet
Fosinopril/fosinopril with hydrochlorothiazide
Fosphenytoin
Fourth heart sound (S4/atrial gallop). See Heart sounds
Fourth nerve paralysis
Fractional excretion
of magnesium, in hypomagnesemia
of nitric oxide, in asthma
of phosphate
of sodium, in acute kidney injury
Fractional flow reserve, in angina
Fracture-dislocation, spinal
Fractures. See also specific type and under Bone
atypical, bisphosphonates causing
in diabetes
in elderly, falls and
estrogen replacement therapy affecting risk of
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
in osteomalacia
in osteoporosis
prevention of
in Paget disease of bone
pathologic. See Pathologic fractures
thiazolidinedione use and
Fragile X mental retardation
Fragile-X tremor-ataxia syndrome
Fragility fractures. See Pathologic fractures
Fragmin. See Dalteparin
Frailty, in elderly
Frambesia (yaws)
Framingham score/projections
in HIV infection/AIDS
obesity and
Framycetin, for burn injury
Francisella tularensis (tularemia)
Frataxin gene, in Friedreich ataxia
Freckles (ephelides)
Free erythrocyte protoporphyrin
Free-living amebas. See Amebas
Free thyroxine assay (FT4)
in hyperthyroidism
during pregnancy
thyroiditis and
after treatment
in hypopituitarism
in hypothyroidism
levothyroxine treatment and
during pregnancy
reference values for
Free thyroxine index (FT4I)
in euthyroid sick syndrome
in hyperthyroidism
Free triiodothyronine (FT3)
in hyperthyroidism
Frenzel goggles, in vertigo evaluation
Freons, toxicity of
Frequency, urinary. See Irritative voiding symptoms
Fresh-frozen plasma, transfusion of. See also Transfusion
for anticoagulant overdose
for bleeding disorders
for cirrhosis-related bleeding
for DIC
for GI bleeding/variceal hemorrhage
for thrombotic microangiopathies
Fresh whole blood, transfusion of. See also Transfusion
Frey procedure, for pancreatitis
Friction rubs. See Pericardial friction rub; Pleural friction
rub; Tendon friction rub
Fried rice, Bacillus cereus contamination of
Friedreich ataxia
Frigidity
Frontal lobe lesions
Frontal sinusitis
Frontotemporal dementias
Frostbite
Raynaud phenomenon and
Frostnip
Frovatriptan, for migraine headache
Frozen packed red blood cells, transfusion of. See also
Transfusion
Frozen shoulder
in diabetes
Fructosamine, serum levels of
in diabetes mellitus
reference/normal values for
Fructose
for diabetics
diarrhea caused by
in ejaculate, in infertility workup
flatus caused by
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone
FT3. See Free triiodothyronine
FT4. See Free thyroxine assay
FT4I. See Free thyroxine index
FTA-ABS test
on cerebrospinal fluid
in HIV infection/AIDS
FTO gene, in type 2 diabetes
FU. See Fluorouracil
Fucithalmic. See Fusidic acid
Fugue
Fukuda test
Full liquid diet
Full-thickness burn, survival and
Fulminant ulcerative colitis
Fulvestrant
Fumagillin, for microsporidiosis
Functional alimentary hypoglycemia
Functional asthma
Functional capacity/status, assessment of in elderly
Functional dyspepsia
Functional fitness
Functional hyperventilation. See Hyperventilation
Functional proteinuria
Functional testing, in musculoskeletal evaluation
Fundoplication
for erosive esophagitis/GERD
with myotomy, for achalasia
Fungal infections. See also specific type
of bones and joints
in burn injury
drugs for. See also Antifungal agents
in HIV infection/AIDS
otologic
prevention of
rashes
invasive, sinusitis
keratitis
myocarditis in
of nails
opportunistic
prevention of
superficial. See also Tinea
Fungemia
in candidiasis
in coccidioidomycosis
Funguria, candidal (candiduria)
FUO. See Fever, of unknown/undetermined origin
Furazolidone, for giardiasis
Furosemide. See also Diuretics; Loop diuretics
in acute tubular necrosis
for cirrhotic ascites
for heart failure
infarct-related
for hypercalcemia
for hypertension
in urgencies/emergencies
hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism and
hypokalemia and
lithium interactions and
for pulmonary edema
Furuncles/furunculosis
in HIV infection/AIDS
Fusarium, in opportunistic infection
Fusidic acid, for ophthalmic disorders
Fusilev. See Levoleucovorin
Fusion inhibitors. See Entry inhibitors
Fusobacteria/Fusobacterium necrophorum,
Fuzeon. See Enfuvirtide
FVC (forced vital capacity)
in asthma
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
ratio of to forced expiratory volume in one second. See
FEV1/FVC ratio
FXTAS (fragile-X tremor-ataxia syndrome)
G6PD 
deficiency. See 
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency
G20210A prothrombin mutation
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
GA (tabun) poisoning
GABA. See Gamma-aminobutyric acid
Gabapentin. See also Anticonvulsant therapy
for menopausal symptoms
for neuropathic pain/painful diabetic neuropathy
overdose/toxicity of
for phobic disorder
for postherpetic neuralgia
for restless legs syndrome
for seizures
GABHS. See Group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infection
GAD65 antibodies, in type 1 diabetes
Gadolinium, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis caused by
Gait/gait disorders. See also Falls
in ACL injury
in elderly
hip osteoarthritis and
in meniscal injuries of knee
in normal-pressure hydrocephalus
in parkinsonism
p
in spinal stenosis
in tabes dorsalis
Galactomannan, in invasive aspergillosis
Galactorrhea
α-D-Galactosidase enzyme (Beano), for gastrointestinal
gas
Galantamine, for dementia
Galerina (amatoxin/aminitin toxin) mushroom poisoning
Gallaverdin phenomenon
Gallbladder
carcinoma of
cholesterolosis of
gangrene of
hydrops of
porcelain
during pregnancy
removal of. See Cholecystectomy
stones in. See Cholelithiasis
strawberry
Gallium 
nitrate, 
for 
cancer-related
hypercalcemia/toxicity/bone pain
Gallium scanning, in infectious myocarditis
Gallstone ileus
Gallstones. See Cholelithiasis
Galvus. See Vildagliptin
Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT)
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), in Huntington disease
Gamma-butyrolactone, overdose/toxicity of
Gamma-globin, in sickle cell syndromes
Gamma globulin
intravenous. See Intravenous immune globulin
serum
in autoimmune hepatitis
in cirrhosis
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP) levels
alcohol use/abuse and
in liver disease/jaundice
reference values for
Gamma-hydroxybutyrate, overdose/toxicity of
Cushing syndrome and
Gamma interferon. See Interferon-γ
Gamma knife radiation/gamma radiosurgery
for intracranial arteriovenous malformations
for pituitary adenoma
for thyroid cancer brain metastases
for trigeminal neuralgia
Gammopathy, monoclonal. See Monoclonal gammopathy
Gamolenic acid, for fibrocystic condition
Ganciclovir
for CMV infection
for ophthalmic disorders
Ganfort. See Bimatoprost/timolol
Ganglioneuromas, in MEN
Gangrene
anaerobic infection and
bacterial synergistic
digital, in polyarteritis nodosa
of feet, in diabetes mellitus
of gallbladder
gas
Gardasil. See Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine
Gardner syndrome, epidermal inclusion cysts in
Gardnerella infection (bacterial vaginosis)
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
Gas, gastrointestinal
Gas gangrene
Gasoline, sniffing
Gastrectomy
for carcinoids
for gastric cancer
prophylactic
hypoglycemia after
vitamin B12 deficiency and
Gastric acid/gastric contents
aspiration of. See also Aspiration
acute (Mendelson syndrome)
anaerobic pneumonia/lung abscess and
chemical pneumonitis and
chronic
in comatose patient
nosocomial pneumonia and
hypersecretion 
of, 
in 
Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome/gastrinoma
inhibition of secretion of. See Acid-antisecretory
agents; Antacids; H2 receptor blocking drugs; Proton
pump inhibitors
radiation affecting secretion of
reflux 
of. See 
Gastric 
acid 
refluxate;
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Gastric acid refluxate. See also Gastroesophageal reflux
disease
abnormal clearance of
irritant effects of
Gastric banding surgery, for obesity
in type 2 diabetes
Gastric bypass, for obesity
hypoglycemia after
in type 2 diabetes
Gastric cancer
adenocarcinoma
H pylori infection and
pernicious anemia gastritis and
carcinoid tumors
dyspepsia in
GI bleeding and
H pylori gastritis and
lymphoma
H pylori infection and
mesenchymal tumors
peptic ulcer disease and
pernicious anemia gastritis and
Gastric emptying
delayed
in GERD
in scleroderma
in poisoning/drug overdose
Gastric lavage, for poisoning/drug overdose
Gastric mucosal biopsy, in gastric adenocarcinoma
Gastric neoplasms
benign
malignant. See Gastric cancer
Gastric outlet obstruction
in peptic ulcer disease
vomiting and
Gastric pH
nosocomial pneumonia and
in Zollinger Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Gastric polyps
Gastric ulcers. See also Peptic ulcer disease
gastric cancer and
H pylori gastritis and
refractory
Gastric varices, GI bleeding from, in portal hypertension
Gastrin
D cells secreting
hypersecretion of
carcinoid tumors and
in pernicious anemia gastritis
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
proton pump inhibitors affecting
reference values for
Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome)
carcinoid tumors and
GERD and
in MEN
peptic ulcer disease and
Gastritis. See also Gastropathy
alarm symptoms in
alcoholic
in anisakiasis
atrophic
H pylori infection and
in pernicious anemia
CMV
eosinophilic
erosive/hemorrhagic
GI bleeding and
H pylori,
gastric cancer and
nonerosive/nonspecific
NSAID
in pernicious anemia
phlegmonous/necrotizing
stress
Gastroenteritis. See also Diarrhea
adenovirus causing
amebic (intestinal amebiasis)
appendicitis differentiated from
Bacillus cereus causing
campylobacter
Guillain-Barré syndrome and
clostridial
coccidial and microsporidial
E coli causing
food-borne. See Food poisoning
hypokalemia and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
irritable bowel syndrome and
in measles
nausea/vomiting in
noroviruses/Norwalk virus causing
reactive arthritis and
rotaviruses causing
salmonella causing
shigella causing (shigellosis)
staphylococcal
autoantibodies/ANCA in
viral. See also specific virus
Yersinia enterocolitica causing
Gastroesophageal junction
mucosal 
laceration 
of. See 
Mallory-Weiss
syndrome/tears
stricture at. See Esophagus, strictures of
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
alarm features/troublesome symptoms and
Barrett esophagus and
chest pain in
chronic gastric aspiration and
cough and
dyspepsia in
erosive (reflux) esophagitis/GI bleeding and
esophageal webs and rings and
extraesophageal manifestations of
heartburn in
laryngopharyngeal reflux and
peptic stricture and
vocal fold lesions and
Gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma
gastric
H pylori infection and
pernicious anemia gastritis and
small intestine
Crohn disease and
Gastrointestinal bleeding. See also specific cause
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair and
acute
lower
upper
anorectal disease causing
aspirin and
in Budd-Chiari syndrome (hepatic vein obstruction)
in cirrhosis
colorectal cancer and
diverticular
in erosive/hemorrhagic gastritis (gastropathy)
gastric cancer and
from gastrointestinal/esophageal varices
hemorrhoids causing
in Henoch-Schönlein purpura
hepatic encephalopathy and
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
iron deficiency and
Kaposi sarcoma causing
Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears and
noncirrhotic portal hypertension and
NSAIDs and
obscure
occult. See also Fecal occult blood testing
in peptic ulcer disease
in polycythemia
in portal hypertension/portal hypertensive gastropathy
rebleeding risk and
in stress gastritis
tumors causing
in typhoid fever
from vascular ectasias
Gastrointestinal carcinoids
gastric
small intestine
Gastrointestinal fluid losses, replacement guidelines for
Gastrointestinal gas
Gastrointestinal irritant-type mushroom poisoning
Gastrointestinal lymphoma
gastric
H pylori infection and
small intestine
Gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)
Gastrointestinal system. See also specific structure or
organand under Intestinal
anaerobic flora of
decontamination of, in poisoning/drug overdose
caustic/corrosive agent ingestion and
disorders of
adverse ophthalmic effects of drugs used in
Angiostrongylus causing
in anisakiasis
in anthrax
in ascariasis
bleeding. See Gastrointestinal bleeding
cancer
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
chemotherapy-induced
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
CMV infection and
in common variable immunodeficiency
constipation and
diarrhea and
dyspepsia in
exenatide use and
flukes causing
functional
   dyspepsia
   irritable bowel syndrome
gastrointestinal gas and
in gnathostomiasis
hiccups and
in HIV infection/AIDS
in hookworm disease
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
in hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis
liraglutide use and
luminal gastrointestinal tract dysfunction
mesenchymal tumors
motility. See Motility disorders
mushroom poisoning causing
nausea and vomiting in
noncardiac chest pain and
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
radiation causing
in schistosomiasis
in scleroderma
in strongyloidiasis
in syphilis
in trichinosis
in trichuriasis/whipworm
in Turner syndrome
Kaposi sarcoma involving
obstruction of. See Intestinal obstruction
Gastroparesis
in diabetics
hypoglycemia and
vomiting and
Gastropathy. See also Gastritis
erosive/hemorrhagic
GI bleeding and
in HIV infection/AIDS
hypertrophic (Ménétrier disease)
portal hypertensive. See also Portal hypertension
Gastroplasty, for obesity
Gastrostomies
GATA3 gene mutations, HDR/Barakat syndrome caused
by
Gatifloxacin
blood glucose in diabetics and
ophthalmic
Gaucher cells
Gaucher disease
GB (sarin) poisoning
GB surgery. See Gastric banding surgery
GBL (γ-butyrolactone), overdose/toxicity of
GBM 
antibodies. See 
Anti-glomerular 
basement
membrane antibodies
GBP. See Gastric bypass
G-CSF 
(granulocyte 
colony-stimulating 
factor). See
Filgrastim
GD (soman) poisoning
Gefitinib
for lung cancer
Gelatinase-associated lipocalin, neutrophil, in acute tubular
necrosis
Gemcitabine
Gemfibrozil
Gemifloxacin, for pneumonia
Gemzar. See Gemcitabine
Gender identity disorder/gender dysphoria
Gene expression profiling, in breast cancer
Gene therapy
for hemophilia
for parkinsonism
Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized seizures. See also Seizures
differential diagnosis of
Genetic disorders. See also specific type
electrolyte metabolism disturbances and
Genetic instability
in colorectal cancer
in HNPCC
Genetic testing/counseling. See also specific disorderand
Prenatal testing
for cancer susceptibility genes/cancer screening
APC gene mutation
breast cancer and
colorectal cancer and
HNPCC and
MYH gene mutation
ret mutation
clinical relevance and
for diabetes genes
for Duchenne muscular dystrophy
for familial Mediterranean fever
for hemochromatosis
for Huntington disease
in male infertility
for MEN
for pancreatitis
for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
prenatal
in sickle cell syndromes
Genital herpes. See also Herpes simplex infection
anorectal involvement and
during pregnancy/neonatal infection
Genital reconstruction surgery, for transsexuals
Genital ulcers
adenovirus causing
in Behçet syndrome
in chancroid
in granuloma inguinale
herpetic. See Genital herpes
in lymphogranuloma venereum
STDs causing
in syphilis (chancre)
Genital warts. See Venereal (genital) warts
Genitalia, ambiguous, in steroidogenic enzyme defects
Genitourinary system. See also specificorgan or structure
anaerobic flora of
disorders of. See also specific type
anaerobic infection in women
benign prostatic hyperplasia
in blastomycosis
cancer
hematuria in
infections
interstitial cystitis
male erectile and sexual dysfunction
male infertility
radiation exposure causing
ulcers. See Genital ulcers
in uremia
urinary incontinence
urinary stone disease
Genotypic resistance testing, in antiretroviral therapy
Gentamicin. See also Aminoglycosides
for endocarditis
for ophthalmic disorders
resistance to
for urinary tract infection
Geodon. See Ziprasidone
GERD. See Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Geriatric medicine/disorders. See also Age/aging; Older
adults
assessment of older adult and
management of common problems and
principles of care and
Germ cell tumors
paraneoplastic syndrome associated with
testicular
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation for
gynecomastia and
Germline mutations/testing
in HNPCC
in MEN 1
Gerstmann syndrome
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS)
Gestational diabetes. See also Diabetes mellitus
Gestational 
hyperthyroidism. See 
Hyperthyroidism
(thyrotoxicosis), during pregnancy
Gestational thrombocytopenia
Gestational trophoblastic disease
hCG levels in
hyperthyroidism in
Gestodene, in oral contraceptives, thromboembolism and
GFR. See Glomerular filtration rate
GGTP 
levels. See Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
(GGTP) levels
GH. See Growth hormone
GHB (γ-hydroxybutyrate), overdose/toxicity of
Cushing syndrome and
Ghon complex, in tuberculosis
GHRH/arginine stimulation testing
Giant cell (temporal/cranial) arteritis
headache in
ischemic optic neuropathy in
retinal artery occlusion and
Giant cell myocarditis
Giant 
cell 
thyroiditis. See Subacute (de Quervain)
thyroiditis
Giardia antigen assay, stool
Giardia lamblia/intestinalis/duodenalis (giardiasis)
Gibbus deformity, in spinal tuberculosis
GIFT. See Gamete intrafallopian transfer
Gigantism
Gilbert syndrome
Gilles de la Tourette syndrome
Gingivitis
in HIV infection/AIDS
necrotizing ulcerative
Gingivostomatitis. See also Gingivitis; Stomatitis
herpetic
Ginkgo, toxicity of
Ginseng, toxicity of
GIP1. See Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
GIST. See Gastrointestinal stromal tumor
Gitelman syndrome
Glanders
Glanzmann thrombasthenia
Glasgow alcoholic hepatitis score
Glatiramer, for multiple sclerosis
Glaucoma
acute angle-closure
pupillary dilation precipitating
chronic
angle-closure
in diabetes mellitus
facial pain caused by
neovascular (rubeotic), retinal vein occlusion and
normal-tension
treatment of
Gleason grading system, for prostate cancer
in CAPRA assessment tool
Gleevec. See Imatinib
Gliclazide
Glimepiride
with pioglitazone
with rosiglitazone
Glioblastoma multiforme
Gliomas
brainstem
spinal
Gliosis, in multiple sclerosis
Glipizide
with metformin
Globin chain synthesis, in thalassemias
α-Globin gene
in alpha thalassemia syndromes
β-Globin gene
in beta thalassemia syndromes
β-Globin synthesis, in sickle cell syndromes
γ-Globin synthesis, in sickle cell syndromes
Glomerular diseases
renal involvement in
nephrotic 
spectrum. See also specific type and
Nephrotic syndrome
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
alkalosis in alkali administration and
in chronic kidney disease
dialysis indications and
estimated
reference value for
prerenal acute kidney injury and
uremic acidosis and
Glomerular proteinuria
Glomerular sclerosis/glomerulosclerosis
in diabetic nephropathy
focal segmental
stroke/stroke prevention and
acute kidney injury caused by
anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM)
cryoglobulin-associated
in Goodpasture syndrome
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in Henoch-Schönlein purpura
IgA nephropathy
immune-complex
in lupus/SLE
membranoproliferative
hepatitis C infection and
idiopathic
in microscopic polyangiitis
nephritic presentation of
pauci-immune (ANCA-associated)
peri-infectious
postinfectious
rapidly progressive
serologic testing in
in syphilis
Glomerulonephropathies. See also Glomerulonephritis;
Nephropathy
membranoproliferative
hepatitis C infection and
Glomerulopathy, sickle cell
G l o m e r u l o s c l e r o s i s . See 
Glomerular
sclerosis/glomerulosclerosis
Glomus tumors (tympanicum/jugulare)
tinnitus and
Glossitis
Glossodynia
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
earache in
headache in
Glottic (true vocal fold) cancer
GLP-1. See Glucagon-like peptide 1
Glucagon
A cells secreting
for β-blocker overdose/toxicity
contraindications to use of in pheochromocytoma
for hypoglycemia
in insulinoma diagnosis
lack of response to, hypoglycemia and
tumors secreting
diabetes and
Glucagon emergency kit
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)
Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, for
diabetes
Glucagonomas
(1-3)-β-D-Glucan levels
in aspergillosis
in Pneumocystis pneumonia
β-Glucocerebrosidase, in Gaucher disease
Glucocorticoid 
deficiency. See also Adrenocortical
insufficiency
familial
Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism. See also
Aldosteronism
Glucocorticoids, tumors secreting, diabetes and
Glucokinase gene defect, in MODY
Glucometers
Glucophage/Glucophage XR. See Metformin
Glucosamine/glucosamine sulfate plus chondroitin, in
osteoarthritis
Glucose. See also Glucose tolerance/intolerance
ascitic fluid
bacterial peritonitis and
blood 
levels 
of. See 
also 
Hyperglycemia;
Hypoglycemia
acceptable
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in diabetes mellitus
   continuous monitoring of
   control of. See Glycemic control in diabetes
   pregnancy and
   self-monitoring of
   surgery and
in diabetic ketoacidosis
hemoglobin A1c levels and
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
in insulinoma
monitoring/management of during surgery
prebreakfast hyperglycemia and
reference values for
testing
   in pregnancy
cerebrospinal fluid, in CNS infection
in diabetic ketoacidosis management
drugs affecting absorption of, for diabetes mellitus
drugs affecting liver/muscle/adipose tissue, for
diabetes mellitus
hyperosmolality caused by
for hypoglycemia
hyponatremia and
hypophosphatemia caused by administration of
pleural fluid
in parapneumonic effusion
in urine. See Glycosuria
Glucose breath test, in bacterial overgrowth
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP1)
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
dapsone therapy and
primaquine therapy and
sulfasalazine therapy and
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase screen
Glucose tolerance/intolerance. See also Diabetes mellitus
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
in Cushing syndrome
in diabetes mellitus
functional alimentary hypoglycemia and
impaired
lithium affecting
prediabetes and
in pregnancy
reference/normal values for
testing
in pregnancy
Glucose 
transporters, 
thiazolidinediones 
affecting
expression of
α-Glucosidase inhibitors
for diabetes mellitus
overdose/toxicity of
Glucosuria. See Glycosuria
Glucotrol/Glucotrol XL. See Glipizide
Glucovance. See Glyburide, with metformin
GLUT 1/GLUT 4. See Glucose transporters
Glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 antibodies, in type 1
diabetes
Glutamine
γ-Glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP) levels
alcohol use/abuse and
in liver disease/jaundice
reference values for
Glutathione reductase, in riboflavin deficiency
Gluten
in celiac disease/sprue
in dermatitis herpetiformis
Gluten-free diet, for celiac disease/dermatitis herpetiformis
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy. See Celiac disease
Glyburide
with metformin
during pregnancy
Glycated (glycosylated) hemoglobin. See Hemoglobin
A1/A1a/A1b/A1c
Glycemic control in diabetes
acceptable/target levels of
complications rate and, clinical studies of
continuous glucose monitoring systems and
estrogen replacement therapy affecting
exercise/activity and
glycated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1) measurements
in evaluation of
nephropathy development/progression and
pregnancy and
retinopathy development/progression and
self-monitoring of blood glucose and
surgery and
vascular disorders and
Glycohemoglobins. See Hemoglobin A1/A1a/A1b/A1c
Glycoprotein B vaccine, for CMV infection
Glycoprotein-D vaccine, for HSV-2
Glycoprotein Ib/IX, in Bernard-Soulier syndrome
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors
drugs blocking
for acute coronary syndromes
for myocardial infarction
PCI and
platelet function affected by
Glanzmann thrombasthenia and
Glycopyrrolate, in terminally ill/dying patient
Glycosuria/glucosuria
in diabetes mellitus
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state and
ketoacidosis and
hypernatremia and
nondiabetic (renal)
in pregnancy
Glycosylated (glycated) hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1). See
Hemoglobin A1/A1a/A1b/A1c
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor deficiency, in
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Glycyrrhetinic/glycyrrhizinic acid, hypertension/hypokalemia
and
Glynase. See Glyburide
Glyset. See Miglitol
GM-CSF (granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating
factor). See Sargramostim
GN. See Glomerulonephritis
Gnathostoma (gnathostomiasis)
GnRH 
analogs. See Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) analogs
Goeckerman regimen, for psoriasis
Goiter
endemic
fetal
hyperthyroidism and
hypothyroidism/cretinism and
lithium causing
multinodular (nodular)
toxic
substernal/retrosternal
thyroid surgery for
Gold salts, adverse ophthalmic effects of
Gold top SST tubes
Golfer's elbow
Golimumab, for rheumatoid arthritis
GoLYTELY. See Polyethylene glycol
Gonadal dysgenesis. See Turner syndrome
Gonadoblastoma, testicular
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
deficiency/low pulse frequency of, in amenorrhea
ectopic secretion of, in acromegaly
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs. See
also Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)
analogs
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for endometriosis
hypogonadism caused by
Gonadotropins
cancer-related production of
deficiency of. See also Hypogonadism
acquired
in amenorrhea
congenital
human 
chorionic 
(hCG). See Human chorionic
gonadotropin
human menopausal (hMG), for ovulation induction
Gonococcal infections/gonorrhea
anorectal involvement and
arthritis and
chlamydial coinfection and
conjunctivitis
diarrhea and
disseminated disease and
drug resistant
epididymitis in
pelvic infection/PID
pharyngitis in
during pregnancy
prevention and
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
screening for in STD patients
Goodpasture syndrome
alveolar hemorrhage in
glomerulonephritis in
hemoptysis in
Gordon syndrome
Goserelin. See also 
Luteinizing 
hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) analogs
for breast cancer
for prostate cancer
GOT. See Aspartate aminotransferase
Gottron sign
Gout/gouty arthritis
in diabetes
kidney disease and
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
saturnine, in lead poisoning
in transplant patient
gp120, HIV vaccine development and
GPI (glycosylphosphatidylinositol) anchor deficiency, in
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
GPT. See Alanine aminotransferase
GRACE Risk Score
Gradenigo syndrome
Graft-versus-host disease, transfusion-associated
granulocyte transfusions and
Graft-versus-host reaction
Graft-versus-malignancy effect
Graham–Steel murmur
Gram-negative infections. See also specific causative
agent
bacteremia and sepsis
in cancer patient
folliculitis
acne and
Gram-positive 
infections. See also specific causative
agent
in cancer patient
Gram stain
ascitic fluid
in pneumonia diagnosis
in community-acquired disease
in nosocomial disease
synovial fluid
in gonococcal arthritis
in nongonococcal acute bacterial (septic) arthritis
Grand mal (tonic-clonic) seizures. See also Seizures
Grand mal (tonic-clonic) status epilepticus
Granisetron. See also Antiemetics
Granular urinary casts
Granulocyte 
colony-stimulating 
factor 
(G-CSF). See
Filgrastim
Granulocyte count
chemotherapy dosage modification and
infections and
Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-
CSF). See Sargramostim
Granulocyte transfusion. See also Transfusion
Granulocytic ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis
Lyme disease coinfection and
Granulocytopenia. See also Neutropenia
in cancer chemotherapy
infections and
Granuloma. See also Granulomatosis; Granulomatous
disorders
arytenoid cartilage
in Crohn disease
hepatic, drugs/toxins causing
inguinale
lethal midline
pulmonary
in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener
granulomatosis)
in sarcoidosis
swimming pool
Granulomatosis
allergic 
angiitis 
and. See Allergic angiitis and
granulomatosis
infantisepticum
lymphomatoid
hypertension/hypertension management and
delirium and
microscopic polyangiitis differentiated from
nose and paranasal sinus involvement in
pulmonary involvement in
during pregnancy
Granulomatous disorders. See also specific type and
Granuloma; Granulomatosis
amebic encephalitis
aspergillosis in patients with
fever/FUO and
hypercalcemia in
meningitis
neck masses
of nose and paranasal sinuses
Granulomatous thyroiditis. See Subacute (de Quervain)
thyroiditis
Graves dermopathy (pretibial myxedema)
Graves disease. See also Hyperthyroidism
eye disease and
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
in pregnancy
thyroid antibodies/TSH receptor antibody in
treatment of
Graves ophthalmopathy/exophthalmos
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
Gray platelet syndrome
y p
y
Gray top tubes
Great toe, in gout
Green top tubes
Greta. See Azarcon
Grief reaction/grieving
Grip (handgrip), heart murmurs affected by
Grippe, summer
Griseofulvin
for onychomycosis
Ground itch
Group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infection
cellulitis
endocarditis
erysipelas
glomerulonephritis and
pharyngitis. See also Pharyngitis, streptococcal
rapid antigen tests for
rheumatic fever and
scarlet fever
skin infections
Group B streptococcal infection
endocarditis
in pregnancy/neonate
Group C streptococcal infection
endocarditis
Group D streptococcal infection
endocarditis
Group G streptococcal infection
endocarditis
Group therapy. See also Support groups
for chronic pain disorders
for personality disorders
for somatoform disorders
Growth factors. See also Filgrastim; Sargramostim
for chemotherapy-induced toxicity
for neutropenia
platelet-derived, in myelofibrosis
Growth hormone (GH)
deficiency of
excess of, acromegaly and gigantism caused by
replacement therapy with
for AIDS wasting
during pregnancy
for Turner syndrome
serum levels of
in acromegaly/gigantism
reference values for
tumors secreting
diabetes and
prolactin cosecretion and
Growth hormone–releasing hormone, in GH stimulation
tests
Growth hormone stimulation tests
GSS. See Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome
Guaiac testing. See Fecal occult blood testing
Guanabenz
overdose/toxicity of
Guanadrel, for hypertension
Guanarito virus
Guanethidine
antidepressant drug interactions and
for hypertension
MAOI interactions and
Guanfacine
overdose/toxicity of
for Tourette syndrome
Guarana, toxicity of
Guargum. See also Fiber, dietary
Guillain-Barré syndrome (acute idiopathic polyneuropathy)
dysautonomia in
influenza/influenza vaccination and
poliomyelitis differentiated from
yellow fever vaccination and
Guinea worm infection (dracunculiasis)
Gum disease. See Gingivitis
Gummas, in syphilis
Guns. See Firearms
Gut. See Gastrointestinal system
Gut dialysis, (repeat-dose charcoal)
Guttate psoriasis. See also Psoriasis
Guyton hypothesis, salt-sensitive hypertension and
GVH. See Graft-versus-host reaction
GVHD. See Graft-versus-host disease
GVM. See Graft-versus-malignancy effect
Gynecologic disorders. See also specific disorder
appendicitis differentiated from
diagnostic procedures used in
in HIV infection/AIDS
Gynecomastia
carcinoma of male breast and
in hyperprolactinemia
in hypogonadism
in Klinefelter syndrome
testicular tumors causing
testosterone replacement therapy and
Gypsy moths, skin lesions caused by
Gyromitra (monomethylhydrazine) mushroom poisoning
H1 receptor blocking drugs. See Antihistamines
H2 receptor blocking drugs
for GERD
for laryngopharyngeal reflux
for peptic ulcer disease
for stress gastritis
hyperthyroidism
H1N1 influenza vaccine. See also Influenza virus vaccine
in asthma patients
in COPD
pregnancy and
H3N2 influenza
H5N1 avian influenza. See also Influenza
H63D mutation, in hemochromatosis. See also HFE gene
H1069Q mutation, in Wilson disease
H pylori infection. See Helicobacter pylori infection
HAART regimens (highly active antiretroviral therapy). See
Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Habitual (recurrent) abortion
Habituation techniques
for benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo
for tinnitus
HACE. See High-altitude cerebral edema
HACEK organisms, endocarditis caused by
HAEM. See Herpes-associated erythema multiforme
Haemophilus,
aphrophilus 
(Aggregatibacteraphrophilus). 
See
HACEK organisms
ducreyi,
influenzae,
in HIV infection/AIDS
immunization in immunocompromised host and
Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine
Hair
excess of. See Hirsutism
exclamation, in alopecia areata
loss of. See also Alopecia
chemotherapy-induced
removal of, preoperative
Hair analysis, for drug detection
Hair cells, hearing loss and
Hairy cell leukemia
aplastic anemia differentiated from
rheumatic manifestations of
Hairy leukoplakia
Halcion. See Triazolam
Haldol. See Haloperidol
Hallucinations/hallucinosis
alcoholic (organic)
in delirium tremens
in dementia
in focal seizures
intracranial tumors causing
luminous, in migraine headache
in narcolepsy
psychedelic drug use and
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
substance-induced
Hallucinogenic mushroom poisoning
Hallucinogens
Hallucinosis. See Hallucinations/hallucinosis
HALO (radiofrequency wave electrocautery), for Barrett
esophagus
Halo sign, in invasive aspergillosis
Halobetasol
Halofantrine
Hashimoto (chronic lymphocytic/autoimmune) thyroiditis
for aggressive/violent behavior
for alcoholic hallucinosis
antidepressant drug interactions and
p
g
for bipolar disease/mania
decanoate form of
for delirium
for dementia-associated behavior problems
in elderly
for hallucinogen overdose/toxicity
for Huntington disease
intravenous
for opioid-induced nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for personality disorder
for psychedelic abuse/overdose
for Tourette syndrome
HA M. See Human T cell lymphotropic/leukemia virus
(HTLV), myelopathy caused by
Hamartin gene, in tuberous sclerosis
Hamartomatous polyposis syndromes
Hamburger. See Meat
Hamilton scale, assessment of suicidal intent and
Hamman-Rich syndrome (acute interstitial pneumonia/AIP)
HAMP gene, in juvenile-onset hemochromatosis
Hampton hump, in pulmonary embolism
Hand
in complex regional pain syndrome
in immersion syndrome
in osteoarthritis
in porphyria cutanea tarda
in Raynaud phenomenon
in rheumatoid arthritis
ulnar nerve lesions at
Hand disinfection/washing, in infection control
Hand eczema, vesiculobullous (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Hand-foot-mouth disease
coxsackieviruses causing
herpetic stomatitis differentiated from
enterovirus 71 causing
Hand-foot syndrome (acral erythema), chemotherapy-
induced
Handgrip, heart murmurs affected by
Hansen disease (leprosy)
neuropathy associated with
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
Hantaviruses/Hantaan virus
HAP. See Hospital-acquired pneumonia
HAPE. See High-altitude pulmonary edema
HAPS (harmless acute pancreatitis score)
Haptoglobin
in hemolytic anemia
reference values for
Harmless acute pancreatitis score (HAPS)
Harris–Benedict equation
Hartley-Dunhill operation
hypothyroidism caused by
hepatitis C and
hyperthyroidism caused by
Hashimoto thyroiditis and
thyroid antibodies in
goiter/thyroid nodules and
HAV. See Hepatitis A virus
Havrix. See Hepatitis A vaccine
Hawkins impingement sign
Hay fever. See Allergic rhinitis
Hb. See Hemoglobin
HbA1. See Hemoglobin A1/A1a/A1b/A1c
HbA2. See Hemoglobin A2
HBcAg
antibody to (anti-HBc)
screening blood for
HbCO. See Carboxyhemoglobin levels
HBeAg
antibody to (anti-HBe)
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B
HbF. See Hemoglobin F
HBIG. See Hepatitis B immune globulin
HBsAg
antibody to (anti-HBs)
hepatitis D and
in hepatocellular carcinoma
inactive carrier state
maternal carrier state/transmission to newborn and
vaccination recommendations and
screening blood for
HBV. See Hepatitis B virus
HCAP. See Health care-associated pneumonia
hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotropin
HCO3–. See Bicarbonate
Hct. See Hematocrit
HCTZ. See Hydrochlorothiazide
HCV. See Hepatitis C virus
HDAg
antibody to (anti-HDV)
HDCV (human diploid cell) rabies vaccine
HDL. See High-density lipoproteins/cholesterol
HDL 
disorders. See Huntington disease-like (HDL)
disorders
HDL1/HDL2/HDL3 genes, in Huntington disease-like
disorders
HDR syndrome
HDV. See Hepatitis D virus
Head injury
headache associated with
hearing loss associated with
hypopituitarism associated with
olfactory dysfunction and
seizures associated with
subarachnoid hemorrhage and
vertigo associated with
Head lice
Head and neck cancer
lymphoma
metastatic
squamous cell carcinoma of larynx
Head and neck infections
actinomycosis
anaerobic
deep neck infections and
masses caused by
Head-up tilt table testing, in syncope
Headache. See also specific type and Migraine headache
acupuncture for
acute
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
in carbon monoxide poisoning
cerebral arteriovenous malformations causing
chronic
ECT causing
in giant cell arteritis
in high altitude-related illness
hypertension and
in intracerebral/subarachnoid hemorrhage
from intracranial aneurysm leak
oral contraceptive use and
in patent foramen ovale
in pheochromocytoma
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in pseudotumor cerebri
Health care (hospital)-associated infections
bacterial rhinosinusitis
burn injury and
coagulase-negative staphylococci causing
erythrovirus (parvovirus)
fever/FUO and
hepatitis C
meningitis
pneumonia. See also Pneumonia
scabies
in transplant recipient
Health care-associated pneumonia
Health care providers
H1N1 influenza transmission prevention and
hemorrhagic fever prevention and
HIV transmission risk and
HSV transmission prevention and
immunization recommendations for
radiation safety and
relationship of with patient. See Doctor–patient
relationship
SARS transmission prevention and
Health care proxy. See Advance directives
Health literacy, adherence and
Health maintenance/disease prevention. See also specific
disease
adherence and
approach to patient and
immunization and
principles of care and
Hearing aids/hearing amplification
adherence and
in recruitment
Hearing evaluation
in elderly
Hearing loss. See also specific type
aminoglycosides causing
autoimmune
barotrauma and
cisplatin causing
conductive
diabetes mellitus and
in elderly (presbyacusis)
in endolymphatic hydrops (Ménière syndrome)
eustachian tube dysfunction causing
glomus tumors causing
head trauma causing
hereditary
in HIV infection/AIDS
in labyrinthitis
long QT syndrome and
in multiple sclerosis
mumps causing
neural
noise trauma causing
ossicular chain disruption causing
in otitis media
in otosclerosis
ototoxicity and. See also Ototoxicity
physical trauma causing
sensorineural
sensory
sudden
tinnitus and
vertigo and
in vestibular disorders
vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neuroma) causing
Hearing rehabilitation
Heart. See also under Cardiac; Coronary; Myocardial and
Cardiovascular disorders; Heart disease
examination of
in cardiovascular screening of athletes
in hypertension
in myocardial infarction
holiday
in hypertension
myxedema
radiation injury and
sarcoidosis involving
systemic diseases affecting
traumatic injury of
sudden death of athlete and
tumors of
Heart block. See Atrioventricular (heart) block
Heart disease. See also specific disorder
acute heart failure/pulmonary edema
amyloidosis and
anthracycline-induced
dexrazoxane for
in athletes, screening for
bradycardias
carcinoid
cardiomyopathies
peripartum
cardiorenal syndrome and
in Chagas disease
chest pain in
cholesterol/lipoproteins in
screening tests for levels of
congenital
pregnancy and
congestive heart failure. See also Congestive heart
(cardiac) failure
coronary (atherosclerotic CAD/ischemic). See also
Coronary heart disease
in diabetes mellitus
dyspnea in
endocarditis prophylaxis and
during pregnancy
functional classification of
pregnancy and
in HIV infection/AIDS
homocysteine/hyperhomocysteinemia and
hypertension/hypertension management and
in hyperthyroidism
hypertriglyceridemia and
in hypothyroidism
immunization recommendations in
lipid disorders and
in Lyme disease
in Marfan syndrome
metabolic syndrome (syndrome X) and
myocarditis
neoplastic
pericardial disorders and
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in polyarteritis nodosa
pregnancy and
hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism and
prevention of
chemoprevention/aspirin in
cholesterol screening and
exercise/activity and
hypertension prevention/management and
lipid disorder prevention/management and. See
also Lipid-lowering therapy
parathyroid hormone affecting
pulmonary (cor pulmonale). See also Pulmonary heart
disease
pulmonary hypertension and
rate and rhythm disturbances. See also Arrhythmias
rheumatic/rheumatic fever and
risk factors for
calcium balance/imbalance and
modification/risk reduction and
in scleroderma
in SLE
spondylitic
surgery in patient with
surgical resection/removal of
systemic disorders and
thiazolidinedione use and
traumatic
sudden death of athlete and
in Turner syndrome
valvular. See also Valvular heart disease
Heart failure
acute
congestive. See also Congestive heart (cardiac)
failure
Heart-lung transplant, for cystic fibrosis
Heart murmurs
in angina
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
atrial myxoma causing
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
bedside maneuvers/interventions affecting
in cardiomyopathy
in coarctation of aorta
in endocarditis
in heart failure
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
in mitral valve prolapse
in myocardial infarction
in patent ductus arteriosus
in pulmonary stenosis
in pulmonic regurgitation
in rheumatic carditis
in tetralogy of Fallot
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
in ventricular septal defect
Heart rate
in asthma exacerbation
in atrial fibrillation
disturbances of. See also Arrhythmias
in mitral stenosis
in GI bleeding
in paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
in pulmonary embolism
in ventricular tachycardia
Heart rhythm, disturbances of. See also Arrhythmias
Heart sounds
in angina
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in atrial myxoma
in atrial septal defect
in cardiomyopathy
in heart failure
in hypertension
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
in myocardial infarction
in patent ductus arteriosus
in pulmonary embolism
in pulmonary hypertension
in pulmonary stenosis
in pulmonic regurgitation
in tetralogy of Fallot
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
in valvular heart disease
Heart transplantation, for heart failure
Heart valves. See also Prosthetic heart valves; Valve
replacement; Valvular heart disease
in alkaptonuria
endocarditis affecting. See also Endocarditis
Heartburn (pyrosis)
Heat
disorders caused by exposure to. See also Burns;
Hyperthermia
cholinergic urticaria
miliaria (heat rash)
prevention of
reduction/removal of
for heat exposure syndromes
Heat cramps
Heat exhaustion
Heat rash
Heat stroke
Heat syncope/collapse
Heavy metals. See also specific type
overdose/poisoning and
ophthalmic effects and
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Hebephrenic (disorganized) schizophrenia
Heberden nodes
Hectorol. See Doxercalciferol
Heel, plantar hyperkeratosis of
Hegar dilators, for vaginismus
Heimlich maneuver
for foreign body removal
in near drowning
Heinz bodies
in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
unstable hemoglobins and
Helical (spiral) CT. See also Computed tomography
in chest pain evaluation
in 
colorectal 
cancer 
screening. See 
Virtual
colonoscopy
in dysuria evaluation
in lung cancer screening
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pulmonary embolism
in renal artery stenosis
in urinary stone disease
Helicobacter pylori infection
dyspepsia and
eradication therapy for
dyspepsia management and
gastric cancer/MALT lymphoma and
gastritis management and
peptic ulcer management and
   NSAID-induced ulcers and
   rebleeding prevention and
   recurrence prevention and
gastric cancer/MALT lymphoma and
gastritis
gastric cancer and
peptic ulcer disease and
refractory
testing for
in dyspepsia
reference values for
Heliotrope rash, in dermatomyositis
Helium-oxygen mixture (Heliox), for smoke inhalation
Heller cardiomyotomy, for achalasia
HELLP syndrome
Helmet cells, in microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
Helminthic infections. See also specific type
cestodes causing
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes caused by
myocarditis in
nematodes causing
filariasis
intestinal
invasive
trematodes (flukes) causing
Helper-inducer T cells. See CD4 T cells
Helvella (monomethylhydrazine) mushroom poisoning
Hemangioblastoma
Hemangioma, cavernous, of liver
Hemarthroses, in hemophilia
Hematemesis
in cirrhosis
in erosive/hemorrhagic gastritis (gastropathy)
in GI bleeding
in Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears
in peptic ulcer disease
Hematin, for porphyria
Hematochezia
in lower GI bleeding
in peptic ulcer disease
in upper GI bleeding
Hematocrit. See also specific disorder
in anemia
in myeloproliferative disorders
in polycythemia
reference values for
Hematogenous osteomyelitis
Hematologic 
disorders. See also specific type and
Hemostasis disorders
anemias
blood transfusions and
cancer-related
in chronic kidney disease
leukemias/myeloproliferative disorders
lymphomas
neutropenia
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
radiation exposure and
stem cell transplantation and
Hematoma
auricular (cauliflower ear)
myocardial
perianal, thrombosed hemorrhoid causing
septal, in nasal trauma
subdural. See Subdural hemorrhage/hematoma
Hematometra, in endometrial carcinoma
Hematopoiesis, extramedullary, in myelofibrosis
Hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation. See Bone
marrow/stem cell transplantation
Hematopoietic stimulating factors. See Filgrastim; Growth
factors; Sargramostim
Hematuria
asymptomatic
in bladder cancer
in cystitis
in dysuria
in glomerulonephritis/nephritic spectrum disorders
in hemorrhagic cystitis
g
y
in Henoch-Schönlein purpura
in IgA nephropathy
in polycystic kidney disease
in renal cell carcinoma
in sickle cell disease
in SLE
synpharyngitic
in tuberculosis
in ureteral/renal pelvis cancer
in urinary stone disease
Hemianopia. See Visual field defects
Hemicrania continua
Hemicraniectomy, decompressive, for stroke
Hemiplegia, in stroke
Hemiplegic migraine, familial/sporadic
Hemobilia
in cholangiocarcinoma
Hemoccult. See Fecal occult blood testing
Hemochromatosis
Addison disease and
cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
hypopituitarism caused by
Hemodiafiltration, continuous venovenous/venovenous, for
poisoning/drug overdose
Hemodialysis. See also Dialysis
for chronic kidney disease
for heat stroke
for hyperkalemia
for hypermagnesemia
for hypernatremia
immunization recommendations for patient receiving
for poisoning/drug overdose
with carbamazepine
with lithium
with methanol or ethylene glycol
with phenobarbital
with salicylates
with theophylline
with valproic acid
pruritus associated with
for uremic pericarditis
Hemodynamic status
in ARDS, monitoring
in atrial fibrillation, management and
in COPD
GI bleeding and
in myocardial infarction
Hemoglobin
in anemia
glycated/glycosylated. See Hemoglobin
A1/A1a/A1b/A1c
nephrotoxicity/acute tubular necrosis and
reference values for
in sickle cell syndromes. See also Sickle cell
anemia/syndromes
in thalassemias
total
unstable
Hemoglobin A
in beta thalassemia syndromes
reference values for
in sickle cell syndromes
Hemoglobin 
A1/A1a/A1b/A1c 
(glycated/glycosylated
hemoglobin)
in hypertension
acceptable levels of
diagnosis and
postoperative complications and
pregnancy and
reference/normal values for
Hemoglobin A2
in beta thalassemia syndromes
reference values for
in sickle cell syndromes
Hemoglobin AS genotype (sickle cell trait)
pregnancy and
Hemoglobin C disorders
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
in hemoglobin H disease
in prenatal care
reference values for
in sickle cell syndromes
in thalassemias
Hemoglobin F (fetal hemoglobin)
in beta thalassemia syndromes
glycated hemoglobin values affected by
reference values for
in sickle cell syndromes
Hemoglobin H/hemoglobin H disease
Hemoglobin S
in pregnancy
Hemoglobin saturation. See Sao2
Hemoglobin SC disease
in pregnancy
retinopathy in
Hemoglobinemia, in hemolytic anemia
Hemoglobinuria
in hemolytic anemia
iron deficiency and
paroxysmal nocturnal
Hemojuvelin, in juvenile-onset hemochromatosis
Hemolytic anemias/hemolysis. See also specific typeor
cause
autoimmune
in cold agglutinin disease
in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
in hemoglobin C disease
in hereditary spherocytosis
microangiopathic
thrombotic microangiopathies and
in sickle cell syndromes
unstable hemoglobins and
Hemolytic crises, in sickle cell disease
Hemolytic disease of newborn, prevention of
Hemolytic streptococcus. See specific typeunder Group
Hemolytic transfusion reactions
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
E coli causing
Hemopericardium
Hemophagocytosis
in H1N1 influenza
Hemophilia A and B
Hemophilia C (factor XI deficiency)
Hemoptysis
in bronchiectasis
in Goodpasture syndrome
in lung cancer
in pulmonary embolism
in tuberculosis
Hemorrhage. See specific type or structureaffected and
Bleeding
Hemorrhagic conjunctivitis
acute, enterovirus 70 causing
coxsackievirus infection and
Hemorrhagic cystitis
adenovirus causing
chemotherapy-induced
mesna for
Hemorrhagic effusion, pleural. See also Hemothorax
Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS)
Hemorrhagic fevers
dengue
hantavirus causing
Hemorrhagic (erosive) gastritis. See Gastritis
Hemorrhagic shock. See also Hypovolemic shock
Hemorrhoidectomy
Hemorrhoids
bleeding and
fecal soiling/incontinence and
pruritus ani caused by
thrombosed
Hemosiderin
accumulation of. See also Hemochromatosis
urine
in hemolytic anemia
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Hemosiderosis
idiopathic pulmonary
transfusional, in thalassemia
Hemostasis 
disorders. See also specific type and
Bleeding
antithrombotic therapy and
coagulation disorders
platelet disorders
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
Hemosuccus pancreaticus
Hemothorax
Hemotympanum
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
HepA. See Hepatitis A vaccine
HepB. See Hepatitis B vaccine
Hepacare. See Hepatitis B vaccine
Hepar lobatum
Heparin/low-molecular weight heparin
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for acute coronary syndromes
for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, pregnancy
and
after cardiac valve replacement surgery
coagulopathy caused by
for deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
(venous thromboembolic disease)
prevention and
treatment and
for DIC
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
hyperkalemia and
for myocardial infarction
after thrombolytic therapy
with PCI
perioperative
thrombocytopenia caused by
reference values in
Heparin-associated/PF4 antibody
reference values for
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
reference values in
Hepatic abscess
amebic
pyogenic
Hepatic adenoma
hepatocellular carcinoma arising from
oral contraceptive use and
Hepatic biopsy. See Liver, biopsy of
Hepatic candidiasis
Hepatic coagulopathy
in cirrhosis
liver failure and
Hepatic cysts, hydatid
Hepatic disease. See Liver, disorders of
Hepatic encephalopathy
in acute fatty liver of pregnancy
in acute liver failure
in cirrhosis
GI bleeding/esophageal varices and
protein-restricted diet for
Hepatic failure. See Liver (hepatic) failure
Hepatic fibrosis
in cirrhosis
drugs/toxins causing
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Hepatic hydrothorax
Hepatic iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan, in cholecystitis
Hepatic steatosis. See Fatty liver
Hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
Hepatitis
alcoholic
postoperative complications associated with
autoimmune
CMV
drugs/toxins causing
fibrosing cholestatic
hypoxic
ischemic
isoniazid causing
postoperative complications associated with
in Q fever
in syphilis
in varicella
viral. See also Hepatitis A; Hepatitis B; Hepatitis C;
Hepatitis D; Hepatitis E; Hepatitis G
arthritis in
   rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
chronic
   postoperative complications associated with
hypertension and
in drug users
in HIV infection/AIDS
HSV causing
aldosteronism and
liver failure and
in liver transplant patients, adenoviruses causing
postoperative complications associated with
prevention of
transfusion-associated
Hepatitis A
prevention/immunization and. See also Hepatitis A
vaccine
screening for, in STD patients
Hepatitis A and B vaccine
Hepatitis A immune globulin
during pregnancy/for newborn
Hepatitis A vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
during pregnancy
STD prevention and
for travelers
Hepatitis A virus (HAV)
Hepatitis B
acute
antiretroviral agents for
arthritis in
cancer associated with
chronic
cirrhosis and
delta agent (hepatitis D) and
HIV infection/AIDS and
inactive carrier state
maternal carrier state/transmission to newborn and
vaccination/vaccination recommendations and
polyarteritis nodosa and
prevention/immunization/screening 
and. See also
Hepatitis B vaccine
in STD patient
sexual assault/rape in transmission of
transfusion in transmission of/screening blood for
Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg)
antibody to (anti-HBc)
screening blood for
Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)
p
g
(
g)
antibody to (anti-HBe)
Hepatitis B immune globulin
during pregnancy/for newborn
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
antibody to (anti-HBs)
hepatitis D and
in hepatocellular carcinoma
inactive carrier state
maternal carrier state/transmission to newborn and
vaccination recommendations and
screening blood for
Hepatitis B vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in cancer prevention
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
for newborn/pregnant patient
after rape/sexual assault
STD prevention and
for travelers
Hepatitis B virus (HBV)
Hepatitis B virus DNA
Hepatitis C
acute
arthritis in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
cancer associated with
chronic
cirrhosis and
cryoglobulinemia in
y g
hemophilia and
HIV infection/AIDS and
immune thrombocytopenia in
lichen planus and
in pregnancy
testing for
renal disease and
thyroiditis/hypothyroidism and
transfusion in transmission of/screening blood for
Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
antibodies to (anti-HCV)
screening blood for
Hepatitis C virus RNA
Hepatitis D
acute
chronic
hepatitis B and
Hepatitis D antigen (HDAg)
antibody to (anti-HDV)
Hepatitis D virus (HDV/delta agent)
Hepatitis D virus RNA
Hepatitis E
prevention/immunization and
Hepatitis E vaccine
Hepatitis E virus (HEV)
Hepatitis G
Hepatitis G virus (HGV)
Hepatobiliary cancers. See also specific type
Hepatobiliary CMV
Hepatocellular carcinoma. See also Liver, cancer of
cirrhosis and
hemochromatosis and
hepatitis and
hepatitis B vaccine in prevention of
incidence/risk/mortality of
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
pyogenic abscess and
Hepatocellular 
disease. See also Cirrhosis; Liver,
disorders of
jaundice in
Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
hepatic adenomas and
in MODY
Hepatojugular reflux
Hepatolenticular degeneration. See Wilson disease
Hepatomegaly
in biliary tract carcinoma
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in cirrhosis
in fatty liver
in hairy cell leukemia
in hepatitis
Hepatopathy, ischemic
Hepatoportal sclerosis
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Hepatorenal syndrome
p
y
Hepatosplenic candidiasis
Hepatotoxicity
in hypopituitarism
of anesthetics
of methotrexate
of nevirapine
of thiazolidinediones
of tuberculosis therapy
Hepcidin
in anemia of chronic disease
in anemia of chronic kidney disease
in hemochromatosis
HER-2/neu overexpression, in breast cancer
prognosis and
therapy and
Herald patch, in pityriasis rosea
“Herbal ecstasy” (ephedrine)
Herbal products
for dyspepsia
toxicity of
Herbicide poisoning (cholinesterase inhibitors)
Herceptin. See Trastuzumab
Hereditary angioedema
Hereditary cholestatic syndromes
Hereditary colorectal cancer/polyposis syndromes. See
also specific disorder
Hereditary hearing loss
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
epistaxis in
Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN), types I
to IV
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)
endometrial carcinoma and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hernias
hiatal
esophageal webs and rings and
GERD and
vaginal (pelvic organ prolapse)
Herniated 
nucleus 
pulposus. See Nucleus pulposus,
herniation of
Herniation syndromes
intracranial tumors causing
lumbar puncture and
in stroke
Heroin abuse
Herpangina
coxsackievirus
echovirus
Herpes-associated erythema multiforme
Herpes genitalis. See Genital herpes
Herpes labialis
esophagitis and
Herpes simplex infection
acyclovir prophylaxis/treatment and
anorectal involvement and
Bell palsy and
chemoprophylaxis for
disseminated/generalized
dermatitis in (eczema herpeticum)
encephalitis
erythema multiforme associated with
esophagitis in
gladiatorum
hypogonadism and
esophageal
keratitis
during pregnancy/neonatal infection
stomatitis/gingivostomatitis in
treatment/prevention of
type 1
type 2
vaccine development and
Herpes zoster (shingles)
earache in
eye involvement and
facial involvement in/Ramsay Hunt syndrome and
male
neuralgia after
prevention and. See also Herpes zoster vaccine
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus
Herpes zoster oticus
Herpes zoster vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in hypogonadism
yp g
neuralgia prevention and
Herpesviruses. See also specific type
Herpesviruses 1 and 2. See Herpes simplex infection
Herpetic stomatitis/gingivostomatitis
Herpetic whitlow
Herplex. See Idoxuridine
Heterophil antibody tests, in mononucleosis
Heterophyes species
Heterotopic pregnancy. See also Ectopic pregnancy
HEV. See Hepatitis E virus
Hexalen. See Altretamine
Hexosaminidase deficiency, in juvenile spinal muscular
atrophy
HFE gene, in hemochromatosis
HFRS. See Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
hGH. See Human growth hormone
HGV. See Hepatitis G virus
HHEX-IDE gene, in type 2 diabetes
HHT. See Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
HHV. See Human herpesviruses
5-HIAA. See 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid
Hiatal hernia
esophageal webs and rings and
GERD and
Hibernation, myocardial
Hiccups
HIDA scan, in cholecystitis
Hidradenitis suppurativa (acne inversa)
High-altitude cerebral edema
High-altitude pulmonary edema
High altitude-related illness
acute mountain sickness
cerebral edema
chronic mountain sickness (Monge disease)
neurologic conditions
prevention of
pulmonary edema
subacute mountain sickness
High (eversion) ankle sprain
High blood pressure. See Hypertension
High-calcium diet
High-carbohydrate diet
cholesterol lowering and
in porphyria
High-density lipoproteins/cholesterol
atherogenesis/cardiovascular/coronary heart disease
and
in women
cholesterol-lowering diets and
in diabetes mellitus
estrogen replacement affecting
raising levels of
fibric acid derivatives for
niacin for
reference values for
screening tests for levels of
tendinous xanthomas and
testosterone replacement affecting
thiazolidinedione therapy and
High dose chemotherapy, with bone marrow/stem cell
transplantation. See also 
Bone 
marrow/stem 
cell
transplantation; Chemotherapy
High-fiber diet. See Fiber, dietary
High molecular-weight kininogen deficiency
High-potassium diet
Highly 
active 
antiretroviral 
therapy 
(HAART). See
Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Hill sign
Hip
arthritis of
back pain and
nongonococcal acute bacterial (septic)
examination of
osteonecrosis of
range of motion of
in back pain
in hip fracture
in knee pain
Hip fracture
atypical, bisphosphonate use and
estrogen replacement therapy affecting risk of
falls in elderly and
osteoporosis and
postoperative delirium and
Hip protectors, fracture prevention and
Hip replacement, for arthritis
Hip resurfacing surgery
Hirschsprung disease, in MEN
Hirsutism
in adrenocortical insufficiency
in polycystic ovary syndrome
testosterone replacement therapy in women and
His-ventricular interval, long
Histamine
in bronchial provocation testing for asthma
drugs blocking receptors for. See Antihistamines; H2
receptor blocking drugs
Histidine decarboxylase gene mutation, in Tourette
syndrome
Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi/Kikuchi-
Fugimoto disease)
Histiocytosis, Langerhans cell
Histoplasma capsulatum (histoplasmosis)
bone and joint involvement in
Histrionic (hysterical) personality disorder
HIT. See Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
HIV/HIV-1. See also HIV infection/AIDS
drug resistance and
drugs blocking entry of into cells (entry inhibitors)
screening blood for antibody to
serologic tests in identification of. See HIV testing
HIV-2. See also HIV infection/AIDS
HIV-associated cognitive/motor complex (AIDS dementia
complex)
HIV-associated nephropathy
HIV infection/AIDS. See also Immunocompromised host
adenovirus infection and
adherence to therapy and
allergic reactions in
anal dysplasia/cancer and
arthritis in
autoimmunity in
bacillary angiomatosis/bartonellosis in
biliary disease in
breastfeeding in transmission of
campylobacter/campylobacter-like organisms causing
disease in
cancer associated with
candidiasis in
esophageal
in hypogonadism
vulvovaginal
CD4 T cells in. See CD4 T cells
CDC definitions and
cerebral lymphoma in
Chagas disease and
cholecystitis in
CIN/cervical cancer in
clinical findings in
CMV infections in
prophylaxis of
retinitis
coccidial and microsporidial infection in
coccidioidomycosis in
coronary heart disease in
cortisol resistance/adrenal insufficiency and
counseling and
postexposure prophylaxis and
cryptococcosis/cryptococcal meningitis in
prevention/prophylaxis and
cryptosporidiosis in
dementia associated with
diarrhea/enterocolitis in
differential diagnosis of
drug use and
prevention/postexposure prophylaxis and
endocrinologic manifestations of
eosinophilic folliculitis in
erythrovirus (parvovirus) infection in
esophagitis in
etiology of
extrapyramidal effects in patients with
fever/FUO and
folliculitis and
fungal rashes in
gastrointestinal manifestations of
gastropathy in
gynecologic manifestations of
gynecomastia and
hairy leukoplakia in
health care maintenance for patients with
hemophilia and
hepatic disease/hepatitis in
hepatitis A vaccine in
hepatitis B vaccine in
in estrogen replacement therapy
acyclovir treatment/prophylaxis and
esophagitis
herpes zoster and
histoplasmosis in
Hodgkin disease in
hyperkalemia in
hypersensitivity reactions and
hyponatremia in
immune thrombocytopenia in
immunization recommendations in
incidence/prevalence of
infections in. See also specific type and Opportunistic
infections
CD4 T cell levels and
prevention of
treatment of
inflammatory 
reactions 
(immune 
reconstitution
syndromes) in
influenza vaccination and
intracranial tumors in
Kaposi sarcoma in
laboratory findings in
leishmaniasis and
lymphadenopathy in
y p
p
y
eustachian tube dysfunction/serous otitis media and
lymphoma in
MAC infections in
prevention of
malabsorption in
malaria in
measles/measles (MMR) vaccine in
mental 
status 
changes 
in. See HIV-associated
cognitive/motor complex
molluscum contagiosum in
myelopathies in
myocarditis in
myopathy in
needle-stick injury and
nephropathy in
neurologic manifestations of
neuropathy
in MEN
nontuberculous mycobacterial infection in
ocular manifestations of
oral lesions in
otitis media and
otologic manifestations of
P marneffei infection in
pathogenesis of
pathophysiology of
perinatal transmission of
breastfeeding and
pneumonia 
in. See also Pneumocystisjiroveci
pneumonia
CD4 T cell count and
immunization against. See Pneumococcal vaccine
pneumonitis in, nonspecific interstitial
postexposure prophylaxis and
in pregnancy
prevention of. See HIV infection/AIDS, transmission of,
prevention of
prognosis of
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in
psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis in
pulmonary manifestations of. See also HIV infection/AIDS,
pneumonia in
reactive arthritis and
retinitis in
rheumatic manifestations of
Salmonella bacteremia in
scabies in
sclerosing cholangitis in
screening for. See HIV testing
seborrheic dermatitis in
seizures in
sinusitis in
skin disorders in
sporotrichosis in
staphylococcal skin infections in
strongyloidiasis in
syphilis and
syphilis tests affected by
systemic complaints associated with
T cells in. See CD4 T cells
toxoplasmosis in
prevention/chemoprophylaxis and
transient ischemic attacks and
transmission of
bites in
to fetus/newborn
health care providers and
prevention of
   blood screening/blood treatment and
   condoms for
   postexposure prophylaxis and
rape/sexual assault and
sexual behavior and
transfusions and
treatment of
adjunctive
antiretroviral 
therapy. See also Antiretroviral
therapy/HAART
opportunistic infections/malignancies and
   prophylaxis and
in pregnancy
tuberculosis and
tuberculin skin test in
tuberculosis in
chemoprophylaxis/prevention and
drug use and
intestinal involvement in
peritoneal involvement and
treatment of
vaccine development and
medullary thyroid carcinoma in
VDRL test in
weight loss in
Wernicke encephalopathy in
in women. See also HIV infection/AIDS, perinatal
transmission of
xerosis in
HIV integrase inhibitors
resistance to
HIV painful articular syndrome
HIV rapid antibody tests
HIV RNA tests, reference values for
HIV testing
in blood screening
influenza vaccine affecting results in
after needle-stick
in pregnancy
after rape/sexual assault
reference values for
in STD patients
in syphilis patients
transmission prevention and
HIV viral load tests
antiretroviral therapy initiation/monitoring and
py
g
blood screening and
reference values for
Hives. See Urticaria
Hivid. See Zalcitabine
HJV gene, in juvenile-onset hemochromatosis
HLA. See Human leukocyte antigen
hMG. See Human menopausal gonadotropins
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. See Statin drugs
HMSN. See Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy
HNF
hepatic adenomas and
in MODY
HNPCC. See Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
Hoarseness
contact ulcers/granulomas causing
GERD and
laryngeal leukoplakia causing
laryngitis causing
laryngopharyngeal reflux causing
in lung cancer
in recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
vocal folds/vocal fold lesions and
HOCM (hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy). See
Cardiomyopathy
Hodgkin disease
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation for
fever/FUO and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Holiday heart
Holosystolic murmurs. See Heart murmurs
Holter monitoring. See Ambulatory electrocardiographic
monitoring
Homans sign, in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary
embolism
Home environment, of elderly patients, falls and
Home hemodialysis
Home oxygen therapy
Homeostenosis. See Age/aging
Homocysteine
disorders of metabolism of
reference values for
Homocystinuria
Homogentisic acid oxidase deficiency, in alkaptonuria
Homonymous field defects. See Visual field defects
Homosexuality
hepatitis B transmission and
HIV infection/AIDS transmission risk and
STD prevention/screening and
syphilis in
Honey, infant botulism and
Hookworm disease
cutaneous larva migrans
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes and
Hordeolum
Hormone receptor sites, in breast cancer
in male
prognosis and
treatment and
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). See Estrogen
(hormone) replacement therapy
Hormone 
therapy. See also 
Estrogen 
(hormone)
replacement therapy; Testosterone replacement therapy
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for breast cancer
adjuvant/neoadjuvant
hormone receptor sites and
in male
for metastatic disease (palliative)
breastfeeding and
in contraception
injections/implants
oral contraceptives
for dysfunctional uterine bleeding
for endometriosis
for erectile dysfunction
for hypogonadism
for infertility
in male
for lactation suppression
for osteoporosis prevention/management
for prostate cancer
Hormones, ectopic production of
by islet cell tumors
in paraneoplastic syndromes
Horner syndrome (oculosympathetic paralysis)
in coma or stupor
headache and
in lung cancer
Horse chestnut seed extract, for venous insufficiency
Hospice care. See also End of life, provision of care at
Hospital-acquired pneumonia
Hospital-associated infections. See Health care (hospital)-
associated infections
Hospitalization
for alcohol use/abuse/withdrawal
for asthma/asthma exacerbation
for community-acquired pneumonia
for COPD
for depression
diabetes management during
for diarrhea
for hyperemesis gravidarum
infections acquired during. See also Health care
(hospital)-associated infections
for personality disorders
for preeclampsia/eclampsia
prolonged
psychiatric problems associated with
for schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
for suicidal patient
for third-trimester bleeding
for vomiting
Host defenses, impairment of. See Immunocompromised
host
Hot environments, disorders caused by exposure to. See
also under Heat
Hot flushes
estrogen replacement therapy for
in menopause
topical progesterone for
Hot soaks, for wart removal
Hot tub (Pseudomonas) folliculitis
Hounsfield units, urinary stone density measured with
Household cleaning agents, poisoning caused by. See
Caustic/corrosive agents
Howell-Jolly bodies, in sickle cell anemia
HPC (hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation). See
Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation
HPMPC. See Cidofovir
HPS. See Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
HPV. See Human papillomavirus
HPV vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis prevention and
in STD prevention
HPV (16/18) and HPV (6/11/16/18) L1 virus-like particle
vaccine. See also HPV vaccine
HRIG. See Human rabies immune globulin
HRT (hormone replacement therapy). See Estrogen
(hormone) replacement therapy
HRV. See Rotavirus vaccine
HSDD. See Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
HSH (hydrogenated starch hydrolases)
HSV-1. See Herpes simplex infection, type 1
HSV-2. See Herpes simplex infection, type 2
5-HT3 receptor antagonists. See Serotonin 5-HT3-receptor-
blocking agents
HTLV. See Human T cell lymphotropic/leukemia virus
Humalog. See Insulin lispro
Human bite wounds
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
in amenorrhea, pregnancy and
for cryptorchism
in ectopic pregnancy
in gestational trophoblastic disease
hyperthyroidism and
gynecomastia and
hyperthyroidism during pregnancy and
for male infertility
pregnancy tests and
reference values for
spontaneous abortion and
testicular tumors producing
Human deoxyribonuclease (rhDNase), for cystic fibrosis
Human diploid cell (HDCV) rabies vaccine
Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis
Lyme disease coinfection and
Human growth hormone. See also Growth hormone
Human herpesvirus 1 and 2. See Herpes simplex infection
Human herpesvirus 3. See Varicella zoster virus
Human herpesvirus 4. See Epstein-Barr virus
Human herpesvirus 6
aphthous ulcers and
Human herpesvirus 7
Human herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes
virus)
Human herpesviruses. See also specific type
Human immunodeficiency virus. See HIV/HIV-1; HIV-2
Human insulin. See also Insulin therapy
Human interferons. See specific type under Interferon
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
clinical relevance of testing for
in diabetes
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing
for granulocyte transfusions
for platelet transfusions
for stem cell transplant
Human menopausal gonadotropins (hMG), for ovulation
induction
Human metapneumovirus
Human monocytic ehrlichiosis
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
in anal cancer
in CIN/cervical cancer
screening for
genital types of. See also Venereal (genital) warts
in laryngeal carcinoma
nasal tumors (inverted papillomas) caused by
recurrent respiratory (laryngeal) papillomas caused by
vaccine for. See Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine
in vulvar carcinoma
warts caused by. See also Venereal (genital) warts
Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis prevention and
in STD prevention
Human papillomavirus (HPV) virus-like particle (VLP)
vaccine. See also Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine
Human parechovirus infection
Human 
parvovirus 
B19 
infection. See Erythrovirus
(parvovirus B19) infection
Human rabies immune globulin
Human T cell lymphotropic/leukemia virus (HTLV)
myelopathy caused by
transfusion in transmission of/screening blood for
Humidifier lung
Humira. See Adalimumab
Humoral 
immunity. See 
also 
B 
lymphocytes;
Immunoglobulins
infections associated with defects in
Humulin. See also Insulin therapy
Hungry bone syndrome
Huntingtin gene
Huntington disease
parkinsonism differentiated from
Huntington disease-like (HDL) disorders
Hürthle cell thyroid carcinoma
HUS. See Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Hutchinson sign
Hyaline, alcoholic
Hyaline casts
Hyaluronic acid injections, for osteoarthritis of knee
Hybridization, in situ, for HER-2/neu assessment in breast
cancer
Hycamtin. See Topotecan
Hydatid disease/cysts
Hydatidiform mole. See also Gestational trophoblastic
disease
hCG levels in
hyperthyroidism in
Hydralazine
for heart failure
for hypertension
eclampsia and
in urgencies/emergencies
Hydration. See Fluid management/hydration
Hydrea. See Hydroxyurea
Hydrocarbon toxicity/abuse
pneumonitis and
Hydrocele
in filariasis
in testicular cancer
Hydrocephalus
arteriovenous malformations causing
intracranial tumor causing
normal-pressure
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
Hydrochlorothiazide. See also Diuretics; Thiazide diuretics
in combination products
for diabetes insipidus
for islet cell tumors/insulinomas
Hydrocodone
in combination agents
Hydrocortisone. See also Corticosteroids
for ACTH deficiency
acute adrenal insufficiency
Addison disease
hypercortisolism/Cushing syndrome treatment and
for hypopituitarism
for inflammatory bowel disease/ulcerative colitis
perioperative
topical
Hydrodistention, in interstitial cystitis
Hydro-Diuril. See Hydrochlorothiazide
Hydrofluoric acid burns
Hydrogen breath test
in bacterial overgrowth
in lactose intolerance
Hydrogen cyanide gas, poisoning caused by
Hydrogenated starch hydrolases
y
g
y
Hydromorphone
overdose/toxicity of
Hydronephrosis
postrenal acute kidney injury and
in tubulointerstitial disease
Hydrophobia, in rabies
Hydrops
endolymphatic. See Endolymphatic hydrops
fetalis
of gallbladder
Hydroquinone, for hyperpigmentation
Hydrothorax, hepatic
Hydroureter, postrenal acute kidney injury and
Hydroxocobalamin, for cyanide poisoning
β-Hydroxybutyrate/hydroxybutyric acid
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in diabetes mellitus
in diabetic ketoacidosis
γ-Hydroxybutyrate, overdose/toxicity of
Cushing syndrome and
Hydroxychloroquine
adverse ophthalmic effects of
arrhythmias caused by
for lichen planus
for lupus/SLE
for porphyria cutanea tarda
for rheumatoid arthritis
18-Hydroxycorticosterone, in aldosteronism
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA)
carcinoids secreting
reference values for
11-Hydroxylase/P450c11 deficiency
17-Hydroxylase/P450c17 deficiency
21-Hydroxylase/P450c21 deficiency
Hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase
inhibitors. See Statin drugs
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
in amenorrhea
in hirsutism/virilization
in preterm labor prevention
11 β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
in hypertension
in licorice-induced hypokalemia
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, amenorrhea
in
17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency
5-Hydroxytryptamine-3 
receptor 
antagonists. See
Serotonin 5-HT3-receptor-blocking agents
Hydroxyurea
in cancer chemotherapy
for essential thrombocytosis
for polycythemia
for sickle cell disease
25-Hydroxyvitamin D3. See Calcifediol
Hydroxyzine. See also Antihistamines
for insomnia
for pruritus
for urticaria
Hygiene hypothesis, for diabetes mellitus
Hygroton. See Chlorthalidone
Hymen, imperforate, absent menses and
Hymenolepis
diminuta (rodent tapeworm)
nana (dwarf tapeworm)
Hyoscyamus niger, toxicity of
Hyper-IgE syndrome, atopic-like dermatitis in
Hyperacusis
Hyperadrenergic syndrome, mitral valve prolapse and
Hyperaldosteronism. See Aldosteronism
Hyperalimentation. See Central vein nutritional support
Hyperandrogenism
acne and
amenorrhea caused by
in hirsutism/virilization
in polycystic ovary syndrome
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
for carbon monoxide poisoning
for clostridial myonecrosis
for dysbarism/decompression sickness
for high altitude-related illness
Hyperbilirubinemia. See also Bilirubin levels; Jaundice
in biliary tract carcinoma
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
Hypercalcemia. See also Hyperparathyroidism
adrenocortical insufficiency/Addison disease and
artifact causing
bisphosphonate use causing
bisphosphonates for
calcium ingestion causing
cancer-related
pamidronate/zoledronic acid for
familial hypocalciuric
hypercalciuria and
hyperparathyroidism and
in hyperthyroidism
hypocalciuria and
immobilization
in kidney injury/renal failure/dialysis patients
lithium use and
in MEN
in myeloma
parathyroid carcinoma and
psoriasis treatment with vitamin D analogs and
in sarcoidosis
vitamin D ingestion and
Hypercalciuria. See also Calcium nephrolithiasis
hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism and
hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism and
with hypomagnesemia
in sarcoidosis
Hypercapnia. See Permissive hypercapnia; Respiratory
acidosis
Hypercarotenosis
Hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
diabetic ketoacidosis and
dilutional
gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss and
parenteral nutritional support and
posthypocapnia
renal disease/renal tubular acidosis and
urinary anion gap in assessment of
Hypercholesterolemia. See also 
Cholesterol; 
Lipid
disorders
clinical presentations in
familial
in diabetes mellitus
management of. See Lipid-lowering therapy
in nephrotic syndrome
preventable disease/deaths and
screening for
in cardiovascular disease prevention
in older adults
in women
Hyperchylomicronemia
clinical presentations in
in diabetes mellitus
familial
Hypercoagulability
in acute mesenteric vein occlusion
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
in Behçet syndrome
deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
superficial thrombophlebitis and
Hypercortisolism. See also Cushing syndrome
Hyperdynamic state, in myocardial infarction
Hyperemesis gravidarum
thyroid disorders and
Wernicke encephalopathy and
Hypereosinophilic syndromes, cardiac involvement in
Hypergammaglobulinemia
bronchiectasis and
chronic pancreatitis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Hypergastrinemia
carcinoid tumors and
in pernicious anemia gastritis
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma) and
Hyperglycemia. See also Diabetes mellitus
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
antipsychotic drug use and
coma caused by. See Diabetic coma
control of. See Glycemic control in diabetes
in diabetic ketoacidosis
drugs causing
drugs for treatment of. See also Antidiabetic agents;
Insulin therapy
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
hyponatremia and
insulin resistance and
pancreatitis/pancreatectomy and
parenteral nutritional support and
in pheochromocytoma
prebreakfast
in pregnancy
congenital anomalies caused by
preventable disease/deaths and
secondary
surgery and, prevention of
Hyperglycemic coma. See Diabetic coma
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
Hyperhomocysteinemia, 
in 
coronary 
heart
disease/occlusive arterial disease
Hyperinfection syndrome, in strongyloidiasis
Hyperinsulinemia
acne and
factitious
hypoglycemic
insulinoma causing
islet cell hyperplasia causing
in insulin resistance syndrome (syndrome X)
in polycystic ovary syndrome
Hyperkalemia
in acidosis
adrenocortical insufficiency/Addison disease and
angiotensin-converting 
enzyme 
(ACE)
inhibitors/angiotensin blockers causing
in diabetic ketoacidosis
genetic disorders and
in HIV infection/AIDS
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
in hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
postoperative
renal disorders/failure and
in tubulointerstitial disease
in tumor lysis syndrome
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Hyperkeratosis, plantar, of heels
Hyperketonemia
in diabetic ketoacidosis
at end of life
Hyperleukocytosis, in acute leukemia
Hyperlipidemia. See also Lipid disorders
antipsychotic drugs and
antiretroviral therapy causing
in diabetes mellitus
familial combined
hyponatremia and
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
treatment of. See Lipid-lowering therapy
Hypermagnesemia
in acute tubular necrosis/kidney injury
hypomagnesemia treatment and
hypoparathyroidism and
Hypermetabolism
in burn injury
in chronic myeloid leukemia
in HIV infection/AIDS
Hypermethioninemia, newborn screening for
Hypernatremia
in diabetes insipidus
in diabetes mellitus/glucosuria
enteral nutritional support and
Hyperopia
Hyperosmolality (hyperosmolar disorders)
hyperglycemia and (hyperglycemic hyperosmolar
state)
hypernatremia and
Hyperosmolar nonketotic dehydration, parenteral nutritional
support and
Hyperostosis, diffuse idiopathic skeletal (DISH)
Hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis
Hyperparathyroidism. See also Hypercalcemia
bisphosphonate use and
bone changes and
chronic kidney disease and
hypercalcemia and
hypercalciuria and
lithium use and
in MEN
after parathyroidectomy
parathyroidectomy for
during pregnancy
Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome
Hyperpathia
intracranial mass lesions causing
neuropathy causing
stroke causing
Hyperphosphatemia
hypercalcemia and
in kidney disease
acute tubular necrosis
bone disorders and
hyperparathyroidism and
hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism and
in lactic acidosis
parenteral nutritional support and
in tumor lysis syndrome
Hyperpigmentation. See also Pigmented skin lesions
in Addison disease
in alkaptonuria
antipsychotic drugs causing
chemotherapy-induced
drugs causing
in hemochromatosis
nail, drugs causing
in porphyria cutanea tarda
postinflammatory
in varicose veins
in venous insufficiency
in visceral leishmaniasis
Hyperplastic polyps
Hyperprolactinemia
amenorrhea and
asenapine causing
gynecomastia and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
infertility and
nipple discharge in
risperidone-induced
Hyperproteinemia, hyponatremia and
Hyperreactio luteinalis
Hyperreflexia
in serotonin syndrome
in tetanus
Hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism
Hypersensitivity, visceral
chest pain and
irritable bowel syndrome and
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity 
reactions. See also Allergies/allergic
reactions
to antimicrobials
in HIV infection/AIDS
to ophthalmic medications
to transfusion
Hypersensitivity syndromes, drug-induced (complex drug
eruptions)
Hypersomnias
yp
Hyperstat. See Diazoxide
Hypertension
insulin therapy for
aortic dissection and
assessment/diagnosis of
atherosclerosis and
atrial fibrillation and
cardiovascular disease/risk factors/prevention and
cerebrovascular disease and
Insulin therapy
classification of
in coarctation of aorta
complications of untreated disease and
in Cushing syndrome
dementia and
in diabetes mellitus/diabetic nephropathy
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors for
antihypertensive therapy regimens for
benefits of control of
calcium channel blocking agents and
epistaxis and
estrogen use and
fibromuscular dysplasia/renal artery stenosis and
genetic factors in
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
headache and
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors for
insulin resistance syndrome and
intracerebral hemorrhage and
intracranial. See Intracranial hypertension
malignant
headache in
management of
hypoglycemia associated with
   cardiovascular/heart disease prevention and
   congestive heart failure and
   in diabetic patients
   exercise/activity and
   kidney disease/renal failure and
   lifestyle modifications/nonpharmacologic therapy
and
alcohol-related
   preoperative
   for urgencies/emergencies
metabolic syndrome (syndrome X) and
in nephritic syndrome
ocular. See Ocular hypertension
oral contraceptive use and
in pheochromocytoma
in poisoning/drug overdose
in polyarteritis nodosa
in polycystic kidney disease
portal. See Portal hypertension
portopulmonary
atherogenesis/cardiovascular/coronary heart disease
and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of
exercise/activity in
primary essential
pulmonary. See Pulmonary hypertension
renal disease and
renal vascular
resistant
retinochoroidopathy in
salt-sensitive
screening for
secondary
sleep apnea and
sodium restriction and
lipoproteins/lipid fractions and
in emergencies/urgencies
Hypertension exacerbated in pregnancy
Hypertensive emergencies
MAOIs causing
in pheochromocytoma
diagnostic imaging and
in scleroderma
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Hypertensive nephropathy
Hypertensive 
urgencies. See 
also 
Hypertensive
emergencies
Hyperthecosis. See Polycystic ovary syndrome
Hyperthermia. See also Fever; Heat; Serotonin syndrome
antipsychotic 
drugs 
causing. See 
Neuroleptic
malignant syndrome
heat exposure syndromes and
malignant
in poisoning/drug overdose. See also Serotonin
syndrome
Hyperthermia therapy, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis)
amiodarone-induced
apathetic
atrial fibrillation in
cancer-related
cardiac disorders/failure and
eye disease associated with
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
factitious
fetal
in gestational trophoblastic disease
lipoproteins/lipid fractions and
in Graves disease
Hashimoto thyroiditis and
hypercalcemia and
hypothyroidism after treatment for
iodine-induced (jodbasedow disease/phenomenon)
lactation and
lipid abnormalities and
lithium causing
muscle weakness and
osteoporosis and
palpitations and
after parathyroidectomy
periodic paralysis and
pituitary tumor/hyperplasia causing
postpartum
heart disease risk and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
struma ovarii causing
subacute thyroiditis and
subclinical
thyroid carcinoma and
thyroid testing in
toxic adenoma/solitary nodule causing
TSH levels in
Hypertonic hyponatremia
Hypertonic saline
for cystic fibrosis
for hyponatremia
Hypertrichosis
lanuginosa
minoxidil therapy and
in porphyria cutanea tarda
Hypertriglyceridemia. See also Lipid disorders
alcohol use/abuse and
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
clinical presentations in
HIV infection/antiretroviral therapy and
hyponatremia and
insulin resistance syndrome/diabetes mellitus and
management of
in nephrotic syndrome
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
pancreatitis and
Hypertrophic/hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. See
Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic gastropathy (Ménétrier disease)
Hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy/hypertrophic 
pulmonary
osteoarthropathy
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
Hyperuricemia
acute tubular necrosis/kidney injury and
asymptomatic
cancer-related/chemotherapy-induced
allopurinol for
rasburicase for
chronic kidney disease and
in diabetes insipidus
in diabetes mellitus
drugs causing
in gout
in myeloma
in polycythemia
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in transplant patient
urinary stone formation and. See also Uric acid urinary
stones
Hyperuricosuric calcium nephrolithiasis
Hyperventilation
for acute mountain sickness
lactic acidosis and
in metabolic acidosis
neurogenic, in coma or stupor
respiratory alkalosis (hypocapnia) and
Hyperviscosity syndrome
in myeloma
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Hypervitaminosis A
Hypervolemia, acute kidney injury and
Hypervolemic hypernatremia
Hypervolemic hypotonic hyponatremia
Hyphema
Hypnagogic hallucinations. See also Hallucinations
in narcolepsy
Hypnosis/hypnotherapy
for chronic pain
for conversion disorders
for dyspepsia
for irritable bowel syndrome
Hypnotic drugs. See Sedative-hypnotics
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD)
Hypoadrenalism. See Adrenocortical insufficiency
Hypoalbuminemia
anion gap affected in
ascites and
calcium levels and
in nephrotic syndrome
in protein-losing enteropathy
Hypoaldosteronism
Addison disease and
in renal tubular acidosis
Hypobaric hypoxia. See also High altitude-related illness
air travel emergencies and
Hypocalcemia
bisphosphonate use and
familial
with hypercalciuria
hyperphosphatemia and
hypomagnesemia and
hypoparathyroidism 
and. See 
also
Hypoparathyroidism
in kidney disease
acute tubular necrosis
bone disorders and
muscle cramps caused by
pancreatitis and
after parathyroidectomy
in pseudohypoparathyroidism
tetany and
Hypocalciuria, 
hypercalcemia 
and 
(hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia)
Hypocapnia. See Respiratory alkalosis
yp
p
p
y
Hypochloremia, in respiratory acidosis
Hypochlorite, for skin/clothing decontamination
Hypocholesterolemic drugs. See Lipid-lowering therapy
Hypochondriasis
Hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
Hypocomplementemia
in hepatitis C-related renal disease
in SLE
Hypogammaglobulinemia
in bronchiectasis
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
common variable immunodeficiency causing
infection and
Hypoglycemia
adrenocortical insufficiency and
difficile, colitis/diarrhea caused by
altered awareness of
autoimmune/immunopathologic
cancer-related
chronic kidney disease/uremia and
coma caused by
in poisoning/drug overdose
diabetes treatment and
drug-induced
exercise-induced
factitious
fasting
postethanol
functional alimentary
after gastric surgery
glucagon response to, lack of
hyperinsulinemic
insulinoma causing
islet cell hyperplasia causing
hypophosphatemia associated with treatment of
insulin-induced/intensive glycemic control and
noninsulinoma 
pancreatogenous 
hypoglycemia
syndrome (islet cell hyperplasia) causing
nonislet cell tumors causing
occult diabetes and
pancreatic B cell tumors/insulinoma causing
pentamidine-induced
postprandial (reactive)
postethanol
status epilepticus caused by
surgery and, prevention of
Hypoglycemic drugs. See also Antidiabetic agents; Insulin
therapy
overdose/toxicity of
Hypoglycemic unawareness
Hypogonadism
in Addison disease
androgen insensitivity causing
female
amenorrhea in
hormone replacement therapy for
premature (premature ovarian failure)
in Turner syndrome
GH-secreting pituitary tumor causing
in HIV infection/AIDS
hypergonadotropic
hyperprolactinemia and
hypogonadotropic
isolated/congenital
C difficile causing
Tuberculosis
gynecomastia and
hormone replacement therapy for
infertility and
sexual dysfunction and
osteoporosis and
Hypokalemia
aldosteronism and
differential diagnosis
diabetic ketoacidosis treatment and
diuretic use and
genetic disorders and
in hyperchloremic normal anion gap metabolic
acidosis/renal tubular acidosis
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
hypomagnesemia and
kidney injury/renal disorders and
in metabolic alkalosis
parenteral nutritional support and
vitamin B12 replacement therapy and
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
in hyperthyroidism
Hypomagnesemia
hypercalciuria and
thrombophlebitis/septic phlebitis and
hypokalemia and
parenteral nutritional support and
Hypomagnesemia-hypercalciuria syndrome
Hypomania. See also Mania
in cyclothymic disorders
drug therapy for
Hyponatremia
adrenocortical insufficiency/Addison disease and
in diabetic ketoacidosis
drugs causing
endurance exercise causing
in HIV infection/AIDS
hormone abnormalities causing
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
in hypopituitarism
in hypothyroidism/myxedema
MDMA causing
nausea/pain/surgery/procedures causing
after pituitary surgery
in porphyria
psychogenic polydipsia/beer potomania causing
reset osmostat causing
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
in SIADH
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
Hypoparathyroidism
fetal, maternal hyperparathyroidism and
hyper-/hypomagnesemia and
hypercalciuria and
hypocalcemia and
after parathyroid surgery
tetany and
after thyroidectomy
Hypophosphatasia
Hypophosphatemia
in diabetic ketoacidosis
hypercalciuria and
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
hyperparathyroidism and
osteomalacia/rickets and
Hypophosphatemic rickets/osteomalacia
Hypophysectomy, for breast cancer
Hypopigmentation
in atopic dermatitis
in tinea (pityriasis) versicolor
in tuberous sclerosis
Hypopituitarism
after acromegaly/gigantism treatment
amenorrhea and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Hypopnea, sleep. See also Sleep apnea
Hypoproteinemia, in nephrotic syndrome
Hypoprothrombinemia
in cirrhosis
factor II antibodies and
salicylate-induced
Hypopyon
in anterior uveitis
in bacterial keratitis
in Behçet syndrome
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
in renal tubular acidosis
Hyposmia
in Kallmann syndrome
Hypotension
in Addison disease
in cholera
in desensitization therapy
in diabetes mellitus
dysautonomia (autonomic dysfunction) and
myocardial infarction and
orthostatic 
(postural). See Orthostatic (postural)
hypotension
palpitations and
pheochromocytoma/pheochromocytoma removal and
in poisoning/drug overdose
right ventricular infarction and
in shock
syncope and
transient ischemic attacks and
Hypotensive agents. See Antihypertensive drug therapy
Hypothalamic disorders
amenorrhea caused by
Hypothermia
coma and
of extremities
near drowning and
in poisoning/drug overdose
prevention of
rhabdomyolysis and
systemic (accidental)
Hypothyroidism
Addison disease and (Schmidt syndrome)
amiodarone-induced
cardiac disorders/failure and
congenital/fetal
maternal hyperthyroidism and
cretinism and
goiter/thyroid nodules and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
hepatitis C and
hyperprolactinemia and
after hyperthyroidism treatment
hyponatremia in
lipid abnormalities in
lithium causing
mania/bipolar disease and
muscle weakness and
pericardial effusions and
during pregnancy
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
after radioiodine therapy
in subacute (de Quervain) thyroiditis
subclinical
thiourea treatment and
thyroid testing in
after thyroidectomy
TSH deficiency/levels in
Hypotonic hyponatremia
Hypouricemia, in SIADH
Hypoventilation
alveolar
central
primary (Ondine curse)
obesity and (Pickwickian syndrome)
respiratory acidosis and
Hypovolemia
kidney injury and
in myocardial infarction
rhabdomyolysis and
Hypovolemic hypernatremia
Hypovolemic hypotonic hyponatremia
Hypovolemic shock
in heat stroke
in myocardial infarction
Hypoxemia
in ARDS
in asthma
in COPD
oxygen therapy and
in cystic fibrosis
dyspnea and
near drowning and
in patent foramen ovale
in pulmonary embolism
in respiratory failure
in sleep apnea
Hypoxia
hypobaric. See also High altitude-related illness
air travel emergencies and
lactic acidosis and
near drowning and
in pulmonary embolism
Hypoxic hepatitis
Hypoxis rooperi, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Hysterectomy. See 
also 
Menopause/menopausal
syndrome, surgical
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for cervical cancer
for endometrial carcinoma
for endometriosis
for gestational trophoblastic disease
for ovarian cancer
for pelvic organ prolapse
for PID
for postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
premature ovarian failure and
p
prophylactic, in HNPCC
for uterine leiomyoma
Hysteria (somatization disorder)
Hysterical conversion. See Conversion disorder
Hysterical (histrionic) personality disorder
Hysterosalpingography
in infertility workup
Hysteroscopy
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in endometrial carcinoma
Hytrin. See Terazosin
H yza a r. See 
Losartan, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
hydrochlorothiazide
123I. See also Radioactive iodine
for thyroid scanning. See also Radioiodine thyroid
scans and uptake
for whole body scanning, in thyroid cancer surveillance
123I-MIBG scanning, in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
131I. See also Radioactive iodine
for goiter
for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
ophthalmopathy flares and
thiourea treatment and
for thyroid cancer treatment
for thyroid nodules
for whole body scanning, in thyroid cancer surveillance
131I-MIBG therapy, for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
131I tositumomab
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
IA-2/IA2-β antibodies, in type 1 diabetes
IAA. See Insulin, antibodies to
IADL. See Instrumental activities of daily living
Iatrogenic pneumothorax
Ibandronate. See also Bisphosphonates
for osteoporosis prevention/management
Ibotenic acid, poisoning with mushrooms containing
Ibritumomab tiuxetan
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Ibuprofen
lithium interactions and
platelet function affected by
Ibutilide
for atrial fibrillation
for atrial flutter
ICA. See Islet cell antibodies
ICD. See Implantable cardioverter defibrillator
Ice water bath, for heat stroke
ICSI. See Intracytoplasmic sperm injection
Icteric leptospirosis (Weil syndrome)
Icterus. See Jaundice
Idamycin. See Idarubicin
Idarubicin
toxicity of
Idiogenic osmoles, hypernatremia treatment and
Idiopathic adulthood ductopenia
Idiopathic 
brachial 
plexus 
neuropathy 
(neuralgic
amyotrophy)
Idiopathic 
bronchiolitis 
obliterans 
with 
organizing
p n e u m o n i a . See 
Cryptogenic 
organizing
pneumonia/pneumonitis
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Idiopathic membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. See
also Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Idiopathic midline destructive disease
Idiopathic 
polyneuropathy, 
acute. See Guillain-Barré
syndrome
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Idiopathic (primary) pulmonary hypertension
Idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, diffuse (DISH)
Idiopathic torsion dystonia
Idiosyncratic drug reactions, liver disease caused by
Idioventricular rhythm, accelerated
in myocardial infarction
Idoxuridine
IEP. See Immunofixation electrophoresis
IFA. See Immunofluorescence assay
Ifex. See Ifosfamide
Ifosfamide
hemorrhagic cystitis caused by
mesna for prevention of
IgA
in celiac disease/dermatitis herpetiformis
in common variable immunodeficiency
in monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance
in mononucleosis
in myeloma
reference values for
selective deficiency of
anaphylactic transfusion reactions and
serum levels of, in IgA nephropathy
in toxoplasmosis
IgA nephropathy (Berger disease)
IgE. See also Allergies/allergic reactions
in anaphylaxis/urticaria/angioedema
atopy/atopic disease and
tests for
IgE-mediated (immediate/type I) hypersensitivity. See also
Allergies/allergic reactions
IGF-1. See Insulin-like growth factor-1
IGF-2. See Insulin-like growth factor-2
IGF2BP2 gene, in type 2 diabetes
IgG
in antibody-mediated/cytotoxic hypersensitivity
in autoimmune hemolytic anemia
in bullous pemphigoid
in common variable immunodeficiency
deficiency of, with IgA deficiency
in hepatitis A
in hepatitis B
in IgA nephropathy
in immune complex hypersensitivity
intravenous. See Intravenous immune globulin
in Lyme disease
in membranous nephropathy
in monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance
in mononucleosis
in multiple sclerosis
in myeloma
in neuromyelitis optica
in pancreatitis
platelet-associated
in postinfectious glomerulonephritis
reference values for
in rubella
in toxoplasmosis
IgG index
IgG4-associated cholangitis
IGIV. See Intravenous immune globulin
IgM
in antibody-mediated/cytotoxic hypersensitivity
in cold agglutinin disease
in common variable immunodeficiency
in hepatitis A
in hepatitis B
in immune complex hypersensitivity
in Lyme disease
in mononucleosis
reference values for
in rubella
in toxoplasmosis
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
IL. See under Interleukin
IL2RA/IL7RA genes, in multiple sclerosis
IL28B gene, in hepatitis C
Ileitis/ileocolitis, in Crohn disease
Ileum. See also Small intestine
resection of
short bowel syndrome and
vitamin B12 deficiency and
Ileus
gallstone
in pancreatitis
paralytic (acute/adynamic)
Iliac arteries, atherosclerotic/occlusive disease of
Iliotibial band syndrome
Illicit drug use. See Substance use disorders
Illness behaviors, abnormal
Illusions
in focal seizures
intracranial tumors causing
psychedelic drug use and
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Iloperidone
Iloprost, for pulmonary hypertension
Imagery (emotive imagery), in anxiety disorders
Imaging. See also specific disorder andunder Radiation
radiation exposure and
cancer risk and
Imatinib
for chronic myeloid leukemia
for gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors
Imbalance. See Dysequilibrium; Falls; Vertigo; Vestibular
disorders
Imidazoles, topical. See also specificagent
Imiglucerase, for Gaucher disease
Imipenem
for abdominal infections
for anthrax
for pneumonia
Imipramine. See also Antidepressants
for cataplexy
Imiquimod
for actinic keratoses
for genital warts
Immediate (IgE-mediated/type I) hypersensitivity. See also
Allergies/allergic reactions
Immersion (trench) foot/hand
Immobility
deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and
in elderly
hypercalcemia and
pressure ulcers and
rhabdomyolysis and
urinary incontinence and
Immobilization
for dislocated shoulder
in musculoskeletal injury management
Immune alveolar hemorrhage
Immune clearance hepatitis B
Immune complex-mediated hypersensitivity (type III)
glomerulonephritis and
membranous nephropathy and
serum sickness and
Immune 
globulin. See specific type and Intravenous
immune globulin
Immune insulin resistance
Immune intervention therapy, for diabetes prevention/delay
Immune reconstitution syndromes (IRIS)
in cryptococcosis
Immune recovery uveitis
Immune thrombocytopenia. See also Thrombocytopenia
Immune tolerant hepatitis B
Immunity/immune 
response 
disorders. See
Allergies/allergic reactions; Atopic disease; Autoimmune
disorders; Immunodeficiency
influenza virus vaccine
recommended types/schedules for
for adults
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
for infants/children/adolescents
during pregnancy
for travelers
safety (adverse effects/contraindications) and
Immunocompromised host. See also HIV infection/AIDS;
Immunodeficiency
adenovirus infection in
aspergillosis in
bronchiectasis in
cancer-related infection and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
coccidial and microsporidial infection in
cognitive disorders/delirium and
diarrhea in
erythrovirus (parvovirus) infection in
fever/FUO and
antimicrobial therapy and
gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis in
herpes zoster/herpes zoster vaccination in
herpetic stomatitis in
histoplasmosis in
immunizations in
in HIV infection/AIDS
opportunistic infection/course of disease and
pneumococcal vaccine
infections in. See also Opportunistic infections
infectious esophagitis in
mucormycosis in
nocardiosis in
Pneumocystis infections in
pulmonary infiltrates/pneumonia in
scabies in
squamous cell carcinoma in
q
strongyloidiasis in
toxoplasmosis in
varicella in
Immunodeficiency. See also Immunocompromised host
acquired, in HIV infection/AIDS. See also HIV
infection/AIDS
common variable
in Epstein-Barr virus infection
infections associated with. See also Opportunistic
infections
primary
selective IgA
anaphylactic transfusion reactions and
Immunofixation electrophoresis
in amyloidosis
in myeloma
Immunofluorescence assay, in Lyme disease
Immunoglobulins. See also specific typeunder Ig and
Antibodies
in colostrum/breast milk
reference values for
Immunologic disorders. See Allergies/allergic reactions;
Atopic disease; Autoimmune disorders; Immunodeficiency
Immunomodulating therapy. See also Immunotherapy
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for asthma
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
for myeloma
for ophthalmic disorders
thrombocytopenia caused by
Immunopathologic (autoimmune) hypoglycemia
Immunosuppressive 
therapy. See 
also
Immunocompromised host; Immunomodulating therapy
for aplastic anemia
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia
fever/FUO and
hyperkalemia caused by
infections and
Kaposi sarcoma complicating
for multiple sclerosis
for myelodysplastic syndromes
neurologic disorders associated with
for polyarteritis nodosa
for pure red cell aplasia
for SLE
thrombocytopenia caused by
after transplant
infections and
kidney transplant and
squamous cell carcinoma and
stem cell transplantation and
Immunotherapy. See also Immunomodulating therapy
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
intravesical, for bladder cancer
,
for venomous stings
in wart removal
Impedance plethysmography/testing
in esophageal disorders
in venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
Imperforate hymen, absent menses and
Impetiginization, in allergic contact dermatitis
Impetigo
allergic contact dermatitis differentiated from
antibiotics for
in HIV infection/AIDS
Impingement syndrome (subacromial)
Implanon
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator
for cardiomyopathy
for heart failure
for long QT syndrome
postinfarction
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
for ventricular fibrillation/sudden death
for ventricular tachycardia
Impotence. See Erectile dysfunction/impotence
Impulse conduction, disturbances of. See Conduction
disturbances
Impulse control disorders
aggressive/violent behavior and
in dementia
In vitro fertilization
Inactivated enhanced-potency poliovaccine (IPV/Salk
vaccine)
pregnancy and
for travelers
Inactive HBsAg carrier state
Inactivity, physical
lipid abnormalities and
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of
Incentalomas, thyroid PET
Incentive spirometry, prevention of postoperative pulmonary
complications and
Incest
Incidentalomas (incidentally discovered thyroid nodules)
Inclusion body encephalitis, measles and
Inclusion body myositis
Inclusion conjunctivitis
in newborn
Inclusion cysts, epidermal (EIC)
furuncles differentiated from
Inclusion disease, CMV, in newborn
Incompetent cervix
cerclage/activity restriction for
Incomplete abortion
Incontinence. See Fecal incontinence; Urinary incontinence
Increased 
intracranial 
pressure. See 
Intracranial
hypertension
Incretins, for diabetes mellitus
Indapamide
Inderal. See Propranolol
Indian tick typhus
Indigestion. See Dyspepsia
Indinavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Indirect straight leg raise test, in back pain
Indocin. See Indomethacin
Indometh. See Indomethacin
Indomethacin
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for gout
lithium interactions and
in pain management
for patent ductus arteriosus
for preterm labor prevention
“Induction-maintenance” strategy, for antiretroviral therapy
Industrial bronchitis
Inevitable abortion
Infant. See Newborn
Infant botulism
Infarcts. See specific type
Infection/infectious 
diseases. See also specific type
ororgan system affected
in acute leukemia
arthritis and
bacterial
bite wounds and
burn injury and
in cancer patients. See also Opportunistic infections
catheter-associated
chlamydial
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
in drug users
HIV infection/AIDS
   prevention/postexposure prophylaxis and
fever/FUO and
after frostbite, prevention of
gastritis caused by
glomerulonephritis and
headache and
health care-associated
helminthic
oral (thrush)
in 
immunocompromised 
host. See also 
HIV
infection/AIDS; Opportunistic infections
insulin requirements and
interstitial nephritis and
mycotic
of bones and joints
superficial. See also Tinea
in myeloma
myocarditis and
neuropathies associated with
neutropenia and
opportunistic. See Opportunistic infections
osteomyelitis and
during pregnancy
prevention of. See also Immunizations
CD4 T cell counts and
protozoal
reactive arthritis and
rickettsial
seizures and
sexually transmitted
shock associated with. See Sepsis/septic shock
spirochetal
surgical site
antibiotic prophylaxis for
in diabetic patients
thrombocytopenia and
transfusion in transmission of
travel and
tubulointerstitial nephritis and
vaccine-preventable
viral
Infection control
handwashing and
health care-associated infection prevention and
Infection (struvite) urinary stones
Infectious diseases. See Infection
Infectious mononucleosis. See Mononucleosis
Infective endocarditis. See Endocarditis, infective
Inferior vena cava filters/interruption, for pulmonary
embolism
Infertility
female
endometriosis and
in polycystic ovary syndrome
hyperprolactinemia and
in hypopituitarism. See also Hypogonadism
male
cryptorchism and
in cystic fibrosis
in Klinefelter syndrome
marijuana use and
radiation exposure causing
Inflammation. See also specific type andstructure/systems
affected
coronary heart disease and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Inflammatory adenoma of liver
Inflammatory aneurysm
Inflammatory bowel disease. See also Crohn disease;
Ulcerative colitis
acne treatment and
arthritis and
colorectal cancer and
diarrhea in
drug therapy for
GI bleeding and
hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis and
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
social support for patient with
Inflammatory breast carcinoma. See also Breast cancer
Inflammatory eye disease. See also Conjunctivitis; Uveitis
Inflammatory myopathy
idiopathic
Inflammatory pericarditis, acute. See also specificcause
and Pericarditis
Inflammatory polyneuropathy, chronic
Inflammatory skin nodules. See also specific type
Infliximab. See also Anti-TNF agents
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
for psoriasis
for rheumatoid arthritis
Influenza
cough in
drug resistance and
H1N1 (2009 H1N1/swine flu)
immunization against. See H1N1 influenza vaccine
H5N1 (avian)
neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir/zanamivir) for
pneumonia and
prevention of. See also Influenza virus vaccine
seasonal
Influenza A/California/04/2009 (2009 H1N1/swine flu)
immunization against
Influenza virus vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in asthma patients
avian (H5N1) influenza and
in COPD
H1N1 influenza and
in asthma patients
high-dose
HIV screening tests affected by
in HIV infection/AIDS
pneumonia prevention and
pregnancy and
seasonal influenza
Infraspinatus tendon, evaluation of
Infratentorial arteriovenous malformations
Infundibular stenosis
Infusion pumps
for enteral nutritional support
insulin. See Insulin infusion pumps
Ingrown hairs, pseudofolliculitis caused by
Ingrown nails
INH. See Isoniazid
Inhalation injury/smoke inhalation
burn survival and
corrosive acids and
cyanide poisoning and
Inhalational anthrax
Inhaled insulin
Inhalers
in HIV infection/AIDS
for COPD therapy
Inhibin A, prenatal screening for
Inhibitor 
tolerance 
induction, 
in 
hemophilia
management
Injection drug use. See also Substance use disorders
febrile patient and
infections and
endocarditis
hepatitis
HIV infection/AIDS
   prevention/postexposure prophylaxis and
osteomyelitis
skin infections
wound botulism
Injury. See Trauma
INK4A gene, pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Inkspot lentigines
Inner ear
Inner ear antigens, autoimmune audiovestibular dysfunction
and
Innocent murmurs. See Heart murmurs
Innohep. See Tinzaparin
Inocybe (muscarine) mushroom poisoning
Inotropic agents. See also Digitalis/digitalis glycosides
for heart failure
left ventricular (infarct-related)
for shock
Insect bites/stings. See also specific type of insect
anaphylaxis caused by
scorpion stings
spider bites
urticaria caused by
Insecticide poisoning (cholinesterase inhibitors)
Insemination, artificial
Insomnia
in dementia
drug therapy for
fatal familial (FFI)
in older patients
psychological strategies for
Inspra. See Eplerenone
Instability. See also Falls; Gait/gait disorders; Genetic
instability
knee
shoulder
Instrumental activities of daily living (IADL), assessment of
ability to perform in elderly
Insulin. See also Insulin therapy
adipokines affecting action of in obesity
antibodies to
in autoimmune/immunopathologic hypoglycemia
in factitious hypoglycemia
in immune insulin resistance
insulin therapy causing
in type 1 diabetes
B cell tumors/insulinomas secreting
B cells secreting
g
blood levels of
chronic kidney disease and
in insulinoma diagnosis
prebreakfast hyperglycemia and
factitious hypoglycemia caused by administration of
immunoreactive, reference values for
insensitivity 
to. See 
Insulin 
resistance/insulin
insensitivity
mutant, in diabetes mellitus
receptors for. See Insulin receptors
resistance 
to. See 
Insulin 
resistance/insulin
insensitivity
Insulin aspart. See also Insulin therapy
in mixtures/combination therapy
in pregnancy
Insulin detemir. See also Insulin therapy
Insulin gene, in diabetes mellitus
Insulin glargine. See also Insulin therapy
in pregnancy
Insulin glulisine. See also Insulin therapy
Insulin hypoglycemia test, in GH deficiency
Insulin infusion pumps
clinical studies of long-term complications and
continuous glucose monitoring and
ketoacidosis and
during pregnancy
rapidly acting analogs used in
surgery and
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)
deficiency of
in GH deficiency/rhGH therapy
in GH excess
reference values for
Insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF-2), nonislet cell tumor
hypoglycemia and
Insulin lispro. See also Insulin therapy
in mixtures/combination therapy
in pregnancy
Insulin pens
Insulin receptors
antibodies to, in hypoglycemia
mutant, diabetes caused by
Insulin resistance/insulin insensitivity. See also Insulin
resistance syndrome
acanthosis nigricans and
acne and
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
in Cushing syndrome
in diabetes
diabetic ketoacidosis and
hepatitis C and
hyperglycemia and
immune
in polycystic ovary syndrome
during pregnancy
Insulin 
resistance 
syndrome 
(metabolic
syndrome/syndrome X)
coronary heart disease/angina and
diabetes and
dyslipidemia in
fatty liver and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
hypertension and
hypophosphatemia and
obesity and
Insulin syringes and needles
non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
administration methods/regimens for
allergy to
antidepressant drug interactions and
anti-insulin antibodies and
for β-blocker overdose/toxicity
bioavailability of preparations and
for calcium channel blocker overdose/toxicity
complications of
concentrations of insulin and
continuous subcutaneous infusion (CSII). See also
Insulin infusion pumps
for diabetic ketoacidosis
transition to subcutaneous regimen and
exercise affecting
factitious hypoglycemia and
for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
for hyperkalemia
hypoglycemia and
immunopathology of
p
gy
inhalation for administration of
injection sites for
intensive
acceptable levels of glycemic control and
clinical studies of long-term
complications and
diabetic nephropathy development/progression and
diabetic retinopathy development/progression and
hypoglycemia and
during pregnancy
self-monitoring of blood glucose and
surgery and
in type 2 diabetics
intraoperative requirements/administration of
lipodystrophy/lipoatrophy/lipohypertrophy and
MAOI interactions and
mixtures/combination therapy and
with oral antidiabetic agents, for type 2 diabetes
during pregnancy
preparation types available
in prevention/delay of diabetes
purified insulin and
self-monitoring of blood glucose and
species of insulin and
surgery and
for type 1 diabetics
for type 2 diabetics
Insulinomas. See also Islet cell tumors
localization of
in MEN
INTACS (intrastromal corneal ring segments)
Intal. See Cromolyn
Integrase inhibitors, for HIV infection/AIDS
resistance to
Integrilin. See Eptifibatide
Intelence. See Etravirine
Intensive care unit, patient in. See Critical illness
Intensive care unit psychosis
Intercostal neuritis
Intercourse, sexual. See Sexual intercourse
Interdigital (toe web) tinea pedis
Interferon-α/interferon alfa
for cancer chemotherapy
for essential thrombosis
for hepatitis B
for hepatitis C
for hepatitis D
for Kaposi sarcoma
pegylated. See Peginterferon
for polycythemia
for renal cell carcinoma
thyroid dysfunction caused by
toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
Interferon-β/interferon beta
for multiple sclerosis
thyroid dysfunction caused by
Interferon-γ, in fever
Interleukin-1 (IL-1), in fever
Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
in cancer chemotherapy
for renal cell carcinoma
thyroid dysfunction caused by
Interleukin-2 receptor? gene, in multiple sclerosis
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
in Addison disease
in amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism
in fever
Interleukin-7 receptor? gene, in multiple sclerosis
Interleukin-8 (IL-8), in familial Mediterranean fever
Interleukin-11 (neumega/IL-11), recombinant (oprelvekin),
for chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia
Interleukin-12/23 (IL-12/23) monoclonal antibodies, for
psoriasis
Intermediate-acting insulin. See also Insulin therapy; NPH
insulin
mixed insulin preparations and
Intermediate uveitis (pars planitis). See also Uveitis
Intermittent claudication. See Claudication
Intermittent mandatory ventilation, synchronized (SIMV), for
respiratory failure
Intermittent positive-pressure breathing (IPPB), prevention
of postoperative pulmonary complications and
Internal hordeolum
Internal rotation, assessment of
,
in hip
in shoulder
rotator cuff strength and
Interosseous nerve, anterior, lesion of
Interpersonal relationships
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
social issues for terminally ill/dying patient and
Interstitial cystitis
Interstitial lung disease. See also specific disorder
acute pneumonia (AIP)
cryptogenic 
organizing 
pneumonia/pneumonitis
(COP/bronchiolitis 
obliterans 
organizing
pneumonia/BOOP)
desquamative pneumonia (DIP)
drug-related
eosinophilic
idiopathic pneumonias
nonspecific pneumonia (NSIP)
in HIV infection/AIDS
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
respiratory bronchiolitis-associated (RB-ILD)
sarcoidosis
usual pneumonia (UIP)
Interstitial nephritis
in SLE
Intertriginous area
miliaria affecting
seborrhea of
Intertrigo
tinea differentiated from
Interventricular septum
hypertrophy of, in cardiomyopathy
rupture of, in myocardial infarction
Intervertebral disk disorders. See Cervical spine/disk
disease; Lumbar spine/disk disease; Sacral spine/disk
disease; Thoracic spine/disk disease
Interview (medical)
Intestinal adenocarcinoma
Intestinal amebiasis
Intestinal angina (visceral artery insufficiency)
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth. See Bacterial overgrowth
Intestinal carcinoids
Intestinal disorders. See Gastrointestinal system, disorders
of
Intestinal flagellate infections. See also specific type
Intestinal flukes
Intestinal ischemia
GI bleeding and
Intestinal lymphoma
Intestinal motility disorders. See Motility disorders
Intestinal nematode (roundworm) infections
Intestinal obstruction. See also Motility disorders
in 
acute 
colonic 
pseudo-obstruction 
(Ogilvie
syndrome)
chemotherapy-induced neuropathy causing
in chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
in Crohn disease
in gastroparesis
tumors causing
vomiting and
Intestinal sarcoma
Intestinal transplantation, for short bowel syndrome
Intestinal tuberculosis
Intestinal-type gastric cancer
Intoxication. See also specific substancecausing
acute alcohol
metabolic acidosis/osmolar gap and
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
pathologic
Intra-arterial embolization. See Embolization
Intracerebral hemorrhage. See also Stroke
arteriovenous malformations causing
in coarctation of aorta
head injury causing
headache in
hypertension and
thrombolytic therapy for myocardial infarction and
thrombolytic therapy for pulmonary embolism and
Intracoronary 
stents. See also Percutaneous coronary
intervention
subsequent perioperative risks/management and
Intracranial abscess. See Brain abscess
Intracranial aneurysm. See also Stroke
in polycystic kidney disease
subarachnoid hemorrhage and
Intracranial 
bleeding. See Intracerebral hemorrhage;
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Intracranial hypertension
in arteriovenous malformations
benign (pseudotumor cerebri)
headache and
brain abscess/infection causing
cerebral injury and
ECT contraindicated in
headache and
idiopathic
in liver failure
optic disk swelling and (papilledema)
headache and
in stroke
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
tumors causing. See also Intracranial masses/tumors
vomiting caused by
Intracranial masses/tumors
abscess causing. See Brain abscess
coma or stupor caused by
false localizing signs and
headache caused by
cough headache and
in HIV infection/AIDS
metastatic
nonmetastatic neurologic complications and
ocular motor palsies and
p
primary
seizures caused by
vocal fold paralysis caused by
Intracranial venous thrombosis. See also Stroke
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
Intraepidermal squamous cell carcinoma (Bowen disease)
Intrahepatic cholestasis
of pregnancy
Intrahepatic 
portosystemic 
shunts. See Transvenous
(transjugular) intrahepatic portosystemic shunts
IntraLASIK (femtosecond laser assisted LASIK)
Intralipid. See Intravenous fat
Intraocular foreign body
Intraocular hypertension. See Ocular hypertension
Intraocular inflammation. See also Uveitis
Intraocular lenses
after cataract removal
for refractive errors
Intraocular pressure
elevated. See Ocular hypertension
normal
Intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy, 
for 
malignant
ascites/peritoneal carcinomatosis
Intrastromal corneal ring segments (INTACS)
Intrathecal pumps, for pain medications
Intrauterine devices (IUDs)
dysmenorrhea and
for emergency/postcoital contraception
levonorgestrel-releasing
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
pelvic infection/PID and
progestin-releasing
Intrauterine insemination
Intravascular 
abscesses 
(septic 
superficial
thrombophlebitis). See also Septic thrombophlebitis
Intravascular ultrasound, in angina
Intravenous catheters. See Catheters/intravenous lines
Intravenous drug use. See Injection drug use
Intravenous fat
for calcium channel blocker overdose
for hypotension in poisoning/overdose
in nutritional support
Intravenous fluids. See Fluid management/hydration
Intravenous gamma globulin. See Intravenous immune
globulin
Intravenous immune globulin
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia
for common variable immunodeficiency
for Guillain-Barré syndrome
for immune thrombocytopenia
for pemphigus
for posttransfusion purpura
for pure red cell aplasia
for toxic epidermal necrolysis
Intravenous lines. See Catheters/intravenous lines
Intraventricular conduction defects
Intraventricular cysts, in cysticercosis (neurocysticercosis)
Intravesical chemotherapy, for bladder cancer
Intrinsic acute kidney injury. See also specific cause
Intrinsic factor, in pernicious anemia gastritis
Intron A. See Interferon-α/interferon alfa
Intubation. See also Airway management; Mechanical
ventilation
in ARDS
in asthma
for burn injuries
in comatose patient
conversion to tracheotomy and
in epiglottitis
for near drowning
pneumonia (ventilator-associated) and
for respiratory failure
for smoke inhalation
Invalidism. See Sick role
Invasive fibrous/invasive (Riedel) thyroiditis
Invasive fungal sinusitis
Invasive mole. See also Gestational trophoblastic disease
Invasive nematode (roundworm) infections
Invega. See Paliperidone
Inverse pityriasis rosea
Inverse psoriasis, tinea differentiated from
Inversion ankle sprains
Inverted papilloma
Invirase. See Saquinavir
Iodinated contrast agents, for hyperthyroidism/Graves
disease
Iodine
in amiodarone-induced thyroid disease
hyperthyroidism
hypothyroidism
deficiency of
goiter and
thyroid nodules caused by
dietary/supplementary
in goiter prevention/treatment
Graves disease triggered by
restriction for thyroid nodules/cancer/goiter and
jodbasedow disease/phenomenon and
radioactive. See Radioactive iodine; Radioiodine
thyroid scans and uptake
Iodine-131 tositumomab
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Iodized salt, goiter prevention/treatment and
123I-meta-Iodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scanning, in
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
131I-meta-Iodobenzylguanidine (131I-MIBG) therapy, for
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
Iodochlorhydroxyquin, adverse ophthalmic effects of
Iodoquinol, for amebiasis
Ionizing radiation. See also under Radiation
from medical imaging
cancer risk and
Iontophoresis sweat test, in cystic fibrosis
Iopanoic acid, for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
Iopidine. See Apraclonidine
Ipecac, for poisoning/drug overdose
iPledge
Ipodate sodium, for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
IPPB. See Intermittent positive-pressure breathing
Ipratropium
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
with albuterol
for COPD
IPV (inactivated poliovaccine/Salk vaccine)
pregnancy and
for travelers
Iquix. See Levofloxacin
Irbesartan/irbesartan with hydrochlorothiazide
Iressa. See Gefitinib
Iridodialysis
Iridoplasty/iridotomy/iridectomy, 
for 
angle-closure
glaucoma
Irinotecan
for colorectal cancer
IRIS (immune reconstitution syndromes)
in cryptococcosis
Iris nodules, in uveitis
Iritis
Iron
accumulation of
in hemochromatosis
in sideroblastic anemia
deficiency of/iron deficiency anemia
celiac disease and
in chronic kidney disease
in cirrhosis
in colorectal cancer
esophageal webs and (Plummer-Vinson syndrome)
GI bleeding and
in idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
in polycythemia
during pregnancy
thrombocytopenia and
dietary
nutritional support requirements and
overdose/toxicity of. See also Hemosiderosis
serum levels of
in anemia of chronic disease
in iron deficiency anemia
in overdose
reference values for
in sideroblastic anemia
supplementary
in chronic kidney disease
for iron deficiency anemia
for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
in pregnancy
total body
Iron-binding capacity, total (TIBC)
Iron deficiency anemia. See Iron, deficiency of
Iron overload. See Hemochromatosis; Hemosiderosis
Irritable bowel syndrome
alarm symptoms in
diarrhea in
psychological therapies for
Irritant contact dermatitis
Irritative voiding symptoms
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
in bladder cancer
in cystitis
in epididymitis
in interstitial cystitis
in prostatitis
in pyelonephritis
IS. See Incentive spirometry
Ischemia
acute tubular necrosis caused by
brainstem, seizures differentiated from
digital
in Raynaud phenomenon
in scleroderma
intestinal
GI bleeding and
mesenteric
myocardial. See Angina, pectoris; Coronary heart
disease; Myocardial ischemia
visceral
Ischemia testing, noninvasive, preoperative
Ischemic cardiomyopathy
Ischemic chest pain. See also Angina
Ischemic colitis
Ischemic heart disease. See Angina, pectoris; Coronary
heart disease; Myocardial ischemia
Ischemic hepatitis/hepatopathy
Ischemic optic neuropathy
in giant cell arteritis
Ischemic rest pain. See Rest pain
Isentress. See Raltegravir
Islet cell antibodies, in diabetes mellitus
Islet cell tumors
hypoglycemia caused by
in MEN
Islet cells, pancreatic. See also B cells
hyperplasia 
of 
(noninsulinoma 
pancreatogenous
hypoglycemia syndrome)
transplantation of, for diabetes
Ismelin. See Guanethidine
Isocarboxazid, overdose/toxicity of
Isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH)
congenital
Isomalt
Isoniazid
benzodiazepine interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
pyridoxine (vitamin B6) for
seizures and
for tuberculosis
in latent disease/prophylactic
in pregnancy
resistance and
Isoniazid/rifampin, for tuberculosis
Isoniazid/rifampin/pyrazinamide, for tuberculosis
Isophane (NPH) insulin. See Insulin therapy; NPH insulin
Isopropanol, overdose/toxicity of, osmolar gap in
Isoptin. See Verapamil
Isosorbide. See also Nitrates
for angina
for heart failure
left ventricular (infarct-related)
for pulmonary edema
Isospora belli (isosporiasis)
Isosthenuria
in chronic kidney disease
in sickle cell disease
Isotonic hyponatremia
Isotretinoin
for acne
adverse ophthalmic effects of
breastfeeding and
for lupus
for rosacea
teratogenicity of
Isradipine
for angina
for hypertension
overdose/toxicity of
Istodax. See Romidepsin
Itch-scratch cycle. See also Pruritus
in lichen simplex chronicus
Itch-X-Gel. See Pramoxine
Itching. See Pruritus
Itchy red bump syndrome
Itopride, for functional dyspepsia
ITP. See Immune thrombocytopenia
Itraconazole
for aspergillosis
for blastomycosis
for candidiasis
for chromoblastomycosis
for coccidioidomycosis
for histoplasmosis
for onychomycosis
for P marneffei infection
for paracoccidioidomycosis
for sporotrichosis
IUDs. See Intrauterine devices
IVC filters. See Inferior vena cava filters/interruption
Ivermectin
for ascariasis
for cutaneous larva migrans
for filariasis
for gnathostomiasis
for loiasis
for onchocerciasis
for scabies
for strongyloidiasis
IVF. See In vitro fertilization
IVIG. See Intravenous immune globulin
IVUS. See Intravascular ultrasound
Ixabepilone
Ixempra. See Ixabepilone
Ixodes ticks. See Ticks
J stents, ureteral, after shock wave lithotripsy
J wave, in hypothermia
JAK2/JAK2 mutation
in essential thrombocytosis
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
in myelofibrosis
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
in polycythemia
Jamais vu
in focal seizures
intracranial tumors causing
Janeway lesions, in endocarditis
Janumet. See Sitagliptin, with metformin
Januvia. See Sitagliptin
Japanese B encephalitis
immunization against
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction
in leptospirosis
in relapsing fever
in syphilis
Jaundice (icterus)
in acute fatty liver of pregnancy
biliary stricture causing
in biliary tract carcinoma
in cholecystitis
in choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
cholestatic
in cirrhosis
in HIV infection/AIDS
in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
in leptospirosis
liver failure and
obstructive
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
in sickle cell syndromes
travel and
Jaw
osteonecrosis of, bisphosphonate use and
tumors of, hyperparathyroidism and
Jaw claudication, in giant cell arteritis
Jaw pain, in acute coronary syndromes/angina
JC 
virus 
(JCV), 
progressive 
multifocal
leukoencephalopathy caused by
Jejunostomies
Jervell-Lange-Nielsen syndrome
Jevtana. See Cabazitaxel
Jo-1 antibody, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Jock itch
Jodbasedow 
disease/phenomenon. See also Graves
disease; Hyperthyroidism
John Cunningham (JC) virus, progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy caused by
Joint fluid examination. See Synovial fluid examination
Joints
bleeding into, in hemophilia
Charcot. See Charcot joint
coccidioidomycosis involving
in decompression sickness
disorders/inflammation of
in Chikungunya fever
degenerative. See also Arthritis; Osteoarthritis
   in alkaptonuria
diagnosis and evaluation of
in HIV infection/AIDS
palindromic
pattern of
histoplasmosis involving
mycotic infections of
replacement of
coagulase-negative staphylococcal infection and
osteomyelitis and
in sarcoidosis
tuberculosis of
Jones criteria, for rheumatic fever
Joule burn
Jugular venous pulsations
in cardiomyopathy
in constrictive pericarditis
in heart failure
in myocardial infarction
in pericardial effusion/tamponade
in tetralogy of Fallot
in tricuspid regurgitation
in tricuspid stenosis
“Jump rope septum,”
Junctional nevi
Junctional rhythm, atrioventricular
Junctophilin-3 gene, in Huntington disease-like disorders
Junin virus
Juvenile angiofibroma
Juvenile polyposis, familial
Juvenile spinal muscular atrophy
JVP. See Jugular venous pulsations
K+. See Potassium
K103N mutation, antiretroviral drug resistance and
K-ras gene/mutations
colorectal cancer and
gallbladder cancer and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Kadian. See Morphine
Kal 1-6 genes, in Kallmann syndrome
Kala azar. See Visceral leishmaniasis
Kaletra. See Lopinavir/r
Kallmann syndrome
Kaolin pneumoconiosis
Kaposi sarcoma
chemotherapy for
cutaneous
ear involvement in
in HIV infection/AIDS
intestinal/visceral
oral
pulmonary
virus causing
Kaposi 
sarcoma-associated 
herpes 
virus 
(human
herpesvirus 8)
Kappa amyloid
Kappa free light chains, reference values for
Karyotyping
in male infertility
in Turner syndrome
Kasabach-Merritt syndrome
Katayama syndrome
Kattan nomogram, for prostate cancer assessment
Kava, toxicity of
Kawasaki disease
Kayexalate. See Sodium polystyrene sulfonate
Kayser-Fleischer ring, in Wilson disease
KCNE3 gene, in periodic paralysis
KCNJ2 gene, in periodic paralysis
KCNJ11 gene, in type 2 diabetes
KCNK18 gene, in familial hemiplegic migraine
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, hypoparathyroidism in
Kefir, for flatus
Keflex. See Cephalexin
Kegel (pelvic muscle) exercises
for fecal incontinence
for urinary incontinence
Kemadrin. See Procyclidine
Kennedy syndrome
Kenny-Caffey syndrome
Kent bundles, in preexcitation syndromes
Kenya tick typhus
Kepivance. See Palifermin
Keratectomy, photorefractive (PRK)
Keratic precipitates
Keratin 5/6, in mesothelioma
Keratinocytes, cultured, for burn wound closure
Keratitis
acanthamoeba
adenovirus
bacterial
chemical
contact lens wear and
fungal
herpes simplex
herpes zoster ophthalmicus
ultraviolet (actinic)
Keratoconjunctivitis. See also Conjunctivitis
adenovirus
atopic
chlamydial
epidemic
adenovirus
coxsackievirus
herpes simplex
sicca (dry eye)
in Sjögren syndrome
vernal
Keratoderma blennorrhagicum, in reactive arthritis
Keratolytic agents, for wart removal
Keratomalacia, in vitamin A deficiency
Keratomileusis
laser assisted in situ (LASIK)
laser epithelial (LASEK)
Keratopathy, band, in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
Keratoplasty, conductive
Keratoses
actinic
squamous cell carcinoma arising from
seborrheic
Kerlone. See Betaxolol
Kernig sign
Ketamine, in pain management
Ketoacidemia, in diabetic ketoacidosis
Ketoacidosis
alcoholic
diabetic. See also Diabetic ketoacidosis
Ketoconazole
for ACTH-secreting adrenal tumor/adrenocortical
carcinoma
in cancer chemotherapy
for candidiasis
for prostate cancer
for tinea versicolor
topical
Ketonemia
in diabetic ketoacidosis
at end of life
Ketones/ketone bodies
serum, reference values for
in urine. See Ketonuria
Ketonuria
in diabetes mellitus
in diabetic ketoacidosis
Ketoprofen
Ketorolac
for ophthalmic disorders
Ketosis, 
in 
diabetes 
mellitus. See also Diabetic
ketoacidosis
17-Ketosteroid reductase deficiency, in hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism
Ketotifen, for allergic eye disease
Ki-67 stain, breast cancer division rate and
Kidney. See also under Renal and Kidney disease/injury
abnormal development of, hypertension and
acute injury of (acute renal failure). See also Acute
kidney injury; Renal failure
biopsy of. See Renal biopsy
calculus formation in. See Nephrolithiasis; Urinary
stone disease
cancer of
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
chronic disease of. See also Chronic kidney disease
cystic diseases of. See Renal cysts
disorders of. See also Kidney disease/injury
in gout
medullary cystic
medullary sponge
metastatic disease of
methotrexate eliminated by
in myeloma
NSAIDs affecting
in phosphate regulation
polycystic
intracranial aneurysms and
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in SLE
systemic fibrosis and
toxic drug effects on. See Nephrotoxicity
transplantation of. See Kidney transplantation
tumors of
Kidney 
disease/injury. See also under Renal and
Nephritis; Nephropathy; Nephrotoxicity
ACE inhibitor use and
acid-base disorders in. See also Renal tubular acidosis
acute
postoperative
aminoglycosides and
in amyloidosis
anion gap acidosis and
assessment of
cardiorenal syndrome and
chronic. See also Chronic kidney disease
cystic. See also Renal cysts
in diabetes. See also Diabetic nephropathy
duration in evaluation of
exenatide use and
GFR in
glomerular
nephritic spectrum
nephrotic spectrum
in gout
lipid abnormalities/lipodystrophy/lipoatrophy and
hantaviruses causing (hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome)
heart failure and
hematuria in
Henoch-Schönlein purpura and
hepatitis C infection and
hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism and
hyperkalemia and
hypermagnesemia and
hyperphosphatemia in
hypertension and
treatment of
hypocalcemia and
hypokalemia and
hypomagnesemia and
hyponatremia in
intrinsic
lithium associated with
lower extremity edema and
mercury causing
methotrexate and
in microscopic polyangiitis
in myeloma
myoglobinuria/rhabdomyolysis and
antiretroviral therapy and
nephrotic spectrum
glomerular. See also Nephrotic syndrome
in primary renal disorders
from systemic disorders
neuropathy associated with
NSAIDs causing
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in polyarteritis nodosa
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
proteinuria in
pruritus associated with
radiation exposure causing
renal biopsy in
in scleroderma
sickle cell syndromes and
in SLE
in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in systemic fibrosis
in thrombotic microangiopathies
toxic drug effects and. See Nephrotoxicity
in tuberculosis
tubulointerstitial
in tumor lysis syndrome
in Turner syndrome
urinalysis in
Kidney stones. See Nephrolithiasis; Urinary stone disease
Kidney transplantation
adenovirus infection and
for diabetic nephropathy
for IgA nephropathy
pancreas transplantation and, for diabetes
Kiesselbach plexus, epistaxis and
Kikuchi/Kikuchi-Fugimoto disease
g
Killip classification
Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules
Kindling, in substance abuse disorders
Kingella species. See HACEK organisms
Kininogen, high molecular-weight, deficiency of
KIT protein, in gastrointestinal stromal tumors
Klatskin tumors
Klebsiella/Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Kleine-Levin syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
gynecomastia in
infertility and
Klonopin. See Clonazepam
Knee
arthritis of
knee pain and
nongonococcal acute bacterial (septic)
complex regional pain syndrome and
examination of
meniscal injuries and
overuse syndromes of
pain and
range of motion of
arthritis and
in collateral ligament injury
knee pain and
replacement of, for arthritis
Knee pain
in ALC injury
anterior (patellofemoral pain)
in collateral ligament injury
osteoarthritis and
in PCL injury
Knee realignment surgery
Kocher sign
Koebner phenomenon
in lichen planus
in psoriasis
KOH preparation
Kombiglyze XR. See Saxagliptin, with metformin
Koplik spots
Korsakoff psychosis/syndrome
KPs. See Keratic precipitates
KRAS mutations, in lung cancer
Krukenberg tumor
KSHV. See Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes virus
Kübler-Ross, stages of dying described by
Kugelberg-Welander syndrome
Kumamoto study
Kupffer cells
in autoimmune hemolytic anemia
in cirrhosis
in cold agglutinin disease
Kuru
Kussmaul respirations, in metabolic acidosis
Kussmaul sign
in constrictive pericarditis
p
in myocardial infarction
Kwashiorkor/kwashiorkor-like secondary protein–energy
malnutrition
Kyphoscoliosis, in syringomyelia
L-AmB. See Liposomal amphotericin B
La belle indifférence
La/SSB antibody
in lupus/SLE
in Sjögren syndrome
Labetalol, for hypertension
in aortic dissection
eclampsia and
pheochromocytoma and
in urgencies/emergencies
Labor and delivery
acute fatty liver of pregnancy and
for cardiac patient
endocarditis prophylaxis and
for diabetic patient
herpes simplex transmission during
for HIV-positive patient
induction of, after 41 weeks
preeclampsia/eclampsia and
preterm (premature)
varicella transmission and
Laboratory tests. See Diagnostic/laboratory tests
Labyrinthine concussion, vertigo caused by
Labyrinthitis
Lacerations
cerebral
ocular
scalp
Lachman test
Lac-Hydrin-Five
Lacosamide
Lacrimal apparatus, disorders of
Lacrimal punctal occlusion, for dry eye
Lacrimal sac, infection of (dacryocystitis)
LaCrosse agent, California encephalitis caused by
β-Lactam antibiotics. See Beta-lactam antibiotics
Lactase deficiency. See also Lactose (milk) intolerance
Lactase enzyme replacement
Lactate. See Lactic acid
Lactate dehydrogenase (LD/LDH)
ascitic fluid
bacterial peritonitis and
tuberculous peritonitis and
in hemolytic anemia
in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
pleural fluid
in Pneumocystis pneumonia
reference values for
in testicular cancer
in vitamin B12 deficiency
Lactated Ringer solution. See Fluid management/hydration
Lactation/breastfeeding
antituberculosis drug therapy during
breast abscess and
breast cancer and
drug/medication 
use/avoidance 
during. See also
specificagent
HIV infection/AIDS transmission and
iron requirements/supplementation during
IUD insertion and
mastitis and
candidal
oral contraceptive use and
progestin minipill and
suppression of
thyroid medication during
Lactic acid (lactate)
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in lactic acidosis
reference/normal values for
Lactic acidosis
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
metformin causing
Lactitol
Lactobacillus probiotic, for antibiotic-associated
colitis prevention
Lactoferrin, fecal
in Crohn disease
in diarrhea
Lactose-free diet
Lactose (milk) intolerance
diarrhea caused by
flatus caused by
Lactulose
for constipation
in GI bleeding
for hepatic encephalopathy
Lactulose breath test, in bacterial overgrowth
Lacunar infarction. See also Stroke
LAD A. See Latent autoimmune diabetes mellitus of
adulthood
Laennec cirrhosis
LAIV influenza vaccine. See also Influenza virus vaccine
Lambda amyloid
Lambda free light chains, reference values for
Lambert-Eaton (myasthenic) syndrome
in cancer
Laminectomy, decompressive
for spinal trauma
for spinal tumors/cord compression
Lamisil. See Terbinafine
Lamivudine (3TC). See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with abacavir
for hepatitis B
during pregnancy
resistance to
with zidovudine
postexposure
with zidovudine and abacavir
Lamotrigine
for bipolar disease/mania
overdose/toxicity of
for seizures
pregnancy and
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Language. See Speech/language
Laninamivir
Lanreotide, for acromegaly/gigantism
Lansoprazole. See also Proton pump inhibitors
Lanthanum, for hyperphosphatemia
mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease and
Lantus. See Insulin glargine
Laparoscopy
in ascites
in ectopic pregnancy
in gynecologic disorders
in PID
for tubal ligation
Lapatinib
Large cell carcinoma of lung. See also Lung cancer
Large-needle (core needle) biopsy, for breast lump
evaluation. See also Breast, biopsy of
stereotactic guided
Large-volume paracentesis. See Paracentesis
Laron syndrome/dwarfism
Larva migrans
cutaneous
ocular
visceral
Laryngeal carcinoma
hoarseness and
leukoplakia and
Laryngeal leukoplakia
Laryngeal nerve, recurrent
damage to during thyroid surgery
vocal fold paralysis caused by damage/lesions of
Laryngeal papillomas
Laryngectomy, for squamous cell carcinoma of larynx
Laryngitis
Laryngopharyngeal 
reflux. See also Gastroesophageal
reflux disease
Laryngospasm
in drowning
in hypocalcemia
Larynx
masses of
papillomas of
LASEK (laser epithelial keratomileusis)
Laser assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK)
Laser epithelial keratomileusis (LASEK)
Laser-induced prostatectomy, transurethral (TULIP), for
benign prostatic hyperplasia
Laser therapy
for acne scars
for age-related macular degeneration
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
for CIN/cervical cancer
for condylomata acuminata
for diabetic retinopathy
for esophageal cancer palliation
for glaucoma
for hirsutism
for hyperpigmentation
for lung cancer palliation
for pseudofolliculitis
for refractive errors
for retinal detachment
for retinal vein occlusion
for sickle cell retinopathy
for wart removal
LASIK (laser assisted in situ keratomileusis)
Lasix. See Furosemide
Lassa fever
Latanoprost, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Latanoprost/timolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Late life psychosis
Latent autoimmune diabetes mellitus of adulthood (LADA)
Lateral collateral ligament
injury of
Lateral epicondylosis
Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve lesions (meralgia
paresthetica)
Lateral meniscus. See also Meniscal cartilage, of knee
Lateral sclerosis
amyotrophic
dementia and
primary
Latex allergy, anaphylaxis and
Latissimus dorsi flap, for breast reconstruction
Latrodectus mactans (black widow spider)
Lavage
bronchoalveolar. See Bronchoalveolar lavage
gastric, for poisoning/drug overdose
Lavender top tubes
Laxative abuse
diarrhea caused by
Laxatives
hypermagnesemia and
for irritable bowel syndrome
for opioid-induced constipation
LCHAD 
deficiency. See 
Long-chain 
3-
hydroxyacylcoenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency
LCIS. See Lobular carcinoma in situ
LCM. See Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
LD. See Lactate dehydrogenase
LDCT. See Low-dose helical computed tomography
LDH. See Lactate dehydrogenase
LDL. See Low-density lipoproteins/cholesterol
Lead, reference values for
Lead encephalopathy
gasoline sniffing and
Lead nephropathy
Lead poisoning
gasoline sniffing and
gout and
ophthalmic effects of
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Leflunomide, for rheumatoid arthritis
Left-to-right shunts. See Shunts
Left ventricular aneurysm
coronary artery trauma and
myocardial infarction and
Left ventricular angiography, in angina
Left ventricular (LV) apical ballooning syndrome. See Tako-
Tsubo (stress/catecholamine-induced) cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular assist devices
for cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, increased, in
dyspnea
Left ventricular (left heart) failure/dysfunction. See also
Congestive heart (cardiac) failure
hypertension and
myocardial infarction and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
Left ventricular hypertrophy
in cardiomyopathy. See also Cardiomyopathy
in coarctation of aorta
in congestive heart failure
hypertensive
sudden death of athlete and
Leg. See also under Lower extremity
acute arterial occlusion of
appearance of
in acute arterial occlusion
in femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
in lower leg/foot occlusive disease
in varicose veins
in venous insufficiency
Leg elevation
for lymphedema
for venous insufficiency
Leg pain. See also Claudication
in acute arterial occlusion
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
in pulmonary embolism
in spinal stenosis
Leg ulcers
in sickle cell syndromes
in venous insufficiency/varicose veins/lower extremity
occlusive disease
   osteomyelitis and
Legal blindness. See also Blindness
age-related macular degeneration causing
Legalon-SIL. See Silymarin
Legionella/Legionella pneumophila,
Legionnaires disease (legionella pneumonia/legionellosis)
Leiden mutation, deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary
embolism and
Leiomyomas
esophageal
gastrointestinal
of uterus (fibroid tumor)
Leiomyosarcoma
gastrointestinal (stromal tumors)
of uterus
Leishmania (leishmaniasis)
cutaneous
post-kala azar
mucocutaneous (espundia)
post-kala azar dermal
recidivans
visceral (kala azar)
Leishmanin skin test
Lemierre syndrome
Lenalidomide
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
for myelodysplastic syndromes
for myelofibrosis
for myeloma
Lens opacity. See Cataract
Lentigines
solar (liver spots)
Lentigo maligna melanoma
g
g
Lepirudin, for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Leprechaunism
Lepromatous leprosy. See also Leprosy
Lepromin skin test
Leprosy (Hansen disease)
neuropathy associated with
Leptin/leptin receptor, in obesity
insulin action and
Leptomeningeal metastases (carcinomatous meningitis)
Leptospira/Leptospira interrogans (leptospirosis)
Lescol. See Fluvastatin
Lethal midline granuloma
Letrozole
for breast cancer
for endometriosis
for ovulation induction
Leucine, in insulinoma diagnosis
Leucovorin (folinic acid) rescue
with 5-fluorouracil
with methotrexate
Leukapheresis
for acute leukemia
for chronic myeloid dysplasia
Leukemias
acute. See also specific type
infection and
lymphoblastic/lymphocytic (ALL)
myeloid (AML)
promyelocytic (APL)
   DIC associated with
adult 
T 
cell 
(ATL). See also Human T cell
lymphotropic/leukemia virus
aleukemic
chronic
lymphocytic (CLL)
myeloid (CML)
myelomonocytic (CMML)
prolymphocytic
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma and
fever/FUO and
hairy cell
meningeal
plasma cell
rheumatic manifestations of
secondary to chemotherapy or radiation therapy
stem cell transplants for
Leukemic arthritis
Leukeran. See Chlorambucil
Leukine. See Sargramostim
Leukoagglutinin transfusion reactions
leukocyte-poor blood in prevention of
Leukocidin, Panton-Valentine
Leukocyte casts
in interstitial nephritis
Leukocyte count. See White blood cell count
Leukocyte-poor blood, transfusion of. See also Transfusion
Leukocytes
fecal, in diarrhea
pleural fluid
Leukocytosis
in acute leukemia
in cellulitis
in lymphangitis/lymphadenitis
in Still disease
Leukoderma
Leukoencephalopathy, progressive multifocal (PML)
Leukopenia, in SLE
Leukoplakia
hairy
laryngeal
oral
Leukotriene modifiers
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
Leuprolide. See also Luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) analogs
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for endometriosis
hypogonadism caused by
for male infertility
for prostate cancer
Leustatin. See Cladribine
Levalbuterol, for asthma
Levaquin. See Levofloxacin
Levatol. See Penbutolol
Levemir. See Insulin detemir
Levetiracetam
overdose/toxicity of
for seizures
pregnancy and
Levitra. See Vardenafil
Levo-Dromoran. See Levorphanol
Levobunolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Levocabastine, for allergic eye disease
Levodopa
benzodiazepine interactions and
MAOI interactions and
for neuroleptic malignant syndrome
for parkinsonism
with carbidopa
with carbidopa and entacapone
Levofloxacin. See also Fluoroquinolones
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for ophthalmic disorders
for pneumonia
Levoleucovorin rescue, with methotrexate
Levonorgestrel
in combination oral contraceptives
for emergency/postcoital contraception
for menopausal symptoms
in Mirena intrauterine device
Levonorgestrel-releasing IUD
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for dysmenorrhea
Levorphanol
Levothyroxine (thyroxine)
for hypothyroidism/myxedema
in Hashimoto thyroiditis
during pregnancy
RAI therapy/surveillance for thyroid cancer and
for thyroid cancer
for thyroid nodules and
after thyroidectomy
Levulose, for porphyria
Lewy bodies, dementia with
Lexapro. See Escitalopram
Lexiva. See Fosamprenavir
Leydig cell tumors/hyperplasia
hypogonadism and
LGV. See Lymphogranuloma venereum
Lhermitte sign
LHRH 
analogs. See Luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) analogs
LHRH 
antagonist. See Luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) antagonist
Lialda. See Mesalamine
Libido
loss of. See also Sexual dysfunction
in chronic kidney disease
postmenopausal changes in
Libman-Sacks endocarditis, in SLE
Librium. See Chlordiazepoxide
Lice
in epidemic typhus
in relapsing fever
in trench fever
Lichen planus
drugs causing eruptions similar to
oral
Lichen planus-like drug eruptions
Lichen sclerosus
anogenital pruritus caused by
vulvar
Lichen simplex chronicus (circumscribed neurodermatitis)
Lichenoid eruptions, drugs causing
Licorice, hypertension/hypokalemia and
Lid. See Eyelids
Lid retraction/lid lag, in dysthyroid eye disease
Liddle syndrome
Lidex. See Fluocinonide
Lidocaine. See also Lidocaine patch
for arrhythmias
infarct-related
ventricular tachycardia
for cluster headache
in HIV infection/AIDS
Lidoderm. See Lidocaine patch
Life expectancy
assessment/prognosis of older adult and
obesity affecting
prognosis at end of life and
Life support
basic, in near drowning
withdrawal/withholding, in end-of-life care
advance directives and
Lifestyle
modifications of
adherence and
in constipation management
in GERD management
in hypertension management/prevention
lipid-lowering and
in obesity management
in urinary incontinence management
sedentary
lipid abnormalities and
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of
Lift off test
Light, pupillary reaction to. See Pupillary reactions
Light chains
in amyloidosis
in myeloma
in urine. See Bence Jones proteinuria
Light eruption, polymorphous (PMLE)
Light therapy. See Phototherapy
Light visors, for depression with seasonal onset
g
,
p
Lightning injuries
Ligneous (Riedel) thyroiditis
Lille model, in alcoholic liver disease
Limb-girdle (Erb) muscular dystrophy
Limb loss. See Amputation
Limbic encephalitis
Linear scleroderma
Linezolid
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for enterococcal infection
for pneumonia
serotonin syndrome caused by
for staphylococcal skin infection
Linitis plastica
Linoleic acid, in nutritional support
Liothyronine. See also Thyroid hormone
antidepressant drug augmentation and
for myxedema coma
Lipase
lipoprotein, abnormality of
in pancreatic enzyme supplements
serum levels of
in pancreatitis
reference values for
Lipedema, chronic venous insufficiency differentiated from
Lipemia retinalis
in diabetes mellitus
Lipid-based amphotericin B
for aspergillosis
for cryptococcal meningitis
for mucormycosis
Lipid disorders/lipids. See also Fat; Lipoproteins
herpes simplex infection in
atherogenesis/cardiovascular/coronary heart disease
and
cholesterol lowering and
clinical presentations in
in diabetes mellitus
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
pharmacologic therapy affecting. See Lipid-lowering
therapy
screening for
cardiovascular disease prevention and
secondary conditions and
thiazolidinediones affecting
Lipid fractions, coronary heart disease risk and. See also
Lipoproteins
Lipid-lowering therapy
acute coronary syndromes and
in aortic stenosis
for cardiovascular/heart disease prevention
cholesterol screening and
in older patients
in women
in diabetes
diet and
exercise/activity and
y
goals of
high LDL cholesterol and
high triglycerides and
in HIV infection/AIDS
in hypertension
in nephrotic syndrome
pharmacologic. See also specific type of therapy and
Statin drugs
rhabdomyolysis/myopathy/myositis caused by
selection of agents for
therapeutic effects of
Lipid-modifying diet
in diabetes
Lipiduria
Lipitor. See Atorvastatin
Lipoatrophic diabetes
Lipoatrophy
antiretroviral therapy and
at insulin injection sites
Lipocalin, neutrophil gelatinase-associated, in acute tubular
necrosis
Lipodermatosclerosis
Lipodystrophy
Cushing syndrome differentiated from
HIV infection/antiretroviral therapy and
at insulin injection sites
Lipohypertrophy, at insulin injection sites
Lipoid nephrosis (minimal change disease)
Lipoid pneumonia
Lipomas
atrial septal
epidermal inclusion cysts differentiated from
intestinal
in MEN
Liponyssoides sanguineus mites. See Mites
Lipoprotein lipase, abnormality of
Lipoproteins. See also specific type and Cholesterol
atherogenesis/cardiovascular/coronary heart disease
and
in diabetes mellitus
estrogen replacement affecting
lowering. See Lipid-lowering therapy
remnant
screening tests for levels of
testosterone replacement affecting
thiazolidinediones affecting
Liposomal 
amphotericin 
B. See also Lipid-based
amphotericin B
for histoplasmosis
for leishmaniasis
Liposomal daunorubicin
Liposomal doxorubicin
for Kaposi sarcoma
5-Lipoxygenase inhibitor, for asthma
Liquid diets
Liquid nitrogen. See also Cryotherapy
for actinic keratoses
for condylomata acuminata
hypopigmentation/depigmentation and
for wart removal
Liquid oxygen systems, for home oxygen therapy
Liraglutide
Lisinopril
breastfeeding and
for heart failure
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
Lispro insulin. See Insulin lispro
Listeria monocytogenes (listeriosis)
meningitis caused by
Literacy (health), adherence and
LITH gene, in cholelithiasis/gallstones
Lithium
antidepressant drug augmentation/interaction and
breastfeeding and
drug interactions of
ECT-associated memory loss and
hypercalcemia and
hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis/thyroiditis and
hypothyroidism and
monitoring levels of
overdose/toxicity of
hemodialysis for
ophthalmic effects and
seizures and
in pregnancy
for unipolar depression
Lithotripsy
for choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
for cholelithiasis/gallstones
for pancreatic duct stones
for renal stones
for sialolithiasis
for ureteral stones
Livalo. See Pitavastatin
Livedo reticularis
Liver
abscesses of
amebic
pyogenic
anesthesia/surgery affecting function of
biopsy of
in alcoholic liver disease
in cirrhosis
in hemochromatosis
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
in hepatocellular carcinoma
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
cancer of. See also Hepatocellular carcinoma
cirrhosis and
hemochromatosis and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
hepatitis B vaccine in prevention of
incidence/mortality/risk of
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
cavernous hemangioma of
disorders of. See also specific disorder and under
Hepatic
acute liver failure
alcoholic
ascites in
   spontaneous bacterial peritonitis and
biliary cirrhosis
bleeding associated with
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
cirrhosis
coagulopathy
diagnosis of
drug- and toxin-induced. See also Hepatotoxicity
esophageal varices in
in fascioliasis
hemochromatosis
hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
hepatitis
   autoimmune
   viral. See also Hepatitis A; Hepatitis B; Hepatitis C;
Hepatitis D; Hepatitis E; Hepatitis G
      acute
         hepatitis A
         hepatitis B
         hepatitis C
         hepatitis D (delta agent)
         hepatitis E
         hepatitis G
      chronic
         hepatitis B
         hepatitis C
         hepatitis D
in HIV infection/AIDS
hyponatremia in
immunization recommendations in
jaundice in
lipid abnormalities and
neoplastic. See also Liver, cancer of
   benign tumors
   drugs/toxins causing
   oral contraceptive use and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. See also Fatty liver
noncirrhotic portal hypertension
NSAIDs causing
parenteral nutritional support and
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
pruritus associated with
in syphilis
Wilson disease
enlarged. See Hepatomegaly
fatty. See Fatty liver
fibrosis of. See Hepatic fibrosis
focal nodular hyperplasia of
telangiectatic
in heart failure
in HIV infection/AIDS
hydatid cyst of
nodular regenerative hyperplasia of, noncirrhotic portal
hypertension and
passive congestion of
resection of, for hepatocellular carcinoma
shock
transplantation of
for acute liver failure
adenovirus infection and
alcoholic liver disease and
for autoimmune hepatitis
for biliary cirrhosis
biliary stricture and
for cholangiocarcinoma
for cirrhosis
CMV infection and
esophageal varices and
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
for hepatocellular carcinoma
for 
hepatopulmonary 
syndrome/portopulmonary
hypertension
for hepatorenal syndrome
in HIV infection/AIDS
for mushroom poisoning
for Wilson disease
Liver cell adenoma. See Hepatic adenoma
Liver (hepatic) failure
acetaminophen causing
acute
fatty liver of pregnancy and
in cirrhosis
herpetic
in HIV infection/AIDS
in mushroom poisoning
nefazodone causing
Liver flukes
Chinese
sheep
Liver function tests
Liver-kidney microsomes, antibody to, in autoimmune
hepatitis
Liver spots (solar lentigines)
Livial. See Tibolone
Livostin. See Levocabastine
Lixivaptan, for hyponatremia/SIADH
LMWH (low-molecular-weight heparin). See Heparin
Loa loa (loiasis)
Load and shift test
Lobectomy
pulmonary, for lung cancer. See also Lung resection
thyroid, for thyroid carcinoma
Lobular carcinoma in situ
Local anesthetics, for eye disorders, precautions for use of
Locked-in syndrome (de-efferented state)
Lodine. See Etodolac
Lodoxamide, for allergic eye disease
Löffler syndrome
Logiparin. See Tinzaparin
Loiasis
Lomustine (CCNU)
Lone Star tick. See Ticks
Long-acting insulin. See also Insulin therapy
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in pregnancy
Long-chain 3-hydroxyacylcoenzyme A dehydrogenase
deficiency, acute fatty liver of pregnancy and
Long His-ventricular interval
Long QT syndrome. See also QT interval, long
palpitations and
Long-term care facility, caregiver issues related to
placement in
Loniten. See Minoxidil
Loop diuretics. See also Diuretics; Furosemide
for acute tubular necrosis
for cirrhotic ascites
for heart failure
chronic kidney disease and
for hyperkalemia
for hypernatremia
for hypertension
in chronic kidney disease
in urgencies/emergencies
hypokalemia and
for hyponatremia
hyponatremia caused by
lithium interactions and
ototoxicity of
Loop excision, for CIN
Loperamide. See also Antidiarrheal agents
for fecal incontinence
for irritable bowel syndrome
Lopid. See Gemfibrozil
Lopinavir/r 
(lopinavir/ritonavir). See also Antiretroviral
therapy/HAART
Lopressor/Lopressor HCT. See Metoprolol
Loprox. See Ciclopirox
Loratadine
for allergic eye disease
for allergic/perennial rhinitis
for urticaria
Lorazepam. See also Benzodiazepines
for alcohol withdrawal
with antipsychotics
for anxiety/stress disorders
for delirium
for insomnia
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
for seizures
in eclampsia
status epilepticus and
Lorazepam interview, in conversion disorder
Lorcet. See Hydrocodone
Lortab. See Hydrocodone
Losartan
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
for Marfan syndrome
Lotemax. See Loteprednol
Lotensin/Lotensin HCT. See Benazepril
Loteprednol, for ophthalmic disorders
L o t r e l . See 
Benazepril/benazepril 
with
hydrochlorothiazide/benazepril with amlodipine
Lotrimin Ultra. See Butenafine
Louse. See Lice
Lovastatin. See also Statin drugs
protease inhibitor interactions and
for thyroid cancer
Lovenox. See Enoxaparin
Lidocaine patch, for postherpetic neuralgia/neuropathic
pain
Low birth weight infants, hypertension risk and
Low-calorie diets, in obesity management
Low-carbohydrate diets, in obesity management
Low-cholesterol diet
in diabetes
in nephrotic syndrome
Low-density lipoproteins/cholesterol
prophylactic/suppressive
in older patients
in women
in diabetes mellitus
diet affecting
in familial hypercholesterolemia
lowering levels of. See also Lipid-lowering therapy
target values and
reference values for
screening tests for levels of
thiazolidinedione therapy and
Low-dose helical computed tomography (LDCT), in lung
cancer screening
Low-fat diet
in diabetes
in obesity management
for pancreatitis
Low-molecular-weight heparin. See Heparin
Low-protein diet. See Protein-restricted diet
Low-salt diet. See Sodium-restricted diet
Low-saturated-fat diet
Low-sodium diet. See Sodium-restricted diet
Low vision. See Visual impairment/loss
Lower 
airway/respiratory 
tract 
disorders. See also
Pneumonia
asthma differentiated from
Lower esophageal sphincter. See Esophageal sphincter,
lower
Lower extremity edema
in chronic venous insufficiency
leg ulcers and
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding. See also Gastrointestinal
bleeding
Lower leg/foot arteries, atherosclerotic/occlusive disease
of
leg ulcers and
osteomyelitis and
Lower motor neuron lesions, weakness in
Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome
LOX. See Liquid oxygen systems
Loxapine
Loxitane. See Loxapine
Loxosceles laeta/reclusa (brown recluse spider)
Loxoscelism
Lozol. See Indapamide
LRRK2 gene, in parkinsonism
LSD
Lubiprostone
for irritable bowel syndrome
Lubriderm
Ludiomil. See Maprotiline
Ludwig angina
Lues maligna
Lumbar motion, Schober test of
Lumbar puncture. See also Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
in CNS infections
headache after
in headache evaluation
herniation syndromes and
in syphilis, indications for
Lumbar spine/disk disease. See also Spine
back pain and
herniated disk
stenosis
tuberculosis (Pott disease)
Lumbosacral plexus lesions
Lumefantrine-artemether (Coartem/Riamet)
Lumigan. See Bimatoprost
Luminal gastrointestinal tract dysfunction
Luminous hallucinations. See also Hallucinations
in migraine headache
Lump (breast). See also Breast cancer
detection/evaluation of
biopsy in
clinical examination in
cytology in
mammography in
   biopsy and
self-examination in
ultrasonography in
fat necrosis causing
fibroadenoma
in fibrocystic condition
in male
removal of. See Lumpectomy
Lumpectomy
genetic mutations for breast cancer and
local recurrence and
for noninvasive (ductal/lobular) carcinoma
Lunesta. See Eszopiclone
Lung. See also under Pulmonaryand Respiratory
abscess of
aspergilloma of
cancer of. See Lung cancer
collapse of. See Atelectasis
fibrosis of. See Pulmonary fibrosis
hydatid cyst of
radiation injury of
toxic/chemical injury of
aspiration and
smoke inhalation and
Lung biopsy
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
hemoptysis caused by
in interstitial (diffuse parenchymal) lung disease
in lung cancer
in mesothelioma
in Pneumocystis pneumonia
in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
in pulmonary infiltrates in immunocompromised host
in sarcoidosis
in solitary pulmonary nodule
in tuberculosis
Lung cancer
adenocarcinoma
asbestosis and
bronchioloalveolar cell
bronchogenic carcinoma
chemical carcinogens and
cough in
hemoptysis in
hoarseness and
incidence/risk/mortality of
large cell
mesothelioma
metastatic
myasthenic syndrome in
non–small cell
occupational exposures and
palliative therapy for
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
pleural effusion in
prognosis for
pulmonary function testing in
screening for
small cell
smoking/smoking cessation and
as co-carcinogen
screening and
solitary pulmonary nodule and
squamous cell carcinoma
staging of
superior vena caval obstruction in
survival rates for
treatment of
Lung capacity, total (TLC). See also Pulmonary function
tests
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
Lung flukes (Paragonimus),
Lung injury, acute, transfusion-related
Lung resection, for lung cancer
metastatic disease and
pulmonary function testing and
staging and
Lung scanning
in pulmonary embolism
in pulmonary hypertension
Lung sounds. See Breath sounds
Lung transplantation
adenovirus infection and
CMV infection prophylaxis and
for COPD
for cystic fibrosis
for pulmonary hypertension
Lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS), for COPD
Lung volumes. See also Pulmonary function tests
in COPD
Lungworm, rat (A cantonensis),
Lupron. See Leuprolide
Lupus anticoagulant
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
pregnancy loss and
in SLE
Lupus cerebritis
Lupus erythematosus
autoantibodies in
chronic cutaneous (discoid/subacute)
drug-related
photosensitivity and
systemic. See also Systemic lupus erythematosus
Lupus nephritis
Lupus panniculitis
Lupus pernio
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
in amenorrhea
deficiency of. See also Hypogonadism
gynecomastia and
in hirsutism/virilization
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS and
in infertility workup
in menopause
in polycystic ovary syndrome
reference values for
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) analogs
in cancer chemotherapy
for prostate cancer
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) antagonist
for prostate cancer
Luteoma of pregnancy
Luvox. See Fluvoxamine
LVEDP. See Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure
LVRS. See Lung volume reduction surgery
Lyme disease (Lyme borreliosis)
anaplasmosis/ehrlichiosis and
arthritis in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
babesiosis and
chronic (post-Lyme disease syndrome)
coinfections and
congenital
diagnosis/overdiagnosis of
erythema migrans in
facial palsy and
head and neck symptoms in
myopericarditis in
neuropathy associated with
during pregnancy
prevention of
prognosis of
serologic testing in
treatment of
Lymph 
nodes. See 
also 
specific 
nodes 
and
Lymphadenitis; Lymphadenopathy
in filariasis
in Hodgkin disease
in neck, normal
Lymphadenectomy
selective (sentinel lymph node biopsy)
in breast cancer
   arm edema avoidance and
   neoadjuvant therapy and
in melanoma
in testicular cancer
Lymphadenitis
in cat-scratch disease
in chancroid
in filariasis
histiocytic 
necrotizing 
(Kikuchi/Kikuchi-Fugimoto
disease)
mycobacterial (tuberculous and nontuberculous)
in plague
Lymphadenopathy
in African trypanosomiasis
in American trypanosomiasis/Chagas disease
in cat-scratch disease
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in cutaneous T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)
dermatopathic
in exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma
HIV
eustachian tube dysfunction/serous otitis media and
in leishmaniasis
in lymphogranuloma venereum (buboes)
in mononucleosis
in non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in onchocerciasis
in pharyngitis
in plague
reactive cervical
in syphilis
in toxoplasmosis
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis
Lymphangitis
in filariasis
Lymphatic channel diseases
in filariasis
Lymphatic filariasis
Lymphedema
chronic venous insufficiency differentiated from
in filariasis
in myxedema
Lymphoblastic lymphoma
Lymphocyte count
Lymphocyte 
transformation 
tests, 
autoimmune
audiovestibular dysfunction and
Lymphocyte-white blood cell count ratio, differentiation of
tonsillitis from mononucleosis and
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Lymphocytic colitis
Lymphocytic 
meningitis, 
benign 
recurrent 
(Mollaret
meningitis)
Lymphocytosis, in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Lymphoepithelioma, nasopharyngeal
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Lymphohistiocytosis, hemophagocytic
Lymphoma. See also Burkitt lymphoma; Hodgkin disease;
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in celiac disease/dermatitis herpetiformis
cerebral
in HIV infection/AIDS
classification of
cutaneous T cell (mycosis fungoides)
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma and
fever/FUO and
follicular
stem cell transplantation for
gastric
H pylori infection and
head and neck
in HIV infection/AIDS
of kidney
large cell (Richter syndrome)
lymphoblastic
mantle cell
methotrexate causing
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALToma)
Crohn disease and
gastric
   H pylori infection and
of thyroid
y
nose and paranasal sinus involvement and
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
primary effusion (body cavity)
in Sjögren syndrome
small intestine
stem cell transplantation for
T cell. See Human T cell lymphotropic/leukemia virus;
T cell lymphoma
testicular
of thyroid
Lymphoproliferative disorder, posttransplant
Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer/HNPCC)
endometrial carcinoma and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
varicella zoster virus infection/varicella vaccine and
M184V mutation, antiretroviral drug resistance and
Ma-huang (ephedra), toxicity of
MAC (Mycobacterium avium complex) infections. See
Mycobacterium (mycobacterial infections), avium complex
Machupo virus
Macroglobulinemia
neuropathy associated with
Waldenström. See Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Macrolides. See also specific agent and Erythromycin
for pharyngitis
for pneumonia
Macrophages, in HIV infection/AIDS
Macroprolactin/macroprolactinemia/macroprolactinoma
Macropsia, intracranial tumors causing
Macular degeneration, age-related
Maculopathy/macular edema
age-related
diabetic
retinal vein occlusion causing
thiazolidinedione use and
Mad cow disease (bovine spongiform encephalopathy)
MADH4 gene
in familial juvenile polyposis
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Maduromycosis
Magnesium
dietary/supplementary
in acute ventricular tachycardia
for hypocalcemia
for hypomagnesemia
for hypoparathyroidism/tetany
requirements for in nutritional support
restriction of in chronic kidney disease
disorders 
of 
concentration 
of. See 
also
Hypermagnesemia; Hypomagnesemia
genetic disorders and
in hypocalcemia
potassium balance/hypokalemia and
serum/plasma levels of
calcium serum levels and
reference/normal values for
urinary excretion of, in hypomagnesemia
Magnesium-ammonium-phosphate (struvite) urinary stones
Magnesium 
chloride. See 
Magnesium,
dietary/supplementary
Magnesium citrate, for constipation/bowel cleansing
Magnesium hydroxide
Magnesium oxide. See Magnesium, dietary/supplementary
Magnesium salicylate
choline
Magnesium sulfate
for asthma
for eclampsia
hypermagnesemia and
for hypomagnesemia
for hypoparathyroidism/tetany
for preterm labor prevention
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in carotid occlusive disease
in renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
in visceral artery insufficiency
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
in biliary stricture
in biliary tract carcinoma
in liver disease/jaundice
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
in primary sclerosing cholangitis
Magnetic 
resonance 
elastography, 
in 
liver
disease/cirrhosis
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). See also specific
disorder and Neuroimaging
in ACL injury
for breast cancer evaluation/screening
cardiac
in angina
in cardiomyopathy
in constrictive pericarditis
in myocardial infarction
in tumor diagnosis
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
in liver disease/jaundice
in musculoskeletal evaluation
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in prostate cancer
for rotator cuff evaluation
in seizure evaluation
in thyroid cancer evaluation/surveillance
Mahaim fibers, in preexcitation syndromes
Major depressive disorder. See also Depression
Major outer surface protein A (OspA), in Lyme disease
Major outer surface protein B (OspB), in Lyme disease
Malabsorption. See also specific disorder or cause
bacterial overgrowth causing
in celiac disease
in Crohn disease
diarrhea caused by
flatus and
HIV infection/AIDS
hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis and
in lactase deficiency
in protein-losing enteropathy
in scleroderma
in short bowel syndrome
in Whipple disease
Malar rash
in dermatomyositis
in SLE
Malaria
cerebral
congenital
drug resistance in
laboratory findings in
during pregnancy
treatment/chemoprophylaxis and
prevention of. See also Antimalarial agents
self-treatment and
severe
treatment of. See also Antimalarial agents
nonimmune populations and
vaccine development and
Malarone (atovaquone plus proguanil)
for malaria chemoprophylaxis
self treatment and
Malassezia furfur
seborrheic dermatitis in HIV caused by
tinea versicolor caused by
Malathion lotion, for pediculosis
Malathion poisoning
Male breast
carcinoma of
enlargement of. See Gynecomastia
Male 
erectile 
dysfunction. See 
Erectile
dysfunction/impotence
Male infertility. See Infertility
Malignant ascites
Malignant effusions. See also specific type
Malignant external otitis
earache in
Malignant hypertension
headache in
Malignant hypertensive retinopathy
Malignant hyperthermia
Malignant melanoma. See Melanoma
Malignant neoplastic disease. See Cancer
Malignant pleural mesothelioma
Malingering, psychogenic nonepileptic/pseudoepileptic
seizure and
Mallory bodies, in alcoholic liver disease
Mallory-Denk bodies, in alcoholic liver disease
Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears
Malnutrition. See also Nutritional disorders
alcoholic liver disease/cirrhosis and
in anorexia nervosa
in elderly
neuropathy associated with
protein–energy
Malocclusion (dental)
earache and
facial pain and
MALT lymphoma (MALToma)
Crohn disease and
gastric
H pylori infection and
thyroid
Maltese crosses
Maltitol
Mammaprint, breast cancer prognosis and
Mammographic localization biopsy
Mammography
breast implants and
in breast lump evaluation
computerized stereotactic guided core needle biopsy
and
digital
estrogen replacement therapy and
follow-up
localization biopsy and
pregnancy affecting
Mammoplasty, augmentation. See Breast implants
Mandibular advancement appliances, for snoring
Mania/manic episodes
drug therapy for
ECT for
schizophrenia differentiated from
sleep disorders and
Mannitol
for ciguatera poisoning
hyponatremia caused by
lithium interactions and
for liver failure
as sweetening agent
Manometry
anal
esophageal
in achalasia
in motility disorders
Mansonella/Mansonella perstans, filariasis caused by
Mantle cell lymphoma
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation for
Mantoux test. See also Tuberculin skin test
MAO 
inhibitors 
(MAOIs). See Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors
Maple bark stripper's disease
Maprotiline
Marasmus/marasmus-like 
secondary 
protein–energy
malnutrition
Maraviroc. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Marburg hemorrhagic fever
Marfan syndrome
aortic disorders (dissection/aneurysm/regurgitation) in
pregnancy and
sudden death and
mitral valve prolapse and
Marginal blepharitis
Marijuana
for nausea and vomiting. See also Dronabinol
in AIDS wasting
in pain control
MARS. See Molecular adsorbent recirculating system
Mask of pregnancy. See Melasma
Masochism, sexual
Mast 
cell 
stabilizers/mediator 
inhibitors. See also
Cromolyn; Nedocromil
for allergic eye disease
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
Mastectomy
arm edema after
breast conserving therapy and
breast reconstruction/implants after
local recurrence and
for inflammatory carcinoma
local recurrence after
in male
for noninvasive (ductal/lobular) carcinoma
for phyllodes tumor of breast
prophylactic
Masticatory (jaw) claudication, in giant cell arteritis
Mastitis, puerperal
candidal
Mastoidectomy
Mastoiditis
Match test, in cough evaluation
Maternal age, Down syndrome and
Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD)
Matulane. See Procarbazine
Maturity-onset diabetes of young (MODY)
Mavik. See Trandolapril
Maxillary sinusitis
Maximal oxygen uptake, lung cancer surgery and
Maxipime. See Cefepime
Maxzide. See Triamterene, with hydrochlorothiazide
Maze procedure
Mazindol, for obesity
Mazzotti test, for onchocerciasis
MC4R gene, in type 2 diabetes
McCune-Albright syndrome
MCH. See Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
MCHC. See Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
MCKD1/MCKD2 genes, in medullary sponge kidney
MCL. See Medial collateral ligament
McMurray test
MCTD. See Mixed connective tissue disease
MCV. See Mean cell/corpuscular volume
MCV/MCV4 vaccine. See Meningococcal vaccine
MDIs. See Metered-dose inhalers
MDMA (methylenedioxymetha-mphetamine)
hyponatremia caused by
seizures caused by
MDR. See Multidrug resistance
MDRD (Modification of Diet and Renal Disease) equation,
for GFR estimation
MDRTB. See Multidrug resistance, in tuberculosis
MDS. See Myelodysplastic syndromes
Meal replacement diets
“Meals on Wheels” mnemonic
Mean cell/corpuscular volume (MCV)
alcohol use/abuse and
in anemia classification. See also specific disorder
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
Measles (rubeola)
atypical
prevention/immunization 
and. See 
also 
MMR
(measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine
Measles encephalitis
Measles immune globulin
Measles-mumps-rubella 
vaccine. See MMR (measles-
mumps-rubella) vaccine
Measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine (MMRV)
Measles vaccine. See also MMR (measles-mumps-rubella)
vaccine
Meat
bovine spongiform encephalopathy/variant Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease and
brucellosis and
contaminated, in sarcocystosis
E coli
gastroenteritis and
gnathostomiasis and
sparganosis and
tapeworm infection and
toxoplasmosis and
trichinosis and
Mebendazole
for ascariasis
for enterobiasis/pinworms
for hookworm disease
for hydatid disease
for trichinosis
for trichuriasis/whipworm
MEBO (moist exposed burn ointment)
Mecasermin, for Laron syndrome
Mechanical ventilation
for ARDS
for asthma
complications of
for COPD
HSV infection and
for near drowning
pneumonia and
for respiratory failure
for shock
tracheotomy for
withdrawal of, in end-of-life care
Mechanic's hands
Mechlorethamine
Meclizine
Meclofenamate
Meclomen. See Meclofenamate
Medial collateral ligament
injury of
Medial epicondylosis
Medial meniscus. See also Meniscal cartilage, of knee
Median nerve compression, in carpal tunnel syndrome
Mediastinal lymph node biopsy, in lung cancer
Mediastinal masses
superior vena caval obstruction and
Mediastinal widening, drug-induced
Mediastinitis, superior vena caval obstruction and
Mediator inhibitors. See also Cromolyn; Nedocromil
for asthma
Medical imaging. See also specific disorderand under
Radiation
radiation exposure and
cancer risk and
Medical interview
Medicare prescription drug benefit
Medication overuse headache
Medications. See also under Drug
adherence 
to 
regimen 
for. See 
also
Adherence/nonadherence
Medicare payment for
Medicinal herbs. See Botanical (herbal) medicines
Mediterranean diet
Mediterranean fever, familial
Mediterranean spotted fever
Medrol Dosepak. See Methylprednisolone
Medroxyprogesterone
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for contraceptive injection
for endometriosis
in hormone replacement therapy
for postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
for psychosexual disorders
Medullary cystic kidney
Medullary sponge kidney
Medulloblastoma
Mefenamic acid
Mefloquine
with artesunate
for malaria chemoprophylaxis
rabies vaccination and
MEFV gene
Megace. See Megestrol
Megacolon
in Chagas disease
toxic
acute 
colonic 
pseudo-obstruction 
(Ogilvie
syndrome) differentiated from
in ulcerative colitis
Megaesophagus, in Chagas disease
Megakaryocytes
in essential thrombocytosis
in myelodysplastic syndromes
Megaloblastic anemia
in celiac disease
folic acid deficiency causing
subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord and
vitamin B12 deficiency causing
fish tapeworm infection and
Megestrol
for AIDS wasting
for breast cancer
in cancer chemotherapy
corticosteroid activity of
for elderly
Meglitinide analogs, for diabetes mellitus
Meglumine antimonate, for leishmaniasis
Meibomian gland
abscess of (internal hordeolum)
inflammation of
blepharitis and
chalazion and
Melancholia. See also Depression
Melanocytic nevi (normal moles)
Melanoma
atypical nevi and
blue nevi and
familial
intraoral
in MEN
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Melanosis, arsenical
Melarsoprol, for African trypanosomiasis
MELAS syndrome
hypoparathyroidism in
Melasma (chloasma)
oral contraceptive use and
MELD (Model for End-Stage Liver Disease) score
in alcoholic liver disease/cirrhosis
hepatocellular carcinoma and
in liver failure
postoperative complications and
Melena
in erosive/hemorrhagic gastritis (gastropathy)
in GI bleeding
in peptic ulcer disease
Melioidosis
Mellaril. See Thioridazine
Melphalan
Memantine, for dementia
Membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis/glomerulonephropathy
hepatitis C infection and
idiopathic
Membranous nephropathy
hepatitis C infection and
Memory impairment. See also Amnesia
in dementia/delirium
ECT causing
in mild cognitive impairment
MEN. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia
MEN1 gene mutation, thyroid tumors and
Menarche
age at, breast cancer risk and
failure of. See Amenorrhea
Mendelson syndrome
Menest. See Estrogens, oral
Ménétrier disease (hypertrophic gastropathy)
Ménière syndrome (endolymphatic hydrops)
hearing loss and
menin gene, in MEN 1
Meningeal irritation, noninfectious
Meningeal leukemia
Meningiomas
Meningismus. See also specificinfection
Meningitis. See also Meningoencephalitis
in anthrax
aseptic/viral. See also specific causative agent and
Aseptic meningitis
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
carcinomatous (leptomeningeal metastases)
chronic
in coccidioidomycosis
coxsackieviruses causing
cryptococcal
prophylaxis of
CSF analysis in
echoviruses causing
in gnathostomiasis
H influenzae causing
headache in
health care-associated
herpes simplex
in HIV infection/AIDS (cryptococcal)
prophylaxis of
leptospiral
in listeriosis
in Lyme disease
meningococcal
prevention/immunization 
and. See 
also
Meningococcal vaccine
in mumps
otogenic
in paragonimiasis
parechovirus infection causing
in plague
pneumococcal
prevention of. See Pneumococcal vaccine
purulent/bacterial
partially treated
in syphilis
in tick-borne encephalitis
in toxocariasis
tuberculous
viral. See Meningitis, aseptic
Meningococcal (Neisseria meningitidis) infections
drug resistance and
meningitis
prevention/immunization 
and. See Meningococcal
vaccine
Meningococcal vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
for travelers
Meningococcemia
adrenal 
crisis 
and 
(Waterhouse-Friderichsen
syndrome)
Meningoencephalitis. See also Encephalitis; Meningitis
acanthamoeba
in African trypanosomiasis
amebic
in American trypanosomiasis/Chagas disease
in angiostrongyliasis
in gnathostomiasis
travel and
Meningovascular syphilis. See also Neurosyphilis
Meniscal cartilage, of knee
injuries/tears of
Menopause/menopausal syndrome
age at
average
breast cancer risk and
amenorrhea in
estrogen replacement therapy for. See Estrogen
(hormone) replacement therapy
libido and
osteoporosis and
premature. See also Ovarian failure
surgical
vaginal bleeding after. See Postmenopausal vaginal
bleeding
Menorrhagia
iron deficiency anemia and
IUD use and
Menostar. See Estradiol transdermal systems
Menstruation/menstrual cycle. See also Vaginal bleeding
abnormalities of, in polycystic ovary syndrome
age of onset of, breast cancer risk and
asthma associated with (catamenial asthma)
cessation of. See also Amenorrhea; Menopause
depression associated with
failure to appear. See Amenorrhea
iron deficiency anemia and
pain associated with. See Dysmenorrhea
pneumothorax 
associated 
with 
(catamenial
pneumothorax)
Mental retardation
in Down syndrome
fragile X
in homocystinuria
in Klinefelter syndrome
in tuberous sclerosis
Mental status, altered. See also Cognitive disorders
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
after head injury
headache and
Mentax. See Butenafine
Mepacrine. See Quinacrine
Meperidine
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
Mephedrone, toxicity of
Meralgia paresthetica
Mercaptopurine
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
Mercury poisoning
marijuana use and
Merlin gene, in neurofibromatosis
Meropenem
for abdominal infections
for pneumonia
Merrem. See Meropenem
MERRF syndrome
Mesalamine, for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
Mescaline
Mesenchymal tumors
gastrointestinal
osteomalacia/rickets and
Mesenteric ischemia/mesenteric artery occlusive disease
Mesenteric vasculitis
Mesenteric vein occlusion
Mesna, for hemorrhagic cystitis
Mesnex. See Mesna
Mesoridazine
Mesothelioma
asbestos exposure and
Metabolic acidosis. See also specific type
anion gap. See Anion gap/anion gap acidosis
dyspnea and
in hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
in hypothermia
in kidney disease/renal failure
in near drowning
parenteral nutritional support and
in poisoning/drug overdose
with methanol or ethylene glycol
with salicylates
posthypocapnia
Metabolic alkalosis
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
posthypercapnia
saline-responsive
saline-unresponsive
Metabolic bone disease. See also specific disorder
in chronic kidney disease (renal osteodystrophy)
Metabolic disturbances
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
coma or stupor caused by
neuropathies associated with
nutritional support and
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
seizures caused by
Metabolic encephalopathy
cancer-related
coma or stupor caused by
Metabolic syndrome (syndrome X/insulin resistance
syndrome)
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
coronary heart disease/angina and
diabetes and
fatty liver and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
hypertension and
hypophosphatemia and
obesity and
triglycerides in
Metacercariae. See Cercariae/metacercariae
Metaglip. See Glipizide, with metformin
Metagonimus species
Metanephrines
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
reference values for
Metapneumovirus, human
Metastron. See Strontium
Metered-dose inhalers
for CMV infection
for COPD therapy
Metformin
antipsychotic drug-related weight gain and
for diabetes mellitus
in combination preparations/regimens
insulin therapy and
intensive therapy with
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
prevention and
for hirsutism/virilization
lactic acidosis caused by
overdose/toxicity of
Methacholine bronchial provocation testing, in asthma
Methadone
for cocaine addiction
for heroin withdrawal/maintenance
hypogonadism caused by
overdose/toxicity of
for pain management
Methamphetamine
Methanol poisoning
anion gap/osmolar gap in
ethanol for
hemodialysis for
Methcathinone
Methemalbuminemia, in hemolytic anemia
Methemoglobinemia
reference values in
Methicillin, staphylococcal infections resistant to. See also
Community-associated methicillin-resistant S aureus (CA-
MRSA)
in burn injury
community-acquired pneumonia
endocarditis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
impetigo
Methimazole
autoimmune hypoglycemia and
for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
during pregnancy/lactation
RAI therapy and
toxic multinodular goiter and
toxic solitary thyroid nodule and
Methionine, in homocystinuria/hyperhomocysteinemia
Methotrexate
breastfeeding and
for ectopic pregnancy
for elective abortion
with folinic acid/leucovorin rescue
for gestational trophoblastic disease
for 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
monitoring levels of
for psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis
for rheumatoid arthritis
in combination regimen
toxicity of
Methyl alcohol. See Methanol
Methyl salicylate. See also Salicylates
overdose/toxicity of
Methylcellulose. See also Fiber, dietary
Methylcobalamin. See also Vitamin B12
Methyldopa
antidepressant drug interactions and
breastfeeding and
for hypertension
during pregnancy
lithium interactions and
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
Methylene blue
for methemoglobinemia
for shock
Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase
homocysteine levels and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine. See MDMA
Methylmalonic acid
reference values for
in vitamin B12 deficiency
Methylnaltrexone, for opioid-induced constipation
Methylphenidate
abuse/overdose of
for depression
for opioid-induced sedation
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydopyridine, parkinsonism
caused by
Methylprednisolone. See also Corticosteroids
for alcoholic liver disease
for allergic contact dermatitis, inappropriateness of
for asthma
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
for nausea and vomiting
4-Methylpyrazole. See Fomepizole
Methyltestosterone
Methylxanthines, for asthma
Metipranolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Metoclopramide
for diabetic autonomic neuropathy
for dyspepsia
for gastroparesis
for migraine headache
for nausea and vomiting
tardive dyskinesia and
Metolazone
for acute tubular necrosis
for heart failure
for hypertension
Metoprolol
for acute coronary syndromes
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
infarct-related
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
for heart failure
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
for myocardial infarction
perioperative
for pheochromocytoma
Metritis. See also Endometritis
Metronidazole
for abdominal infections
for amebiasis
for anaerobic pneumonia/lung abscess
for antibiotic-associated colitis
for bacterial vaginosis
for Crohn disease
for giardiasis
in H pylori eradication therapy
for hepatic encephalopathy
for leg ulcers
for rosacea
for trichomoniasis
Metyrapone, 
for 
ACTH-secreting 
adrenal
tumor/adrenocortical carcinoma
Metyrosine, for pheochromocytoma
Mevacor. See Lovastatin
Mexiletine
Mg. See Magnesium
MGUS . See Monoclonal gammopathy, of unknown
significance
MI. See Myocardial infarction
Mi-2 antibody, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Miacalcin. See Calcitonin
MIC (minimal inhibitory concentration)
Micafungin
for aspergillosis
for candidiasis
Micardis/Micardis HCT. See Telmisartan
Mice
lymphocytic choriomeningitis transmission and
rickettsialpox transmission and
MICE mnemonic, in musculoskeletal injuries
ankle sprains
Miconazole
for vulvovaginal candidiasis
Micro-Coombs test. See Coombs test
Microalbuminuria, in diabetes/diabetic nephropathy
glycemic control and
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias
thrombotic microangiopathies and
Microangiopathy
in diabetes mellitus
thrombotic
Microbes. See Infection/infectious diseases
Microdilution plates, for drug susceptibility testing
β2-Microglobulin
in myeloma staging
reference values for
Microlithiasis (biliary sludge)
pancreatitis and
Micronase. See Glyburide
Micronor. See Norethindrone
Microprolactinoma
Micropsia, intracranial tumors causing
Microsatellite instability
in colorectal cancer
in HNPCC
Microscopic colitis
Microscopic polyangiitis
autoantibodies in
glomerulonephritis and
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis) differentiated from
Microscopic urinalysis
Microsporidiosis. See 
also 
specific 
causative
organismMicrosporum
infection, tinea corporis/circinata caused by
Microwave hyperthermia, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Micturition. See Voiding
Midamor. See Amiloride
Midazolam
for delirium
for seizures
status epilepticus and
MIDD. See Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness
Middle cerebral artery occlusion, in stroke
Middle ear
infection of. See Otitis, media
neoplasia of
trauma to
Midline malignant reticulosis
Mifepristone (RU 486)
for elective abortion
C sordellii infection after
for psychotic depression
Miglitol
overdose/toxicity of
Migraine equivalent
Migraine headache
acupuncture for
nausea and vomiting in
oral contraceptive use and
in patent foramen ovale
prophylactic treatment of
transient ischemic attacks differentiated from
vertigo/dizziness and
Migrainous vertigo
Milan criteria
Mild cognitive impairment
Miliaria
crystallina/pustulosa/rubra
Milk, raw
brucellosis and
campylobacter infection and
tick-borne encephalitis and
Milk-alkali syndrome
Milk intolerance. See Lactose (milk) intolerance
Milk thistle (silymarin), for mushroom poisoning
Milker's nodules (paravaccinia)
Miller Fisher syndrome
poliomyelitis and
Milrinone, for heart failure
Miltefosine, for leishmaniasis
Milwaukee protocol
Mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease (renal
osteodystrophy)
Mineral oil
for constipation
as skin emollient
Mineral oil enema
Mineralocorticoids. See also Aldosterone
apparent excess of
genetic mutation in
hypertension and
deficiency of. See also Adrenocortical insufficiency
hyperkalemia and
steroidogenic enzyme defects and
in saline-unresponsive alkalosis
Minerals
chronic kidney disease/renal osteodystrophy and
requirements for in nutritional support
“Mini-cog” screening, in dementia
Mini-Mental State Examination, in dementia
Minilaparotomy, for tubal ligation
Minimal change disease
Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC)
Minimally conscious state
Minimally invasive prostate surgery, for benign prostatic
hyperplasia
Minipill (progestin)
Minipress. See Prazosin
Minnesota tube, for esophageal varices
Minocycline
for acne
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for rheumatoid arthritis
for rosacea
Minoxidil
for androgenetic (pattern) baldness
for hypertension
hypertrichosis caused by
lower extremity edema caused by
Miotics, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Miralax. See Polyethylene glycol
Mirena intrauterine device
Mirizzi syndrome
Mirtazapine
in elderly
Miscarriage. See Abortion
Mismatch 
repair 
gene 
defects, 
in 
colorectal
cancer/HNPCC
Misolastine, for allergic/perennial rhinitis
Misoprostol
for elective abortion
for missed abortion
for NSAID toxicity mitigation
Missed abortion
Mites
atopic dermatitis (eczema) and
bird and rodent
rickettsialpox and
scrub typhus and
skin lesions and
in stored products
trombiculid
Mithramycin, for cancer-related hypercalcemia
Mitiglinide
Mitochondrial DNA mutations
in diabetes mellitus
hearing loss and
hypoparathyroidism and
myopathies associated with
Mitomycin
for bladder cancer
Mitotane, for adrenocortical carcinoma
Mitoxantrone
toxicity of
Mitral regurgitation/insufficiency
interventions affecting murmur in
in Kawasaki syndrome
mitral valve prolapse and
in myocardial infarction
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
secondary
Mitral stenosis
pregnancy and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
Mitral valve
parachute
in rheumatic fever/heart disease
Mitral valve prolapse (“floppy”/myxomatous mitral valve)
interventions affecting murmur in
in Marfan syndrome
panic disorder and
in polycystic kidney disease
Mitral valve rupture
Mittelschmerz
appendicitis differentiated from
in symptothermal natural family planning
Mixed acid-base disorders
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
step-by-step analysis and
Mixed connective tissue disease
Mixed sleep apnea
MLH1 gene, in colorectal cancer, in HNPCC
MLL gene
MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
arthritis and
encephalitis and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
MMRV (measles-mumps-rubella-varicella) vaccine
MMSE. See Mini-Mental State Examination
Moban. See Molindone
Mobility, reduced. See Immobility
Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) atrioventricular block
in myocardial infarction
Mobitz type II atrioventricular block
in myocardial infarction
Moclobemide, overdose/toxicity of
Modafinil
for cognitive decline in cancer survivors
for narcolepsy
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score
in alcoholic liver disease
hepatocellular carcinoma and
in liver failure
postoperative complications and
Modification of Diet and Renal Disease (MDRD) equation,
for GFR estimation
Modified Duke criteria, for endocarditis
Modified McMurray test
Moduretic. See Amiloride, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
hydrochlorothiazide
MODY. See Maturity-onset diabetes of young
Moexipril
with hydrochlorothiazide
Mohs surgery
for basal cell carcinoma
for eyelid tumors
for squamous cell carcinoma
Moist exposed burn ointment (MEBO)
Moisturizers (skin)/emollients
Molar pregnancy. See Hydatidiform mole
Molds, opportunistic infections caused by
prevention of
p
Mole, hydatidiform. See Hydatidiform mole
Mole (skin). See also Nevi
atypical (atypical nevus)
benign
changes in, melanoma and
normal
Molecular adsorbent recirculating system (MARS)
for hepatorenal syndrome
for liver failure
for Wilson disease
Molindone
Mollaret meningitis
Molluscum contagiosum
in HIV infection/AIDS
Mometasone
inhaled, for asthma
topical, for dermatologic disorders
Monge disease
Monkeypox
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
drug/food interactions of
serotonin syndrome and
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for parkinsonism
for phobic disorder
Monoclonal antibodies
in cancer chemotherapy
in new-onset type 1 diabetes
for psoriasis
Monoclonal gammopathy
motor syndromes in
of unknown significance (MGUS)
amyloidosis and
Monoclonal protein. See also Paraproteins
in myeloma
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Monocular blindness, transient
Monocyte count
Monocytic ehrlichiosis
Monomethylhydrazine mushroom poisoning
Mononeuritis multiplex. See also Neuropathies
in diabetes mellitus
in HIV infection/AIDS
in Lyme disease
microscopic polyangiitis and
polyarteritis nodosa and
Mononeuropathies. See also Mononeuritis multiplex;
Neuropathies
in diabetes
in HIV infection/AIDS
in sarcoidosis
Mononucleosis
CMV
Epstein-Barr virus
pharyngitis in
Mononucleosis spot (Monospot) test
p
(
p )
Monopril/Monopril HCT. See Fosinopril
Montelukast
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
Montenegro (leishmanin) skin test
Montgomery-Asberg rating scale, assessment of suicidal
intent and
Montreal Cognitive Assessment
Mood disorders. See also Depression; Mania
dementia and
Moraxella/Moraxella catarrhalis infections
keratitis
Morbilliform skin disorders
Morganella,
Moricizine, toxicity of
Morning sickness. See Vomiting, of pregnancy
Morphea
Morphine
for dyspnea
for myocardial infarction
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for pulmonary edema
left ventricular/infarct-related
de Morsier syndrome (septo-optic dysplasia)
Mosaicism
Klinefelter syndrome and
premature ovarian failure and
in Turner syndrome
Mosquitoes/mosquito control
chikungunya fever and
dengue and
encephalitis and
filariasis and
malaria and
yellow fever and
Moths, skin lesions caused by
Motility disorders. See also specific disorder
colonic, constipation and
esophageal
chest pain in
dysphagia in
intestinal. See also Intestinal obstruction
diarrhea and
in irritable bowel syndrome
in scleroderma
vomiting and
Motivational interview, at-risk drinking and
Motor activity, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Motor conduction velocity studies. See Conduction velocity
studies
Motor neuron diseases
spasticity caused by
weakness/paralysis caused by
Motor palsies, ocular
in myasthenia gravis
Motor tics, in Tourette syndrome
,
y
Motor vehicle accidents. See Automobile accidents
Motrin. See Ibuprofen
Mountain sickness
acute
chronic (Monge disease)
subacute
Mouth. See Oral cavity
Movement disorders. See also specific type
drug-induced
in Wilson disease
MoviPrep. See Polyethylene glycol
Moxalactam, platelet function affected by
Moxifloxacin
for abdominal infections
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for ophthalmic disorders
for pneumonia
6-MP. See Mercaptopurine
MPGN. See Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
MPO-ANCA. See Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody;
Myeloperoxidase ANCA
MPSV4 vaccine. See Meningococcal vaccine
MPTP, parkinsonism caused by
MRA. See Magnetic resonance angiography
M
R C
P . See 
Magnetic 
resonance
cholangiopancreatography
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
MRSA infection. See Methicillin, staphylococcal infections
resistant to
MS Contin. See Morphine
MSH2/MSH6 genes, in HNPCC
MSI. See Microsatellite instability
mTOR inhibitors, in cancer chemotherapy
MTX. See Methotrexate
Mucin tear deficiency
Mucocutaneous (mucosal) candidiasis
Mucocutaneous herpes simplex
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (espundia)
Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome (Kawasaki disease)
Mucor infection
Mucormycosis
rhinocerebral
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma. See MALT
lymphoma
Mucosal 
associated 
lymphoid 
tumors. See MALT
lymphoma
Mucosal biopsy
in celiac disease
in diarrhea
in gastric adenocarcinoma
in Whipple disease
Mucosal protective agents, for peptic ulcer disease
Mucositis, oral, chemotherapy/radiation causing
Mucous patches, in syphilis
Multibacillary (lepromatous) leprosy. See also Leprosy
Multidetector CT
in chest pain
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
in polyp/cancer detection
Multidrug resistance. See also Drug resistance
health care-associated infections and
in tuberculosis
Multifocal atrial tachycardia
Multinodular (nodular) goiter. See also Goiter
toxic
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
type 1 (Wermer syndrome)
follicular thyroid carcinoma and
gastric carcinoids in
gastrinomas in
insulinoma in
islet cell tumors in
neuroendocrine tumors in
parathyroid adenoma/hyperplasia in
pituitary adenomas in
prolactinomas in
type 2A (Sipple syndrome)
medullary thyroid carcinoma in
parathyroid adenoma/hyperplasia in
pheochromocytoma in
type 2B
CMV infection in
parathyroid adenoma/hyperplasia in
pheochromocytoma in
Multiple marker screening, in Down syndrome
Multiple myeloma. See Myeloma
Multiple personality disorder (dissociative identity disorder)
Multiple sclerosis
glossopharyngeal neuralgia and
optic neuritis and
trigeminal neuralgia and
vertigo/hearing loss in
Multisystem atrophy (Shy-Drager syndrome)
dysautonomia and
parkinsonism and
Multitarget DNA tests, in colorectal cancer screening/polyp
detection
Mumps
prevention/immunization 
and. See 
also 
MMR
(measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine
Mumps vaccine. See also MMR (measles-mumps-rubella)
vaccine
Munchausen by proxy
Munchausen syndrome
Mupirocin, for impetigo
Mural thrombus, myocardial infarction and
Murine (flea-borne) typhus
Murmurs. See Heart murmurs
Murphy sign, in cholecystitis
Murray Valley encephalitis
Muscarine, poisoning with mushrooms containing
Muscimol, poisoning with mushrooms containing
Muscle biopsy
in motor neuron diseases
in muscular dystrophy
in polyarteritis nodosa
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in trichinosis
Muscle cramps. See also Tetany
heat exposure causing
in hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
Muscle cysticercosis
Muscle necrosis, in rhabdomyolysis
Muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) antibodies, in
myasthenia gravis
Muscle wasting. See also Weakness
in HIV infection/AIDS
in motor neuron disease
in muscular dystrophy
Muscle weakness. See Myopathies; Weakness
Muscular dystrophies
cardiomyopathy in
Musculoskeletal disorders. See also specific type
ankle injuries and
arthritis
crystal deposition-induced
degenerative
infectious
rheumatoid
autoimmune
bone infections
in diabetes
diagnosis and evaluation of
general approach to
hip problems
knee problems
in Lyme disease
pain/pain syndromes and
seronegative spondyloarthropathies
shoulder problems
spine problems
sports injuries and
surgery for
in syphilis
treatment of
in trichinosis
in tuberculosis
upper extremity problems
Musculotendinous strain, cervical, acute
Mushroom picker's disease
Mushroom poisoning
anticholinergic-type mushrooms and
liver failure and
MuSK antibodies, in myasthenia gravis
Musset sign
Mustargen. See Mechlorethamine
Mutamycin. See Mitomycin
Mutations. See also specific type andspecific disorder
Mutism
akinetic (persistent vegetative state)
(p
g
)
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Myasthenia gravis
aminoglycosides contraindicated in
Graves disease and
Myasthenic crisis
Myasthenic (Lambert-Eaton) syndrome
in cancer
Mycamine. See Micafungin
Mycetoma
Mycobacterium (mycobacterial infections)
abscessus,
avium complex (MAC)
disseminated disease caused by
in HIV infection/AIDS
   prophylaxis of
lymphadenitis caused by
pulmonary disease caused by
bovis
BCG vaccine made from
intestinal disease caused by
lymphadenitis caused by
chelonae/chelonei,
fortuitum,
gordonae,
haemophilum,
kansasii,
leprae,
lymphadenitis
malmoense,
marinum,
meningitis
nontuberculous 
atypical. See also Nontuberculous
atypical mycobacteria
lymphadenitis caused by
pulmonary disease caused by
skin and soft tissue infections caused by
scrofulaceum,
szulgai,
tuberculosis. See also Tuberculosis
bone and joint disease caused by
intestinal disease caused by
lymphadenitis caused by
meningitis caused by
pulmonary disease caused by
resistant strains of
ulcerans,
xenopi,
Mycophenolate mofetil
for autoimmune hepatitis
for pemphigus
Mycoplasma,
genitalium,
pneumoniae, Stevens-Johnson syndrome caused by
Mycosis fungoides (cutaneous T cell lymphoma)
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma and
Mycotic aneurysms
drug use and
intracranial
Mycotic infections (mycoses). See also Fungal infections
allergic bronchopulmonary
of bones and joints
drugs for management of. See also Antifungal agents
superficial. See also Tinea
Myelinolysis, central pontine, hyponatremia treatment and
Myelitis
in CMV infection
in coxsackievirus infection
in neuromyelitis optica
in tick-borne encephalitis
Myelodysplastic syndromes
aplastic anemia differentiated from
platelets affected in
rheumatic manifestations of
sideroblasts/sideroblastic anemia and
stem cell transplantation for
thrombocytopenia and
Myelofibrosis
Myelography
in spinal dural arteriovenous fistulae
in spinal tumors
Myeloid growth factors. See Filgrastim; Growth factors;
Sargramostim
Myeloid leukemia. See Acute myeloid leukemia; Chronic
myeloid leukemia
Myeloma
amyloidosis and
hypercalcemia in
kidney involvement in
neuropathy associated with
nonsecretory
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
proteinuria in
stem cell transplantation for
Myeloma kidney
Myelopathy. See also specific cause
epidural/subdural hemorrhage causing
in HIV infection/AIDS
human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV)
in multiple sclerosis
neck pain/cervical spondylosis and
Myeloperoxidase 
ANCA 
(MPO-ANCA). See 
also
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in microscopic polyangiitis
Myeloproliferative disorders. See also Leukemias
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
platelet function affected in
rheumatic manifestations of
Myeloradiculopathy, in spinal dural arteriovenous fistulae
Myelosuppressive therapy
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation and
infection and
for leukemia
for polycythemia
Myerson sign
MYH gene mutations
in familial adenomatous polyposis
in HIV-associated nephropathy
screening for
Mykrox. See Metolazone
Myleran. See Busulfan
Myocardial contusions/hematomas
Myocardial 
dysfunction. See also Congestive heart
(cardiac) failure
myocardial infarction and
Myocardial failure. See Congestive heart (cardiac) failure
Myocardial hibernation
Myocardial hypertrophy. See Cardiomyopathy
for CMV infection
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair and
accelerated idioventricular rhythm in
angiography/catheterization in
antihypertensive therapy and
arrhythmias associated with
antiarrhythmic 
prophylaxis/postinfarction
management and
aspirin for
atrial fibrillation in
biomarkers in
bradycardia/sinus bradycardia in
chest pain in
cocaine abuse and
complications of
conduction disturbances associated with
coronary artery trauma
coronary vasospasm causing
coxibs (COX-2 inhibitors) associated with
in diabetes mellitus
glycemic/hypertension control and
Dressler syndrome after
estrogen replacement therapy and
heart failure and
hemodynamic status and
hypotension and
interventricular septum rupture and
ischemia after
left ventricular aneurysm and
left ventricular failure and
mechanical defects associated with
mitral regurgitation and
mural thrombus and
myocardial dysfunction and
myocardial rupture and
oral contraceptive use and
painless
papillary muscle dysfunction/rupture and
pericarditis after
perioperative, 
preoperative 
risk
assessment/management and
postinfarction risk stratification/modification and
during pregnancy
prevention and
Q waves and. See also Non-Q wave (non-ST
elevation) infarction
reperfusion therapy for
revascularization procedures and
postinfarction
prophylactic/preoperative
right ventricular infarction and
rosiglitazone use and
shock and
sudden death and
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias in
thiazolidinedione use and
thrombolytic therapy for
PCI and
treatment of
postinfarction management and
ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation and
antiarrhythmic prophylaxis and
Myocardial ischemia. See also Angina; Coronary heart
disease; Myocardial infarction
in acute coronary syndromes
chest pain in. See also Angina; Myocardial infarction
cocaine abuse and
coronary vasospasm causing
dyspnea in
mitral regurgitation and
postinfarction
silent, dyspnea in
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
in angina
in cardiomyopathy
in myocardial infarction
preoperative
Myocardial rupture
Myocardial sarcoidosis
Myocardial stress imaging, in angina
Myocardial stunning
Myocarditis
adenovirus infection and
in African trypanosomiasis
in American trypanosomiasis/Chagas disease
clozapine causing
coxsackievirus infection and
in diphtheria
drug-induced/toxic
giant cell
infectious
in Kawasaki syndrome
pheochromocytoma and
toxoplasmic
Myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red fiber (MERRF) syndrome
Myoclonic seizures. See also Seizures
Myoclonus
nocturnal
opioid-induced
palatal, tinnitus and
Myoglobinuria
acute tubular necrosis/rhabdomyolysis and
Myolysis
Myomas (leiomyomas/fibroid tumors), of uterus
Myomectomy
Myonecrosis, clostridial
Myopathies (myopathic disorders)
HIV
inflammatory
idiopathic
lipid-lowering therapy/statin drugs causing
miscellaneous causes of
mitochondrial
zidovudine causing
Myopericarditis. See also Pericarditis
Borrelia burgdorferi/Lyme disease causing
Myopia
surgical correction of
Myositis. See also Dermatomyositis; Polymyositis
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statin drugs) causing
inclusion body
Myotomy
for achalasia
for Zenker diverticulum
Myotomy–myomectomy, for cardiomyopathy
Myotonia/myotonic dystrophy
cardiomyopathy in
congenita
Myringotomy
for barotrauma
for otitis media
Myxedema. See also Hypothyroidism
pretibial (Graves dermopathy)
Myxedema coma
Myxedema crisis
Myxedema heart
Myxedema madness
Myxedema pericardial effusion
Myxoma, atrial
fever/FUO and
herpes simplex virus and
Myxomatous mitral valve. See Mitral valve prolapse
Na+. See Sodium
Nabumetone
Nadolol
for esophageal varices, prevention of rebleeding and
Naegleria fowleri,
NAEPP. See National Asthma Education and Prevention
Program
Nafarelin
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for endometriosis
Nafcillin, platelet function affected by
NAFLD. See Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Naftifine
Naftin. See Naftifine
Nail atrophy
Nail disorders. See also Digital clubbing
candidal infection
chemotherapy-induced
in dermatomyositis
hyperpigmentation, drugs causing
pitting/stippling
in psoriasis
in Raynaud phenomenon
tinea unguium (onychomycosis)
Nalfon. See Fenoprofen
Nalmefene, for coma/opioid overdose
Naloxone
for heroin/opioid overdose/withdrawal
Naltrexone
for alcohol use/abuse
for heroin/opioid withdrawal
for obesity
Naphazoline, overdose/toxicity of
Naprosyn. See Naproxen
Naproxen
cardiovascular risk and
Naratriptan, for migraine headache
Narcissistic personality disorder
Narcolepsy
Narcotic (opioid) antagonists. See also Naloxone
for constipation
for heroin/opioid overdose/withdrawal
Narcotics. See also Opioids/opioid analgesics
abuse of
narcotic antagonists/naloxone for
Nardil. See Phenelzine
Narrowband 
UVB 
(NB-UVB) 
therapy. See 
also
Phototherapy
for lichen planus
for psoriasis
Nasal biopsy, in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener
granulomatosis)
Nasal bleeding. See Epistaxis
Nasal CPAP
for sleep apnea
for snoring
Nasal polyps
allergic rhinitis and
Nasal pyramid, fracture of
Nasal septoplasty, for sleep apnea
Nasal sinuses. See Paranasal sinuses
Nasal trauma
epistaxis and
Nasal tumors
Nasal vestibulitis
NASH. See Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Nasoduodenal feeding tube
Nasoenteric feeding tube
for caustic esophageal injury
Nasogastric intubation
for acute paralytic ileus
for feeding tube
for GI bleeding
hospital-acquired bacterial rhinosinusitis and
in near drowning
for vomiting
Nasolacrimal duct, obstruction of, dacryocystitis and
Nasopharynx
juvenile angiofibroma arising in
malignant tumors of
Epstein-Barr virus and
serous otitis media and
Natacyn. See Natamycin
Natalizumab
for inflammatory bowel disease
for multiple sclerosis
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy caused by
Natamycin, for ophthalmic disorders
Nateglinide
National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
(NAEPP), asthma diagnosis/management guidelines of
Native DNA, antibodies to
Natriuresis defects, in hypertension
Natriuretic peptide
atrial, in senile amyloidosis
B-type (BNP/beta)
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in dyspnea
heart failure and
in mitral regurgitation
recombinant. See Nesiritide
reference values for
Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES),
cholecystectomy via
Nausea and vomiting
in appendicitis
chemotherapy-induced
with diarrhea/food poisoning/gastroenteritis
drugs for management of. See also Antiemetics
exenatide use and
in HIV infection/AIDS
hyponatremia caused by
in intestinal obstruction
in intracerebral hemorrhage
liraglutide use and
in migraine headache
opioids causing
palliation of
in pancreatitis
in polyarteritis nodosa
in pregnancy
in gestational trophoblastic disease
in terminally ill/dying patient
Navane. See Thiothixene
Navelbine. See Vinorelbine
Navy top tubes
NB-UVB therapy. See Narrowband UVB (NB-UVB) therapy
Nd:YAG laser photoresection. See also Laser therapy
for lung cancer palliation
Near drowning
Nearsightedness (myopia)
surgical correction of
Nebivolol
for heart failure
for hypertension
Nebulizer therapy
MMR vaccine
for COPD
Necator americanus,
Neck
infections of
anaerobic
deep
masses caused by
masses in
congenital lesions in adults
in Hodgkin disease
infectious and inflammatory
lymphoma
metastatic
thyroid cancer. See Thyroid cancer
Neck dissection
for laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
for thyroid cancer
Neck fractures
Neck injury, cervical vertigo and
Neck manipulation
Neck pain
disk-related
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
Necrolysis, toxic epidermal
drugs causing
Necrosectomy, for necrotizing pancreatitis
Necrotizing cellulitis, synergistic
Necrotizing fasciitis
cellulitis differentiated from
Necrotizing (phlegmonous) gastritis
Necrotizing lymphadenitis, histiocytic (Kikuchi/Kikuchi-
Fugimoto disease)
Necrotizing pancreatitis
Necrotizing pneumonia
Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
Nedocromil
for allergic eye disease
for allergic rhinitis
for asthma
Needle ablation of prostate, transurethral (TUNA), for
benign prostatic hyperplasia
Needle-stick injury, HIV infection/AIDS transmission risk
and
Neer impingement sign
Nefazodone
Neglect/abuse, of elderly
Negri/Negri-like bodies, in rabies
Neighborhood reaction
Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. See also Gonococcal infections
resistant strains of
meningitidis. 
See 
also 
Meningococcal
(Neisseriameningitidis) infections
resistant strains of
Nelfinavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Nelson syndrome
Nematode infections. See also specific type
filariasis
intestinal roundworm
invasive roundworm
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy. See also Chemotherapy
for bladder cancer
for breast cancer
for colorectal cancer
for esophageal cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
for lung cancer
Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser photoresection.
See Nd:YAG laser photoresection
Neologisms, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Neonate. See Newborn
Neoplasia. See Cancer
Neoplastic pericarditis
Neorickettsia sennetsu,
Neostigmine
for 
acute 
colonic 
pseudo-obstruction 
(Ogilvie
syndrome)
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for myasthenia gravis
Neovascular age-related macular degeneration
Neovascular (rubeotic) glaucoma, retinal vein occlusion
and
Neovascularization
in age-related macular degeneration
in diabetic retinopathy
in retinal vein occlusion
Nepafenac, for ophthalmic disorders
Nephrectomy, for renal cell carcinoma
influenza/H1N1 influenza vaccination and
Nephritic syndrome. See also Glomerulonephritis
in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Nephritis. See also Glomerulonephritis
interstitial
lupus
radiation exposure and
in syphilis
tubulointerstitial
Nephrocalcinosis
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
in renal tubular acidosis
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. See Diabetes insipidus,
nephrogenic
Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)
Nephrolithiasis (kidney stones). See also Urinary stone
disease
calcium
hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria/hyperparathyroidism
and
in Crohn disease
cystine
dysuria and
in polycystic kidney disease
in renal tubular acidosis
in short bowel syndrome
struvite
uric acid
Nephrolithotomy
Nephropathia epidemica
Nephropathy
analgesic
Balkan, ureteral/renal pelvis cancer and
contrast
diabetic. See Diabetic nephropathy
HIV-associated
hypertensive
IgA (Berger disease)
lead
membranous. See Membranous nephropathy
obstructive
reflux
urate/uric acid
Nephrosclerosis, hypertension causing
Nephrosis, lipoid (minimal change disease)
Nephrostomy, for pyelonephritis
Nephrotic spectrum diseases
glomerular. See also Nephrotic syndrome
in primary renal disorders
from systemic disorders
Nephrotic syndrome. See also specific disease
in diabetes mellitus. See also Diabetic nephropathy
focal segmental glomerular sclerosis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
hyponatremia in
lipid abnormalities and
lithium causing
lower extremity edema and
in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
membranous nephropathy and
minimal change disease and
proteinuria in
Nephrotoxicity. See also specific agent
acute tubular necrosis and
of aminoglycosides
of cisplatin
of cyclosporine
endogenous substances causing
exogenous agents causing
of mercury
of methotrexate
of NSAIDs
of radiographic contrast media
reversible kidney injury and
Nephroureterectomy
Nerve agents, for chemical warfare
skin decontamination and
Nerve biopsy
in polyarteritis nodosa
in polyneuropathies
Nerve block, for pain control
in herpes zoster/postherpetic neuralgia
Nerve conduction velocity studies. See Conduction velocity
studies
Nervous system. See under Neurologic
Nesiritide
for heart failure
for pulmonary edema
Neulasta. See Pegfilgrastim
Neumega. See Oprelvekin
Neupogen. See Filgrastim
Neural hearing loss. See also Hearing loss
Neural tube defects, folic acid in prevention of
Neuralgia
glossopharyngeal. See Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
postherpetic
varicella vaccine in prevention of
trigeminal. See Trigeminal neuralgia
Neuralgic 
amyotrophy 
(idiopathic 
brachial 
plexus
neuropathy)
M2 
inhibitors 
(amantadine/rimantadine),
influenza/influenza resistance and
prophylactic
Neuritis
intercostal
optic
in neuromyelitis optica
Neuroblastoma
Neuroborreliosis. See also Lyme disease
Neuroclaudication, in spinal stenosis
Neurocutaneous diseases
Neurocysticercosis
Neurodermatitis, circumscribed (lichen simplex chronicus)
Neuroendocrine tumors. See also Carcinoid tumors; Islet
cell tumors
diarrhea and
gastrinoma differential diagnosis and
in MEN
pancreatic
Neurofibromas
Neurofibromatosis
neuroendocrine tumors in
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma in
vestibular schwannoma (eight nerve tumors/acoustic
neuroma) and
Neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint)
in diabetes mellitus
in tabes dorsalis
Neurogenic claudication
Neurogenic hyperventilation, in coma or stupor
Neurogenic shock
Neuroimaging
in bacterial rhinosinusitis
in brain abscess
in cerebral infarction
in cerebrovascular occlusive disease
in CNS infections
in Cushing syndrome
in cysticercosis
in dementia
in headache
in Huntington disease
in intracerebral hemorrhage
in intracranial aneurysm
in intracranial arteriovenous malformations
in intracranial tumors
in multiple sclerosis
in pituitary tumors
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
in seizure evaluation
in stroke
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
in transient ischemic attacks
in vestibular disorders/vertigo
Neurokinin receptor antagonists, for nausea and vomiting
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Neuroleptics. See Antipsychotic drugs
Neurologic deficits
arteriovenous malformations causing
back pain and
in brain abscess
in cerebral infarction
in cysticercosis
in head injury
in intracerebral hemorrhage
in intracranial aneurysms
intracranial tumors causing
false localizing signs and
in lacunar infarct
in leprosy
migraine headache and
neck pain and
spinal cord tumors/compression causing
spinal trauma causing
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
in thrombotic microangiopathy
in transient ischemic attacks
Neurologic 
disorders. See also specific type and
Neurologic deficits; Neuropathies
in African trypanosomiasis
in American trypanosomiasis/Chagas disease
Angiostrongylus causing
in Behçet syndrome
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
CMV causing
coxsackieviruses causing
in cryptococcosis
in cysticercosis
in Gaucher disease
in gnathostomiasis
herpes simplex
high altitude-associated
in HIV infection/AIDS
in hypercalcemia
hypernatremia treatment and
hyponatremia treatment and
infection. See also Encephalitis; Meningitis
anaerobic
in leprosy
in loiasis
in Lyme disease
in malaria
measles/measles vaccination causing
nausea and vomiting and
in near drowning
nonmetastatic complications of cancer
in paragonimiasis
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in porphyria
postoperative
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
primary angiitis and
radiation exposure and
respiratory failure caused by
SIADH caused by
in SLE
in strongyloidiasis
Neuraminidase 
inhibitors 
(oseltamivir/zanamivir), 
for
influenza
thiamine deficiency causing
in varicella
vertigo and
vitamin B12 deficiency causing
vitamin E deficiency causing
in Whipple disease
in Wilson disease
Neurologic evaluation
in back pain
in carpal tunnel syndrome
in dementia
in headache
in neck pain
preoperative
Neuroma/neurinoma. See also Neurofibromatosis
acoustic. See Acoustic neuroma/neurinoma
mucosal, in MEN
plexiform
Neuromodulation, for angina
Neuromuscular/neuromuscular transmission disorders
dysphagia in
in hypercalcemia
respiratory failure caused by
in uremia
weakness in
Neuromyelitis optica (Devic disease/syndrome)
optic neuritis in
Neuron-specific enolase
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
in pheochromocytoma
Neuronal 
neuropathies. See also specific type and
Neuropathies
Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antibodies, in
cancer-related neuropathy
Neuronitis, vestibular
Neuronopathy
bulbospinal X-linked
cancer-related
Neuropathic bladder
chemotherapy-induced
in diabetes
Neuropathic pain. See also Neuropathies
Neuropathies
acute motor axonal/acute motor and sensory axonal
(AMAN/AMSAN). See also Guillain-Barré syndrome
alcoholism and nutritional deficiency and
in amyloidosis
antiretroviral agents causing
autonomic. See Autonomic neuropathy
brachial plexus
cancer-related
chemotherapy-induced
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
cisplatin-induced
c o m p r e s s i o n. See 
Entrapment/compression
neuropathy
in critically ill patient
in cryoglobulinemia
diabetic
foot disorders/ulcers/gangrene and
glycemic control and
didanosine therapy and
diphtheritic
dysautonomia and
entrapment. See Entrapment/compression neuropathy
facial. See also Bell palsy
hereditary motor and sensory (HMSN), types I to IV
in HIV infection/AIDS
infectious/inflammatory disease and
inherited
in leprosy
in Lyme disease
metabolic/systemic disease and
in microscopic polyangiitis
in myeloma
nutritional. See also specific nutrient
optic
inflammatory (optic neuritis)
   in neuromyelitis optica
ischemic
   giant cell arteritis and
in paraproteinemias
peripheral. See also specific type
in polyarteritis nodosa
in porphyria
in rheumatoid arthritis
in sarcoidosis
stavudine therapy and
in thiamine deficiency
toxic
in vitamin B12 deficiency
Neuropeptide Y, in pheochromocytoma
Neuropsychological assessment, in dementia
Neuroses, Sunday
Neurosyphilis
cerebrospinal fluid examination in
indications for
drug therapy for
in HIV infection/AIDS
treatment failures and
Neurotomy, radial optic, for retinal vein occlusion
Neurotoxicity. See also Neurologic disorders
of cisplatin
opioid-induced
of snake venom
Neurotransmitters. See specific type
Neurotrophic keratitis
Neurotropic disease
viral. See also specific disorder
yellow fever vaccine-associated
Neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin. See Insulin
therapy; NPH insulin
Neutral protamine lispro (NPL) insulin
Neutrocytic ascites
Neutrogena
Neutropenia
in acute leukemia
antibiotic therapy in
in aplastic anemia
aspergillosis and
autoimmune
cancer chemotherapy causing
fever/FUO and
antimicrobial therapy and
gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis and
granulocyte transfusion for
in hairy cell leukemia
infections and
in cancer patients
prevention/treatment and
Neutrophil count. See also Neutropenia; Neutrophilia
ascitic
in bacterial peritonitis
joint fluid
reference values for
Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, in acute tubular
necrosis
Neutrophilia
in cellulitis
in gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
Nevanac. See Nepafenac
Nevi. See also Mole (skin)
atypical (dysplastic)
blue
compound
junctional
melanocytic
pigmented
Nevirapine. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Nevus. See Nevi
New World cutaneous leishmaniasis
New World hantaviruses
Newborn/infant
air travel and
antiretroviral/zidovudine therapy for
chlamydial infection in
CMV infection/inclusion disease in
coxsackievirus myocarditis in
gonococcal infection in
group B streptococcal infection in
hemolytic disease of, prevention of
hepatitis B transmission/vaccine and
hepatitis C transmission and
herpes simplex infection and
HIV transmission to
listeriosis in (granulomatosis infantisepticum)
maternal thyroid disease and
parechovirus infection in
pneumocystosis in
rubella infection and
seizures presenting in
smoking during pregnancy and
syphilis in (congenital syphilis)
penicillin treatment in maternal disease and
toxoplasmosis during pregnancy and
varicella in
Nexavar. See Sorafenib
NF1/NF2 genes, in neurofibromatosis
NH3. See Ammonia
NHERF1 mutation, in osteomalacia/rickets
Niacin (vitamin B3)
deficiency of
for lipid modification
toxicity of
Niacinamide. See also Niacin
Niaspan. See Niacin
Nicardipine
for angina
for hypertension
pheochromocytoma surgery and
in urgencies/emergencies
overdose/toxicity of
Niclosamide, for tapeworm infection
Nicotinamide. See also Niacin
for niacin deficiency
Nicotine. See also Smoking
for replacement therapy
Nicotinic acid. See Niacin
Nifedipine. See also Calcium channel blocking drugs
for angina
for hypertension
in urgencies/emergencies
   MOAI-induced
overdose/toxicity of
for preterm labor prevention
Nifurtimox
for African trypanosomiasis
for American trypanosomiasis/Chagas disease
Night blindness, in vitamin A deficiency
Nightmares
Nikolsky sign
Nil disease (minimal change disease)
Nilandron. See Nilutamide
Nilotinib
for chronic myeloid leukemia
Nilutamide
Nimodipine. See also Calcium channel blocking drugs
overdose/toxicity of
NIPD. See Nocturnal intermittent peritoneal dialysis
Nipent. See Pentostatin
N I P H S . See 
Noninsulinoma 
pancreatogenous
hypoglycemia syndrome
Nipple, Paget disease of
Nipple discharge
in breast cancer
cytologic evaluation of
in fibrocystic breast condition
in hyperprolactinemia
in male
Nipride. See Nitroprusside
Nisoldipine
for angina
for hypertension
overdose/toxicity of
Nitazoxanide
for cryptosporidiosis
for giardiasis
Nitrates. See also Nitroglycerin
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for acute attack
prophylactic administration of
for heart failure
left ventricular (infarct-related)
for myocardial infarction
phosphodiesterase 
inhibitor/sildenafil
contraindications and
for pulmonary edema
Nitric oxide
in exhaled breath, in asthma
in shock
Nitric oxide synthetase, in shock
Nitrites
for cyanide poisoning
methemoglobinemia caused by
Nitrobenzene, methemoglobinemia caused by
Nitrofurantoin
breastfeeding and
for urinary tract infection
Nitrogen, liquid. See Liquid nitrogen
Nitrogen balance, nutritional support and
Nitrogen mustards, in cancer chemotherapy
Nitrogen oxide gases, methemoglobinemia caused by
Nitroglycerin. See also Nitrates
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for acute attack
in diagnosis
prophylactic administration of
for heart failure
left ventricular (infarct-related)
for hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
for myocardial infarction
phosphodiesterase 
inhibitor/sildenafil
contraindications and
for pulmonary edema
Nitroprusside
for cardiogenic shock
cyanide poisoning caused by
for heart failure
infarct-related
for hypertension
in aortic dissection
pheochromocytoma surgery and
in urgencies/emergencies
Nix. See Permethrin
Nizatidine. See also H2 receptor blocking drugs
Nizoral. See Ketoconazole
Njovera (endemic syphilis)
NK cell lymphoma
nose and paranasal sinus involvement and
NK1 receptor antagonists, for nausea and vomiting
NMO-IgG, in neuromyelitis optica
NMP22 assay, in bladder cancer
NMS. See Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
NNRTIs. See 
Nonnucleoside 
reverse 
transcriptase
inhibitors
Nocardia asteroides/brasiliensis (nocardiosis)
actinomycotic mycetoma and
Noctec. See Chloral hydrate
Nocturia, in heart failure
Nocturnal intermittent peritoneal dialysis
Nocturnal myoclonus
Nocturnal penile tumescence testing
Nodular glomerulosclerosis, in diabetic nephropathy
Nodular goiter. See Multinodular (nodular) goiter
Nodular malignant melanoma
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia, noncirrhotic portal
hypertension and
Nodules
milker's (paravaccinia)
pulmonary, solitary. See Solitary pulmonary nodule
rheumatoid
in coal workers (Caplan syndrome)
gouty tophi differentiated from
skin. See also specific type
inflammatory
violaceous to purple
subcutaneous. See Subcutaneous nodules
thyroid. See also Goiter; Thyroid cancer; Thyroid
nodules
vocal fold
laryngitis and
Noise trauma, hearing loss caused by
Nolvadex. See Tamoxifen
Non-ABCDE hepatitis, transfusion-associated
Nonadherence. See Adherence/nonadherence
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). See also Fatty
liver
cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)
Nonbacterial prostatitis
Noncirrhotic portal hypertension
Nonclostridial crepitant cellulitis
Noncompliance. See Adherence/nonadherence
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus
Nondiabetic (renal) glucosuria
Nonepileptic seizure, psychogenic (PNES)
Nonerosive/nonspecific gastritis
Nonfamilial adenomatous polyps
Nongonococcal acute bacterial arthritis. See Septic
(nongonococcal acute bacterial) arthritis
Non-group A streptococcal infections
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. See also Lymphoma
fever/FUO and
gastric
hepatitis C and
furunculosis/carbuncles and haemolyticus
nose and paranasal sinus involvement and
small intestine
thyroid
Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia syndrome
(islet cell hyperplasia)
Noninsulinomas, localization of
Noninvasive ischemia testing, preoperative
Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NPPV)
for COPD
for obesity-hypoventilation (Pickwickian) syndrome
for respiratory failure
Nonionizing radiation
Nonislet cell tumor hypoglycemia
Nonketotic 
hyperglycemic 
hyperosmolar 
coma. See
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
Nonmyeloablative 
allogeneic 
transplant. See 
Bone
marrow/stem 
cell 
transplantation; 
Reduced-intensity
allogeneic stem cell transplantation
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs).
See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
antituberculous drug interactions and
in combinations
resistance to
Nonoxynol 9
HIV infection/AIDS and
Nonparalytic poliomyelitis
Nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia
Nonproliferative retinopathy
Non-Q wave (non-ST elevation) infarction. See also
Myocardial infarction
Non-rapid eye movement (non-REM) sleep
Nonscarring alopecia
Nonsecretory myeloma
Nonseminomas
Non-sexually transmitted epididymitis
Non-sexually transmitted treponematoses
Td vaccine
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
staging of
survival rates for
treatment of
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP)
in HIV infection/AIDS
Non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes. See also
Acute coronary syndromes
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). See also
specific agent
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
for acute coronary syndromes
in analgesic nephropathy
for ankylosing spondylitis
in cancer prevention
colorectal cancer and
Tetanus-diphtheria toxoid (Td vaccine)
COX-1/COX-2 affected by
gastritis/gastropathy caused by
gastrointestinal side effects/bleeding and
for gout
for headache
hypertension and
hyponatremia caused by
myocardial infarction and
nonselective. See also Coxibs
for ophthalmic disorders
for osteoarthritis
for pain management, with opioid analgesics
in peptic ulcer disease
H pylori eradication therapy and
misoprostol coadministration and
prevention and
diarrhea caused by
risk reduction and
platelet function affected by
prerenal acute kidney injury and
for psoriatic arthritis
renal toxicity of
for rheumatoid arthritis
selective. See Coxibs
topical
tubulointerstitial nephritis caused by
Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
Nontreponemal antigen tests, for syphilis
Nontuberculous atypical mycobacteria (NTM)
adenitis/lymphadenitis caused by
MAC infections. See Mycobacterium (mycobacterial
infections), avium complex
pulmonary disease caused by
in HIV infection/AIDS
skin and soft tissue infections caused by
Noonan syndrome
Nor-QD. See Norethindrone
Norelgestromin, in transdermal contraceptive patch
Norepinephrine
for hypotension/shock
cardiogenic
in tricyclic antidepressant overdose
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
Norethindrone
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in combination oral contraceptives
in hormone replacement therapy
for postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
in progestin minipill
with transdermal estradiol
Norflex. See Orphenadrine
Norfloxacin. See also Fluoroquinolones
for ophthalmic disorders
for urinary tract infection
Norgestimate
in combination oral contraceptives
in estrogen replacement therapy
Norgestrel, in combination oral contraceptives
in vibrio infection
Normal flora
anaerobic infections caused by
coagulase-negative staphylococci as
g
g
p y
opportunistic infections caused by
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
Normal ranges, for diagnostic/laboratory tests. See also
specific test
Normal-tension glaucoma
Normetanephrine, in pheochromocytoma
Normochloremic metabolic (increased anion gap) acidosis
Normodyne. See Labetalol
Normokalemic periodic paralysis
Noroviruses, acute diarrhea/food poisoning caused by
Norplant system
Norpramin. See Desipramine
Norprolac. See Quinagolide
North Asian tick typhus
Norton score, for pressure ulcers
Nortriptyline. See also Antidepressants
for neuropathic pain/diabetic neuropathy
Norvasc. See Amlodipine
Norvir. See Ritonavir
Norwalk virus
acute diarrhea/food poisoning caused by
Nose. See also under Nasal
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
infections of. See also Rhinosinusitis; Sinusitis
inflammatory disease of
traumatic injury of
tumors/granulomatous disease of
Nosebleed. See Epistaxis
Nosocomial 
infections. See Health care (hospital)-
associated infections
Nosocomial pneumonia
NOTES (natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery),
cholecystectomy via
Novantrone. See Mitoxantrone
Novolin. See also Insulin therapy
Novolog. See Insulin aspart
NPH insulin. See also Insulin therapy
in mixtures/combination therapy
in pregnancy
NPL insulin
NPM1, in acute leukemia
NPPV. See Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation
NPT2a/NPT2c mutations, in osteomalacia/rickets
NREM sleep
NRTIs. See Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NSCLC. See Non-small cell lung cancer
NSF. See Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
NSIP. See Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
nsNSAID. See Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NSVT. See Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
NTM. See Nontuberculous atypical mycobacteria
NTZ. See Nitazoxanide
Nuclear bleeding scans, in GI bleeding
Nuclear bone scanning. See Bone scanning
Nuclear radiation, carcinogenesis and
Nuclear transcription factor mutations, in MODY
Nucleic acid amplification tests
in chlamydial infection
in gonococcal infection
in STD screening
in tuberculosis
Nucleophosmin 1, in acute leukemia
Nucleoside/nucleotide 
backbone, 
for 
antiretroviral
regimens
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs). See
also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
in combinations
for hepatitis B
lactic acidosis caused by
resistance to
Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor. See also
Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
for hepatitis B
resistance to
vibrios causing
NuLYTE. See Polyethylene glycol
Nursing (breastfeeding). See Lactation
Nursing homes, caregiver issues related to placement in
Nutcracker esophagus
NutraSweet. See Aspartame
Nutrients. See also Diet; Nutritional disorders; Nutritional
support
diets restricting
diets supplementing
requirements for in nutritional support
Nutrition. See also Diet; Nutrients; Nutritional disorders;
Nutritional support
in Crohn disease
in pregnancy
preventable disease/deaths and
for terminally ill/dying patient
Nutritional 
disorders. See also 
Eating 
disorders;
Malnutrition; Nutritional support; Obesity
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
diet therapy for
neuropathy associated with. See also specific type
thrombocytopenia associated with
in vibrio infection
in alcoholic liver disease/cirrhosis
in burn injury
in caustic esophageal injury
in Crohn disease
in elderly
in HIV infection/AIDS
for involuntary weight loss
in pancreatitis
for protein–energy malnutrition
in respiratory failure
in short bowel syndrome
for terminally ill/dying patient
y
y g p
in ulcerative colitis
Nutropin Depot. See Recombinant human growth hormone
Nystagmus
in coma or stupor
intracranial tumors causing
in vertigo
in vestibular neuronitis
Nystatin, for candidiasis
oral
vulvovaginal
Obesity
arthritis and
asthma risk and
cancer risk and
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
coronary heart disease and
in Cushing syndrome
definition of/measurements in
in diabetes mellitus
diet and
metformin treatment and
diet/eating behavior changes and
esophageal cancer and
exercise/activity and
genetic factors in
health consequences of
in hypertension
hypogonadism in
hypoventilation and (Pickwickian syndrome)
lipid abnormalities in
medical conditions/evaluation and
medications in management of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
in polycystic ovary syndrome
postoperative pulmonary complications and
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of
treatment of. See also Bariatric surgery
weight gain in pregnancy and
Obesity-hypoventilation syndrome (Pickwickian syndrome)
Obliterative bronchiolitis. See also Bronchiolitis
O'Brien test
Obscure gastrointestinal bleeding
Obscure-occult bleeding
Obscure-overt bleeding
Obsessions. See also Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
panic disorder and
Tourette syndrome and
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
Obstetrics/obstetric disorders. See also Pregnancy
adverse ophthalmic effects of drugs used in
Obstructive jaundice
Obstructive 
lung 
disease. See Airway 
disorders,
obstruction; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Obstructive shock
Obstructive sleep apnea
obesity-hypoventilation syndrome and
postoperative pulmonary complications and
Obstructive uropathy
postrenal
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Obstructive voiding symptoms
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
in prostate cancer
in prostatitis
Obturator sign, in appendicitis
Occipital lobe lesions
Occlusive dressings
in exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma
for leg ulcers
for psoriasis
for wart removal
Occult diabetes
Occult gastrointestinal bleeding. See also Gastrointestinal
bleeding
stool test for. See Fecal occult blood testing
Occupational asthma
Occupational pulmonary diseases. See also specific
disorder
Occupational radiation exposure
Occupational therapy, for stroke patient
OCD. See Obsessive-compulsive disorder
OCD spectrum
Ochronosis
13C-Octanoic acid breath test, in nausea and vomiting
Octreotide
for acromegaly/gigantism
for ACTH-secreting tumor identification/treatment
for carcinoid syndrome
for diarrhea
for drug-induced hypoglycemia
for GH-secreting tumor
for GI bleeding/esophageal varices
for islet cell tumors/insulinomas
for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma identification
Ocu-Pred. See Prednisolone
Ocu-chlor. See Chloramphenicol
Ocuflox. See Ofloxacin
Ocular contusions
Ocular disease. See Eye, disorders of
Ocular examination. See Eye, examination of
Ocular hemorrhages
eye injuries and
vitreous
Ocular hypertension. See also Glaucoma
in acute angle closure glaucoma
in chronic glaucoma
treatment of
Ocular lacerations
Ocular larva migrans
Ocular medications. See Ophthalmic medications
Ocular motor palsies
in myasthenia gravis
Ocular movements. See Eye (extraocular) movements
Ocular muscular dystrophy
Ocular/orbital pain
in acute angle-closure glaucoma
in corneal abrasion
headache and
in ultraviolet (actinic) keratitis
in uveitis
Ocular trauma
Oculocephalic reflex, in coma or stupor
Oculomotor response, in coma or stupor
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
Oculosympathetic paralysis. See Horner syndrome
Oculovestibular reflex, in coma or stupor
Ocusert. See Pilocarpine
Oddi, sphincter of. See Sphincter of Oddi
Odontogenic infections. See also Dental disorders
deep neck infections and
Odor, breath
in cyanide poisoning
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in uremia
Odor identification/discrimination/threshold, disorders of
Odynophagia
in epiglottitis (supraglottitis)
in esophageal cancer
in infectious esophagitis
in pharyngitis
in pill-induced esophagitis
Odynophonia, laryngeal contact ulcers/granulomas causing
OEP. See Oil of evening primrose
Ofatumumab
Ofloxacin. See also Fluoroquinolones
for ophthalmic disorders
for urinary tract infection
Ogen. See Estrogen vaginal creams
Ogilvie syndrome
Oil of evening primrose (OEP), for fibrocystic condition
Oka/Merck VZV vaccine. See Herpes zoster vaccine
Olanzapine. See also Antipsychotic drugs
for bipolar disease/mania
for depression
diabetes and
in elderly
overdose/toxicity of
for personality disorder
for psychedelic abuse/overdose
Old World cutaneous leishmaniasis
Old World hantaviruses
Older adults. See also specific disorder affecting
abused
advance directives and
antipsychotic therapy in
appendicitis in
assessment of
benzodiazepine use in
caregiver issues and
cholesterol screening in
delirium in
at end of life
postoperative
dementia in
assessment of/screening for
decision-making capacity and
depressed. See also Depression
drug use (pharmacotherapy/polypharmacy) and
falls and
urinary incontinence and
falls and
fecal incontinence and
fever/FUO in
frailty and
functional assessment of
gait disorders in
hearing impairment in
immobility and
influenza vaccine for
insomnia/insomnia management in
malnourished
management of common problems in
pressure ulcers in
principles of care of
prognosis/life expectancy and
psychosis in (late life psychosis)
suicide in
undernutrition and
urinary incontinence and
values/preferences and
vision impairment in
weight loss in
Olecranon bursitis
Olestra, diarrhea caused by
Olfactory dysfunction
Oligoclonal bands, in multiple sclerosis
Oligodendroglioma
Oligospermia
Oliguria
in acute tubular necrosis
in obstructive uropathy
Olmesartan
with amlodipine
with hydrochlorothiazide
Olopatadine, for allergic eye disease
Olsalazine, for inflammatory bowel disease
Omalizumab, for asthma
Omega-3 fatty acids/fish oil
platelet function affected by
preventable disease/deaths associated with low
intake of
Omeprazole. See also Proton pump inhibitors
clopidogrel interaction and
On-off phenomenon
Onchocerca volvulus (onchocerciasis/river blindness)
Oncocytoma, of kidney
Oncotype Dx assay
Oncovin. See Vincristine
Ondansetron. See also Antiemetics
Ondine curse (primary alveolar hypoventilation)
One-leg standing extension test, in back pain
Onglyza. See Saxagliptin
Ontak. See Denileukin diftitox
Onycholysis
Onychomycosis (tinea unguium)
Onychophagia
Oophorectomy (salpingo-oophorectomy)/ovarian ablation.
See also Menopause/menopausal syndrome, surgical
in breast cancer prevention/treatment
for endometrial carcinoma
for endometriosis
estrogen replacement therapy after
for hirsutism/virilization
in ovarian cancer prevention/treatment
HNPCC and
malignant ascites and
for PID
premature ovarian failure and
testosterone levels after
Oophoritis, in mumps
Opana/Opana ER. See Oxymorphone
Open-angle glaucoma, chronic
Open biopsy, for breast lump evaluation. See also Breast,
biopsy of
Open can test
Opening snap, in mitral stenosis
Operant conditioning. See Behavior modification
Ophthalmia neonatorum
Ophthalmic artery, obstruction of
Ophthalmic medications
contaminated
systemic effects of
toxic and hypersensitivity reactions to
Ophthalmopathy, Graves
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
Ophthalmoplegia
episodic vertigo in
headache and
Ophthalmoplegic migraine
Opioid receptor antagonist laxatives, for constipation
Opioids/opioid analgesics. See also specific agent
addiction and
allergic reaction to
for chronic pain
constipation caused by
for COPD
dependency and
for diarrhea
for dyspnea
in end-of-life care
hypogonadism caused by
for migraine headache
for myocardial infarction
nausea and vomiting caused by
for neuropathic pain
with NSAIDS
overdose/abuse of
management of
narcotic antagonists/naloxone for
during pregnancy
pseudo-addiction and
tolerance and
withdrawal and
Opisthorchis felineus/viverrini (opisthorchiasis)
cholangiocarcinoma and
Opium, tincture of. See Tincture of opium
Opportunistic infections. See also specific type
in cancer patients
fungi/molds causing
prevention of
in HIV infection/AIDS
diarrhea/food poisoning caused by
prevention of
treatment of
prevention of
in transplant patients
treatment of
Oprelvekin, for chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia
Opsoclonus/myoclonus
Optic atrophy
in optic neuritis
in pseudotumor cerebri
Optic disk
cupping of, in chronic glaucoma
drusen of
swelling of
in ischemic optic neuropathy
in optic neuritis
Optic nerve
compression of, in dysthyroid eye disease
damage to in glaucoma
Optic neuritis
in neuromyelitis optica
Optic neuropathy
inflammatory (optic neuritis)
in neuromyelitis optica
ischemic
in giant cell arteritis
Optic neurotomy, radial, for retinal vein occlusion
OptiPranolol. See Metipranolol
Optivar. See Azelastine
OPV (oral/Sabin polio vaccine)
IPV booster and
Oragrafin. See Ipodate sodium
Oral cavity
anaerobic flora of
pneumonia/lung abscess and
p
g
bullous pemphigoid involving
cancer of
candidiasis involving (thrush)
esophagitis and
pleural
erythema multiforme involving
erythroplakia involving
in HIV infection/AIDS
leukoplakia involving
lichen planus involving
mucositis of, chemotherapy/radiation causing
pemphigus involving
ulcerative lesions of
in Behçet syndrome
chemotherapy-induced
herpes simplex esophagitis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Oral contraceptives
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
antibiotics affecting efficacy of
benzodiazepine interactions and
breast cancer risk and
cervical dysplasia/cancer and
combined
contraindications/adverse effects of
depression associated with use of
drug interactions and
for emergency/postcoital contraception
endometrial hyperplasia/carcinoma and
yp p
for endometriosis
after gestational trophoblastic disease
hepatic adenoma/liver tumors associated with
for hirsutism/virilization
for hormone replacement therapy
hypertension and
lactation/breastfeeding and
lipid abnormalities associated with use of
melasma (chloasma) caused by
nipple discharge caused by
ovarian cancer prevention and
thromboembolic disease and
Oral 
glucose 
tolerance 
test. See 
Glucose
tolerance/intolerance
Oral hypoglycemic agents. See Antidiabetic agents
Oral nutritional supplements
in HIV infection/AIDS
for undernourished elderly
Oral polio vaccine (OPV/Sabin vaccine)
IPV booster and
Oramorph. See Morphine
Orbital cellulitis/abscess
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
Orbital floor, blowout fracture of
Orchiectomy
for intra-abdominal testes
for prostate cancer
for testicular cancer
Orchiopexy/orchidopexy, infertility/testicular cancer risk and
Orchitis
in filariasis
mumps
Orellanine, Cortinarius mushroom poisoning and
Orf
Organ of Corti, hearing loss caused by disorders of
Organ donation. See also Transplantation
Organ 
transplantation. See 
specific 
typeand
Transplantation
Organic 
brain 
syndrome. See Cognitive disorders;
Delirium; Dementia
Organic (alcoholic) hallucinosis
Organic personality syndrome
Organophosphate poisoning
seizures caused by
Orgasm
loss 
of/orgasmic 
dysfunction. See also Sexual
dysfunction
antidepressants causing
antipsychotics causing
in female
in male
Oriental spotted fever
Orientia tsutsugamushi,
Orinase. See Tolbutamide
Orlistat
for obesity
in type 2 diabetes
vitamin D affected by
Ornithosis (psittacosis)
Oromandibular dystonia
Oropharyngeal anthrax
Oropharyngeal dysphagia. See also Dysphagia
Orphenadrine, 
for 
parkinsonism. See 
also
Antiparkinsonism drugs
Ortho Dienestrol. See Estrogen vaginal creams
Ortho-Prefest. See Estrogens, with progestins
Orthodeoxia
in hepatopulmonary syndrome
in patent foramen ovale
Orthodromic reentrant tachycardia
Orthokeratology
Orthopedics. See also Musculoskeletal disorders
ankle injuries
general approach to musculoskeletal injuries and
hip problems
knee problems
shoulder problems
spine problems
upper extremity problems
Orthophosphates, for hypercalciuria
Orthostatic (postural) hypotension
in diabetes mellitus
dysautonomia (autonomic dysfunction) and
falls in elderly and
heat syncope/collapse and
MAOIs causing
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma and
syncope and
tricyclic antidepressants causing
Orthostatic proteinuria
Orudis. See Ketoprofen
Oruvail. See Ketoprofen
Osborn wave, in hypothermia
OsCal 
(calcium 
carbonate). See 
Calcium,
dietary/supplementary
Oseltamivir, for influenza
prophylactic
Osler nodes, in endocarditis
Osler sign
Osler triad
Osler-Weber-Rendu 
syndrome. See 
Hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Osmolality
fecal/stool, in diarrhea
serum
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
in hypernatremia
in hyponatremia
in methanol/ethylene glycol poisoning
reference values for
urine
in acute kidney injury
in hypernatremia
in hyponatremia
reference values for
Osmolar/osmol gap
calculation of
in poisoning/drug overdose
alcohol toxicity and
isopropanol toxicity and
methanol or ethylene glycol toxicity and
Osmolarity
Osmophobia, in migraine headache
OsmoPrep. See Sodium phosphate
Osmostat, reset, hyponatremia caused by
Osmotic diarrhea. See also Diarrhea
Osmotic diuretics
for angle-closure glaucoma
lithium interactions and
Osmotic fragility test, in hereditary spherocytosis
Osmotic gap, stool
Osmotic laxatives
OspA antigen, in Lyme disease
OspB antigen, in Lyme disease
Ossicular disruption, hearing loss and
Osteitis condensans ilii
Osteitis deformans (Paget disease of bone)
Osteitis fibrosa cystica
Osteoarthritis. See also Arthritis
arthroplasty/joint replacement for
p
y j
p
osteomyelitis and
of cervical spine
exercise/activity in prevention/management of
glucosamine/chondroitin for
of hip
of knee
knee pain and
prevention of
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
spinal stenosis and
Osteoarthropathy, 
hypertrophic 
pulmonary. See
Hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy/hypertrophic 
pulmonary
osteoarthropathy
Osteodystrophy
Albright hereditary
renal
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteogenic sarcoma. See Osteosarcoma
Osteoma, ear canal
Osteomalacia
in celiac disease
in chronic kidney disease
hypophosphatemic
osteoporosis with
Osteomyelitis
acute pyogenic
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
candidal
in coccidioidomycosis
in drug users
hematogenous
in histoplasmosis
mycotic
in sickle cell syndromes
of skull base (malignant external otitis)
earache in
staphylococcal
vertebral
back pain and
epidural abscess and
Osteonecrosis
corticosteroid use and
dysbaric
of jaw, bisphosphonate use and
Osteopenia. See also Osteoporosis
in complex regional pain syndrome
Osteophytes
in diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis
neck pain/cervical spondylosis and
in osteoarthritis
in spinal stenosis
Osteoporosis
in celiac disease
circumscripta
in cirrhosis
corticosteroid therapy and
fractures/bone pain and
hip fractures and
in hyperthyroidism
hypogonadism and
levothyroxine treatment and
in men
in myeloma
osteomalacia with
postmenopausal
prevention/treatment of
bisphosphonates in
calcium in
   milk-alkali syndrome and
chronic corticosteroid treatment and
estrogen replacement therapy in
exercise/activity and
selective estrogen receptor modulators in
vitamin D in
thiazolidinedione use and
Osteoprotegerin, in multiple myeloma
Osteosarcoma (osteogenic sarcoma)
Paget disease of bone and
Osteosclerosis, in renal osteodystrophy
Ostium primum atrial septal defect
Ostium secundum atrial septal defect
Otalgia. See Earache
Otelixizumab, for new-onset type 1 diabetes
Otic barotrauma. See Barotrauma
Otic drops
p
for cerumen removal
for external otitis
ototoxic, avoidance of with perforated tympanic
membrane
Otitis
external/malignant external
earache in
facial pain and
media
acute
cholesteatoma and
chronic
complications of
earache in
in HIV infection/AIDS
RSV causing
serous
   nasopharyngeal carcinoma and
Otoconia, vertigo associated with
Otogenic meningitis
Otosclerosis
Ototoxic chemoprotection
Ototoxicity
of aminoglycosides
of cisplatin
hearing loss and
Ottawa Ankle Rules
Outer surface protein A (OspA), in Lyme disease
Outer surface protein B (OspB), in Lyme disease
p
(
p ),
y
Ovarian ablation. See Oophorectomy
Ovarian cancer/tumors
dermatomyositis and
estrogen replacement therapy and
genetic 
mutations 
associated 
with. See also
BRCA1/BRCA2 genes
HNPCC and
hirsutism/virilization caused by
malignant ascites and
palmar fasciitis and
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
during pregnancy
prevention of
genetic risk factors and
oral contraceptive use and
thyroid hormone secreted by
Ovarian cyst
appendicitis differentiated from
in gestational trophoblastic disease
Ovarian failure
in Turner syndrome
Ovarian tumor antigen. See CA 125
Ovaries, polycystic. See Polycystic ovary syndrome
Over-the-counter drugs, use/abuse of
stimulants and
Overflow incontinence
fecal
urinary
Overlap syndrome
Overload proteinuria
Overuse syndromes, of knee
pain and
Overweight. See also Obesity
definition of
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of
Ovide. See Malathion
Ovulation
awareness of
contraception based on
in infertility counseling
induction of for infertility
in polycystic ovary syndrome
Ovulation bleeding
Owl's eye inclusions, in CMV infection
Oxalate, 
in 
urinary 
stones. See 
also 
Calcium
nephrolithiasis
Oxaliplatin
for colorectal cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
Oxandrolone, for AIDS wasting
Oxaprozin
Oxazepam
overdose/toxicity of
Oxcarbazepine. See also Anticonvulsant therapy
for bipolar disease/mania
for seizures
Oxiconazole
Oximetry. See Pulse oximetry/CO-oximetry
Oxistat. See Oxiconazole
Oxitriptan, for myoclonus
Oxprenolol, overdose/toxicity of
Oxybate. See Gamma-hydroxybutyrate
Oxybutynin, for urinary incontinence
Oxycodone
in combination preparations
overdose/toxicity of
Oxycontin. See Oxycodone
Oxygen, partial pressure of. See Pao2; Po2
Oxygen concentrators, for home oxygen therapy
Oxygen 
saturation. See Sao2Oxygen 
tension. See
Po2Oxygen therapy
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for ARDS
for asthma exacerbation
for burn injury
for carbon monoxide poisoning
for cluster headache
for COPD
for dysbarism/decompression sickness
for dyspnea
for heart failure, left ventricular (infarct-related)
for high altitude-related illness
home
hyperbaric. See Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
for hypothermia
for methemoglobinemia
for near drowning
perioperative, surgical site infection and
for Pneumocystis pneumonia
for pulmonary edema
for pulmonary hypertension
for respiratory failure
for sleep apnea
for smoke inhalation
transtracheal
Oxygen uptake, maximal, lung cancer surgery and
Oxyhemoglobin saturation. See Sao2
OxyIR. See Oxycodone
Oxymetazoline, overdose/toxicity of
Oxymorphone
Oxyuriasis (pinworms)
Oysters, contaminated, vibrio infection caused by
3P tumor suppressor gene, in thyroid cancer
P16/CDKN2A gene mutations, pancreatic/periampullary
carcinoma and
p24 antigen assay, in blood screening
P53 gene mutations. See also TP53 gene mutations
in breast cancer
in colorectal cancer
smoking and
in thyroid cancer
P450 aromatase (P450arom) deficiency, amenorrhea in
P450 (CYP) system/cytochrome P450
alcoholic liver disease and
antibodies to, in autoimmune hepatitis
fentanyl and
hepatotoxicity and
nefazodone affecting
protease inhibitors affecting
P450 (CYP) 2C9 variants, testing for
P450c11 deficiency
P450c17 deficiency
P450c21 deficiency
P wave
in cor pulmonale
in 
differentiation 
of 
aberrantly 
conducted
supraventricular beats from ventricular beats
in multifocal atrial tachycardia
in paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
in pulmonary stenosis
Pacemaker
overdrive, for ventricular tachycardia
permanent
for atrioventricular block
   infarct-related
biventricular (resynchronization), for heart failure
for cardiomyopathy
preoperative placement of
for refractory atrial fibrillation
for sick sinus syndrome
temporary
for infarct-associated conduction disturbances
perioperative placement of
Pacemaker syndrome
Packed red blood cells, transfusion of. See also
Transfusion
autologous
for DIC
frozen
for GI bleeding
Paclitaxel
for breast cancer
neuropathy caused by
protein-bound
Paco2. See also Pco2
in asthma, exacerbation severity/management and
in near drowning
Paecilomyces, in opportunistic infection
Paget carcinoma of breast
nipple involvement and
Paget disease
of bone
extramammary
mammary. See Paget carcinoma of breast
PAI-I. See Plasminogen activator I
Pain. See also specific type and Pain disorders; Pain
management; Pain syndromes
assessment scales for
chronic
biofeedback/hypnosis for
opioids in management of
in complex regional pain syndrome
drug 
therapy 
for. See 
Pain 
management,
pharmacologic
at end of life
hypersensitivity to, in diabetes
hyponatremia caused by
ischemic. See Rest pain
in musculoskeletal disorders
neuropathic. See also Neuropathies
nonpharmacologic 
interventions 
in. See 
Pain
management, nonpharmacologic
ocular. See Ocular/orbital pain
otic. See Earache
psychologic factors and (somatoform pain disorder)
response to, in coma or stupor
rest. See Rest pain
in sickle cell anemia
Pain disorders. See also Pain
chronic
with psychologic factors (somatoform pain disorder)
Pain 
management. See also specific disorder and
Analgesia/analgesics
assessment scales and
back pain and
barriers to good care and
for chronic pain/chronic pain disorders
at end of life
nonpharmacologic
pharmacologic
acetaminophen/NSAIDs/coxibs (COX-2 inhibitors)
adjuvant
for neuropathic pain
opioids
principles of
in terminally ill/dying patient
Pain syndromes. See also specific type and Pain
Painful bladder syndrome. See Interstitial cystitis
Painful diabetic neuropathy
Painful intercourse. See Dyspareunia
Painless myocardial infarction
Painless postpartum thyroiditis. See also Postpartum
thyroiditis
Painless sporadic thyroiditis
PAIR (percutaneous aspiration/injection/reaspiration), for
hydatid cysts
Palatal myoclonus, tinnitus and
Palifermin, for chemotherapy-induced mucositis
Palilalia, in Tourette syndrome
Palindromic rheumatism
Paliperidone
Palivizumab
Palladin gene, pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Palladone. See Hydromorphone
Palliative care
definition and scope of
at end of life. See also End of life, provision of care at
pain management
for gastric cancer
for heart failure
for lung cancer
symptom management and
constipation
delirium and agitation
dyspnea
nausea and vomiting
pain
Palliative care institutions. See also End of life, provision of
care at
Pallidotomy, for parkinsonism
Pallor, in Raynaud phenomenon
Palmar erythema
in cirrhosis
in rheumatoid arthritis
Palmar fasciitis
cancer and
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
in Dupuytren contracture
Palms
tinea of
ulnar lesions at
vesiculobullous dermatitis of (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Palonosetron. See also Antiemetics
Palpitations
in pheochromocytoma
in pulmonary embolism
Palsies. See specific type and Paralysis/palsies
Paludrine. See Proguanil
2-PAM. See Pralidoxime
Pamelor. See Nortriptyline
Pamidronate. See also Bisphosphonates
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for chemotherapy-induced toxicity/bone pain
for hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
for osteoporosis prevention/management
corticosteroid use and
for Paget disease of bone
Panacinar bibasilar emphysema. See also Emphysema
Panbronchiolitis, diffuse
Pancreas
cancer of
GI bleeding and
pancreatitis and
diseases of. See also specific type and Diabetes
mellitus; Pancreatitis
dyspepsia and
vomiting and
divisum
functioning/neuroendocrine tumors of
hypoglycemia caused by
in MEN
pseudocysts of
ascites and
cystic carcinoma differentiated from
infected (pancreatic abscess)
transplantation of, for diabetes mellitus
Pancreatectomy
diabetes/hyperglycemia and
for insulinoma
for noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia
syndrome (islet cell hyperplasia)
Pancreatic abscess
Pancreatic ascites
Pancreatic duct
ascites caused by disruption of
calculus formation in (pancreaticolithiasis)
Pancreatic enzyme supplements
Pancreatic islets. See also B cells, pancreatic
hyperplasia 
of 
(noninsulinoma 
pancreatogenous
hypoglycemia syndrome)
transplantation of, for diabetes
tumors of. See Islet cell tumors
Pancreatic polypeptide, F cells secreting
Pancreatic pseudocysts
ascites and
cystic carcinoma differentiated from
infected (pancreatic abscess)
Pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitory (PSTI) gene, in
pancreatitis
Pancreaticocholangitis, sclerosing
Pancreaticoduodenal 
resection, 
for
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
Pancreaticojejunostomy, for pancreatitis
Pancreaticolithiasis
Pancreatitis
acute
ascites in
autoimmune
biliary
biliary stricture and
choledocholithiasis and
cholelithiasis/cholecystitis and
chronic
tumefactive
cystic fibrosis and
diabetes/hyperglycemia and
diarrhea in
didanosine therapy and
exenatide use and
hereditary
hypercalcemia and
hypertriglyceridemia and
hypocalcemia and
liraglutide use and
in mumps
necrotizing
g
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
pleural effusion in
sitagliptin use and
tropical
Pancytopenia
in acute leukemia
in aplastic anemia
in hairy cell leukemia
methotrexate causing
stem cell transplantation and
Panencephalitis, subacute sclerosing, myoclonus in
P a n h y p e r g a m m a g l o b u l i n e m i a . See
Hypergammaglobulinemia
P a n h y p o g a m m a g l o b u l i n e m i a . See
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Panhypopituitarism
Panic disorders/panic attacks
chest pain in
hypochondriasis and
palpitations in
PTSD and
seizures differentiated from
sleep
Panitumumab
for colorectal cancer
Pankeratin, in mesothelioma
Panniculitis
lupus
sclerosing
Pannus
in rheumatoid arthritis
in trachoma
Pansinusitis
Panton-Valentine leukocidin
Pantoprazole. See also Proton pump inhibitors
Panuveitis. See also Uveitis
Pao2. See also Po2in ARDS
in asthma, exacerbation severity/management and
COPD/home oxygen therapy and
in near drowning
in smoke inhalation
Papanicolaou smear (Pap smear)
anal, in HIV infection/AIDS
in cancer screening
in CIN
in endometrial carcinoma
in HIV infection/AIDS
for HPV screening
for rape victim
in STD patient
Papillary muscles
dysfunction/rupture of
mitral regurgitation and
in myocardial infarction
mitral stenosis and
Papilledema
headache and
Papillitis. See also Optic disk, swelling of
in optic neuritis
Papillomas
intraductal, nipple discharge and
inverted
recurrent respiratory (laryngeal)
Papillomaviruses. See Human papillomavirus
PAPP-A. See Pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A
Papular acne
Papular urticaria
bedbugs causing
Papules
violaceous to purple
Paracentesis
in ascites. See also Ascitic fluid analysis/examination
in cirrhosis
large-volume
for cirrhotic ascites
for malignant ascites
in peritoneal carcinomatosis
in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Paracetamol. See also Acetaminophen
in analgesic nephropathy
Parachute mitral valve
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (paracoccidioidomycosis)
Paradoxic aciduria
in metabolic alkalosis
in salicylate overdose/toxicity
Paradoxic embolism
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
in transient ischemic attacks
Paradoxic pulse. See Pulsus paradoxus
Paradoxic sleep
Paraganglioma
familial
Paragonimus/Paragonimus westermani (paragonimiasis)
Parainfluenza viruses
Paralysis/palsies. See also specific type or structure
affected
acute flaccid
coxsackievirus causing
enterovirus 71 causing
poliomyelitis and
in botulism
in conversion disorder
facial/Bell palsy
herpes simplex infection and
varicella zoster virus infection and
in motor neuron diseases
ocular motor
in myasthenia gravis
periodic. See Periodic paralysis
in poliomyelitis
progressive supranuclear, parkinsonism differentiated
from
in rabies
sleep, in narcolepsy
spinal cord infarction causing
spinal trauma causing
in stroke
in tick-borne encephalitis
vocal fold
thyroid surgery and
Paralytic (adynamic) ileus
Paralytic shellfish poisoning
Paramalignant pleural effusion
Paramedian artery occlusion, in stroke
Paramyxovirus respiratory infections
Paranasal sinuses
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
granulomatous disease of
infections of. See also Rhinosinusitis; Sinusitis
inflammatory disease of
malignant tumors of
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Paraneoplastic syndromes
achalasia and
autoimmune
hypercalcemia 
and. See Hypercalcemia, cancer-
related
in lung cancer
neurologic disorders and
neuropathies and
Paranoid delusion
Paranoid personality disorder
Paranoid schizophrenia
delusions and
Paraparesis, tropical spastic
Paraphilias (sexual arousal disorders)
in female
Paraplatin. See Carboplatin
Paraplegia. See also Paralysis
spinal cord infarction causing
spinal trauma causing
after thoracic aneurysm repair
Parapneumonic pleural effusion
in pneumococcal pneumonia
Paraproteins
in monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance
in myeloma
neuropathy associated with
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Parasitic infections
diarrhea in
stool analysis for
myocarditis in
Parasomnias
Parasternal lift
in heart failure
in pulmonary stenosis
Parathar. See Teriparatide
Parathion poisoning
Parathyroid gland
disorders 
of. See 
also 
Hyperparathyroidism;
Hypoparathyroidism
adenoma/hyperplasia
   in hypercalciuria
   in MEN
carcinoma
resection of (parathyroidectomy)
thyroid surgery affecting
transplantation 
of 
tissue 
from, 
for
hypoparathyroidism/tetany
Parathyroid 
hormone 
(PTH). See 
also
Hyperparathyroidism; Hypoparathyroidism
bisphosphonates affecting
primary
hypercalcemia and
in hypercalciuria
in hypophosphatemia
magnesium imbalances and
in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
after parathyroidectomy
phosphate balance/imbalances and
reference values for
resistance to, in pseudohypopara-thyroidism
Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
in cancer-related hypercalcemia
in hypophosphatemia
yp p
p
Parathyroidectomy
hypoparathyroidism after
Paravaccinia
Paravertebral abscess, in spinal tuberculosis
Parechovirus infection
Parenchymal lung disease
diffuse. See also specific disorder and Interstitial lung
disease
respiratory failure caused by
Parenteral fluids. See Fluid management/hydration
Parenteral nutritional support. See also Nutritional support
acidosis and
in burn injury
complications of
for Crohn disease
in pancreatitis
patient monitoring during
for protein–energy malnutrition
solutions for
Paresis (general). See also Weakness
in syphilis
Paresthesias
chemotherapy-induced
in diabetes mellitus
malabsorption and
in thoracic outlet syndrome
Paricalcitol, for hyperparathyroidism
Parietal lobe lesions
Parkin gene, in parkinsonism
Parkinsonism
drug-induced
antipsychotic agents
Parkland formula, for fluid resuscitation in burns
Parnate. See Tranylcypromine
Paromomycin
for amebiasis
for cryptosporidiosis
for giardiasis
for leishmaniasis
Paronychia
candidal
Parotid glands. See also Salivary glands
chronic inflammatory/infiltrative disorders affecting
in mumps
sialadenitis affecting
tumors of
Parotidectomy
Parotitis
Paroxetine. See also 
Serotonin-selective 
reuptake
inhibitors
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
during pregnancy
Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, recurrent
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
y
p
y
PARP-i. See Poly-ADP ribose-polymerase inhibitors
Pars plana vitrectomy, for retinal detachment
Pars planitis (intermediate uveitis). See also Uveitis
Partial mole. See also Gestational trophoblastic disease
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide. See Pco2Partial
pressure of oxygen. See Pao2; Po2
Partial seizures. See Focal (partial) seizures
Partial-thickness burn
survival and
Partial thromboplastin time/activated partial thromboplastin
time (PTT/aPTT)
prolonged
acquired factor VIII antibodies causing
in congenital coagulation disorders/hemophilia
in DIC
lupus anticoagulant causing
in vitamin K deficiency
reference values for
Partner abuse (domestic violence)
prevention of
Parvovirus B19 infection. See Erythrovirus (parvovirus B19)
infection
PAS. See Aminosalicylic acid
Passive smoking (environmental tobacco smoke), health
hazards of
asthma
cancer
COPD
during pregnancy
Pasteurella species, in animal bite infections
Patanol. See Olopatadine
Patella
Patellar apprehension test
Patellar tendinitis
Patellofemoral joint, assessment of
Patellofemoral pain
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent foramen ovale
Paternal age, mutations and
Pathergy phenomenon, in Behçet syndrome
Pathologic fractures. See also Fractures
of hip
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
malabsorption and
in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
in myeloma
in osteomalacia
in osteoporosis
Patient 
adherence/nonadherence
( c o m p l i a n c e / n o n c o m p l i a n c e ) . See
Adherence/nonadherence
Patient-controlled analgesia
Patient-delivered therapy, for STDs
Patient–doctor 
relationship. See 
Doctor–patient
relationship
Patient education
acne and
adherence and
asthma management and
in back pain management
diabetes and
fibromyalgia and
HIV infection/AIDS and
postexposure prophylaxis and
infertility and
in SLE
Patient Health Questionnaire 9, assessment of suicidal
intent and
Patient surrogate, Durable Power of Attorney for Health
Care
Patient values/preferences, assessing in older adult
Pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia)
in women
Patulous eustachian tube
Paucibacillary (tuberculoid) leprosy. See also Leprosy
Pauci-immune (ANCA-associated) glomerulonephritis
Pavor nocturnus (sleep terror)
PAX-4 (Arg133Trp) mutation, in idiopathic type 1 diabetes
mellitus
Paxil. See Paroxetine
Pazopanib
Pb. See Lead
PBG. See Porphobilinogen
PCA. See Patient-controlled analgesia
PCEC (purified chick embryo cell culture) rabies vaccine
PCI. See Percutaneous coronary intervention
PCL. See Posterior cruciate ligament
Pco2. See also Paco2
in acid-base disorders
arterial
in diabetic ketoacidosis
in metabolic acidosis
in metabolic alkalosis
reference values for
in respiratory acidosis
in respiratory alkalosis
in respiratory failure
venous
PCOS. See Polycystic ovary syndrome
PCP. See Phencyclidine
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction
PCV 
(pneumococcal 
conjugate 
vaccine). See
Pneumococcal vaccine
PCWP. See Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
PDA. See Patent ductus arteriosus
PDGF. See Platelet-derived growth factor
PDT. See Photodynamic therapy
PE 
(pulmonary 
embolism). See Pulmonary venous
thromboembolism
Pea soup diarrhea, in enteric (typhoid) fever
Peak expiratory flow (PEF)
in asthma
hepatotoxicity/liver failure and
in cough evaluation
Pedal pulses
absence of in lower leg/foot disease
in spinal stenosis
Pediculosis (capitis/corporis/pubis). See also Lice
Pediculus humanus
var capitis,
var corporis,
Pedophilia
intrafamilial (incest)
PEEP. See Positive end-expiratory pressure
Peer support groups. See Support groups
PEF. See Peak expiratory flow
PEG. See Polyethylene glycol
Pegasys. See Peginterferon
Pegfilgrastim, for chemotherapy-induced toxicity
Peginterferon
for essential thrombosis
for hepatitis B
for hepatitis C
for hepatitis D
for polycythemia
Pegintron. See Peginterferon
Pegvisomant, for acromegaly/gigantism
Pelger-Huet abnormality
Peliosis hepatis
in bartonellosis
drugs/toxins causing
Pellagra
Pelvic abscess, anaerobic
Pelvic appendicitis
Pelvic examination, in rape victim
Pelvic floor dyssynergia
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)/pelvic infection. See
also Endometritis; Salpingitis
in actinomycosis
anaerobic
appendicitis differentiated from
chlamydial
dysmenorrhea and
gonococcal
in HIV infection/AIDS
IUDs and
Pelvic muscle (Kegel) exercises
for fecal incontinence
for urinary incontinence
Pelvic organ prolapse
Pelvic pain
chronic (chronic pelvic pain syndrome/nonbacterial
prostatitis)
in dysmenorrhea
in ectopic pregnancy
in endometriosis
in PID
Pemberton sign
Pemetrexed
Pemphigoid, bullous
Pemphigus
foliaceus/erythematosus
paraneoplastic
vulgaris/vegetans
Pen injectors, for insulin administration
Penbutolol
Penciclovir. See also Famciclovir
Penicillamine
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for Wilson disease
Penicillin. See also specific disorder used in
allergy to
for anaerobic pneumonia/lung abscess
for anthrax
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for endocarditis
for group B streptococcal infection prophylaxis in
pregnancy
for Lyme disease
for non-sexually transmitted treponematoses
for pharyngitis
platelet function affected by
resistance to
in enterococcal infections
in pneumococcal infections
for rheumatic fever
for syphilis. See Syphilis
Penicillin skin testing
Penicillium marneffei infections
Penile discharge. See Urethral discharge
Penile prostheses
Penile tumescence testing, nocturnal
Penlac. See Ciclopirox
Pentamidine
for African trypanosomiasis
hypoglycemia caused by
for leishmaniasis
for P jiroveci infection
pneumothorax and
Pentasa. See Mesalamine
Pentavalent antimonials, for leishmaniasis
Pentazocine
Pentosan, for interstitial cystitis
Pentostam. See Stibogluconate
Pentostatin
for hairy cell leukemia
Pentoxifylline
for alcoholic liver disease
for leg ulcers
PEP. See Positive expiratory pressure (PEP) therapy;
Protein electrophoresis
Peptic stricture of esophagus. See also Esophagus,
strictures of
Peptic ulcer disease
complications of
dyspepsia in
gastric cancer and
gastric outlet obstruction and
GI bleeding in
H pylori-associated
gastritis and
HSV infection and
NSAID-induced
pharmacologic/medical management of
refractory
silent
smoking and
ulcer perforation and
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma) and
Pepto-Bismol. See Bismuth compounds
Peptostreptococci
Peramivir
Perceptual distortions
psychedelic drug use and
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Percocet. See Oxycodone
Percodan. See Oxycodone
Percussion. See Chest percussion
Percutaneous aspiration/injection/reaspiration (PAIR), for
hydatid cysts
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for myocardial infarction
prophylactic/preoperative
for traumatic injuries
Percutaneous dilational tracheotomy
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC)
in biliary stricture
in liver disease/jaundice
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).
See Angioplasty, coronary; Percutaneous coronary
intervention
Percutaneous valvuloplasty. See Valvuloplasty
Perennial rhinitis
Perforation
in appendicitis
pregnancy and
of colonic diverticula (diverticulitis)
ulcer
Performance anxiety
Perfusion scans
lung. See Ventilation-perfusion scans
myocardial. See Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
Pergolide
withdrawal of from market
Periampullary adenomas
Periampullary carcinoma
Perianal cellophane tape test, in enterobiasis/pinworms
Perianal disease. See also Anorectal disorders
abscesses and fistulas
anal cancer
in Crohn disease
hematoma, thrombosed hemorrhoid causing
of acetaminophen
Perianal pruritus. See Anogenital/perianal pruritus
Pericardial disease
Pericardial effusions
in Kawasaki syndrome
malignant
myxedema
in pericarditis. See also Pericarditis
in pneumococcal pneumonia
Pericardial friction rub
in myocardial infarction
in pericardial effusion
in pericarditis
Pericardial tamponade. See Tamponade
Pericardiectomy/pericardial window
for constrictive pericarditis
for pericardial effusion/tamponade
for pericarditis
in pneumococcal pneumonia
Pericardiocentesis. See also Pleural fluid analysis
for pericardial effusion/tamponade
Pericarditis
acute inflammatory
bacterial
chest pain in
constrictive
cirrhosis and
restrictive cardiomyopathy differentiated from
superior vena caval obstruction and
coxsackieviruses causing
myocardial infarction and
neoplastic
pneumococcal
postmyocardial infarction/postcardiotomy (Dressler
syndrome)
radiation
tuberculous
uremic
viral
Perichondritis
Perihepatitis, Fitz-Hugh and Curtis syndrome and
Peri-infectious glomerulonephritis
Perilymphatic fistula
Perindopril
Periocular pain. See Ocular/orbital pain
Periodic paralysis
hyperkalemic
hypokalemic
in hyperthyroidism
normokalemic
Periodontal disease
anaerobic
pneumonia and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Perioperative 
management. See 
Preoperative
evaluation/perioperative management
Periorbital pain. See Ocular/orbital pain
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Peripheral intravenous lines, infection/infection prevention
and
Peripheral nerve tumors, mononeuropathy caused by
Peripheral 
neuropathies. See also specific type and
Neuropathies
Peripheral pulses. See Pulses
Peripheral stem cells, for transplantation
Peripheral vascular disease. See Vascular disorders
Peripheral vein nutritional support. See also Nutritional
support
solutions for
Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC), superficial
thrombophlebitis and
Peristalsis, disorders of. See Motility disorders
Peritoneal carcinomatosis
Peritoneal dialysis. See also Dialysis
for chronic kidney disease
for hyperkalemia
for hypermagnesemia
Peritoneal effusions, malignant
Peritoneovenous shunts, for ascites
Peritoneum
diseases of. See also specific type and Ascites;
Peritonitis
nausea and vomiting in
mesothelioma arising in
Peritonitis
ascitic fluid analysis in
dialysis and
diverticulitis and
in familial Mediterranean fever
peptic ulcer perforation and
perforated appendicitis and
pregnancy and
secondary
spontaneous bacterial
in cirrhosis
tuberculous
Peritonsillar abscess/cellulitis
Periungual warts
Permethrin
for pediculosis
for scabies
Permissive hypercapnia
for asthma
Permitil. See Fluphenazine
Permixon. See Saw palmetto
Pernicious anemia
carcinoid tumors and
gastritis and
subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord and
Pernicious vomiting of pregnancy
Peroneal nerve, common, injury to
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-
α), fibrates affecting
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-
γ)
thiazolidinediones affecting
thyroid cancer and
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-
γ) tumor suppressor gene, thyroid cancer and
Perphenazine
in elderly
Persistent anovulation. See Polycystic ovary syndrome
Persistent vegetative state
Personal relationships, social issues for terminally ill/dying
patient and
Personality changes
in dementia
due to general medical condition
in neurosyphilis
Personality disorders
Perspiration. See Sweating
Pertussis (whooping cough)
cough in
prevention/immunization 
and. See also Pertussis
vaccine
Pertussis vaccine, with diphtheria and tetanus toxoids
(DTaP/Tdap vaccines)
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
Pes anserine bursa/bursitis
PESI. See Pulmonary embolism severity index
Pessary, for pelvic organ prolapse
Pesticide poisoning (cholinesterase inhibitors)
PET. See Positron emission tomography
Petit mal (absence) seizures. See also Seizures
Petrolatum, as skin emollient
Petroleum products, toxicity/abuse of
aspiration and
Petrosal sinus sampling, in hypercortisolism/Cushing
syndrome
Petrous apicitis
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Peyronie disease
Dupuytren contracture and
PF4 
heparin 
antibody. See Heparin-associated/PF4
antibody
PFA-100 closure time, reference values for
PFO. See Patent foramen ovale
PFT. See Pulmonary function tests
PGA. See Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome
PGI2. See Prostacyclin
pH
in acid-base disorders. See also specific type
in acidosis
in alcoholic ketoacidosis
in alkalosis
arterial blood
in diabetic ketoacidosis
esophageal, monitoring
overdose/toxicity of
gastric
nosocomial pneumonia and
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
in lactic acidosis
in metabolic acidosis
in metabolic alkalosis
in near drowning
pharyngeal, 
monitoring, 
in
gastroesophageal/laryngopharyngeal reflux
pleural fluid
in parapneumonic effusion
reference values for
in respiratory acidosis
in respiratory alkalosis
urine
calcium stones and
cystine calculi and
in 
hyperchloremic 
metabolic 
acidosis/tubular
acidosis
manipulation of in poisoning/drug overdose
stone disease and
struvite calculi and
uric acid calculi and
vaginal
venous blood
Phacoemulsification, for cataract removal
Phaeohyphomycosis
Phakic intraocular lenses
Phalen sign, in carpal tunnel syndrome
Pharmaceuticals. See under Drug
Pharmacogenetic 
tests. See 
also 
Genetic
testing/counseling
clinical relevance of
Pharyngeal dysphagia. See also Dysphagia
Pharyngeal 
pH 
monitoring, 
in
gastroesophageal/laryngopharyngeal reflux
Pharyngitis
antibiotics for
in diphtheria
Fusobacterium necrophorum,
gonococcal
in mononucleosis
nonstreptococcal exudative (adenovirus)
in peritonsillar abscess and cellulitis
in Still disease
streptococcal
eruptive (guttate) psoriasis after
glomerulonephritis and
rheumatic fever and
viral
Pharyngoconjunctival fever
Pharynx
Phenacetin, in analgesic nephropathy
Phenazopyridine
methemoglobinemia caused by
for urinary tract infection
Phencyclidine
aggressive/violent/psychotic behavior caused by
Phenelzine
overdose/toxicity of
Phenobarbital
for anxiety
overdose/toxicity of
hemodialysis for
for seizures
status epilepticus and
Phenothiazines. See also Antipsychotic drugs
hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism and
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of ophthalmic effects and
Phenotypic resistance testing, in antiretroviral therapy
Phenoxybenzamine
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
pheochromocytoma surgery and
Phentermine, for obesity
D-Phenylalanine derivative, for diabetes mellitus
Phenylbutazone
adverse ophthalmic effects of
lithium interactions and
Phenylpropanolamine, in OTC medications
Phenytoin
antidepressant drug interactions and
for arrhythmias
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for seizures
pregnancy and
status epilepticus and
Pheochromocytoma
β-blocker use in
headache in
hypertension in
in MEN
PHEX endopeptidase mutation, in osteomalacia/rickets
Philadelphia chromosome
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in chronic myeloid leukemia
Phimosis
in balanitis
in chancroid
Phlebectomy
Phlebitis. See Thrombophlebitis
Phlebotomy
for hemochromatosis
for polycythemia
for polycythemia-related pulmonary hypertension
for porphyria cutanea tarda
Phlegmon
Phlegmonous (necrotizing) gastritis
Phobic disorder
Phonic tics, in Tourette syndrome
Phonophobia, in migraine headache
Phosphate. See Phosphorus/phosphate
Phosphate enema
Phosphatidylinositol class A (PIG-A) gene defect, in
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Phosphatonin (fibroblast growth factor 23)
in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
in osteomalacia/rickets
Phosphaturia
hyperphosphatemia and
hypophosphatemia and
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for asthma
for erectile dysfunction
antidepressant-induced
in diabetes
nitrate/nitroglycerin contraindications and
for pulmonary hypertension
Phospholipase A2 receptor, in membranous nephropathy
Phosphorus/phosphate
calcium metabolism affected by
in calcium nephrolithiasis/hypercalciuria
deficiency of. See also Hypophosphatemia
in osteomalacia/rickets
dietary/supplementary
for diabetic ketoacidosis
for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
for hypophosphatemia
for osteomalacia
requirements for in nutritional support
restriction of in chronic kidney disease
disorders of concentration/metabolism of. See also
Hyperphosphatemia; Hypophosphatemia
in chronic kidney disease (renal osteodystrophy)
genetic disorders and
in hypercalcemia
in hypocalcemia
parathyroid hormone affecting
reference values for
urinary excretion of. See Phosphaturia
Photoallergy. See also Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
Photocoagulation
for age-related macular degeneration
for diabetic retinopathy
for retinal detachment
for retinal vein occlusion
for sickle cell retinopathy
Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
acne treatment and
antipsychotic drugs causing
chemotherapy-induced
drugs causing
in SLE
Photodynamic therapy
for actinic keratoses
for Barrett esophagus
for cholangiocarcinoma
for esophageal cancer palliation
Photoepilation
Photophobia
in corneal abrasion
in migraine headache
in ultraviolet (actinic) keratitis
Photopsia (flashing lights), in migraine headache
Photorefractive keratectomy (PRK)
Photoresection, Nd:YAG laser, for lung cancer palliation
Photosensitive epilepsy
Photosensitivity. See Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
Phototherapy
for atopic dermatitis
for lichen planus
for major depression with seasonal onset
for psoriasis
Phototoxicity. See also Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
Photovaporization of prostate (PVP), for benign prostatic
hyperplasia
Phrenic nerve, hiccups caused by irritation of
Phthirus pubis,
Phycomycosis (mucormycosis)
rhinocerebral
Phyllodes tumor of breast
Physical abuse. See Abuse
Physical activity. See Exercise/activity
Physical inactivity. See Inactivity
Physical instability. See Falls; Gait/gait disorders; Instability
Physical therapy
for complex regional pain syndrome
for stroke patient
Physician, relationship of with patient. See Doctor–patient
relationship
Physiologic drug dependence
Physostigmine, 
for 
atropine/anticholinergic
overdose/delirium
Phytanic acid metabolism, in Refsum disease
Phytoestrogens (plant-derived estrogens)
Phytonadione
for anticoagulant overdose
for hypoprothrombinemia, in cirrhosis
for vitamin K deficiency
Phytotherapy, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
PI. See Protease inhibitors
Pica, in iron deficiency anemia
PICC. See Peripherally inserted central catheter
Pick disease
Pickwickian syndrome (obesity-hypoventilation syndrome)
PID. See Pelvic inflammatory disease
Piebaldism
PIG-A gene defect, in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Pigeon-breeder's disease (bird-fancier's lung)
Pigmentary skin disorders. See also Hyperpigmentation;
Hypopigmentation; Pigmented skin lesions
drugs causing
in hypercarotenosis
Pigmented basal cell carcinoma
Pigmented skin lesions. See also specific type
Pill-induced esophagitis
Pilocarpine
for chemotherapy/radiation-induced toxicity
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Pilocarpine iontophoresis sweat test, in cystic fibrosis
Pilopine. See Pilocarpine
Pimecrolimus
for atopic dermatitis
T-cell lymphoma and
Pimozide, for Tourette syndrome
Pindolol
for aggressive/violent behavior
for angina
for hypertension
Pineal tumor
Pinguecula
Pingueculitis
Pink puffers
Pink top tubes
PINK1 gene, in parkinsonism
Pinta
Pinworm infection
Pioglitazone
with glimepiride
with insulin
with metformin
overdose/toxicity of
Piperacillin-tazobactam
for abdominal infections
for pneumonia
Piperaquine
with dihydroartemisinin
Pipracil. See Piperacillin
Piracetam, for myoclonus
Pirbuterol, for asthma
Piroxicam
Pit viper envenomation
Pitavastatin
Pitting (nail)
in psoriasis
Pituitary adenoma
ACTH-secreting
GH-secreting
hypopituitarism caused by
Serotonin syndrome
prolactin-secreting
liver cancer and
thyrotrophe (TSH-secreting)
Pituitary apoplexy
Pituitary gland
destruction/necrosis of, adrenal crisis caused by
disorders of
acromegaly/gigantism
amenorrhea caused by
anterior hypopituitarism
diabetes insipidus. See also Diabetes insipidus
diabetes mellitus. See also Diabetes mellitus
hyperprolactinemia
hormones produced by
absence of (panhypopituitarism)
combined deficiency of (CPHD)
hyperplasia of, thyrotrophe
tumors of. See also Pituitary adenoma
amenorrhea caused by
Pituitary microsurgery
Pityriasis
alba, in atopic dermatitis
rosea
drugs causing eruptions similar to
rubra pilaris
versicolor (tinea versicolor)
Pityrosporum ovale. See Malassezia furfur
Pivot shift test, knee stability/ACL injury and
“Pizza-pie” retinopathy, in CMV infection
PKD1/PKD2 gene mutations
Placenta previa, third-trimester bleeding caused by
Placental abruption, third-trimester bleeding caused by
Plague
chemoprophylaxis for
Plan B, for emergency/postcoital contraception
Plantar fasciitis
Plantar fibromatosis, Dupuytren contracture and
Plantar hyperkeratosis of heels
Plantar nerves, compressive lesions of
Plantar warts
Plaque psoriasis. See also Psoriasis
Plasma cell leukemia
Plasma cells, in myeloma
Plasma chromogranin A (CgA) screening test. See
Chromogranin A
Plasma fractions/components, transfusion of. See also
Fresh-frozen plasma; Transfusion
for thrombotic microangiopathies
Plasma glucose, in diabetes
Plasma renin activity
in Addison disease
in aldosteronism
in hypertension
reference/normal values for
Plasma renin concentration, in aldosteronism
Plasma ultrafiltration, for acute tubular necrosis
Plasmacytomas. See also Myeloma
Plasmapheresis
for Guillain-Barré syndrome
for multiple sclerosis
for myeloma
for Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Plasminogen, reference values for
Plasminogen activator I, congenital deficiency of
Plasmodium. See also Malaria
falciparum,
resistant strains of
severe infection caused by
uncomplicated infection caused by
malariae,
ovale,
vivax,
resistant strains of
Platelet-associated IgG
Platelet count
chemotherapy dosage modification and
cyclic oscillations of (cyclic thrombocytopenia)
in essential thrombocytosis
in myeloproliferative disorders
in polycythemia
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
reference/desired values for
Platelet-derived growth factor
for chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia
for diabetic foot ulcers
in myelofibrosis
Platelet disorders
acquired
congenital
qualitative
thrombocytopenia. See also Thrombocytopenia
Platelet function test, reference values for
Platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors. See Glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa receptors
Platelet-inhibiting agents. See Antiplatelet therapy
Platelet transfusion. See also Transfusion
contraindications to in thrombotic microangiopathy
for DIC
for GI bleeding/variceal hemorrhage
Platelets. See also Platelet disorders
aspirin/NSAIDs affecting function of
autoantibodies against. See Antiplatelet antibody
in Bernard-Soulier syndrome
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
drugs inhibiting. See Antiplatelet therapy
in essential thrombocytosis
in Glanzmann thrombasthenia
in myeloproliferative disorders
sequestration of in spleen
in storage pool disease
Platinol. See Cisplatin
Platinum analogs/platinum-based chemotherapy. See also
Cisplatin
Platypnea
in hepatopulmonary syndrome
orthodeoxia, in patent foramen ovale
Pleconaril
Plendil. See Felodipine
Plerixafor, for stem cell mobilization
Plesiomonas, diarrhea caused by
Plethysmography, 
impedance, 
in 
venous
thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
Pleural biopsy
in lung cancer
in tuberculosis
Pleural diseases
occupational
respiratory failure caused by
Pleural effusions
in asbestosis
drug-induced
exudative
in heart disease/failure
in lung cancer
malignant
in mesothelioma
paramalignant
parapneumonic
in pneumococcal pneumonia
rheumatoid
transudative
tuberculous
Pleural fluid analysis
in anthrax
in lung cancer
in malignant effusion
in mesothelioma
in pneumonia
in tuberculosis
Pleural friction rub
in pulmonary embolism
Pleural mesothelioma/malignant pleural mesothelioma
Pleurectomy, for mesothelioma
Pleuritis/pleuritic chest pain
in epidemic pleurodynia (Bornholm disease)
in pericarditis
in thoracic actinomycosis
Pleurodesis, for malignant pleural effusion
Pleurodynia, epidemic
Plexiform neuroma
Plexogenic pulmonary arteriopathy (idiopathic/primary
pulmonary hypertension)
Plexopathy (diabetic amyotrophy)
Plummer disease (toxic adenoma of thyroid)
in MEN
Plummer-Vinson syndrome
PMDD. See Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
PML. See Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
PML-RARα fusion gene
PMLE. See Polymorphous light eruption
PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome/tension
PMS2 genes, in HNPCC
PNES. See Psychogenic nonepileptic seizure
Pneumatic compression devices
for lymphedema
for venous insufficiency/leg ulcers
for venous thromboembolic disease
Pneumatic dilation. See also Esophageal dilation
for achalasia
Pneumatic retinopexy, for retinal detachment
Pneumococcal (Streptococcuspneumoniae) infections
drug resistance and
endocarditis
immunization against. See Pneumococcal vaccine
keratitis
meningitis
pericarditis
pneumonia
in HIV infection/AIDS
Pneumococcal vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
for asthma patients
hepatitis and
in pneumonia prevention
revaccination and
Pneumoconioses
Pneumocystis carinii. See Pneumocystisjiroveci infection;
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
Pneumocystis jiroveci infection
pentamidine-induced hypoglycemia and
pneumonia. See Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
prevention of
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (pneumocystosis)
CD4 T cell count and
pentamidine-induced hypoglycemia and
pentamidine treatment/chemoprophylaxis and
pneumothorax and
prophylaxis of
Pneumocystosis. See Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
Pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax and
Pneumonectomy, extrapleural, for mesothelioma
Pneumonia. See also specificcausative agent and
Pneumonitis
adenoviruses causing
anaerobic
in aspergillosis
aspiration. See also Aspiration
in anaerobic infections
in community-acquired disease
drug use and
gastric contents causing
nosocomial associated disease and
toxic materials and
bronchial obstruction and
bronchiolitis 
obliterans 
and 
(BOOP/cryptogenic
organizing pneumonia/pneumonitis/COP)
chlamydial
C pneumoniae causing
in psittacosis
CMV
in HIV infection/AIDS
in coccidioidomycosis
community-acquired
cough and
cryptococcal
desquamative interstitial (DIP)
dyspnea in
eosinophilic. See also Löffler syndrome
in H1N1 influenza
health-care associated
herpes simplex
in histoplasmosis
hospital-acquired
idiopathic interstitial
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS. See
also Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
CD4 T cell count and
influenza and
Legionnaires
in leptospirosis
lipoid
in measles
mercury vapor
mycobacterial (NTM)
necrotizing
nonspecific interstitial (NSIP)
in HIV infection/AIDS
nosocomial
plague
pleural effusion in (parapneumonic pleural effusion)
pneumococcal
pneumococcal
p
immunization against. See Pneumococcal vaccine
Pneumocystis. 
See 
Pneumocystis 
jiroveci
pneumonia
postoperative
prevention of
in Q fever
RSV
in SARS
streptococcal
treatment of
anaerobic infection
community-acquired disease
nosocomial disease
in tularemia
usual interstitial (UIP)
varicella zoster virus
during pregnancy
ventilator-associated
viral
Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI)
Pneumonitis. See also Pneumonia
acute gastric aspiration causing
CMV
cryptogenic organizing (COP/idiopathic bronchiolitis
obliterans with organizing pneumonia/BOOP)
in H1N1 influenza
hydrocarbon/petroleum distillates/solvents causing
hypersensitivity
interstitial, drug-induced
mercury vapor
methotrexate causing
radiation
toxoplasmic, in HIV infection/AIDS
Pneumoplasty, reduction, for COPD
Pneumothorax
catamenial
chest pain in
in COPD
dyspnea in
iatrogenic
P jiroveci pneumonia/pentamidine prophylaxis and
spontaneous
tension
traumatic
Pneumovax. See Pneumococcal vaccine
PNH. See Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Po2. See also Pao2
in dyspnea evaluation
in pulmonary embolism
reference values for
in respiratory failure
Podagra
Podophyllum resin (podophyllin/podofilox), for genital warts
Poison control centers
Poison ivy/oak. See also Allergic contact dermatitis
Poisoning/drug overdose. See also specific drug or agent
abdominal radiographs in
anion gap in. See also Anion gap/anion gap acidosis
antidotes for
arrhythmias in
coma caused by
diagnosis of
eye decontamination in
gastrointestinal decontamination in
hypertension in
hyperthermia in
hypotension in
hypothermia in
initial evaluation in
laboratory tests in
osmol gap in
patient observation and
physical examination in
seizures in
skin decontamination in
toxicology screen in
Poisonous mushrooms
anticholinergic-type
liver failure and
Poisonous snakes
Poliomyelitis
prevention/immunization 
and. See also Poliovirus
vaccine
Poliovirus vaccine
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
polio virus associated with
pregnancy and
for travelers
Poly-ADP ribose-polymerase inhibitors, for breast cancer
Polyalcohols (polyols), for diabetics
Polyangiitis, microscopic. See Microscopic polyangiitis
Polyarteritis. See also Arteritis
neuropathy associated with
nodosa
Polyarthralgia/polyarthritis. See Arthritis/arthralgia
Polycarbophil. See Fiber, dietary
Polychondritis, relapsing
Polycystic kidney disease
intracranial aneurysms and
Polycystic ovary syndrome
acne in
amenorrhea in
hirsutism/virilization in
infertility and
obesity in
Polycythemia
in cor pulmonale
hypertension and
pulmonary hypertension and
spurious
vera
hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
and
Polydipsia/thirst
in diabetes insipidus
in diabetes mellitus
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
hyponatremia caused by
lithium causing
psychogenic
hyponatremia caused by
in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy,
autoimmune
Polyethylene glycol/PEG 3350
for constipation/preoperative bowel cleansing
for whole bowel irrigation
Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome
Addison disease in
Hashimoto thyroiditis in
type 1
autoimmune hepatitis in
type 2
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing
in Lyme disease
in malaria
in syphilis
Polymorphic reticulosis
Polymorphonuclear neutrophil count. See Neutrophil count
Polymorphous light eruption (PMLE)
Polymyalgia rheumatica
fibromyalgia differentiated from
polymyositis differentiated from
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
Polymyositis
autoantibodies in
cancer-related
Polymyxins, for ophthalmic disorders
Polyneuropathies. See 
also 
specific 
type 
and
Neuropathies
acute idiopathic. See Guillain-Barré syndrome
cancer-related
chronic inflammatory
in critically ill patients
in diabetes mellitus
in HIV infection/AIDS
in Lyme disease
in polyarteritis nodosa
in rheumatoid arthritis
in sarcoidosis
toxic
Polyols (polyalcohols), for diabetics
Polypectomy
cervical
colonoscopic
GI bleeding after
Polyphagia with weight loss, in diabetes mellitus
Polypharmacy, in elderly
falls and
urinary incontinence and
Polypoid corditis
yp
Polyps/polyposis
adenomatous. See also Adenomatous polyps
familial. See also Familial adenomatous polyposis
nonfamilial
cervical
of colon
GI bleeding and
colorectal cancer and
gastric
hamartomatous
in HNPCC
hyperplastic/serrated
juvenile familial
nasal
allergic rhinitis and
vocal fold
Polyradiculoneuropathy/polyradiculopathy
in CMV infection
in Guillain-Barré syndrome
in HIV infection/AIDS
in Lyme disease
Polysomnography
in sleep apnea
in snoring
Polystyrene sulfonate, for hyperkalemia
Polysurgery (surgery proneness)
somatization disorder and
Polyuria
in Cushing syndrome
in diabetes insipidus
in diabetes mellitus
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
lithium causing
in obstructive uropathy/tubulointerstitial disease
Pomeroy tubal resection
Pompholyx (vesiculobullous hand eczema)
tinea differentiated from
Ponstel. See Mefenamic acid
Pool (swimming pool) granuloma
Pool (swimming pool) safety
Popliteal arteries
acute occlusion of
atherosclerotic/occlusive disease of
compression of, in DVT detection
Popliteal (Baker) cyst
Popliteal tenosynovitis
Porcelain gallbladder
Pork. See also Meat
in gnathostomiasis
in trichinosis
Pork tapeworm (T solium),
cysticercosis and
Porphobilinogen, urinary
in porphyria
reference values for
Porphobilinogen deaminase, deficiency of in porphyria
Porphyria
p y
acute intermittent
cutanea tarda
photosensitivity and
peripheral nerve involvement in
variegate
Porphyrins, urine, in porphyria cutanea tarda
Portal cavernoma
Portal decompression, for esophageal varices
Portal hypertension
ascites in
cirrhosis and
malignant
Prostate cancer
esophageal varices and
GI bleeding in
in myelofibrosis
noncirrhotic
Portal 
hypertensive 
gastropathy. See also 
Portal
hypertension
Portal vein thrombosis, noncirrhotic portal hypertension
caused by
Portopulmonary hypertension
Portosystemic shunts
emergency/surgical, for esophageal varices
rebleeding prevention and
transvenous 
(transjugular). See 
Transvenous
(transjugular) intrahepatic portosystemic shunts
Posaconazole
for aspergillosis
for mucormycosis
prophylactic
Positioning vertigo, benign paroxysmal (BPPV)
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)
for ARDS
for near drowning
for smoke inhalation
Positive expiratory pressure (PEP) therapy, in cystic
fibrosis
Positive inotropic agents. See Inotropic agents
Positive-pressure breathing
for COPD
intermittent (IPPB), prevention of postoperative
pulmonary complications and
Positive-pressure ventilation
for ARDS
for COPD
for respiratory failure
Positron emission tomography (PET)
in angina
for breast cancer evaluation
in dementia
in liver disease/jaundice
for lung cancer staging
in musculoskeletal evaluation
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in solitary pulmonary nodule
in thyroid cancer evaluation/surveillance
in thyroid nodule/goiter
in thyroiditis
Postcapillary pulmonary hypertension
Postcardiotomy/postmyocardial 
infarction 
pericarditis
(Dressler syndrome)
Postcholecystectomy syndrome
Postcoital/emergency contraception
IUD for
Postdysenteric colitis
Postencephalitic parkinsonism
Postepileptic automatism
focal seizures and
Posterior blepharitis
Posterior cerebral artery occlusion, in stroke
Posterior communicating artery, disorders of in third nerve
paralysis
Posterior cruciate ligament
assessment of
injury of
Posterior drawer sign/test
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery obstruction, in stroke
Posterior ischemic optic neuropathy
Posterior nasal cavity, epistaxis originating in
Posterior synechiae, in uveitis
Posterior uveitis. See also Uveitis
Postethanol reactive hypoglycemia
Postgonococcal urethritis/cervicitis
Postherpetic neuralgia
varicella vaccine in prevention of
Posthypercapnia alkalosis
Posthypocapnia acidosis
Postictal period, psychogenic nonepileptic/pseudoepileptic
seizure and
Postinfarction ischemia/angina
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
Post-kala azar dermal leishmaniasis
Post-Lyme disease syndrome
Postmenopausal osteoporosis. See Osteoporosis
Postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
endometrial carcinoma and
Postmyocardial 
infarction/postcardiotomy 
pericarditis
(Dressler syndrome)
Postnasal drip, cough caused by
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction
Postoperative fever
Postoperative hyponatremia
Postpartum depression
Postpartum infection
anaerobic
C sordellii causing
mastitis
candidal
streptococcal
Postpartum psychosis
Postpartum thyroiditis
Postphlebitic syndrome
Postpoliomyelitis syndrome
Postpolypectomy hemorrhage
Postpolypectomy surveillance
Postprandial 
(reactive) 
hypoglycemia. See 
also
Hypoglycemia
postethanol
Postrenal acute kidney injury. See also Acute kidney injury
Post-thrombotic syndrome
compression stockings in prevention of
Posttransfusion purpura (PTP)
Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder
Posttraumatic epilepsy/seizure disorder
Posttraumatic headache
Posttraumatic stress disorder
abuse victims and
rape and
substance use and
Posttraumatic syringomyelia
Posttraumatic vertigo
Postural drainage
in bronchiectasis
in chronic bronchitis
in cystic fibrosis
Postural 
hypotension. See 
Orthostatic 
(postural)
hypotension
Postural instability. See Falls; Gait/gait disorders; Instability
Postural tremor, drug-induced
Posture
in impingement syndrome
neck pain and
Posture stimulation test, in aldosteronism
Potassium
dietary/replacement
for diabetic ketoacidosis
in fluid management
for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
hypertension and
for hypokalemia
in renal tubular acidosis
requirements for in nutritional support
restriction of, in chronic kidney disease
disorders of concentration of. See also Hyperkalemia;
Hypokalemia
genetic disorders and
in hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis/renal
tubular acidosis
periodic paralysis and
serum/plasma levels of
in aldosteronism
in hyperkalemia
reference values for
urinary levels of, in hypokalemia
Potassium channel blocking drugs, for arrhythmias
Potassium chloride. See Potassium, dietary/replacement
Potassium citrate
for hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
for uric acid calculi
Potassium concentration gradient, transtubular (TTKG)
Potassium iodide, in table salt, goiter prevention/treatment
and
Potassium-sparing diuretics
for heart failure
lithium interactions and
Potomania, beer, hyponatremia caused by
Pott disease (spinal tuberculosis)
Pott puffy tumor
Potts shunt, for tetralogy of Fallot
Pouchitis
Poultry, avian influenza and
Powassan encephalitis/agent
Power of attorney, durable, for health care
Poxvirus infections. See also specific type
pp65 antigen, in CMV infection
PPAR-α. See Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha
PPAR-γ. See Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma
PPARG gene. See also Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma
in insulin resistance
PPD (purified protein derivative) test. See also Tuberculin
skin test
PPSV23 vaccine. See Pneumococcal vaccine
PPV 
(pneumococcal 
polysaccharide 
vaccine). See
Pneumococcal vaccine
PR3-ANCA. See Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody;
Proteinase-3 ANCA
PRA. See Plasma renin activity
Prader-Willi syndrome
Pralatrexate
Pralidoxime, 
for 
cholinesterase 
inhibitor
(anticholinesterase) poisoning
PrameGel. See Pramoxine
Pramipexole, for parkinsonism
Pramlintide
overdose/toxicity of
Pramosone. See Hydrocortisone; Pramoxine
Pramoxine
Prandi-Met. See Repaglinide, with metformin
Prandin. See Repaglinide
Prasugrel
for acute coronary syndromes
for myocardial infarction
PCI and
Pravachol. See Pravastatin
Pravastatin. See also Statin drugs
in HIV infection/AIDS
in older patients
Prax. See Pramoxine
Praziquantel
for clonorchiasis/opisthorchiasis
for cysticercosis
for intestinal flukes
for paragonimiasis
for schistosomiasis
for tapeworm infections
Prazosin
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
for hypertension
for urinary incontinence
Pre-Gen Plus. See Multitarget DNA tests
Pre-proliferative retinopathy
Prebreakfast hyperglycemia
Precholecystectomy syndrome
Precose. See Acarbose
Prediabetes
PredMild. See Prednisolone
Prednicarbate
Prednisolone
for asthma
for Bell palsy
for ophthalmic disorders
Prednisone. See also specificdisease and Corticosteroids
for adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder)
for allergic contact dermatitis
for asthma
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia
for autoimmune hepatitis
for back pain
for Bell palsy
in cancer chemotherapy
for chronic inflammatory polyneuropathy
for erythema nodosum leprosum
for giant cell arteritis
for 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
for herpes zoster
for inflammatory bowel disease
Crohn disease
ulcerative colitis
for microscopic polyangiitis
for minimal change disease
in pain management
perioperative
for Pneumocystis
infection
for polymyalgia rheumatica
for prostate cancer
Preeclampsia-eclampsia
antihypertensive therapy in
in gestational trophoblastic disease
headache and
hypermagnesemia associated with treatment of
late-onset (postpartum)
Preexcitation syndromes
atrial flutter and
palpitations in
Pregabalin
for painful diabetic neuropathy/neuropathic pain
for restless legs syndrome
for seizures
Pregnancy
acne treatment and
adverse ophthalmic effects of drugs used in
air travel during
alcohol use during
amenorrhea (primary/secondary) caused by
anemia during
antidepressant use during
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and
antipsychotic drug use during
appendicitis during
asthma during
bleeding during
ectopic pregnancy and
in gestational trophoblastic disease
third-trimester
breast cancer and
breast cancer risk and
cardiac disease and
cardiomyopathy of (peripartum cardiomyopathy)
Chlamydia trachomatis infection and
choledocholithiasis during
cholelithiasis/cholecystitis during
cholestasis of
chorioamnionitis and
in chronic kidney disease
CMV infection during
complications of
cardiovascular
during first and second trimesters
infectious conditions
medical conditions
peripartum
during second and third trimesters
surgical
coxsackievirus infection during, neonatal myocarditis
and
depression during
depression after (postpartum depression)
diabetes insipidus and
diabetes mellitus and
continuous glucose monitoring systems and
diagnosis/differential diagnosis of
drug/medication 
use/avoidance 
during. See also
specific agent
ectopic
elective abortion and
hCG levels in
IUDs and
PID and
ruptured, appendicitis differentiated from
electrical burns during
endocarditis prophylaxis and
erythrovirus (parvovirus) infection in
fatty liver of
folic acid deficiency during
gallbladder disease/surgery during
genital warts/wart removal and
glucosuria and
gonorrhea and
group B streptococcal infection and
growth hormone replacement during
headache during, preeclampsia and
heart disease and
hepatitis B and
vaccination/vaccination recommendations and
hepatitis C and
testing for
hepatitis E and
herpes infection during
HIV infection/AIDS in
hyperparathyroidism during
Nucleus pulposus, herniation of cervical, lumbar/sacral
hyperthyroidism/Graves disease during
propylthiouracil for
thyroidectomy for
hypoosmolality of, reset osmostat and
hypothyroidism/hypothyroidism treatment during
immune thrombocytopenia associated with
immunizations during
neck pain in
iodine deficiency and
iron requirements/deficiency anemia during
IUDs and
lactation and
listeriosis during
luteoma of
Lyme disease and
lymphocytic choriomeningitis and
malaria/malaria treatment and chemoprophylaxis
during
manifestations of
Marfan syndrome and
mask of. See Melasma
maternal virilization during
measles/measles vaccine during
mitral stenosis and
MMR vaccination and
molar (hydatidiform mole). See also Gestational
trophoblastic disease
hCG levels in
hyperthyroidism in
moles (skin) changing during
myomectomy and
nutrition in
ovarian tumors during
parathyroidectomy during
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma and
preeclampsia-eclampsia in
hypermagnesemia associated with treatment of
prenatal care and
preterm (premature) labor and
prevention 
of 
hemolytic 
disease 
of 
newborn
(erythroblastosis fetalis) and
prolactinoma in
prosthetic heart valves and
pulmonary hypertension as contraindication to
Q fever during
rabies vaccination during
radiation exposure during
radioactive iodine contraindicated in
respiratory alkalosis in
Rhesus alloimmunization (Rh incompatibility) and. See
also Rho (D) immune globulin
rubella exposure/rubella vaccination and
scabies/scabies treatment and
screening tests in. See Prenatal testing
seizures/seizure treatment and
in eclampsia
sexually transmitted disorders and
sickle cell anemia and
smoking during
streptococcal infection and
syphilis/syphilis testing and
termination of
by delivery
   in acute fatty liver of pregnancy
   in diabetic patient
   in preeclampsia-eclampsia
by elective abortion. See Abortion, elective/induced
by recurrent (habitual) abortion
by spontaneous abortion
thrombocytopenia during
thrombotic microangiopathies during
thyroid disease during
hyperemesis gravidarum and
nephritic 
spectrum. See also specific type and
Glomerulonephritis
hypothyroidism
surgery for
thyroid cancer treatment and
thyroiditis and
toxoplasmosis during
travel and
traveler's diarrhea during
trophoblastic disease and. See also Gestational
trophoblastic disease
p
tuberculosis/tuberculosis treatment during
ultrasonography during
ectopic pregnancy and
urinary tract infection during
varicella (chickenpox)/varicella vaccine during
vomiting of
gestational trophoblastic disease and
Wernicke encephalopathy and
weight gain in
yellow fever vaccination and
Pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A), testing
for
Pregnancy tests. See also Human chorionic gonadotropin
in amenorrhea
in ectopic pregnancy
for rape victim
in spontaneous abortion
Prehn sign
Prehypertension
treatment of
Prekallikrein deficiency
Preleukemia. See also Myelodysplastic syndromes
Premarin cream. See Estrogen vaginal creams
Premature beats. See Atrial (supraventricular) premature
beats; Ventricular premature beats
Premature 
ejaculation. See 
also 
Erectile
dysfunction/impotence
Premature (preterm) labor
Premature ovarian failure
in Turner syndrome
Premature 
ventricular 
contractions 
(PVCs/ventricular
premature beats/ventricular extrasystoles)
in myocardial infarction
in poisoning/drug overdose
Premenopausal bleeding
abnormal
in polycystic ovary syndrome
normal menstrual. See also Menstruation; Vaginal
bleeding
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Premenstrual syndrome/tension
Premphase. See Estrogens, with progestins
Prempro. See Estrogens, with progestins
Prenatal care
Prenatal testing/diagnosis. See also Genetic testing
for Down syndrome
for Gaucher disease
for muscular dystrophy
for sickle cell disease
for syphilis
for toxoplasmosis
Prenatal vitamins
Preoperative evaluation/perioperative management. See
also specific type of disorder
adverse ophthalmic effects of agents used in
antibiotic prophylaxis and
asymptomatic patient and
cardiovascular disorders and
endocrine disorders and
hematologic disorders and
kidney disease and
liver disease and
neurologic disorders and
pulmonary disorders and, for non-lung resection
surgery
Prepatellar bursae/bursitis
Preproliferative retinopathy
Prerenal acute kidney injury. See also Acute kidney injury
Presbyacusis (hearing impairment in elderly)
Presbyopia
Preservative-free eye medications, contamination and
Preservatives, ocular, toxic/hypersensitivity reactions to
Pressure ulcers
bed rest/immobility and
Preterm (premature) birth
Preterm (premature) labor, prevention of
Pretibial myxedema (Graves
dermopathy)
Preventive care. See also specificdisease
adherence and
approach to patient and
principles of care and
Prevotella,
melaninogenica,
resistant strains of
Prezista/Norvir. See Darunavir, with ritonavir
Priapism (prolonged painful erection)
erectile dysfunction therapy causing
trazodone causing
Primaquine
for malaria
chemoprophylaxis
for P jiroveci infection
Primary effusion (body cavity) lymphoma
Primary exertional headache
Primary headache associated with sexual activity
Primary lateral sclerosis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
cholangiocarcinoma and
in HIV infection/AIDS
Primaxin. See Imipenem
Primidone
Primrose oil (oil of evening primrose/OEP), for fibrocystic
condition
Prinivil. See Lisinopril
Pri nzi de. See 
Lisinopril, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
hydrochlorothiazide
Prinzmetal (variant) angina
Prion diseases
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and
in Huntington disease-like disorders
Pristiq. See Desvenlafaxine
PRK. See Photorefractive keratectomy
PRNP gene
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
in Huntington disease-like disorders
Probenecid
allopurinol interactions and
for gout
Probiotics
for antibiotic-associated colitis
prevention and
relapses and
for flatus
for irritable bowel syndrome
pouchitis and
Problem drinking. See Alcohol use/dependency/abuse; At-
risk (problem) drinking
Procainamide
antidepressant drug interactions and
for arrhythmias
infarct-related
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
ventricular tachycardia
overdose/toxicity of
Procalcitonin assay, in pneumonia diagnosis
Procarbazine
antidepressant drug interactions and
Procardia. See Nifedipine
Prochlorperazine. See also Antiemetics
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
Procollagen, in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
Procrit (epoetin alfa). See Erythropoietin
Proctitis
chlamydial
diarrhea and
herpes simplex
radiation
in syphilis
in ulcerative colitis
Proctocolectomy
for familial adenomatous polyposis
for ulcerative colitis
Proctosigmoiditis, in ulcerative colitis
Proctosigmoidoscopy. See Sigmoidoscopy
Procyclidine, for parkinsonism. See also Antiparkinsonism
drugs
Prodromal schizophrenia
Profunda femoris artery, atherosclerotic/occlusive disease
of
Progesterone. See also Progestins
in estrogen replacement therapy
receptors for, in breast cancer
prognosis and
therapy and
serum levels of
in infertility workup
for pregnancy testing
   ectopic pregnancy and
topical
Progestin minipill
Progestin withdrawal test, in amenorrhea evaluation
Progestins
for abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in cancer chemotherapy
Immunizations (vaccines). See also specific type
IUDs releasing
long-acting (contraceptive injections/implants)
oral
in oral contraceptives
for postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
Prognosis, assessment of in older adult
Prognostic Burn Index
Progressive bulbar palsy
Progressive massive pulmonary fibrosis
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Progressive nonfluent aphasia
Progressive spinal muscular atrophy
Progressive 
supranuclear 
palsy, 
parkinsonism
differentiated from
Proguanil
with atovaquone (Malarone)
for malaria chemoprophylaxis
self-treatment and
during pregnancy
Proinsulin
in factitious hypoglycemia
in insulinoma
PROKR2 gene mutation, hypogonadism and
Prolactin (PRL)
deficiency of
gynecomastia and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
serum levels of. See also Hyperprolactinemia
in amenorrhea
in infertility workup
in psychogenic nonepileptic/pseudoepileptic seizure
identification
reference values for
tumors secreting
GH cosecretion and
Prolactinoma
GH cosecretion and
Proleukin. See Aldesleukin
Proliferative bronchiolitis. See also Bronchiolitis
Proliferative retinopathy
Prolixin. See Fluphenazine
Promethazine. See also Antiemetics
overdose/toxicity of
Prometrium. See Progestins
Pronator teres syndrome
Pronouncement (death)
PROP1 gene mutation, in hypopituitarism
Propafenone
for atrial fibrillation
overdose/toxicity of
Propanil, methemoglobinemia caused by
Propecia. See Finasteride
Prophylactic 
antibiotics. See 
Antimicrobial
chemoprophylaxis
Propine. See Dipivefrin
Propionibacterium acnes. See also Acne
Propofol, for status epilepticus
Propoxyphene
benzodiazepine interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
Propranolol. See also Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs
for aggressive/violent behavior
antidepressant drug interactions and
for arrhythmias
for esophageal varices, prevention of rebleeding and
for hypertension
for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
for migraine prophylaxis
overdose/toxicity of
for panic attacks
Proprioceptive disorders, in tabes dorsalis
Proptosis (exophthalmos), in dysthyroid eye/Graves
disease
RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
Propylene glycol, lactic acidosis and
Propylthiouracil, for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
during pregnancy/lactation
RAI therapy and
toxic solitary thyroid nodule and
ProQuad. See MMRV (measles-mumps-rubella-varicella)
vaccine
Prosom. See Estazolam
Prosopagnosia, intracranial tumors causing
Prostacyclin/prostacyclin analogs, for
pulmonary hypertension
Prostaglandin analogs. See also specificagent
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Prostaglandins
in erectile dysfunction
vascular evaluation and
hyponatremia caused by
NSAIDs affecting
   pharmacologic. See also Antihypertensive drug
therapy
hormone therapy for
incidence/risk/mortality of
localized
locally/regionally advanced
metastatic
paraneoplastic syndromes and
pathology/staging of
screening for
testosterone replacement therapy and
Prostate gland
Atypical antipsychotics. See also Antipsychotic drugs
biopsy of
cancer of. See Prostate cancer
electrovaporization of
inflammation/infection of. See Prostatitis
minimally invasive surgery on
photovaporization of (PVP)
transurethral incision of (TUIP)
transurethral needle ablation of (TUNA)
transurethral resection of (TURP)
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
in prostate cancer
in CAPRA assessment tool
screening and
reference values for
age-specific
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) density, in cancer
screening
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) velocity, in cancer
screening
Prostatectomy
open, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
radical, for prostate cancer
transurethral laser-induced (TULIP), for benign
prostatic hyperplasia
transurethral (TURP), for benign prostatic hyperplasia
urinary incontinence after
Prostatic pain, in acute bacterial prostatitis
p
,
p
Prostatitis
acute bacterial
chronic bacterial
dysuria in
gonococcal
nonbacterial
Prostatodynia
Prostheses
arterial/endovascular. See Bypass grafting
for joint replacement
coagulase-negative staphylococcal infection and
osteomyelitis and
penile
Prosthetic heart valves. See also Valve replacement
anticoagulant therapy and
pregnancy and
coagulase-negative staphylococcal infection and
endocarditis and
anticoagulation and
Protamine, for heparin neutralization
Protease inhibitors. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
antituberculous drug interactions and
for hepatitis C
lipid abnormalities caused by
resistance to
ritonavir boosting and
Protein
ascitic fluid
bacterial peritonitis and
pancreatic ascites and
peritoneal carcinomatosis and
tuberculous peritonitis and
cerebrospinal fluid, in CNS infection
dietary
deficiency of (protein–energy malnutrition)
lactation and
nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
and
requirements for in nutritional support
restriction of. See Protein-restricted diet
in urinary stone formation
pleural fluid
serum
in nephrotic syndrome
reference values for
urinary. See also Proteinuria
ratio of to urinary creatinine
Protein C
activated
for bacteremia/sepsis/shock
resistance to, hypercoagulability and
reference values for
Protein-calorie 
undernutrition. See 
Protein–energy
malnutrition
Protein/creatinine 
urinary 
concentration. See 
also
Proteinuria
Protein electrophoresis
in amyloidosis
in myeloma
in protein-losing enteropathy
reference values for
urinary
in myeloma
in overload proteinuria
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Protein–energy malnutrition
Protein kinase gene, in myotonic dystrophy
Protein-losing enteropathy
GI lymphoma and
in measles
in Whipple disease
Protein malnutrition, in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic
spectrum disorders
Protein-restricted diet
for chronic kidney disease
for diabetes mellitus/diabetic nephropathy
for hepatic encephalopathy
for nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
for urinary stones
Protein S
Proteinase-3 ANCA (PR3-ANCA). See also Antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
Proteinosis, pulmonary alveolar
Proteinuria
asymptomatic
Bence Jones. See Bence Jones proteinuria
in chronic kidney disease
in diabetes mellitus/diabetic nephropathy
by dipstick
in glomerulonephritis/nephritic spectrum disorders
in IgA nephropathy
in interstitial nephritis
membranous nephropathy management and
in myeloma
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in sickle cell disease/glomerulopathy
in SLE
in tubulointerstitial disease
Proteus
miribilis,
vulgaris,
Prothrombin (factor II)
acquired antibodies to
deficiency of
des-gamma-carboxy, in hepatocellular carcinoma
Prothrombin time
in alcoholic liver disease
in anticoagulant overdose/toxicity
in liver disease/jaundice
prolonged
in cirrhosis
in DIC
in vitamin K deficiency
reference/normal values for
Proton pump inhibitors
adverse effects of
for Barrett esophagus
chest pain in esophageal disorders and
clopidogrel interaction and
for dyspepsia
for dysphagia
for esophageal motility disorders
gastrin levels affected by
for GERD/esophagitis
in H pylori eradication therapy
H pylori test results affected by
for laryngopharyngeal reflux
Haloperidol. See also Antipsychotic drugs
for peptic stricture
for peptic ulcer disease
bleeding management and
prevention and
refractory ulcers and
for stress gastritis
for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Protopam. See Pralidoxime
Protopic. See Tacrolimus, topical
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
Protozoal infections. See also specific type and organism
diarrhea in
myocarditis in
Protriptyline
Provenge. See Sipuleucel-T
Provera. See Progesterone
Providencia,
Provocation testing. See also specific test
Provocative tests, in musculoskeletal evaluation
Proximal renal tubular acidosis. See also Renal tubular
acidosis
genetic defects associated with
tubulointerstitial disease and
Prozac. See Fluoxetine
Prozone phenomenon
PrPC/PrPSc, in prion disease
PRSS1 gene, in chronic pancreatitis
Pruritus (itching). See also specific cause
ani
tinea infection causing
anogenital. See Anogenital/perianal pruritus
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
in cutaneous larva migrans
in decompression sickness (skin bends)
in diabetes
drugs for
systemic
topical
of ear canal
in hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
in lichen simplex chronicus
in polycythemia
in renal failure/uremia
vulvae
PRV. See Rotavirus vaccine
PSA. See Prostate-specific antigen
Pseudallescheria boydii, in opportunistic infection
Pseudoachalasia
Pseudo-addiction, pain management in terminally ill/dying
patient and
Pseudoallergic (anaphylactoid) reactions
Pseudoaneurysm
GI bleeding and
myocardial rupture and
Pseudobacteremia
Pseudobulbar palsy
Pseudoclaudication, of spinal stenosis
Pseudocysts
pancreatic
ascites and
cystic carcinoma differentiated from
infected (pancreatic abscess)
vocal fold
Pseudodementia (depression and dementia)
Pseudoephedrine, MAOI interactions and
Pseudoepileptic seizures. See Psychogenic nonepileptic
seizure (PNES/pseudoepileptic seizure)
Pseudofolliculitis
Pseudogout
Pseudohermaphroditism
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
type I
type II
Pseudohyponatremia
Pseudohypoparathyroidism. See also Hypoparathyroidism
Pseudomembrane, in diphtheria
Pseudomembranous colitis. See also Colitis, antibiotic-
associated
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
burn-associated infection caused by
eye medications contaminated by
hot tub folliculitis caused by
keratitis caused by
malignant external otitis caused by
pneumonia caused by
in HIV infection/AIDS
Pseudomonic acid. See Mupirocin
Pseudo-obstruction, intestinal
acute (Ogilvie syndrome)
chronic
Pseudopapilledema
Pseudoporphyria
Pseudoprecocious puberty, testicular tumors causing
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
Pseudoseizures. See Psychogenic nonepileptic seizure
(PNES/pseudoepileptic seizure)
Pseudoseptic arthritis. See also Septic (nongonococcal
acute bacterial) arthritis
Pseudothrombocytopenia
Pseudotumor
cerebri
headache and
lithium use and
pleural fluid
PSI. See Pneumonia Severity Index
Psilocybin
Psilocybe mushroom poisoning and
Psittacosis (ornithosis)
Psoas sign, in appendicitis
Psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy. See also
Phototherapy
for atopic dermatitis
for lichen planus
for psoriasis
Psoriasiform eruptions, drugs causing
Psoriasis
arthritis and
drugs causing
exfoliative dermatitis and (erythrodermic psoriasis)
in HIV infection/AIDS
lithium use and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
tinea differentiated from
Psoriatic arthritis
in HIV infection/AIDS
Psoriatic erythroderma
Psoriatic spondylitis
PSS1 mutation, pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
PSTI gene, in chronic pancreatitis
Psychedelic drug abuse
Psychiatric/psychologic disorders. See also specific type
asthma differentiated from
chest pain and
cognitive disorders and. See also specific type
in elderly, urinary incontinence and
fatigue/chronic fatigue syndrome and
hospitalization and illness and
irritable bowel syndrome and
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
vomiting and
in Wilson disease
Psychogenic dyspnea
Psychogenic nonepileptic seizure (PNES/pseudoepileptic
seizure)
Psychogenic polydipsia
hyponatremia caused by
Psychologic challenges, for terminally ill/dying patient
Psychologic 
disorders. See 
Psychiatric/psychologic
disorders
Psychologic drug dependence
Psychopathic (antisocial) personality disorder
Psychosexual disorders
sexual dysfunction and. See also Sexual dysfunction
Psychosurgery, for OCD
Psychotic depression
Psychotic disorders (psychoses). See also Schizophrenia
alcohol withdrawal and (delirium tremens)
alcoholic (organic) hallucinosis
atypical
brief
classification of
delusions and
depression and
differential diagnosis of
drug-induced/toxic
drug therapy for. See also Antipsychotic drugs
ECT for
in hypothyroidism (myxedema madness)
intensive care unit
Korsakoff
late life (in elderly)
mania differentiated from
postpartum
suicide risk and
Psychotic resolution
Psychotropic 
agents. See also Antianxiety drugs;
Antidepressants; Antipsychotic drugs
for irritable bowel syndrome
thrombocytopenia caused by
Psyllium fiber. See also Fiber, dietary
PT. See Prothrombin time
PTC. See Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography
PTCA (percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty).
See Angioplasty, coronary; Percutaneous coronary
intervention
PTEN multiple hamartoma syndrome (Cowden disease)
thyroid disease and
Pteroylmonoglutamic acid. See Folic acid
Pterygium
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone
PTHrP. See Parathyroid hormone-related protein
Ptosis
in myasthenia gravis
in third nerve paralysis
PTP. See Posttransfusion purpura
PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder
PTT. See Partial thromboplastin time
Puberty
delayed/failure to enter
male hypogonadism and
Turner syndrome and
gynecomastia during
Pubic lice. See also Lice
Puerperal mastitis
candidal
Puestow procedure, modified, for pancreatitis
Puffer fish poisoning
Puffy tumor, Pott
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Pulmonary angiography, in pulmonary embolism
chest pain evaluation and
helical CT
Pulmonary arteriopathy, plexogenic (idiopathic/primary
pulmonary hypertension)
Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations, in hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Pulmonary artery catheter, in shock management
Pulmonary aspiration syndromes. See also Aspiration
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)
in myocardial infarction
in shock
Pulmonary circulation disorders
alveolar hemorrhage syndromes
pulmonary hypertension
respiratory failure caused by
Quetiapine. See also Antipsychotic drugs
vasculitis
Pulmonary cysts, hydatid
Pulmonary diffusing capacity. See Diffusing capacity
Pulmonary disorders. See also specific disorder and
underRespiratory
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
acute respiratory failure
adverse ophthalmic effects of drugs used in
air travel and
airway disorders
in anthrax
in ascariasis
in aspergillosis
in blastomycosis
chronic. See specific disorder and Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
circulatory
in coccidioidomycosis
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
cryptococcal
in decompression sickness
drug-induced
environmental
eosinophilic
in filariasis
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
hantaviruses causing
in histoplasmosis
in 
HIV 
infection/AIDS. See also 
Pneumonia;
Tuberculosis
in hookworm disease
HSV causing
immunization recommendations in
infections. See also Pneumonia
adenovirus
anaerobic
Bordetella bronchiseptica causing
CMV
hemoptysis in
herpes simplex
interstitial
mycobacterial
   nontuberculous
Didanosine (ddI). See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
viral
interstitial (diffuse parenchymal)
in measles
metastatic
microscopic polyangiitis causing
neoplastic. See also Lung cancer
in nocardiosis
occupational
in paragonimiasis
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
pleural diseases and
postoperative, risk factors for
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management of
radiation causing
respiratory failure
in scleroderma
SIADH caused by
in SLE
in strongyloidiasis
in syphilis
toxic. See also Toxic lung injury
transfusion-related
tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
in uremia
ventilation control disorders and
Pulmonary edema
drug-induced
in heart failure (cardiogenic)
perioperative
high-altitude
in near drowning
noncardiac causes of
respiratory failure caused by
in silo-filler's disease
transfusion-related (transfusion-related acute lung
injury)
Pulmonary embolectomy
Pulmonary 
embolism. See 
Pulmonary 
venous
thromboembolism
Pulmonary embolism severity index (PESI)
Pulmonary fibrosis
in ankylosing spondylitis
in interstitial (diffuse parenchymal) diseases
drug-induced
in pneumoconioses
progressive massive
pulmonary heart disease (cor pulmonale) caused by
radiation causing
Pulmonary function tests. See also Spirometry
y
p
y
in asthma
in COPD
in cor pulmonale
in cystic fibrosis
in lung cancer
preoperative
Pulmonary heart disease (cor pulmonale)
in COPD
in pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary hemosiderosis, idiopathic
Pulmonary hypertension
in atrial septal defect
in cirrhosis
in COPD
heart failure and
in hyperthyroidism
idiopathic (primary)
in mitral stenosis
in patent ductus arteriosus
pulmonic regurgitation and
secondary
in ventricular septal defect
Pulmonary infarction, pleural effusion in
Pulmonary infiltrates. See also Pneumonia
in ARDS
drugs causing
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
travel and
Pulmonary nodule, solitary
in metastatic disease
Pulmonary 
osteoarthropathy, 
hypertrophic. See
Hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy/hypertrophic 
pulmonary
osteoarthropathy
Pulmonary radiation fibrosis
Pulmonary regurgitation. See Pulmonic regurgitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation, for COPD
Pulmonary stenosis
Pulmonary 
thromboembolism. See Pulmonary venous
thromboembolism
Pulmonary thromboendarterectomy
Stavudine (d4T). See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Pulmonary vasculitis
asthma differentiated from
Pulmonary 
veno-occlusive 
disease, 
pulmonary
hypertension and
Pulmonary venous thromboembolism
air travel and
assessment/diagnosis of
chest pain in
dyspnea in
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
immobility and
prevention of
risk assessment/stratification and
septic, in drug users
Low back pain. See also Back pain
back pain and. See also Back pain
thrombolytic therapy in
venous thrombosis and. See also Deep venous
thrombosis; Venous thromboembolic disease
Pulmonary ventilation-perfusion scans. See Ventilation-
perfusion scans
Pulmonic regurgitation
Pulmonic stenosis. See Pulmonary stenosis
Pulsatile tinnitus
Pulse deficit, in atrial fibrillation
Pulse oximetry/CO-oximetry
in carbon monoxide poisoning
in coma patient evaluation
in cough evaluation
in dyspnea evaluation
in hepatopulmonary syndrome
in methemoglobinemia
Pulse rate. See Heart rate
Pulses
absence/weakness of
in acute arterial occlusion
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in lower leg/foot occlusive disease
in aortic regurgitation
in hypertension
Pulsus paradoxus
asthma exacerbation and
in pericardial effusion/tamponade
Pulvinar sign
Punctal occlusion, for dry eye
Pupillary dilation, acute angle-closure glaucoma and
Pupillary reactions
in coma or stupor
in third nerve paralysis
Pure autonomic failure
Pure red cell aplasia
cancer-related
Purgatives, for constipation/preoperative bowel cleansing
Purified chick embryo cell culture (PCEC) rabies vaccine
Purified insulin. See also Insulin therapy
Purified protein derivative (PPD) test. See also Tuberculin
skin test
Purine analogs, in cancer chemotherapy
Purines, dietary
in hyperuricemia/gout
in urinary stone formation
Purinethol. See Mercaptopurine
Purpura
cancer-related
in cryoglobulinemia
fulminans
Henoch-Schönlein
in microscopic polyangiitis
posttransfusion
thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic. See 
also
Thrombocytopenia
diarrhea and
Pursed lip breathing
for COPD
prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications
and
Push enteroscopy, in GI bleeding
Pustular skin disorders. See also specific type
Puumala viruses
PUVA therapy. See also Phototherapy
for atopic dermatitis
for lichen planus
for psoriasis
PVCs. See Premature ventricular contractions
Pyelonephritis
dysuria and
emphysematous
during pregnancy
Pygeum africanum, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Pylephlebitis
noncirrhotic portal hypertension and
perforated appendicitis and
Pyoderma
gangrenosum, in Crohn disease
miliaria and
in pediculosis
in scabies
Pyogenic 
arthritis. See Septic (nongonococcal acute
bacterial) arthritis
Pyogenic hepatic abscess
Pyogenic osteomyelitis
Pyometra, in endometrial carcinoma
Pyrantel pamoate
for ascariasis
for enterobiasis/pinworms
Pyrazinamide, for tuberculosis
in latent disease/prophylactic
pregnancy and
Pyrazinamide/isoniazid/rifampin, for tuberculosis
Pyridium. See Phenazopyridine
Pyridostigmine, for myasthenia gravis
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
deficiency of
homocystinuria/hyperhomocysteinemia and
for isoniazid overdose/toxicity
toxicity of
Pyrimethamine
for isosporiasis
for malaria, with sulfadoxine (Fansidar)
with amodiaquine
with artesunate
for prophylaxis in pregnancy/infants
resistance to
for toxoplasmosis
Pyrimidine analogs, in cancer chemotherapy
Pyrogenic erythrotoxin (erythrogenic toxin)
Pyrophosphate 
(technetium-99m) 
scintigraphy, 
in
myocardial infarction
Pyrosis (heartburn)
Pyuria
in cystitis
sterile, in tuberculosis
Q fever
Q waves
in cor pulmonale
in 
myocardial 
infarction. See also Myocardial
infarction; Non-Q wave (non-ST elevation) infarction
Qinghaosu/qinghaosu derivatives. See Artemisinins
QRS complex. See also Electrocardiogram
in atrial fibrillation
in nonparoxysmal junctional tachycardia
in preexcitation syndromes
in tetralogy of Fallot
wide
differentiation 
of 
aberrantly 
conducted
supraventricular beats from ventricular beats and
in poisoning/drug overdose
   with antiarrhythmics
   with antidepressants
   with opiates/opioids
   with phenothiazines
in tetralogy of Fallot
in ventricular premature beats
QT interval. See also Electrocardiogram
long
in hypocalcemia
in hypomagnesemia
palpitations and
in poisoning/drug toxicity
   antiarrhythmic agents in
   antidepressants in
   antipsychotics in
   droperidol in
   opioids in
   phenothiazines in
   quinine/quinidine in
short, in hypercalcemia
Quad screen, in prenatal testing
Quadramet. See Samarium
Quadrantanopia. See Visual field defects
Quadriceps, assessment of strength of
Quadriceps avoidance gait, in ACL injury
Quadriplegia. See also Paralysis
spinal trauma causing
in stroke
Quality of life
assessment of for older adult
decision-making at end of life and
palliative care for improvement of
Quazepam
Quebec platelet disorder
Queensland tick typhus
Questran. See Cholestyramine
benign hyperplasia of. See also Benign prostatic
hyperplasia
for delirium
overdose/toxicity of
“Quickening,”
Quinacrine, for lupus
Quinagolide, for hyperprolactinemia
Quinapril
with hydrochlorothiazide
Quincke pulses
Quinidine
antidepressant drug interactions and
for arrhythmias
for malaria
overdose/toxicity of
Quinine, for malaria
pregnancy and
self-treatment and
Quinsy (peritonsillar abscess)
Quinsy tonsillectomy
Quinupristin/dalfopristin, for E faecium infection
“Quitlines,” for smoking cessation counseling
Quixin. See Levofloxacin
R-CHOP regimen
R-CVP regimen
Rabeprazole. See also Proton pump inhibitors
Rabies
bite injuries and
prevention/immunization 
and. See also Rabies
vaccine
Rabies antiserum
Rabies immune globulin
Rabies vaccine
adsorbed
antimalarial drugs/chloroquine affecting
postexposure
preexposure
Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome
Raccoon roundworm (Baylisascaris procyonis), visceral
larva migrans caused by
Raccoon sign
Racemose cysticercosis
Racial/ethnic background
alcoholism and
antipsychotic drug dosing and
breast cancer risk and
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
cirrhosis and
colorectal cancer incidence and
diabetes mellitus and
esophageal cancer and
gastric adenocarcinoma and
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and
gout and
g
hemochromatosis and
hepatitis C and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
hirsutism
HIV infection/AIDS and
hypertension and
Nutritional 
support. See also Central vein nutritional
support; Enteral nutritional support; Parenteral nutritional
support
lactase deficiency and
melanoma and
multiple sclerosis and
periodic paralysis and
PSA reference values and
sickle cell anemia and
SLE and
thalassemia and
Radial nerve lesions
Radial optic neurotomy, for retinal vein occlusion
Radiation burns
Radiation exposure/reactions. See also Radiation therapy
acute
cancer risk and
Hashimoto's thyroiditis risk and
lung injury caused by
from medical imaging
cancer risk and
occupational/environmental
during pregnancy
thyroid cancer risk and
vomiting
Radiation fibrosis, pulmonary
Radiation pericarditis
Radiation pneumonitis
Radiation proctitis
Radiation sickness
Radiation therapy. See also Radiation exposure/reactions
for basal cell carcinoma
for bladder cancer
for breast cancer
arm edema and
breast implants and
with chemotherapy. See Chemoradiation therapy
for esophageal cancer
for Graves ophthalmopathy
for Hodgkin disease
for intracranial tumors
for laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
leukemia and
for lung cancer
lung injury and
for myeloma-related bone disease
pericarditis caused by
pneumonitis and
for prolactinoma
for prostate cancer
pulmonary fibrosis and
for spinal tumors/cord compression
thrombocytopenia and
for thyroid cancer
thyroid cancer risk and
toxicity of. See Radiation exposure/reactions
Radiculomyelopathy, in HIV infection/AIDS
Radiculopathy, cervical
Radioactive iodine
breastfeeding and
contraindications to in pregnancy
for goiter
for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
ophthalmopathy flares and
thiourea treatment and
toxic multinodular goiter
toxic solitary thyroid nodule and
for thyroid cancer treatment/surveillance
for thyroid nodules
for thyroid scanning. See Radioiodine thyroid scans
and uptake
Radioactive materials for testing, breastfeeding and
Radiocontrast media
iodinated, for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
nephrotoxicity/acute kidney injury and
reactions to
Radioembolization, transarterial (TARE), for hepatocellular
carcinoma
Radiofrequency ablation techniques
for arrhythmias. See Catheter ablation techniques
for benign prostatic hyperplasia (TUNA)
for hepatocellular carcinoma
for trigeminal neuralgia
Radiofrequency wave electrocautery (HALO), for Barrett
esophagus
Radioiodine. See Radioactive iodine
Radioiodine thyroid scans and uptake
in goiter
in hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
amiodarone-induced disease and
in nodule evaluation
in thyroid cancer
false positive/false negative
postoperative/surveillance
in thyroiditis
Radionuclide angiography
in angina
in cardiomyopathy
in heart failure
in postinfarct pseudoaneurysm
Radionuclide scanning. See specific type
Radiosurgery. See Cyberknife radiosurgery; Gamma knife
radiation/gamma radiosurgery
Radiotherapy. See Radiation therapy
Radon, lung cancer associated with exposure to
RAEB. See Refractory anemia with excess blasts
Raf-kinase inhibitors, for renal cell carcinoma
Rage attacks, seizures differentiated from
Ragged red fibers, in mitochondrial myopathies
RAI scans, thyroid. See Radioiodine thyroid scans and
uptake
Rai staging system, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Rales. See Crackles
Raloxifene
breast cancer prevention and
for gynecomastia
hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism and
for osteoporosis
Raltegravir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Ramelteon
Ramipril, for hypertension
diabetes and
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
myoclonus in
Range of motion testing
in musculoskeletal disorders
ankle injuries
back pain and
hip fractures and
knee pain/injury and
neck pain and
shoulder disorders and
wrist disorders and
Ranitidine. See also H2 receptor blocking drugs
Ranke complex, in tuberculosis
Ranolazine, for angina
Ranson criteria
Rape
γ-hydroxybutyrate (“date rape” drug) use and
sexually transmitted diseases and
statutory
Rape trauma syndrome
Rapid antigen testing
in filariasis
in malaria
in pharyngitis
in pneumonia
Rapid cyclers
in bipolar disorder
lithium use and
Rapid detoxification, for heroin/opioid withdrawal
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder
Rapid HIV antibody tests
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test. See RPR test
Rapid treponemal tests
Rapidly acting insulin analogs. See also Insulin therapy
in mixtures/combination therapy
in pregnancy
in pumps
Rapidly progressive acute glomerulonephritis
ras oncogene, thyroid tumors and
Rasagiline, for parkinsonism
Rasburicase, for tumor lysis syndrome/hyperuricemia
,
y
y
yp
Rashes. See also specific type or cause and Skin
disorders
acute exanthems
rickettsial
viral
chemotherapy-induced
in dermatomyositis
drugs causing (dermatitis medicamentosa)
fungal, in HIV infection/AIDS
heat causing (miliaria)
in Lyme disease
in mononucleosis
in pharyngitis
photodistributed 
(photodermatitis). See 
also
Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
in SLE
in Still disease
in strongyloidiasis
in syphilis
travel and
Rat-bite fever
Rat fleas. See Fleas
Rat lungworm (A cantonensis)
Rat poison, anticoagulant toxicity and
Rate control
for atrial fibrillation
cardioversion compared with
for atrial flutter
Rattlesnake envenomation
Rauwolfia derivatives, antidepressant drug interactions and
Raynaud disease
Raynaud phenomenon
scleroderma and
in SLE
R B - IL D . See 
Respiratory 
bronchiolitis-associated
interstitial lung disease
RBC. See Erythrocyte count
Reactivated chronic hepatitis B
Reactive arthritis (Reiter syndrome)
HIV infection/AIDS and
psoriasis and
Reactive cervical lymphadenopathy
Reactive erythemas
Reactive 
(postprandial) 
hypoglycemia. See 
also
Hypoglycemia
postethanol
Reactive thrombocytosis
Rebiana, for diabetics
Rebound headache, analgesic overuse and
Rebound tenderness, in appendicitis
Recall. See Memory
Recklinghausen disease
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma in
Recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), for
ovulation induction
Recombinant growth factors. See Growth factors
Recombinant human deoxyribonuclease (rhDNase), for
cystic fibrosis
Recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH)
Recombinant human TSH/rhTSH. See Thyrotropin-α
Recombinant immunoblot assay (RIBA), in hepatitis C
Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. See Alteplase
Recombivax-HB. See Hepatitis B vaccine
Recompression. See also Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
for dysbarism/decompression sickness
for high altitude-related illness
Reconstructive surgery
genital, for transsexuals
after mastectomy
local recurrence and
vascular. See Bypass grafting
Recrudescent epidemic typhus (Brill-Zinsser disease)
Recruitment, in cochlear dysfunction
Rectal bleeding. See also Gastrointestinal bleeding
hemorrhoids causing
Rectal carcinoids
Rectal examination
in acute bacterial prostatitis
in benign prostatic hyperplasia
in prostate cancer screening/diagnosis
Rectal prolapse
Rectal (Blumer) shelf
Rectal temperature. See Core temperature
Rectal ulcer, GI bleeding caused by
Rectocele
Rectovaginal fistulas, in Crohn disease
Rectum. See also under Rectal
cancer of. See also Colorectal cancer
adjuvant therapy for
neoadjuvant therapy for
surgical excision and
disorders of. See also Anorectal disorders
gonococcal infection. See also Anorectal disorders,
gonococcal
ulcerative colitis involving
Recurrent (habitual) abortion
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
damage to during thyroid surgery
vocal fold paralysis caused by damage/lesions of
Recurrent paroxysmal atrial fibrillation
Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
Red blood cells. See under Red cell and Erythrocytes
Red bugs, skin lesions caused by
Red cell aplasia, pure
cancer-related
Red cell casts
in glomerulonephritis/nephritic spectrum disorders
in interstitial nephritis
Red cell count
in pleural fluid
reference values for
Red cell mass, in polycythemia
Red 
cell 
transfusions. See also specific type and
Transfusion
for DIC
Red man syndrome
Red top tubes
Reduced-intensity allogeneic stem cell transplantation
5α-Reductase deficiency
5α-Reductase inhibitors. See also Finasteride
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Reduction pneumoplasty, for COPD
Reduviid bugs, in Chagas disease
Reed-Sternberg cells
Reentry
atrial flutter and
in supraventricular tachycardia
in ventricular premature beats
in ventricular tachycardia
Refeeding
fatal hypophosphatemia and
for protein–energy malnutrition
Refeeding edema
Reference ranges, for diagnostic/laboratory tests. See also
specific test
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy (complex regional pain
syndrome)
Reflux
gastroesophageal. See Gastroesophageal reflux
disease
hepatojugular
laryngopharyngeal
vesicoureteral, tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Reflux esophagitis. See Esophagitis
Reflux nephropathy
Reflux (venous)
in chronic venous insufficiency
correction of
in varicose veins
Refractive errors
Refractory anemia
Refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB)
Refractory atrial fibrillation
Refractory ulcers
gastric cancer and
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma) and
Refsum disease
Regional hyperthermia, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Regional poison control centers
Regranex. See Becaplermin; Platelet-derived growth factor
Regular insulin. See also Insulin therapy
for diabetic ketoacidosis
in mixtures
Regurgitation
in achalasia
in GERD
in Zenker diverticulum
Rehydration. See Fluid management/hydration
Reinke edema
Reiter syndrome. See Reactive arthritis
Relafen. See Nabumetone
Relapsing fever
Relapsing polychondritis
Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis
Relaxation techniques
for anxiety disorders
for insomnia
for irritable bowel syndrome
for 
psychiatric 
problems 
associated 
with
hospitalization/illness
for tension headache
REM sleep
REM sleep behavior disorder
Remediation 
therapy, 
for 
schizophrenia/psychotic
disorders
Remeron. See Mirtazapine
Remicade. See Infliximab
Remitting seronegative synovitis with non-pitting edema,
cancer and
Remnant lipoproteins. See also Triglycerides
Renal 
angiography/arteriography, 
in 
renal 
artery
stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
Renal artery stenosis
hypertension caused by
renal insufficiency/prerenal acute kidney injury and
Renal biopsy
in focal segmental glomerular sclerosis
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in HIV-associated nephropathy
in IgA nephropathy
in membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
in membranous nephropathy
in nephritic spectrum disorders
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
in SLE
Renal calculi. See also Nephrolithiasis; Urinary stone
disease
Renal cell carcinoma
cystic
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
Renal colic/pain, urinary stones causing
Renal cysts
acquired
in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
complex
infected
in medullary cystic kidney
in medullary sponge kidney
simple/solitary
Renal disorders. See Kidney disease/injury
Renal failure. See also Acute kidney injury; Chronic kidney
disease; Kidney disease/injury; Uremia
acute. See also Acute kidney injury
chronic. See also Chronic kidney disease
dialysis for. See Dialysis
immunization recommendations in
intrinsic
lower extremity edema and
in myeloma
myoglobinuria/rhabdomyolysis and
postoperative
transplantation for. See Kidney transplantation
Renal failure type (β2-microglobulin) amyloidosis
Renal (nondiabetic) glycosuria
Renal hypercalciuria
Renal imaging
in chronic kidney disease
in dysuria evaluation
Renal osteodystrophy
Renal pain. See Renal colic
Renal pelvis
cancer of
obstruction of, postrenal acute kidney injury and
Renal salt-wasting
hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronemic RTA and
in subarachnoid hemorrhage
Renal transplantation. See Kidney transplantation
Renal tubular acidosis
genetic defects associated with
hyperkalemia in
in hypocitraturic calcium nephrolithiasis
hypokalemia in
nephrolithiasis/urolithiasis and
in tubulointerstitial disease
urinary anion gap in
Renal tubular cell casts
Renal tubular necrosis, acute
in pancreatitis
rhabdomyolysis and
Renal vascular hypertension. See also Hypertension
Renin activity (plasma). See Plasma renin activity
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system. See 
also
Aldosterone
in hypertension
Renin inhibitors. See also Angiotensin II receptor blocking
agents; Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
for heart failure
for hypertension
in chronic kidney disease/renal failure
in combination regimen
in diabetes
Renova. See Tretinoin
Repaglinide
with metformin
Repeat-dose charcoal
Reperfusion 
therapy. See 
also 
Revascularization
procedures
for myocardial infarction
assessment of
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
thrombolytic therapy
Rescriptor. See Delavirdine
Rescue angioplasty, for myocardial infarction
Rescula. See Unoprostone
Reserpine
depression caused by
for Huntington disease
for hypertension
MAOI interactions and
Reset osmostat, hyponatremia caused by
Residential facilities, for schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Residual schizophrenia
Residual volume (RV), in COPD
Resin T3/T4 uptake
in euthyroid sick syndrome
in hyperthyroidism
pregnancy and
Resistance, microbial. See Drug resistance
Resistant hypertension
Resistin, insulin action in obesity and
Resolution, psychotic
Resolution stage of sexual activity
Resorptive hypercalciuria
Resource allocation, principles of care and
Respiration. See Breathing; Ventilation
Respiratory acidosis (hypercapnia)
in asthma
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
dyspnea and
metabolic alkalosis and
permissive
for asthma
respiratory failure and
Respiratory alkalosis (hypocapnia)
alcoholic ketoacidosis and
in asthma
in heat exposure syndromes
in hyperventilation syndromes
mechanical ventilation and
metabolic acidosis and
in pulmonary embolism
salicylate overdose/toxicity causing
Respiratory bronchiolitis
Respiratory 
bronchiolitis-associated 
interstitial 
lung
disease (RB-ILD)
Respiratory depression, opioid therapy/pain relief and
Respiratory distress syndrome, acute/adult. See Acute
respiratory distress syndrome
Respiratory failure. See also Acute respiratory distress
syndrome
acidosis in
in acute aspiration of gastric contents
asthma and
in botulism
in burn injury
COPD and
drug-induced
in near drowning
in poliomyelitis
postoperative
in SARS
smoke inhalation and
tracheotomy for
Respiratory injection, of methylprednisolone, for asthma
Respiratory papillomatosis, recurrent
Respiratory rate
in asthma exacerbation
in pulmonary embolism
Respiratory syncytial virus
bronchiolitis caused by
Respiratory syncytial virus immune globulin
Respiratory tract infection. See Pulmonary disorders,
infections
Rest. See also Bed rest; Immobility
requirements for during pregnancy
Rest pain
in femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
in lower leg/foot occlusive disease
in thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease)
Restasis. See Cyclosporine
Restenosis, with PCI
Restless legs syndrome
Restlessness, terminal
Restoril. See Temazepam
Restraints, for aggressive/violent patient
Restrictive cardiomyopathy. See Cardiomyopathy
Resuscitation. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Resynchronization (biventricular pacing), for heart failure
in cardiomyopathy
ret oncogene
in medullary thyroid carcinoma
in MEN
in papillary thyroid carcinoma
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
prophylactic thyroidectomy and
Retardation. See Mental retardation
Retention, urinary. See Urinary retention
Reteplase, for myocardial infarction
Reticulocyte count
Reticulocytosis
in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
in hereditary spherocytosis
in sickle cell anemia
Reticulosis, polymorphic (midline malignant)
Retin-A/Retin A Micro. See Tretinoin
Retina
detachment of
in hypertension
systemic diseases affecting
Retinal artery occlusion, central and branch
Retinal circulation, hypertension affecting (hypertensive
retinochoroidopathy)
Retinal drusen, in age-related macular degeneration
Retinal emboli, transient monocular blindness caused by
Retinal hemorrhage, in blood dyscrasias
Retinal tears, detachment and
Retinal vasculitis. See also Uveitis
Retinal vein occlusion, central and branch
Retinitis
in bartonellosis
CMV
herpetic (acute retinal necrosis)
in HIV infection/AIDS
hydroxychloroquine causing
Retinoblastoma
Retinochoroiditis, toxoplasmic
Retinochoroidopathy, hypertensive
Retinoic acid. See also Tretinoin
for acute myeloid leukemia
for acute promyelocytic leukemia
Retinoic acid receptor, in promyelocytic leukemia
Retinoids. See also specific agent and Vitamin A
for acne
adverse ophthalmic effects of
breastfeeding and
for psoriasis
with PUVA (re-PUVA), for lichen planus
Retinopathy
antipsychotic drugs causing
diabetic
glycemic control and
hypertension control and
in hemoglobin SC disease
malignant hypertensive
“pizza-pie,” in CMV infection
sickle cell
Retinopexy, for retinal detachment
Retrobulbar optic neuritis
Retrocecal appendicitis
Retrograde 
ejaculation. See 
also 
Erectile
dysfunction/impotence
antidepressants causing
in infertility
Retroileal appendicitis
Retrovir. See Zidovudine
Revascularization procedures. See also specific type and
Bypass grafting
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for aortoiliac occlusive disease
coronary
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for heart failure
for myocardial infarction
   postinfarction
   prophylactic/preoperative
prophylactic/preoperative
for traumatic injuries
for erectile dysfunction
for femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
for lower leg/foot occlusive disease
for renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
Reversal reactions, in leprosy
Reverse transcriptase
in HIV infection
inhibitors of. See Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors; Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors;
Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor
Revised Cardiac Risk Index
Revlimid. See Lenalidomide
Rewarming
for frostbite
for frostnip/chilblain
for immersion syndrome
for systemic hypothermia
Reyataz. See Atazanavir
Reye syndrome
aspirin use and
varicella and
Reynold pentad
Rezulin. See Troglitazone
RF. See Rheumatoid factor
Rho (D) immune globulin
after delivery
after ectopic pregnancy
after elective abortion
prenatal administration of
prenatal screening for antibody to
after spontaneous abortion
Rh incompatibility. See also Rho (D) immune globulin
hemolytic disease of newborn caused by
testing for
Rh typing
during pregnancy
for transfusions
Rhabdomyolysis
acute tubular necrosis and
in electric burns/crush injuries
in hypophosphatemia
statin drugs causing
Rhabdomyoma, cardiac
rhDNase, for cystic fibrosis
Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
Rhesus alloimmunization (Rh incompatibility). See also Rho
(D) immune globulin
hemolytic disease of newborn caused by
testing for
Rheumatic carditis/rheumatic valvulitis
endocarditis and
Rheumatic 
diseases. See also specific disease and
Musculoskeletal disorders
cancer and
HIV infection/AIDS and
Raynaud phenomenon and
Rheumatic fever
arthritis in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
prevention and
streptococcal pharyngitis and
Rheumatic heart disease
valvular involvement and
Rheumatism, palindromic
Rheumatoid arthritis
autoantibodies in
differential diagnosis of
ankylosing spondylitis and
gouty/tophaceous arthritis and
osteoarthritis and
neuropathies associated with
septic arthritis and
Rheumatoid factor
in cryoglobulinemia
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
in rheumatoid arthritis
in Sjögren syndrome
Rheumatoid nodules
in coal workers (Caplan syndrome)
gouty tophi differentiated from
Rheumatoid pleural effusion
rhGH. See Recombinant human growth hormone
Rhinitis
allergic (hay fever)
conjunctivitis and
nasal polyps and
medicamentosa
nasopharyngeal/paranasal sinus cancer and
perennial
vasomotor
Rhinocerebral mucormycosis
Rhinosinusitis
acute bacterial. See also Sinusitis
facial pain associated with
headache and
in HIV infection/AIDS
hospital-associated
nasopharyngeal/paranasal sinus cancer and
orbital cellulitis and
acute viral (common cold)
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
cough in
Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks. See Ticks
Rhizopus infection
Rhizotomy, for trigeminal neuralgia
rhTSH/recombinant human TSH. See Thyrotropin-α
Rhus (poison ivy/oak) contact dermatitis. See also Allergic
contact dermatitis
Riamet (artemether-lumefantrine/Coartem)
RIBA. See Recombinant immunoblot assay
Ribavirin
in hantavirus infection
for hemorrhagic fevers
for hepatitis C
for influenza
for RSV infection
teratogenicity of
Riboflavin (vitamin B2), deficiency of
Ribonuclear protein (RNP) antibody
Rice, Bacillus cereus contamination of
Rice water stool, in cholera
Richter syndrome
Rickets
hypophosphatemic (vitamin D-resistant)
vitamin D-dependent
Rickettsia (rickettsial diseases)
africae
akari
australis
conorii
felis
japonica
massiliae
myocarditis in
prowazekii
sibirica
typhi
Rickettsial fever (tick typhus)
Rickettsialpox
Rickettsiosis, California flea
Riedel thyroiditis/struma
Rifabutin
antiretroviral agent interactions and
for MAC prophylaxis/treatment
Rifamate. See Isoniazid/rifampin
Rifampin
for anthrax
antiretroviral agent interactions and
benzodiazepine interactions and
for tuberculosis
in latent disease/prophylactic
in pregnancy
Rifampin/isoniazid, for tuberculosis
Rifampin/isoniazid/pyrazinamide, for tuberculosis
Rifater. See Isoniazid/rifampin/pyrazinamide
Rifaximin
for flatus
for hepatic encephalopathy
for irritable bowel syndrome
for rosacea
for traveler's diarrhea
RIFLE criteria, in acute kidney injury
Rift Valley fever
Right middle lobe syndrome
Right-to-left shunts. See Shunts
Right ventricular (right heart) failure. See also Congestive
heart (cardiac) failure
liver in
Right ventricular hypertrophy
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
in pulmonary stenosis
in tetralogy of Fallot
Right ventricular infarction
Rigidity
in Huntington disease
in Lewy body dementia
lithium use and
in neuroleptic malignant syndrome
in parkinsonism
Rilpivirine
Riluzole, for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Rimantadine, influenza/influenza resistance and
Rimexolone, for ophthalmic disorders
Ring shadow sign
Ringer lactate. See Fluid management/hydration
Ringworm. See Tinea
Rinne test
RIPA. See Ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation
Risedronate. See also Bisphosphonates
for osteoporosis prevention/management
for Paget disease of bone
Risperdal. See Risperidone
Risperidone. See also Antipsychotic drugs
for aggressive/violent behavior
for bipolar disease/mania
for delirium
for depression
long-acting form of
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for personality disorder
for psychedelic abuse/overdose
Ristocetin co-factor assay, in von Willebrand disease
Ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation, in von Willebrand
disease
Ritonavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with atazanavir
with darunavir
with fosamprenavir
with lopinavir (lopinavir/r)
for protease inhibitor boosting
with tipranavir
Rituxan. See Rituximab
Rituximab
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia
for cold agglutinin disease
for hairy cell leukemia
for immune thrombocytopenia
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
for pemphigus
for posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy caused by
for rheumatoid arthritis
Rivaroxaban
Rivastigmine
for dementia
for parkinsonism
River blindness (onchocerciasis)
Rizatriptan, for migraine headache
RMSF. See Rocky Mountain spotted fever
RNA
hepatitis C virus
hepatitis D virus
p
HIV, reference values for
RNA amplification tests, in tuberculosis
RNA-dependent 
DNA-polymerase. See Reverse
transcriptase
RNP. See Ribonuclear protein (RNP) antibody
Ro/SSA antibody
in lupus/SLE
in Sjögren syndrome
Rocaltrol. See Calcitriol
Rocephin. See Ceftriaxone
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rodent excreta
hantavirus transmission and
hemorrhagic fever transmission and
lymphocytic choriomeningitis transmission and
Rodent fleas. See Fleas
Rodent mites. See Mites
Rodent tapeworm (H diminuta)
Rodent ticks. See Ticks
Rodenticide poisoning, anticoagulant toxicity and
Rogaine. See Minoxidil
Romaña sign
Romano-Ward syndrome
Romberg testing
Romidepsin
Romiplostim
for myelodysplastic syndromes
for thrombocytopenia
chemotherapy-induced
immune
Ropinirole, for parkinsonism
Rosacea
acne
steroid
Rose spots, in enteric (typhoid) fever
Rosemont criteria, for chronic pancreatitis
Roseola infantum (exanthema subitum)
Rosiglitazone
for adrenocortical carcinoma
with glimepiride
with metformin
overdose/toxicity of
Ross procedure
for aortic regurgitation
for aortic stenosis
postoperative pulmonic stenosis and
Rosuvastatin. See also Statin drugs
RotaTeq. See Rotavirus vaccine
Rotation
external, assessment of, in shoulder
adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder) and
rotator cuff strength and
internal, assessment of
in hip
in shoulder
   rotator cuff strength and
Rotator cuff tears
impingement syndrome and
strength testing and
Rotatrix. See Rotavirus vaccine
Rotavirus vaccine
Rotaviruses, diarrhea/gastroenteritis caused by
Roth spots, in endocarditis
Rotor syndrome
Rouleaux formation
in myeloma
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Roundworm infections. See also specific type
filariasis
intestinal
invasive
visceral larva migrans caused by
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, for obesity
hypoglycemia after
in type 2 diabetes
Rowasa. See Mesalamine
Roxanol. See Morphine
Roxicodone. See Oxycodone
Rozerem. See Ramelteon
RP. See Raynaud phenomenon
RPR test
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
in HIV infection/AIDS
RRP. See Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
RS3PE (remitting seronegative synovitis with non-pitting
edema), cancer and
RSV. See Respiratory syncytial virus
RSV-A subunit vaccine
RSVIG. See Respiratory syncytial virus immune globulin
RT3U. See Resin T3/T4 uptake
RTA. See Renal tubular acidosis
rtPA (recombinant tissue plasminogen activator). See
Alteplase; Tissue plasminogen activator
RU 486. See Mifepristone
Rubber band ligation. See Banding
Rubella
arthritis associated with
during pregnancy/congenital
prevention/immunization 
and. See 
also 
MMR
(measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine
arthritis and
pregnancy and
Rubella virus vaccine. See also MMR (measles-mumps-
rubella) vaccine
Rubeola. See Measles
Rubeotic (neovascular) glaucoma, retinal vein occlusion
and
Rufen. See Ibuprofen
Rugger jersey spine
Rule of nines
for topical corticosteroid calculation
Rumination
Runner's knee (patellofemoral pain)
Running, overuse syndromes of knee and
Russell viper venom time/Russell viper venom clotting time
for lupus anticoagulant detection
reference values for
RV (residual volume), in COPD
RVA (rabies vaccine adsorbed)
RVV/RVVT. See Russell viper venom time/Russell viper
venom clotting time
RYGB. See Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
S-OIV. See Swine-origin influenza
S stage sleep
SAAG. See Serum-ascites albumin gradient
Sabia virus
Sabin-Feldman dye test, in toxoplasmosis
Sabin vaccine (oral/OPV poliovaccine)
IPV booster and
Saccharin, for diabetics
Saccharomyces 
boulardii 
probiotic, 
for 
antibiotic-
associated colitis relapse
Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies, in Crohn disease
Saccular (berry) aneurysm. See also Intracranial aneurysm
Sacral spine/disk disease. See also Spine
back pain and
Sacroiliac joint/sacroiliitis
in ankylosing spondylitis
in psoriatic arthritis
reactive arthritis and
SAD. See Seasonal affective disorder
Saddle nose deformity
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in nasal trauma
Sadism, sexual
Safer sex
in herpes simplex infection prevention
in HIV infection/AIDS prevention
in syphilis prevention
Saflutan. See Tafluprost
Sag sign
Sagittal sinus thrombosis, in pseudotumor cerebri
Salagen. See Pilocarpine
Salicylates. See also Aspirin
overdose/toxicity of
alkali therapy for
anion gap/osmolar gap in
hemodialysis for
ophthalmic effects and
platelet function affected by
reference values for
for rheumatic fever/heart disease
Salicylic acid preparations, for wart removal
Saline. See also Fluid management/hydration
contrast media nephrotoxicity mediated by
for core rewarming
for cystic fibrosis
for diabetic ketoacidosis
dilutional acidosis and
for eye decontamination
for heat exposure syndromes
for hypercalcemia
for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
for hypernatremia
for hyponatremia
hypotension in poisoning/drug overdose and
for liver failure
for metabolic alkalosis
Saline breast prosthesis. See Breast implants
Saline infusion sonohysterography
in abnormal postmenopausal bleeding
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
Saline purgatives. See Purgatives
Saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis
Saline-unresponsive metabolic alkalosis
Salivary glands
infiltrative disorders of
inflammatory disorders of
acute
chronic
in mumps
tumors of
Salivary stones (sialolithiasis)
Salk vaccine (inactivated/IPV poliovaccine)
pregnancy and
for travelers
Salmeterol
for asthma
with fluticasone
for COPD
Salmon calcitonin. See Calcitonin
Salmonella enterica subsp enterica (salmonellosis)
bacteremia caused by
choleraesuis
diarrhea/enterocolitis/gastroenteritis caused by
drug resistance and
typhi
typhimurium
Salpingectomy, for ectopic pregnancy
Salpingitis. See also Pelvic inflammatory disease
appendicitis differentiated from
chlamydial
gonococcal
tuberculous
Salpingo-oophorectomy. See Oophorectomy
Salpingostomy, for ectopic pregnancy
Salt restriction. See Sodium-restricted diet
Salt-sensitive hypertension
Salt tablets, heat exposure syndromes and
Salvia divinorum, toxicity of
Samarium, for bone pain
Sambuca, hypertension and hypokalemia caused by
Samter triad
Sand flies. See Flies
Sandostatin. See Octreotide
Sanjad-Sakati syndrome
Sao2 (oxygen saturation)
in ARDS
in asthma, exacerbation severity/management and
in cor pulmonale
in dyspnea evaluation
home oxygen therapy and
in near drowning
Pneumocystis pneumonia treatment and
in respiratory failure
in sleep apnea
in smoke inhalation
SAPE (sentinel acute pancreatitis event)
Saphenous vein
superficial thrombophlebitis of
varicose
Saphris. See Asenapine
Sappinia, encephalitis caused by
Saquinavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Sarafem. See Fluoxetine
Sarcocystis bovihominis/suihominis (sarcocystosis)
Sarcoidosis
arthritis in
hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria in
neuropathy associated with
nose and paranasal sinus involvement and
optic neuritis in
pulmonary involvement and
Sarcoma. See also specific type
soft tissue
Sarcoptes scabiei infection (scabies)
Sargramostim (GM-CSF)
for chemotherapy-induced toxicity
for HIV infection/AIDS
for neutropenia
Sarin (GB) poisoning
Sarna. See Camphor/menthol preparations
SARS. See Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Satavaptan, for hyponatremia/SIADH
Saturday night palsy
Saturnine gout, in lead poisoning
Saw palmetto, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Saxagliptin
with metformin
Saxitoxin, paralytic shellfish poisoning caused by
Sb. See Stibogluconate
Scabies
Scaling skin disorders. See also specific type
Scalp
allergic contact dermatitis involving
injuries of
in pediculosis
pemphigus involving
psoriasis of
seborrhea of
Scalpicin. See Hydrocortisone
Scapula winging/“dyskinesis,” in impingement syndrome
Scarlet fever
Scarring, prevention of in burn injury
Scarring (cicatricial) alopecias
SCC. See Squamous cell carcinoma
SCDs (sequential compression devices). See Pneumatic
compression devices
Scedosporium apiospermum/prolificans, in opportunistic
infections
Schatzki rings
Schiller test, in CIN
Schilling test, short bowel syndrome/ileal resection and
Schirmer test
in Sjögren syndrome diagnosis
Schistocytes
in DIC
in microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
Schistosoma
haematobium/intercalatum/japonicum/mansoni/mekongi
(schistosomiasis)
bladder cancer and
Schizoaffective disorders
Schizoid personality disorder
Schizophrenia/schizophrenic 
disorders. See 
also
Psychotic disorders
classification of
depression and
differential diagnosis of
drug-induced/toxic
drug therapy for. See also Antipsychotic drugs
mania differentiated from
positive and negative symptoms in
antipsychotic drugs affecting
prodromal
suicide risk and
Schizophreniform disorders
Schizotypal personality disorder
Schmidt syndrome
Schneiderian papillomas
Schober test of lumbar motion
Schwannoma
gastrointestinal
vestibular (acoustic neuroma/neurinoma/eighth nerve
tumor)
hearing loss and
in neurofibromatosis
Sciatic nerve palsy
Sciatica. See also Back pain
Scintigraphy. See specific type
SCL-70 (scleroderma) antibody
SCLC. See Small cell carcinoma of lung
SCLE. See Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Sclera
blue, in osteogenesis imperfecta
lacerations of
Sclerectomy, for glaucoma
Scleritis, in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener
granulomatosis)
Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis)
autoantibodies in
dysphagia in
limited. See CREST syndrome
linear
Raynaud phenomenon and
Scleroderma (anti-SCL-70) antibody
Scleroderma renal crisis
Scleromyxedema
Sclerosis. See Sclerotherapy
Sclerotherapy
for esophageal varices
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
for hemorrhoids
for malignant effusions
for varicose veins
SCN4A gene, in periodic paralysis
Scoliosis
back pain and
in Marfan syndrome
in syringomyelia
Scombroid poisoning
Scopolamine
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
in terminally ill/dying patient
y
y g p
Scorpion stings
Scotch tape test, in enterobiasis/pinworms
Scotomas. See also Visual field defects/loss
in migraine headache
in optic neuritis
Scratch-itch cycle. See also Pruritus
in lichen simplex chronicus
Screamer's nodules
Screening 
tests. See specific type anddisorder and
Diagnostic/laboratory tests; Genetic testing; Prenatal
testing
Scrofula
Scrotal mass. See Testes, masses/tumors of
Scrotal pain. See also Testicular pain
in epididymitis
Scrotal pruritus
Scrotal swelling, in filariasis
Scrub typhus
Scuba/deep sea diving
dysbarism/decompression sickness and
eustachian tube dysfunction/otic barotrauma and
Scurvy
SDH (suscinate dehydrogenase) gene mutations, in
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
“SEADS” mnemonic, in musculoskeletal injury evaluation
Seafood poisonings. See also Fish; Shellfish
Seasonal affective disorder
Seborrheic dermatitis
atopic dermatitis differentiated from
in HIV infection/AIDS
pityriasis rosea differentiated from
tinea differentiated from
Seborrheic keratoses
Sebum, in acne
Seclusion rooms, for aggressive/violent patient
Second-degree burn
Second-degree heart block
in myocardial infarction
Second-hand smoke. See Passive smoking
Second heart sound (S2). See Heart sounds
Secretin stimulation test
in pancreatitis
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Secretory diarrhea. See also Diarrhea
Sectral. See Acebutolol
Sedation
antidepressants causing
opioids causing
Sedative-hypnotics
antidepressant drug interactions and
for anxiety/stress disorders
in COPD management
for delirium
for insomnia
for nausea and vomiting
overdose/toxicity of
sleep affected by
Sedentary lifestyle. See Lifestyle, sedentary
Segmental myoclonus
Segond fracture
Seizures. See also specific type and Epilepsy;Status
epilepticus
absence (petit mal)
alcohol withdrawal
antidepressant use and
antipsychotic drug use and
atonic
brain abscess and
cerebral arteriovenous malformations causing
classification of
clonic
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
in cysticercosis
degenerative disorders and
differential diagnosis of
drug therapy for. See also Anticonvulsant therapy
flumazenil causing
focal
generalized
in hypocalcemia
hysterical
infection/infectious diseases and
intracranial tumors causing
isoniazid causing
in malaria
myoclonic
panic disorder differentiated from
in poisoning/drug overdose
posttraumatic
during pregnancy
eclampsia and
psychogenic nonepileptic (pseudoepileptic)
schizophrenia differentiated from
serial
solitary
in Sturge-Weber syndrome
surgical management of
in tetanus
theophylline use and
tonic
tonic-clonic (grand mal)
transient ischemic attacks differentiated from
in tuberous sclerosis
vagal nerve stimulation for
vascular disorders and
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). See
also Tamoxifen
in breast cancer prevention/treatment
in cancer chemotherapy
for gynecomastia
for osteoporosis
Selective immunoglobulin A deficiency
anaphylactic transfusion reactions and
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. See Serotonin-
selective reuptake inhibitors
Selegiline
overdose/toxicity of
for parkinsonism
transdermal
Selenium, for Hashimoto thyroiditis
Self-care
assessment of ability to manage
asthma management and
clinician, providing end-of-life care and
diabetes management and
Self-examination, breast
in cancer follow-up
in cancer screening
Self-help groups. See Support groups
Self-hypnosis, for factitious disorders
Self-monitoring of blood glucose, in diabetes mellitus
in pregnant patient
Self-mutilation
Self-treatment, for malaria
Selzentry. See Maraviroc
Semantic dementia
Semen analysis
in infertility workup
in Klinefelter syndrome
Semicircular canal dehiscence, vertigo and
Seminal emission, loss of (anejaculation). See also
Erectile dysfunction/impotence
Seminiferous tubule dysgenesis. See Klinefelter syndrome
Seminomas
SEN-V virus
Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, for esophageal varices
Senile (atrial natriuretic peptide) amyloid
Senile cataract
Senile freckles. See Lentigines
Senna
Sennetsu fever
Sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. See Neuropathies
Sensorineural hearing loss. See also Hearing loss
in HIV infection/AIDS
in Ménière syndrome (endolymphatic hydrops)
Sensory conduction velocity studies. See Conduction
velocity studies
Sensory disturbances/loss. See also Neuropathies
dementia evaluation and
in diabetic neuropathy
dissociated
in focal seizures
in intracerebral hemorrhage
in intracranial tumors
in leprosy
in restless legs syndrome
in spinal cord infarction
in spinal lesions/tumors
in spinal trauma
in stroke
in syringomyelia
Sensory hearing loss. See also Hearing loss
autoimmune
in cochlear otosclerosis
hereditary
sudden
tinnitus and
Sensory neuronopathy, cancer-related
Sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE)
Sentinel loop, in pancreatitis
Sentinel lymph node biopsy
in breast cancer
arm edema avoidance and
neoadjuvant therapy and
in melanoma
Sentinel pile
Seoul viruses
Sepsis/septic 
shock. See 
also 
Bacteremia;
Infection/infectious diseases
ARDS and
catheter-related
corticosteroids for
DIC and
goal directed therapy of
gram-negative
in listeriosis
in liver failure
postabortion
anaerobic
in pyelonephritis
in strongyloidiasis
vibrios causing
Septal ablation, for cardiomyopathy
Septal hematoma, in nasal trauma
Septal hypertrophy, in cardiomyopathy
Septata species. See Encephalitozoon
Septic (nongonococcal acute bacterial) arthritis
in drug users
rheumatoid arthritis and
Septic bursitis
Septic thrombophlebitis
anaerobic infections and
catheter-associated infection and
in drug user
perforated appendicitis and
portal vein, noncirrhotic portal hypertension and
sigmoid sinus, otitis media and
Septic transfusion reaction
Septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome)
Septoplasty, nasal, for sleep apnea
Septra. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Sequential 
compression 
devices. See 
Pneumatic
compression devices
Sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score
in liver failure
in pancreatitis
Sequoiosis
Serax. See Oxazepam
Serentil. See Mesoridazine
Serial seizures. See also Seizures
Serine protease 1 (PRSS1) gene, in chronic pancreatitis
Serine protease inhibitor (SPINK1) gene, in chronic
pancreatitis
Serine threonine kinase gene, in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
SERMs. See Selective estrogen receptor modulators
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies. See also specific
type
back pain in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
Seronegative synovitis, remitting, with non-pitting edema,
cancer and
Seroquel. See Quetiapine
Serotonin
carcinoids secreting
islet cell tumors secreting
Serotonin receptor agonists, for irritable bowel syndrome
Serotonin 5-HT3-receptor-blocking 
agents. See also
Serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors
for irritable bowel syndrome
for migraine headache
for nausea and vomiting
Serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
for anxiety/stress disorders
for dementia
for depression
hyponatremia caused by
for irritable bowel syndrome
MAOI interaction and
for menopausal vasomotor symptoms
for neuropathic pain
for OCD
overdose/toxicity of
for panic attacks
for personality disorders
for phobic disorder
platelet function affected by
during pregnancy
for psychosexual disorders
for PTSD
serotonin syndrome caused by
sexual side effects of
withdrawal from
in syphilis. See also Chancre; Gummas
Serous otitis media
in HIV infection/AIDS
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and
Serous retinal detachment
Serpasil. See Reserpine
Serrated adenomas
colorectal cancer and
Serrated polyps
Serratia
Sertaconazole
Sertoli cell tumors
gynecomastia and
Sertraline. See also Serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors
breastfeeding and
in elderly
overdose/toxicity of
for panic attacks
during pregnancy
Serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG)
in cirrhosis
in mesothelioma
in pancreatic ascites
in peritoneal carcinomatosis
in portal hypertension
Serum eye drops, for dry eye
Serum glucose, in diabetes
Serum osmolality. See Osmolality
Serum protein electrophoresis
in amyloidosis
in myeloma
in protein-losing enteropathy
reference values for
in Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Serum separator (gold top SST) tubes
Serum sickness. See also Immune complex-mediated
hypersensitivity
urticarial vasculitis in
Serzone. See Nefazodone
Sessile serrated adenoma
Sestamibi (technetium-99m) scintigraphy, in angina
Sevelamer, for hyperphosphatemia
in mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney disease
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
Sex change surgery, for transsexuals
Sex chromosomes. See X chromosome; Y chromosome
Sex steroid replacement therapy. See also Estrogen
(hormone) replacement therapy; Testosterone replacement
therapy
for hypogonadism
Sexual abuse
incest
victims of
Sexual arousal disorders. See also Sexual dysfunction
in female
Sexual assault. See Rape
Sexual behavior
hepatitis/hepatitis vaccination and
herpes simplex infections and
HIV infection/AIDS and
postexposure prophylaxis and
prevention and
STDs and
syphilis and
Sexual desire disorders
in female
Sexual dysfunction
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
drugs causing
antidepressants
antipsychotics
lithium
endocrine causes of
in female
in male. See also Erectile dysfunction/impotence
hypogonadism and
psychosexual
Sexual intercourse
cystitis associated with
headache associated with
HIV infection/AIDS transmission and
postexposure prophylaxis and
painful. See Dyspareunia
unlawful (statutory rape)
unprotected, emergency/postcoital contraception and
IUD for
Sexual masochism
Sexual sadism
Sexually transmitted diseases. See also specific disease
condoms in prevention of
drug use and
epididymitis
IUD use and
during pregnancy
rape/sexual assault and
reactive arthritis and
syphilis testing and
Sézary cells, in cutaneous T cell lymphoma (mycosis
fungoides)
Sézary syndrome, exfoliative dermatitis and
SFA. See Superficial femoral artery
SGOT. See Aspartate aminotransferase
SGPT. See Alanine aminotransferase
Shagreen patches, in tuberous sclerosis
Shared epitope, in rheumatoid arthritis
Shaver disease
Shaving, pseudofolliculitis and
Shawl sign
Sheathotomy, arteriovenous, for retinal vein occlusion
Sheep cell agglutination tests, in mononucleosis
Sheep liver fluke infection
Shellfish, contaminated
in angiostrongyliasis
in gnathostomiasis
in paragonimiasis
poisoning by
in vibrio infection
Shiga-like toxins, E coli producing
Shigella, dysenteriae/flexneri/sonnei (shigellosis/bacillary
dysentery)
Shin spots, diabetic
Shingles. See Herpes zoster
Shiny corner sign
Shock
anaphylactic. See Anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock
Myocardial infarction/ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI). See also Coronary heart disease
dengue
distributive
in heat stroke
hypovolemic
in infectious myocarditis
in myocardial infarction
neurogenic
obstructive
in pancreatitis
after pheochromocytoma removal
rewarming
septic. See Sepsis/septic shock
vasodilatory (distributive)
Shock liver
Shock wave lithotripsy. See also Lithotripsy
for renal stones
for salivary duct stones
for ureteral stones
Short-acting insulin. See also Insulin therapy
in diabetic ketoacidosis
Short bowel syndrome
lactic acidosis and
Short stature
in GH deficiency
in Turner syndrome
Shortness of breath. See Dyspnea
Shoulder
dislocated/unstable
assessment of
examination of
frozen (adhesive capsulitis)
in diabetes
rotator cuff tears and
subacromial impingement syndrome and
Shoulder apprehension test
Shoulder-hand syndrome
Shoulder pain
in adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder)
in brachial plexus neuropathy
dislocation/instability and
in impingement syndrome/rotator cuff disorders
in polymyalgia rheumatica
Shoulder stability/instability
assessment of
SHOX gene, in Turner syndrome
Shunt procedures
for hydrocephalus in intracranial tumors
portosystemic. See Portosystemic shunts
Shunts
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
in patent ductus arteriosus
in ventricular septal defect
Shy-Drager syndrome (multisystem atrophy)
dysautonomia and
y
parkinsonism and
SIADH. See Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
Sialadenitis
Sialoendoscopy, for sialolithiasis
Sialolithiasis
Siberian Asian tick typhus
Sibutramine, for obesity
in type 2 diabetes
Sick role (invalidism)
chronic pain disorders and
psychiatric 
problems 
associated 
with
hospitalization/illness and
Sick sinus syndrome
Sickle cell anemia/syndromes
cholelithiasis/gallstones and
contraceptive counseling and
genetic/prenatal/screening testing for
osteomyelitis and
in pregnancy
renal dysfunction associated with
Sickle cell glomerulopathy
Sickle cell retinopathy
Sickle cell trait
pregnancy and
Sickle thalassemia
Sideroblasts/sideroblastic anemia
myelodysplastic syndromes and
Siderosis
Sigmoid esophagus
Sigmoid sinus thrombosis, otitis media and
Sigmoidoscopy
in antibiotic-associated colitis
in cancer screening/polyp identification
in fecal incontinence
in GI bleeding
in ulcerative colitis
Signal 
recognition 
particle 
(SRP) 
antibody, 
in
polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Significant others. See Family/significant others
SIL. See Squamous intraepithelial lesions
Sildenafil
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for erectile dysfunction
antidepressant-induced
in diabetics
nitrate/nitroglycerin contraindications and
for pulmonary hypertension
Silent myocardial ischemia/angina, dyspnea in. See also
Angina; Myocardial ischemia
Silent 
thyroiditis. See also Subacute (de Quervain)
thyroiditis
Silent ulcers
Silibinin/silymarin, for mushroom poisoning
Silicone gel breast implants. See Breast implants
Silicosis
Silo-filler's disease
Silodosin, for benign prostatic hyperplasia
Silvadene. See Silver sulfadiazine
Silver sulfadiazine, for burn wounds
Silymarin/silibinin, for mushroom poisoning
Simple drug eruptions
Simple partial seizures. See also Seizures
Simple/solitary renal cysts
Simultagnosia, intracranial tumors causing
SIMV. See Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation
Simvastatin. See also Statin drugs
for Hashimoto thyroiditis
for polycystic ovary syndrome
protease inhibitor interactions and
Sin Nombre virus
Sinemet. See Carbidopa/levodopa
Sinequan. See Doxepin
Singer's nodules
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
in angina
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Singultus (hiccups)
Sinoatrial exit block (sick sinus syndrome)
Sinonasal inflammatory disease
Sinus arrest (sick sinus syndrome)
Sinus arrhythmia
Sinus 
bradycardia. See 
also
Bradycardia/bradyarrhythmias
in myocardial infarction
persistent (sick sinus syndrome)
in poisoning/drug overdose
in sleep apnea
Sinus tachycardia. See also Tachycardia/tachyarrhythmia
in hyperthyroidism
in myocardial infarction
in poisoning/drug overdose
Sinus venosus atrial septal defect
Sinuses. See Paranasal sinuses
Sinusitis
in aspergillosis
facial pain in
headache in
in HIV infection/AIDS
hospital-associated
invasive fungal
nasopharyngeal/paranasal sinus cancer and
orbital cellulitis and
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, drugs/toxins causing
Sipple 
syndrome. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN), type 2A
Sipuleucel-T
for prostate cancer
Sirolimus
SIRS. See Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Sister Joseph's nodule
Sister Mary Joseph nodule
Sitagliptin
with metformin/pioglitazone
overdose/toxicity of
Siti (endemic syphilis)
Situational (stress and adjustment) disorders. See also
Adjustment (situational) disorders
Sixth disease (exanthema subitum)
Sixth nerve paralysis
Sjögren syndrome
autoantibodies in
Skeletal hyperostosis, diffuse idiopathic (DISH)
Skeletal system disorders. See Bone; Musculoskeletal
disorders
Skin
anaerobic flora of
atrophy of, atopic dermatitis treatment and
biopsy of
in basal cell carcinoma
in cellulitis
in cutaneous leishmaniasis
in cutaneous T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides)
in exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma
in leprosy
in Lyme disease
in onchocerciasis
in polyarteritis nodosa
in rabies
in Rocky Mountain spotted fever
in stasis ulcer
caustic/corrosive injuries of
changes in, in chronic venous insufficiency
decontamination of
for caustic/corrosive burns
chemical warfare agents and
disorders of. See specific type and Skin cancer; Skin
disorders
dry
atopic dermatitis and
emollients for
hardening of. See Scleroderma
Skin bends
Skin cancer. See also specific type
basal cell carcinoma
ear involved in
eyelid involvement and
melanoma
PUVA therapy and
squamous cell carcinoma
sun avoidance in prevention of
Skin disorders. See also specific type and Dermatitis
anaerobic infections
anthrax
arthropod infestations
in blastomycosis
blistering (bullous)
cancer. See Skin cancer
cancer-related
candidal infection
in Chagas disease (chagoma)
chemotherapy causing
chilblain (erythema pernio)
in chromoblastomycosis
in chronic kidney disease/uremia
in coccidioidomycosis
cryptococcal
in cutaneous larva migrans
in cutaneous leishmaniasis
cystic
in decompression sickness
in diabetes mellitus
in dracunculiasis
in drug users
drugs 
causing 
(dermatitis 
medicamentosa/drug
eruption)
in electrical burns
epidermal inclusion cysts
erosive
erythemas
frostbite
fungal infections. See also Tinea
in HIV infection/AIDS
in gnathostomiasis
in gonococcal arthritis
in Graves disease (dermopathy/pretibial myxedema)
in Henoch-Schönlein purpura
in HIV infection/AIDS
in hookworm disease
in leprosy
in Lyme disease
morbilliform
morphologic categorization of
in mycetoma
mycobacterial infections
in nephrogenic systemic fibrosis
in nocardiosis
nodules
inflammatory
violaceous to purple
in onchocerciasis
papules
violaceous to purple
in 
paracoccidioidomycosis 
(South 
American
blastomycosis)
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
p h o t o d e r m a t i t i s . See 
also
Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
p i g me nta ry. See 
also 
Hyperpigmentation;
Hypopigmentation
drugs causing
in hypercarotenosis
pigmented lesions
in polyarteritis nodosa
pruritus (itching) and. See also specific cause
pustular
radiation causing
in sarcoidosis
scaling
in schistosomiasis
in sporotrichosis
staphylococcal infections
in HIV infection/AIDS
streptococcal infections
in strongyloidiasis
Nephritic 
spectrum 
glomerular 
diseases. See also
Glomerulonephritis
treatment of
adverse ophthalmic effects of drugs in
complications of
in tuberous sclerosis
in tularemia
ulcers
in diabetics
in dracunculiasis
in mycetoma
osteomyelitis and
in paracoccidioidomycosis
in polyarteritis
pressure
   bed rest/immobility and
in sickle cell syndromes
in sporotrichosis
venous insufficiency/varicose veins/lower extremity
occlusive disease and
venous insufficiency/varicose veins and. See Skin
disorders, 
ulcers; 
Stasis 
dermatitis; 
Venous
insufficiency/stasis
vesicular
weeping/crusted
drying agents for
Skin grafts
in burn care
for leg ulcers
Skin test anergy
in HIV infection/AIDS
measles causing
in sarcoidosis
tuberculin skin test and
Skin tests. See also specific type
allergy
in asthma
in penicillin allergy
tuberculin. See also Tuberculin skin test
Skull base tumors, vocal fold paralysis caused by
Skull fractures. See also Head injury
hearing loss and
vertigo caused by
SLC30A8 gene/antibodies, in type 2 diabetes
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sleep
abnormal behaviors during (parasomnias)
age-related changes in
breathing disorders and. See also Sleep apnea
disorders of
fatigue/chronic fatigue and
drugs for problems with
stages of
Sleep apnea
central
fatigue/chronic fatigue and
hypertension and
in obesity-hypoventilation syndrome
obstructive
postoperative pulmonary complications and
testosterone replacement therapy and
Sleep attacks, in narcolepsy
Sleep hygiene
Sleep panic attacks
Sleep paralysis, in narcolepsy
Sleep terror (pavor nocturnus)
Sleepiness. See Somnolence
Sleeping sickness
Sleepwalking (somnambulism)
Slow colonic transit, constipation and
Sm antibody, in lupus/SLE
SMA. See Spinal muscular atrophy
SMAD4 gene mutation, in hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia
Hashitoxicosis. See 
also 
Hashimoto 
(chronic
lymphocytic/autoimmune) thyroiditis
myasthenic syndrome and
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
staging of
survival rates for
treatment of
Small intestine. See also under Intestinal
adenocarcinomas in
Crohn disease and
bacterial overgrowth in. See also Bacterial overgrowth
biopsy of
in celiac disease
in Whipple disease
carcinoid tumors in
disorders of
appendicitis and
malabsorption and
malignant tumors
motility disorders. See also Intestinal obstruction
protein-losing enteropathy and
tuberculosis
lymphomas in
resection of, short bowel syndrome and
sarcomas in
Small intestine push enteroscopy, in GI bleeding
Small intestine transplantation, for short bowel syndrome
Smallpox (variola)
Smallpox (variola) vaccination
atopic dermatitis/eczema and
Smell, disorders of sensation of
Smith antibody, in lupus/SLE
y,
p
SMN (survival motor neuron) gene, in spinal muscular
atrophies
Smoke inhalation
burn survival and
cyanide poisoning and
Smoking
abdominal aortic aneurysms and
asbestosis and
atherosclerotic peripheral vascular disease and
bladder cancer and
cancer and
cataract development and
cessation of
acute coronary syndromes and
bupropion for
in cancer prevention
in 
cardiovascular/cerebrovascular 
disease
prevention
clinician's role in
in COPD prevention/management
for hypertension
nicotine replacement therapy for
postoperative pulmonary complications reduced by
for thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease)
in COPD
in cancer patient/immunocompromised host. See
also HIV infection/AIDS
Crohn disease and
environmental exposure and. See Passive smoking
esophageal cancer and
Graves ophthalmopathy and
health hazards of
hemoptysis and
hypertension and
laryngeal leukoplakia and
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and
lung cancer and
as co-carcinogen
screening for
oral cancer and
pneumothorax and
postoperative pulmonary complications and
during pregnancy
preventable disease/deaths and
in renal cell carcinoma
respiratory bronchiolitis and
sleep disorders and
thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease) and
ulcerative colitis and
ureteral/renal pelvis cancer and
vocal fold changes and
Smooth muscle antibodies, in autoimmune hepatitis
Snails, 
in 
disease 
transmission. See
Cercariae/metacercariae
Snake bites
Sneddon syndrome
Sniffing (solvents/gases)
Snoreplasty
Snoring
in sleep apnea
Snow blindness
Social challenges, for terminally ill/dying patient
Social phobias
Social support. See Support groups
Sodium
dietary
hypertension and
during pregnancy
preventable disease/deaths associated with high
intake of
requirements for in nutritional support
restriction of. See Sodium-restricted diet
in urinary stone formation
disorders 
of 
concentration 
of. See 
also
Hypernatremia; Hyponatremia
in fluid management. See also Saline
fractional excretion of, in acute kidney injury
hyperosmolality caused by
intracellular, in hypertension
retention of in volume overload
serum
in hypernatremia
in hyponatremia
reference values for
urine
in acute kidney injury
in SIADH
Sodium bicarbonate. See Bicarbonate
Sodium channel blocking drugs, for arrhythmias
Sodium iodide I 131. See 131I
Sodium ipodate. See Ipodate sodium
Sodium nitrite, for cyanide poisoning
Sodium nitroprusside. See Nitroprusside
Sodium oxybate. See Gamma-hydroxybutyrate
Sodium phosphate, for constipation/bowel cleansing
Sodium-phosphate cotransporters, in osteomalacia/rickets
Sodium phosphate enema
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate, for hyperkalemia
Sodium-restricted diet
for chronic kidney disease
in cirrhosis
for heart failure
in cardiomyopathy
for hypertension
for urinary stones
Sodium salicylate, in pain management
Sodium stibogluconate (antimony), for leishmaniasis
Sodium sulfacetamide. See Sulfacetamide
Sodium thiosulfate, for cyanide poisoning
SOFA score
in liver failure
in pancreatitis
Soft diet
Soft tissue infections
anaerobic
mycobacterial
staphylococcal
Soft tissue sarcoma
Solar lentigines (liver spots)
Soles of feet
tinea of
vesiculobullous dermatitis of (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Solifenacin, for urinary incontinence
Solitary pulmonary nodule
in metastatic disease
Solitary/simple renal cysts
Solitary seizures
Solitary thyroid nodule
toxic (thyroid adenoma)
in MEN
Soluble liver antigen antibodies, in autoimmune
hepatitis
Soluble transferrin receptor
Solvents
bladder cancer caused by exposure to
toxicity/abuse of
Soma. See Carisoprodol
Soman (GD) poisoning
Somatization disorder (Briquet syndrome/hysteria)
Somatoform disorders
Somatoform pain disorder
Somatostatin/somatostatin analogs. See also Octreotide
D cells secreting
for esophageal varices
tumors secreting
diabetes and
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
for ACTH-secreting tumor identification
in carcinoids
in islet cell tumors
for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma identification
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Somatostatinomas
Somatuline. See Lanreotide
Somnambulism (sleepwalking)
Somnolence, excessive
restless legs syndrome causing
in sleep apnea
Somogyi effect
Sonata. See Zaleplon
Sonography. See Ultrasonography
Sonohysterography, saline infusion
in abnormal postmenopausal bleeding
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
Sorafenib
for hepatocellular carcinoma
for thyroid carcinoma
Sorbitol
for constipation
diarrhea caused by
Sore throat. See Pharyngitis
Sorivudine, for herpes zoster
Sotalol
for atrial fibrillation
toxicity of
South African tick fever
South American blastomycosis
Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI)
Sparganosis
Spasmodic torticollis
Spasticity
spinal trauma causing
in tetanus
in upper motor neuron lesions
Specimen collection, tubes for
S P E C T. See 
Single 
photon 
emission 
computed
tomography
Spectazole. See Econazole
Spectrin, in hereditary spherocytosis
Speech/language, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Speech discrimination
in hearing loss
presbyacusis and
testing
vestibular schwannoma affecting
Speech therapy, for stroke patient
SPEP. See Serum protein electrophoresis
Sperm, deficiencies of, infertility and
Sperm analysis, in infertility workup
Spermatogenesis, hormone therapy for improvement of
Spermicides
in contraceptive products
HIV infection/AIDS and
Sphenoid sinusitis
Spherocytes
in autoimmune hemolytic anemia
in hereditary spherocytosis
Spherocytosis, hereditary
Sphincter 
of 
Oddi 
dilation, 
for
choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
pancreatitis and
in postcholecystectomy syndrome
Sphincterotomy
for choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
during pregnancy
in pancreatitis
for sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Sphincters. See specific type
Sphingolipid, accumulation of in Gaucher disease
Spider angiomas, in cirrhosis
Spider bites
Spinal cord
cavitation of (syringomyelia)
compression of
spinal trauma causing
tumors causing
dural arteriovenous fistulae of
epidural/subdural hemorrhage and
infarction of
lesions/tumors of
back pain caused by
cord compression by
sensory disturbances and
syringomyelia and
subacute combined degeneration of
transection of
traumatic injury of
shock and
syringomyelia and
vascular diseases of
Spinal cord stimulation, for angina
Spinal dural arteriovenous fistulae
Spinal manipulation
for back pain
for neck pain
Spinal motion, testing
Spinal muscular atrophy
juvenile
progressive
Spinal poliomyelitis
Spinal (neurogenic) shock
Spinal stenosis
Spinal surgery
for back pain
for neck pain
for spinal stenosis
for traumatic injury
for tumors/cord compression
Spinal tumors. See Spinal cord, lesions/tumors of
Spine. See also Spinal cord
bamboo
disorders of
hyperchloremic 
normal 
anion 
gap. See 
also
Hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis
fractures. See Vertebral compression/fracture
infection. See Vertebral osteomyelitis
lumbar disk herniation
neck pain and. See also Neck pain
stenosis
tuberculosis (Pott disease)
tumors. See Spinal cord, lesions/tumors of
SPINK1 gene, in chronic pancreatitis
Spinocerebellar degeneration, in vitamin E deficiency
Spiral (helical) CT. See Computed tomography; Helical
(spiral) CT
Spiramycin, for toxoplasmosis during pregnancy
Spirillum minus
Spiritual challenges, for terminally ill/dying patient
Spirochetal infections. See also specific type
anaerobic, periodontal infection caused by
meningitis caused by
myocarditis in
non-sexually transmitted
syphilis
Spirometra tapeworms
Spirometry. See also Pulmonary function tests
in asthma
in COPD
in cough evaluation
in dyspnea evaluation
incentive, prevention of postoperative pulmonary
complications and
in lung cancer
Spironolactone
for adrenal hyperplasia/Conn syndrome
for cirrhotic ascites
for heart failure
infarct-related
for hirsutism/virilization
for hypertension
with hydrochlorothiazide
lithium interactions and
Spirulina, toxicity of
Spleen
in hereditary spherocytosis
in polycythemia
Splenda. See Sucralose
Splenectomy
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia
babesiosis and
for Felty syndrome
y y
for Gaucher disease
for hereditary spherocytosis
for immune thrombocytopenia
for myelofibrosis
for noncirrhotic portal hypertension
for platelet sequestration/thrombocytopenia
Splenic rupture, in infectious mononucleosis
Splenic vein thrombosis, noncirrhotic portal hypertension
caused by
Splenomegaly
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in chronic myeloid leukemia
in cirrhosis
in essential thrombocytosis
in hairy cell leukemia
in mononucleosis
in myelofibrosis
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
platelet sequestration and
in polycythemia
thrombocytopenia and
in visceral leishmaniasis
Splinter hemorrhages, in endocarditis
Spondylitic heart disease
Spondylitis
in alkaptonuria
ankylosing. See Ankylosing spondylitis
in inflammatory bowel disease
psoriatic
Spondyloarthropathies, seronegative. See also specific
type
back pain in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
Spondylolisthesis, back pain in
Spondylosis, cervical
Spongiform encephalopathies
bovine (mad cow disease)
transmissible
Spongiosis, in prion diseases
Spontaneous abortion
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
with IUD in place
in Q fever
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in cirrhosis
Spontaneous fractures. See Pathologic fractures
Spontaneous pneumothorax. See also Pneumothorax
Spoon nails
Sporadic thyroiditis, painless
Sporanox. See Itraconazole
Sporothrix schenckii (sporotrichosis)
Sports medicine. See also Musculoskeletal disorders;
Orthopedics
ACL injury
ankle injuries/sprains
collateral ligament injury
dislocated shoulder
general approach to musculoskeletal injuries and
hip fractures
lateral and medial epicondylosis
meniscus injuries
patellofemoral pain
PCL injury
rotator cuff tears and
Spotted fever group rickettsia 364D
Spotted fevers
Spousal abuse (domestic violence)
prevention of
Sprains, ankle
eversion (high)
inversion
Sprue, celiac. See Celiac disease
Sprycel. See Dasatinib
Spurling test
Sputum/sputum examination
in asthma
blood found on (hemoptysis)
in bronchiectasis
in COPD
in cough
in cystic fibrosis
in lung cancer
in nontuberculous mycobacterial infection
in paragonimiasis
in pneumonia
anaerobic/lung abscess
community-acquired
in immunocompromised host
nosocomial
pneumococcal
Pneumocystis
in solitary pulmonary nodule
in strongyloidiasis
in tuberculosis
Sputum eosinophilia, in asthma
Sputum induction
in pneumonia
in immunocompromised host
in tuberculosis
Squamous cell carcinoma
of anus
in HIV infection/AIDS
of bladder
cervical
of ear canal
of esophagus
intraepidermal (Bowen disease)
of larynx
laryngeal leukoplakia and
of lung
nasopharyngeal
inverted/schneiderian papillomas and
oral
of skin
actinic keratoses and
of vulva
Squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL)
“Square root” sign
Squaric acid dibutylester, for wart removal
Squatting, heart murmurs affected by
Squint, in sixth nerve paralysis
SRP antibody, in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
SRS. See Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
SRY gene, in testicular dysgenesis
SS-A/Ro antibody
in lupus/SLE
in Sjögren syndrome
SS-B/La antibody
in lupus/SLE
in Sjögren syndrome
SSc. See Scleroderma
SSI. See Surgical site infection
SSPE. See Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
SSRIs. See Serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors
SST (serum separator/gold top) tubes
ST elevation acute coronary syndromes. See Myocardial
infarction; ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
St. Louis encephalitis
ST segment changes. See also Electrocardiogram
in acute coronary syndromes. See also Acute
coronary syndromes; Myocardial infarction
in angina
Prinzmetal (variant)
antipsychotic drugs causing
in hypertension
in 
myocardial 
infarction. See also Myocardial
infarction
reperfusion assessment and
in pericarditis
in Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy
Normal anion gap acidosis. See also Hyperchloremic
normal anion gap acidosis
Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy mimicking
Staggers
Stalevo. See Entacapone, with levodopa and carbidopa
Standard days method of contraception
Standing, heart murmurs affected by
Stanford V regimen, for Hodgkin disease
Stannosis
Stapedectomy
Staphylococcus (staphylococcal infections)
abscesses
atopic dermatitis and
aureus
abscesses
bacteremia
breast abscess/mastitis
in burn injury
cellulitis
community-associated 
methicillin-resistant 
(CA-
MRSA)
   pneumonia
diarrhea/food poisoning/gastroenteritis
endocarditis
furunculosis/carbuncles and
impetigo
mastitis
methicillin-resistant (MRSA)
   in burn injury
   endocarditis and
   in HIV infection/AIDS
   impetigo
nasal vestibulitis
osteomyelitis
of skin and soft tissues
   in HIV infection/AIDS
toxic shock syndrome
carrier state and
impetigo and
nasal vestibulitis and
surgical site infection associated with
cellulitis
coagulase-negative
burn-associated
endocarditis
cohnii
drug resistance and
epidermidis
folliculitis and
immunization against. See also Immunizations
hominis
impetigo
keratitis
methicillin-resistant 
(MRSA). See Staphylococcus
(staphylococcal 
infections), aureus, 
methicillin-
resistant
non-penicillinase-producing
osteomyelitis
penicillinase-producing
saccharolyticus
saprophyticus
warnerii
STARI (Southern tick-associated rash illness)
Starlix. See Nateglinide
Starvation. See Protein–energy malnutrition
Stasis dermatitis. See also Venous insufficiency/stasis
leg ulcers and
Statin drugs (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors)
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for Hashimoto thyroiditis
hepatotoxicity and
for lipid modification/cardiovascular/heart disease
prevention. See also Lipid-lowering therapy
acute coronary syndromes and
heart failure and
in HIV infection/AIDS
hypertension and
in nephrotic syndrome/nephrotic spectrum disorders
in older patients
perioperative
rhabdomyolysis/myopathy/myositis caused by
Statoconia, vertigo associated with
Status epilepticus
alcohol withdrawal and
drug noncompliance and
nonconvulsive
in theophylline overdose
tonic-clonic
Statutory rape
Stauffer syndrome
H1N1 influenza (swine-origin/swine flu). See also Influenza
neuropathy caused by
resistance to
STDs. See Sexually transmitted diseases
Steatohepatitis, nonalcoholic (NASH)
Steatorrhea. See also Malabsorption
in hyperoxaluric calcium nephrolithiasis
in pancreatitis
Steatosis, hepatic. See Fatty liver
STEC. See Shiga-like toxins
Stein-Leventhal syndrome. See Polycystic ovary syndrome
Stelara. See Ustekinumab
Stelazine. See Trifluoperazine
Stellwag sign
Stem cell disorders
aplastic anemia
leukemias/myeloproliferative disorders
myelodysplastic disorders
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Stem cell transplantation. See also Bone marrow/stem cell
transplantation
Steno-2 study
Stensen duct
calculus formation in
in mumps
Stents/stent 
grafts 
(“covered 
stents”). See 
also
Endovascular surgery/prostheses
for abdominal aortic aneurysm
for angina
aortic valve replacement and
for aortoiliac occlusive disease
for biliary stricture
for biliary tract carcinoma
carotid
for coarctation of aorta
for esophageal cancer
for femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
intracoronary. See also Percutaneous coronary
intervention
subsequent perioperative risks/management and
for myocardial infarction
long-term antithrombotic therapy and
for pancreatic duct disease
p
for primary sclerosing cholangitis
for renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
for superior vena caval obstruction
ureteral, after shock wave lithotripsy
for visceral artery insufficiency/intestinal angina
Stereotactic guided core needle biopsies, in breast cancer
Stereotactic 
radiosurgery. See 
also 
Cyberknife
radiosurgery; Gamma knife radiation/gamma radiosurgery
for lung cancer
for pituitary adenoma
Stereotypy, stimulant abuse and
Sterile pyuria, in tuberculosis
Sterility. See Infertility
Sterilization, for birth control
Steroid acne/folliculitis
Steroid rosacea
Steroidogenic enzyme defects
amenorrhea and
hirsutism/virilization and
Steroids. See Anabolic steroids; Corticosteroids
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (erythema multiforme major)
drugs causing
herpes simplex infection causing
Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis
overlap
sTfR. See Transferrin receptor, soluble
STI571. See Imatinib
Stibogluconate (antimony), for leishmaniasis
Stiff knee gait, in ACL injury
Stiff man syndrome
Stiffness
in ankylosing spondylitis
in fibromyalgia
in myotonic dystrophy/myotonia congenita
in osteoarthritis
in polymyalgia rheumatica
in rheumatoid arthritis
Still disease
Stimson procedure, for dislocated shoulder
Stimulant laxatives
Stimulants
abuse of
aggressive/violent/psychotic behavior and
kindling and
OTC medications and
for depression
for narcolepsy
Stings. See Insect bites/stings
Stippling (nail)
in psoriasis
STK11/LKB1 
mutation, 
pancreatic/periampullary
carcinoma and
Stomach 
disorders. See 
also 
under 
Gastric
andGastrointestinal
tumors
benign
GI bleeding and
malignant. See also Gastric cancer
   gastric adenocarcinoma
   gastric carcinoids
   gastric lymphoma
   mesenchymal
Stomatitis
herpetic
ulcerative (aphthous ulcers)
in Behçet syndrome
in Crohn disease
in HIV infection/AIDS
Stool. See also Stool analysis
blood in. See Diarrhea, bloody; Dysentery; Fecal
occult blood testing
fat in. See Fecal fat
impacted. See Fecal impaction
incontinence of. See also Fecal incontinence
leukocytes in. See Fecal leukocytes
rice water, in cholera
Stool analysis
in amebiasis
in antibiotic-associated colitis
in ascariasis
in bacterial overgrowth
in clonorchiasis and opisthorchiasis
in colorectal cancer screening/polyp detection
in Crohn disease
in cryptosporidiosis
in cyclosporiasis
in diarrhea
in fascioliasis
in giardiasis
in hookworm disease
in intestinal flagellate infection
in intestinal fluke infection
in irritable bowel syndrome
in isosporiasis
in microsporidiosis
for ova and parasites. See also specific disorder
in paragonimiasis
in protein-losing enteropathy
in sarcocystosis
in schistosomiasis
in strongyloidiasis
in tapeworm infections
in trichuriasis/whipworm
Stool antigen assay
for E histolytica
for Giardia
Stool impaction. See Fecal impaction
Stool softeners
Stool surfactants
Stool weight, in diarrhea evaluation
Storage pool disease
albinism-associated
Straight leg raising test
“Strain” pattern, in hypertension
Strains (musculotendinous), cervical, acute
Strawberry gallbladder
Strawberry tongue
in Kawasaki disease
in scarlet fever
Strep throat. See Pharyngitis, streptococcal
Streptobacillary fever, rat-bite fever differentiated from
Streptobacillus moniliformis
Streptococcus (streptococcal infections)
bovis, endocarditis caused by
cellulitis
endocarditis
eruptive (guttate) psoriasis after
erysipelas
glomerulonephritis after
group A. See Group A β-hemolytic streptococcal
infection
group B. See Group B streptococcal infection
impetigo
non-group A
pharyngitis. See Pharyngitis, streptococcal
pneumonia
pneumoniae (pneumococcal infections). See also
P ne umo c o c c a l (Streptococcus 
pneumoniae)
infections
drug resistance and
in pregnancy
pyogenes. See Group A β-hemolytic
streptococcal infection
rheumatic fever after
of skin
toxic shock syndrome caused by
viridans
endocarditis caused by
Streptokinase. See also Thrombolytic therapy
for myocardial infarction
for pulmonary embolism
Streptomycin. See also Aminoglycosides
for actinomycetoma
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for endocarditis
for tuberculosis
contraindications to in pregnancy
Stress 
cardiomyopathy. See 
Tako-Tsubo
(stress/catecholamine-induced) cardiomyopathy
Stress disorders (psychiatric/psychologic)
depression and
irritable bowel syndrome and
posttraumatic
abuse victims and
rape and
substance use and
suicide and
Stress fractures. See Pathologic fractures
Stress gastritis/ulcers
Stress incontinence
in pelvic organ prolapse
Stress reduction techniques
for chronic pain
Stress testing. See also Exercise testing
in angina/chest pain evaluation
echocardiography
electrocardiography
before exercise program initiation
in heart failure
in musculoskeletal evaluation
ankle sprains and
perfusion scintigraphy
postinfarction
preoperative
radionuclide angiography
in syncope evaluation
Striae distensae
Stridor
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis causing
vocal fold paralysis causing
Stroke
arteriovenous malformations causing
atrial fibrillation and
anticoagulation in management/prevention of
carotid intervention causing
carotid occlusion causing
cerebral infarct causing
coma caused by
in diabetic patient
coxibs (COX-2 inhibitors) associated with
in endocarditis
estrogen replacement therapy affecting incidence of
hemorrhagic
Swine-origin influenza (2009 H1N1/swine flu). See also
Influenza
in emergencies/urgencies
intracerebral hemorrhage causing
intracranial aneurysm causing
intracranial venous thrombosis causing
ischemic (infarcts)
lacunar infarct causing
occlusive cerebrovascular disease causing
olanzapine use and
oral contraceptive use and
patent foramen ovale and
postoperative
prevention of
carotid intervention in
chemoprevention/aspirin use and
cholesterol screening and
exercise/activity in
hypertension prevention/management and
lipid disorder prevention/management and. See
also Lipid-lowering therapy
smoking/smoking cessation and
spinal cord vascular disease causing
subarachnoid hemorrhage causing
transient ischemic attacks and
varicella infection and
vertebrobasilar occlusion causing
Stroke (heat)
Stroke volume, in aortic regurgitation
Stroke work index, in myocardial infarction
Stromal tumors (gastrointestinal stromal tumor/GIST)
Strongyloides fulleborni/stercoralis (strongyloidiasis)
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes and
Strontium, for bone pain
Struma ovarii
Struvite urinary stones
Strychnine poisoning, seizures caused by
Stunning, myocardial
Stupor. See also Coma
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Sty (external hordeolum)
Subacromial impingement syndrome
Subacute 
cerebellar 
degeneration/syndrome. See
Cerebellar degeneration
Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord
Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE)
Subacute lupus erythematosus
Subacute mountain sickness
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
myoclonus in
Subacute (de Quervain) thyroiditis
hypothyroid phase in
Subarachnoid hemorrhage. See also Stroke
arteriovenous malformations/fistulae causing
intracranial
spinal
headache in
hypopituitarism associated with
intracranial aneurysms causing
oral contraceptive use and
Subareolar abscess
Subclavian steal syndrome
Subclavian 
vessels, 
compression 
of 
in 
zthoracic
outlet/cervical rib syndromes
Subclinical hyperthyroidism
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Subclinical thyroiditis
Subcortical dementias
Subcutaneous insulin infusion, continuous. See also Insulin
infusion pumps
Subcutaneous nodules
in cysticercosis
in erythema nodosum
in gnathostomiasis
in loiasis
in nocardiosis
in onchocerciasis
in polyarteritis nodosa
in rheumatic fever
in rheumatoid arthritis
gouty tophi differentiated from
in sporotrichosis
Subcutaneous sensor, for glucose monitoring system
Subdural hemorrhage/hematoma
cerebral
acute
chronic
   falls in elderly and
spinal
Siderosis
Sublingual glands. See Salivary glands
Submandibular glands. See also Salivary glands
sialadenitis affecting
tumors of
Submersion injury
Subscapularis tendon
management of injuries of
testing strength of
Substance use disorders. See also specific substance
used and Injection drug use
aggressive/violent behavior and
atypical psychoses and
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by withdrawal and
comorbid conditions and
concerns about, pain management in terminally
ill/dying patient and
febrile patient and
hallucinations/hallucinosis caused by
HIV infection/AIDS and
prevention/postexposure prophylaxis and
infections and
overdoses. See Poisoning/drug overdose
pregnancy and
preventable disease/deaths and
prevention of injury related to
prevention of/screening tests for
PTSD and
toxicology screen in
Subtalar tilt test
Subtentorial lesions. See also Brainstem
coma or stupor caused by
Subungual capillary pulsations (Quincke pulses)
Succimer (DMSA)
for arsenic poisoning
for lead poisoning
for mercury poisoning
Succinylcholine
lithium interactions and
MAOI interactions and
Succussion splash, in gastric outlet obstruction
Sucralfate
reduction of ventilator-associated pneumonia and
for stress gastritis
Sucralose, for diabetics
Sudden death
aborted, driving recommendations and
of athlete
cardiomyopathy causing
cardiomyopathy and
myocardial infarction and
ventricular fibrillation causing
ventricular premature beats and
ventricular tachycardia and
Sudeck atrophy
Sugar alcohols, for diabetics
Suicide
acetaminophen overdose/liver failure and
alcohol use/abuse and
antidepressant overdose in
carbon monoxide poisoning and
caustic esophageal injury and
depression associated with hospitalization/illness and
dispensing medications and
in elderly
hospitalization for patient threatening
panic disorder and
poisoning/overdose and
schizophrenia/psychotic disorders and
Sular. See Nisoldipine
Sulconazole
Sulfacetamide, for ophthalmic disorders
Sulfadiazine
silver, for burn wounds
for toxoplasmosis
Sulfadoxine, with pyrimethamine (Fansidar)
with amodiaquine
with artesunate
for isosporiasis
p
for prophylaxis in pregnancy/infants
resistance to
Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim. See 
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Sulfasalazine
for ankylosing spondylitis
for inflammatory bowel disease
ulcerative colitis
for rheumatoid arthritis
Sulfinpyrazone, for gout
Sulfonamides, adverse ophthalmic effects of
Sulfonylureas. See also specific agent
factitious hypoglycemia caused by
hypoglycemia caused by
intensive therapy with
MAOI interactions and
overdose/toxicity of
Sulfur-sodium sulfacetamide, for rosacea
Sulindac
for familial adenomatous polyposis
in pain management
Sumatriptan
for cluster headache
for migraine headache
Summer grippe
Sun exposure. See Ultraviolet light/sunlight, exposure to
Sunday neuroses
“Sundowning,”
Sunitinib
for gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors
for thyroid carcinoma
thyroid dysfunction caused by
Sunscreens. See also Ultraviolet light/sunlight
in herpes simplex prophylaxis
for hyperpigmentation disorders
for lupus/SLE
for photodermatitis/photosensitivity
for rosacea
Superficial femoral artery (SFA), atherosclerotic/occlusive
disease of
Superficial reflux
in chronic venous insufficiency
correction of
in varicose veins
Superficial spreading melanoma
Superficial venous thrombophlebitis
Superior semicircular canal dehiscence, vertigo and
Superior vena caval obstruction/syndrome
in lung cancer
Superwarfarins, poisoning caused by
Supplements, dietary. See Dietary supplements
Support groups. See also Group therapy
for alcohol use/abuse
for anxiety disorders
for chronic pain
for depression
grief
g
for inflammatory bowel disease
in obesity management
for paraphilias and gender identity disorders
for personality disorders
for schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
for smoking cessation
for somatoform disorders
for victim of violence
Suppurative sialadenitis
Suppurative thyroiditis
Supraclavicular lymph nodes, in breast cancer
palpation for evaluation of
Supraglottic carcinoma
Supraglottitis (epiglottitis)
Haemophilus causing
Supranuclear 
palsy, 
progressive, 
parkinsonism
differentiated from
Supraspinatus tendon
testing strength of
torn
Supratentorial arteriovenous malformations
Supratentorial mass lesion, coma or stupor caused by
Supraventricular beats
aberrantly conducted, differentiation of from ventricular
beats
premature. See Atrial (supraventricular) premature
beats
Supraventricular tachycardia
accessory atrioventricular pathways causing
bradyarrhythmias and
in myocardial infarction
palpitations in
paroxysmal
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management of
Suramin, for African trypanosomiasis
Surfer's ear
Surgery. See also specific disorder or procedure
antibiotic prophylaxis and
anxiety before/after
cardiac complications of
preoperative risk assessment/reduction and
prosthetic heart valve patients and
in cardiac patient
corticosteroid replacement requirement and
in diabetic patient
evaluation of patient before. See also Preoperative
evaluation/perioperative management
fever after
hyponatremia after
insulin needs and
liver function and
patient management and. See also Preoperative
evaluation/perioperative management
during pregnancy
for refractive error correction
thyroid function tests affected by
for wart removal
Surgery proneness (polysurgery)
somatization disorder and
Surgical 
menopause. See 
Menopause/menopausal
syndrome, surgical
Surgical site infection
antibiotic prophylaxis of
in diabetic patients
Surmontil. See Trimipramine
Surrogate, Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care
Surveillance. See Watchful waiting/surveillance
Survival motor neuron (SMN) gene, in spinal muscular
atrophies
Susceptibility 
testing. See Drug resistance; Drug
susceptibility testing
Suscinate 
dehydrogenase 
(SDH) 
mutations, 
in
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
Sustained ventricular tachycardia
Sustiva. See Efavirenz
Sutent. See Sunitinib
Swallowing 
disorders. See 
Dysarthria; 
Dysphagia;
Odynophagia
Swan-neck deformity
Sweat chloride test, in cystic fibrosis
Sweating
fluid loss in, replacement guidelines for
in myocardial infarction
in pheochromocytoma
Sweet ‘N Low. See Saccharin
Sweet One. See Acesulfame potassium
Sweeteners, artificial, for diabetics
SWI. See Stroke work index
Swimmer's ear
Swimmer's itch
Swimming pool granuloma
Swimming pool safety
hypoglycemia caused by tumors of. See also
Insulinomas; Islet cell tumors
SWL. See Shock wave lithotripsy
Sycosis
Sydenham chorea
Symblepharon
Symlin. See Pramlintide
Sympathectomy, for Raynaud phenomenon
Sympathetic nervous system, in hypertension
peripheral inhibitors in management of
Sympatholytic agents
overdose/toxicity of
Sympatholytic syndrome
Sympathomimetic agents
adverse ophthalmic effects of
antidepressant drug interactions and
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
MAOI interactions and
Sympathomimetic syndrome
Symptom 
evaluation/management. See also specific
symptom
Symptothermal natural family planning
Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV), for
respiratory failure
Syncope/near syncope
in aortic stenosis
cardiogenic
in cardiomyopathy
driving recommendations and
dysautonomia and
heat
palpitations and
seizures differentiated from
vasodepressor/vasovagal
Syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess
genetic mutation in
hypertension and
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH)
cancer-related
Syndrome X. See Metabolic syndrome
Synechiae, posterior, in uveitis
Synercid. See Quinupristin/dalfopristin
Synergistic necrotizing cellulitis
Syngeneic stem cell transplant
Synovial fluid examination
in gonococcal arthritis
in Lyme arthritis
in nongonococcal acute bacterial (septic) arthritis
in rheumatoid arthritis
in tuberculous arthritis
Synovitis
remitting seronegative, with non-pitting edema, cancer
and
in rheumatoid arthritis
in SLE
Synpharyngitic hematuria
Synthroid. See Levothyroxine
Syphilis
anorectal involvement and
aortic aneurysms and
cardiovascular involvement and
cerebrospinal fluid examination in
in HIV infection/AIDS
indications for
treatment failures and
congenital
penicillin treatment in maternal disease and
contact treatment and
course/prognosis of
drug therapy for. See also Syphilis, penicillin for
HIV infection/AIDS and
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction and
for neurosyphilis
serologic tests in evaluation of
early
endemic
follow-up care in
gummatous
in HIV infection/AIDS
late (tertiary)
latent
early
late (hidden)
meningovascular/meningitis. See also Neurosyphilis
microscopic examination in
mucous membrane involvement in
natural history of
Non–small cell lung cancer. See also Lung cancer
PCR testing in
penicillin for
HIV infection/AIDS and
neurosyphilis and
pregnancy and
pregnancy and
prevention 
of/screening 
for. See also Syphilis,
serologic tests for
in HIV infection/AIDS
in pregnancy
Small cell carcinoma of lung. See also Lung cancer
public health measures in management of
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
relapses and. See also Syphilis, latent, early
screening blood for
secondary
pityriasis rosea differentiated from
serologic tests for. See also specific test
false-negative
false-positive
   anticardiolipin/antiphospholipid antibody/lupus
anticoagulant causing
   in SLE
follow-up
HIV infection/AIDS and
in neurosyphilis
in non-sexually transmitted treponematoses
in pregnant patient
in STD patients
stages of
treatment failures and
uveitis in
Syringobulbia
Syringomyelia
Syrup of ipecac, for poisoning/drug overdose
Systemic fibrosing syndrome, Dupuytren contracture and
Systemic fibrosis, nephrogenic
Systemic hypertension. See Hypertension
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), shock
and
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
arthritis in
rheumatoid arthritis differentiated from
autoantibodies in
cardiac/pericardial involvement in
criteria for
DHEA for
drugs associated with
lupus 
anticoagulant/antiphospholipid 
antibody
syndrome and
mixed connective tissue disease/overlap syndrome
and
renal involvement in
Systemic sclerosis. See also Scleroderma
Systolic blood pressure. See also Blood pressure
cardiovascular/heart disease risk and
in GI bleeding
in hypertension
treatment goals and
in hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
in hypotension
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in prehypertension
Systolic dysfunction. See Congestive heart (cardiac) failure
Systolic murmurs. See Heart murmurs
T3. See Triiodothyronine
T4. See Thyroxine
T cell lymphoma
adult 
(ATL). See 
also 
Human 
T 
cell
lymphotropic/leukemia virus
in celiac disease
cutaneous (mycosis fungoides)
exfoliative dermatitis/erythroderma and
intestinal
nose and paranasal sinus involvement and
tacrolimus/pimecrolimus associated with
T cell-mediated (delayed/type IV) hypersensitivity
T helper cells. See CD4 T cells
T lymphocytes
in common variable immunodeficiency
in delayed hypersensitivity
in HIV infection/AIDS. See CD4 T cells
t-PA. See Tissue plasminogen activator
T pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) test
T pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA) test
T score
T tube, for choledocholithiasis/cholangitis
T waves. See also Electrocardiogram
in acute coronary syndromes/STEMI
in angina
antipsychotic drugs affecting
lithium affecting
in pericardial effusion
in pericarditis
in Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy
Tabes dorsalis
neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint) in
Tabun (GA) poisoning
TAC regimen, for breast cancer
TACE. See Transarterial chemoembolization
Tâche noire, in tick typhus
“Tachy-brady syndrome,”
Tachycardia/tachyarrhythmia
antidromic reentrant
atrial, multifocal
AV nodal reentrant (AVNRT)
palpitations in
AV reentrant (AVRT)
cardiomyopathy and
in hyperthyroidism
nonparoxysmal junctional
orthodromic reentrant
in pheochromocytoma
in poisoning/drug overdose
sinus. See Sinus tachycardia
in sleep apnea
supraventricular
accessory atrioventricular pathways causing
in myocardial infarction
palpitations in
paroxysmal
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
of
ventricular. See also Ventricular tachycardia
in myocardial infarction
in poisoning/drug overdose
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
of
Tachypnea, in pulmonary embolism
TACI. See Transarterial chemoinfusion
Tacrolimus
adverse ophthalmic effects of
hyperkalemia caused by
topical
for atopic dermatitis
for Crohn disease
for lichen planus
T-cell lymphoma and
Tadalafil
for erectile dysfunction
antidepressant-induced
in diabetics
nitrate/nitroglycerin contraindications and
for pulmonary hypertension
Taenia
saginata (beef tapeworm)
solium (pork tapeworm)
cysticercosis and
Taflotan. See Tafluprost
Tafluprost, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Takayasu disease
Tako-Tsubo 
(stress/catecholamine-induced)
cardiomyopathy/LV apical ballooning
myocardial infarction mimicked by
pheochromocytoma and
Talc, for pleurodesis for malignant effusions
Talcosis (talc exposure)
Tall stature
GH excess causing. See also Gigantism
in Klinefelter syndrome
in Marfan syndrome
Talofibular ligament, ankle sprains involving
Tamm-Horsfall urinary mucoprotein
Tamoxifen
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for breast cancer
hormone receptor status and
in male
as preventive agent
endometrial carcinoma and
for osteoporosis
for Riedel thyroiditis/struma
Tamponade
cancer-related
in pericarditis
in pneumococcal pneumonia
postinfarction/Dressler syndrome
in traumatic cardiac injury
in uremic pericarditis
TAMs (thymidine analog mutations), antiretroviral drug
resistance and
Tamsulosin
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
for urinary incontinence
Tap water enema
Tapeworm 
infections. See 
also 
Cysticercosis;
Echinococcus
invasive
noninvasive
vitamin B12 deficiency in
TAR. See Thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome
Tarceva. See Erlotinib
Tardive dyskinesia
TARE. See Transarterial radioembolization
Target cells, in sickle cell syndromes
Targeted therapy, in cancer chemotherapy
for breast cancer
lung cancer and
Tarka. See Trandolapril, with verapamil
Tarsal tunnel syndrome
Tasigna. See Nilotinib
Tau protein, in dementia
Taxanes
for breast cancer
neuropathy caused by
Taxol. See Paclitaxel
Taxotere. See Docetaxel
Tay-Sachs disease, screening for
Tazarotene, for acne
Tazorac. See Tazarotene
TBCE gene, in hypoparathyroidism
TBE (tick-borne encephalitis). See Ticks, encephalitis
transmitted by
TBPs. See Thyroxine-binding proteins
3TC. See Lamivudine
TC regimen, for breast cancer
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants
TCF7L2 gene, in type 2 diabetes
TCH regimen, for breast cancer
TCu380A intrauterine device
migrans. See also Lyme disease
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
Tdap replacing
Tdap vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
TdT. See Terminal deoxynucleotidal transferase
Tear deficiency
Tears, artificial, for dry eye
Technetium-99m scintigraphy
in angina
in myocardial infarction
for thyroid scanning
TEE 
(transesophageal 
echocardiography). See
Echocardiography
Teeth, disorders of. See Dental disorders
Tegaserod, withdrawal of from market
Tekturna/Tekturna HCT. See Aliskiren
Telangiectasia
hereditary hemorrhagic
epistaxis in
in rosacea
Telaprevir, for hepatitis C
Telavancin, for staphylococcal skin infections
Telbivudine, for hepatitis B
Telemedicine, burn care and
Telepaque. See Iopanoic acid
Telmisartan
with amlodipine
with hydrochlorothiazide
Telogen effluvium
C-Telopeptide, in Paget disease of bone
Temazepam
Temodar. See Temozolomide
Temovate. See Clobetasol
Temozolomide
for gliomas
for pituitary adenoma/prolactinoma
Temperature. See Body temperature; Fever
Temporal artery biopsy, in giant cell arteritis
Temporal (giant cell/cranial) arteritis. See Giant cell
(temporal/cranial) arteritis
Temporal lobe herniation, intracranial tumors causing
Temporal lobe lesions
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction
earache and
facial pain caused by
headache and
Temsirolimus
TEN. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Tendinopathy, upper extremity (lateral and medial
epicondylosis)
Tendinous xanthoma
Tendon friction rub, in scleroderma
Tenecteplase (TNK-t-PA), for myocardial infarction
Tenex. See Guanfacine
Tennis elbow
Tenofovir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with emtricitabine
prophylactic
with emtricitabine and efavirenz
with emtricitabine and rilpivirine
for hepatitis B
prophylactic
resistance to
Tenormin. See Atenolol
Tenosynovitis
in gonococcal arthritis
popliteal
in tuberculous arthritis
Tension pneumothorax
Tension-type headache
Teoptic. See Carteolol
Teplizumab, in new-onset type 1 diabetes
Tequin. See Gatifloxacin
Teratogenic drugs. See also specific agent
Teratomas, testicular
Terazosin
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
for hypertension
for urinary incontinence
Terbinafine
for chromoblastomycosis
for onychomycosis
for sporotrichosis
Terbutaline
for asthma/bronchospasm
for preterm labor prevention
Terconazole, for vulvovaginal candidiasis
Teres minor, evaluation of
Terfenadine, antidepressant drug interactions and
Teriparatide
for hypoparathyroidism
for hypophosphatasia
for osteoporosis
corticosteroid use and
Terlipressin, for GI bleeding/esophageal varices
Terminal delirium
Terminal deoxynucleotidal transferase, in acute leukemia
Terminal illness. See End of life
Terminal restlessness
Terrorism. See also Bioterrorism; Chemical warfare
agents
g
Testes
diseases of
examination of in hypogonadism/
infertility
intra-abdominal
cancer in
in pseudohermaphroditism
masses/tumors of. See also Testicular cancer
gynecomastia and
secondary/metastatic
retractile
undescended (cryptorchism)
pseudohermaphroditism and
testicular cancer and
Testicular cancer
bone marrow/stem cell transplantation for
cryptorchism and
gynecomastia and
secondary/metastatic
Testicular dysgenesis
Testicular failure. See also Hypogonadism
Testicular feminization
Testicular lymphoma
Testicular masses. See Testes, masses/tumors of
Testicular pain, cancer causing
Testicular torsion
Testim. See Testosterone replacement therapy
Testis. See Testes
Testoderm. See Testosterone replacement therapy
Testosterone. See 
also 
Androgens; 
Testosterone
replacement therapy
deficiency of. See also Hypogonadism
pseudohermaphroditism/amenorrhea and
in women
excess of. See Hyperandrogenism
insensitivity/resistance to
prostate cancer and
serum levels of
in gynecomastia
in hirsutism/virilization
in hypogonadism
in infertility workup
in postmenopausal women
reference values for
Testosterone gels/transdermal systems. See Testosterone
replacement therapy
Testosterone replacement therapy
for AIDS wasting
for erectile dysfunction
for hypogonadism
in Klinefelter syndrome
in men
in women
Tetanospasmin
Tetanus
prevention/immunization and. See also Tetanus and
diphtheria toxoids and pertussis vaccine
bite wounds and
frostbite and
Tetanus-diphtheria 5-component acellular pertussis (Tdap)
vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
ST segment elevation (STEMI). See also Myocardial
infarction
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
Tdap replacing
Tetanus and diphtheria toxoids and pertussis vaccine
(DTaP/Tdap vaccines)
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
pregnancy and
Tetanus immune globulin
Tetany
in hyperthyroidism
in hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
malabsorption and
after parathyroidectomy
in respiratory alkalosis
Tetrabenazine, for Huntington disease
Tetracycline
for acne
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for amebiasis
in H pylori eradication therapy
for malaria
for non-sexually transmitted treponematoses
for rosacea
for syphilis
Tetrafosmin scintigraphy, in angina
Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. See Dronabinol
Tetrahydrozoline, overdose/toxicity of
Tetralogy of Fallot
Tetrodotoxin, puffer fish poisoning caused by
Teveten/Teveten HCT. See Eprosartan
Tg. See Thyroglobulin
Tg 
(thyroglobulin) 
antibodies. See 
Antithyroid
(antithyroglobulin/antithyroperoxidase) antibodies
TGF-β. See Transforming growth factor β
Thalamic hemorrhage, stroke and
Thalamic stimulation
for benign essential (familial) tremor
for idiopathic torsion dystonia
for parkinsonism
Thalamic syndrome
intracranial tumors causing
in vertebrobasilar obstruction
Thalamotomy
for benign essential (familial) tremor
for idiopathic torsion dystonia
for parkinsonism
acute myocardial infarction with ST segment elevation
(STEMI) and. See also Myocardial infarction
Thalidomide
for cancer chemotherapy
for erythema nodosum leprosum
for lupus
for myeloma
neuropathy caused by
teratogenicity of
Thaliton. See Chlorthalidone
Thallium-201 scintigraphy
in angina
in myocardial infarction
in thyroid cancer surveillance
Thalomid. See Thalidomide
THC (Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol). See Dronabinol
Theophylline
for asthma
for COPD
lithium interactions and
monitoring levels of
overdose/toxicity of
hemodialysis for
seizures and
perioperative management of patient taking
Therapeutic abortion. See Abortion, elective/induced
Therapeutic diets. See also Diet; Nutrition
Therapeutic drug monitoring. See also specific agent
Thermal injury. See Burns
Thermocoagulation, endoscopic, for bleeding peptic ulcer
Thermoregulation
hyperthermia/heat exposure syndromes and
hypothermia (systemic) and
Thessaly test
Thiabendazole
for cutaneous larva migrans
for strongyloidiasis
Thiamine (vitamin B1)
for alcohol withdrawal
for coma
deficiency of
alcohol use/alcoholic ketoacidosis and
amnestic syndrome and
neuropathy associated with
Wernicke 
encephalopathy/Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome caused by
for Wernicke encephalopathy/thiamine deficiency
Thiazide diuretics. See also Diuretics
for acute tubular necrosis
adverse effects of
ophthalmic
for diabetes insipidus
for heart failure
chronic kidney disease and
hypercalcemia and
for hypercalciuria
for hyperkalemia
for hypertension
in chronic kidney disease
in combination products
in combination regimen
hyponatremia caused by
lithium interactions and
Thiazolidinediones
for diabetes mellitus
overdose/toxicity of
Thick blood film, for malaria diagnosis
Thienobenzodiazepines. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Thienopyridines, platelet function affected by
Thimerosal-free vaccines
Thin blood film, for malaria diagnosis
Thioglitazones, lower extremity edema caused by
Thioguanine
Thiopurine methyltransferase
azathioprine therapy and
mercaptopurine therapy and
testing for variants of
Thioridazine
overdose/toxicity of
Thiosulfate, for cyanide poisoning
Thiotepa, for bladder cancer
Thiothixene
Thioureas
for goiter
for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
during pregnancy/lactation
RAI therapy and
for toxic solitary thyroid nodule
Thioxanthenes. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Third-degree burns
Third-degree (complete) heart block
in atrial septal defect
in myocardial infarction
sudden death and
Third heart sound (S3/ventricular gallop). See Heart sounds
Third nerve paralysis/palsy
in ophthalmoplegic migraine
Third-trimester bleeding
Thirst. See Polydipsia
Thoracentesis
in lung cancer
for malignant effusions
in pleural effusion
in pneumonia
Thoracic actinomycosis
Thoracic aortic aneurysms
giant cell arteritis and
Thoracic carcinoid, in MEN
Thoracic outlet syndrome
chest pain in
Raynaud phenomenon and
Thoracic spine/disk disease
chest pain in
tuberculosis (Pott disease) and
Thoracoscopic surgery, video-assisted (VATS)
for hepatic hydrothorax
in lung cancer diagnosis
in mesothelioma diagnosis
for solitary pulmonary nodule
Thoracoscopy
in lung cancer
in pleural effusion
for pneumothorax
Thoracostomy, tube. See Tube thoracostomy
Thoracotomy
for hemothorax
for pneumothorax
Thorazine. See Chlorpromazine
Thorotrast exposure, ureteral/renal pelvic cancer and
Thought content, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Threatened abortion
Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy, for prostate
cancer
Three-item word recall, in dementia screening
3P tumor suppressor gene, in thyroid cancer
“3” sign, in coarctation of aorta
“Thrifty” (LITH) gene, in cholelithiasis/gallstones
Throat culture, in pharyngitis
Thrombasthenia, Glanzmann
Thrombin inhibitors
for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
for venous thromboembolism
Thrombin time, heparin affecting
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease)
Raynaud phenomenon and
Thrombocytopenia
amegakaryocytic
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
aplastic anemia and
with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (Evans syndrome)
in bone marrow failure
in bone marrow infiltration
in cancer chemotherapy/irradiation
in cirrhosis
cyclic
decreased platelet production causing
DIC and
drug-induced
gestational
in gram-negative bacteremia/sepsis
in hairy cell leukemia
heparin-induced
reference values in
immune
increased platelet destruction causing
infection/sepsis-related
nutritional deficiencies and
platelet sequestration and
platelet transfusion for
in posttransfusion purpura (PTP)
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
pregnancy and
retinal disease associated with
in SLE
in thrombotic microangiopathy
diarrhea and
in von Willebrand disease type 2B
Thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome
Thrombocytosis
essential
reactive
Thromboembolism. See also Embolism; Thrombosis
acute occlusion of limb caused by
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
in atrial fibrillation
anticoagulation in prevention of
in Behçet syndrome
estrogen replacement therapy and
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in myocardial infarction
oral contraceptive use and
perioperative anticoagulation management and
prosthetic heart valves and
pulmonary. See Pulmonary venous thromboembolism
Thromboendarterectomy
c
a
r
o
t
i
d
. See 
Carotid
endarterectomy/thromboendarterectomy
y
y
for femoral/popliteal occlusive disease
pulmonary
Thrombolytic therapy
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for deep venous thrombosis
for frostbite
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
for myocardial infarction
contraindications without ST elevation
PCI and
for pulmonary embolism
for retinal artery occlusion
for stroke
for venous thromboembolic disease
Thrombophlebitis. See also Thrombosis
cancer-related
leg ulcers and
oral contraceptive use and
septic. See Septic thrombophlebitis
of superficial veins
varicosities and
Thrombopoietin, chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia
and
Thrombopoietin 
receptor 
agonists, 
for 
immune
thrombocytopenia
T h r o m b o s i s . See 
also 
Thromboembolism;
Thrombophlebitis
acute occlusion of limb caused by
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
cancer-associated
cavernous sinus, bacterial rhinosinusitis and
cerebrovascular occlusion and
of deep veins. See Deep venous thrombosis
in DIC
in essential thrombocytosis
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
hemorrhoidal
in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
in homocystinuria
intracranial. See also Stroke
in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
in polycythemia
prosthetic heart valves and
sigmoid sinus, otitis media and
venous. See Venous thromboembolic disease
venous sinus
Thrombotic microangiopathy
diarrhea and
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
diarrhea and
Thrush (oral candidiasis)
esophagitis and
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). See
also Myocardial infarction
Thumb sign
“Thunderclap headache,”
Thymectomy
in MEN 1
for myasthenia gravis
Thymidine analog mutations (TAMs), antiretroviral drug
resistance and
Thymidylate 
synthase 
gene 
mutations,
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
Thymoma
myasthenia gravis associated with
paraneoplastic syndromes associated with
pure red cell aplasia caused by
Thyrogen. See Thyrotropin-α
Thyroglobulin
antibodies 
against. See 
Antithyroid
(antithyroglobulin/antithyroperoxidase) antibodies
serum levels of
in goiter
reference values for
in thyroid cancer diagnosis/surveillance
Thyroglossal duct cysts
Thyroid adenoma (toxic solitary thyroid nodule)
in MEN
Thyroid 
antibodies. See 
Antithyroid
(antithyroglobulin/antithyroperoxidase) antibodies
Thyroid cancer
anaplastic/undifferentiated
differentiated
fine-needle aspiration biopsy in
p
p y
follicular
functioning
incidence/risk/mortality of
long-term followup/surveillance for
lymphoma
medullary
in MEN
metastatic
micropapillary
papillary
follicular variant of (mixed papillary-follicular)
pregnancy and
radiation exposure and
staging of
thyroid nodules and
thyroid testing in
Thyroid crisis/storm
during pregnancy
propranolol for
Thyroid gland
biopsy of
disorders 
of. See 
also 
Hyperthyroidism;
Hypothyroidism; Thyroid cancer
eye disease associated with
   RAI treatment for hyperthyroidism and
in HIV infection/AIDS
lipid abnormalities and
lithium causing
neoplastic. See Thyroid cancer; Thyroid nodules
during pregnancy
   hyperemesis gravidarum and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
thyroid testing in. See also Thyroid testing
enlarged. See Goiter
infection of (suppurative thyroiditis)
nodular. See Multinodular (nodular) goiter; Thyroid
cancer; Thyroid nodules
Thyroid hormone. See also Thyroxine; Triiodothyronine
antidepressant drug augmentation and
excess/deficiency 
of. See 
Hyperthyroidism;
Hypothyroidism
exogenous, excess ingestion of (thyrotoxicosis factitia)
replacement therapy with. See Levothyroxine
Thyroid incidentalomas (incidentally discovered thyroid
nodules)
Thyroid nodules. See also Goiter; Thyroid cancer
solitary
toxic (thyroid adenoma)
   in MEN
thyroid testing in
Thyroid radioactive iodine uptake and scan. See
Radioiodine thyroid scans and uptake
Thyroid remnant ablation
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH/thyrotropin)
deficiency of
in euthyroid sick syndrome
fetal
in goiter
in hyperthyroidism
amiodarone-induced
factors affecting
pituitary adenoma/hyperplasia and
pregnancy and
in hypothyroidism
amiodarone-induced
factors affecting
levothyroxine replacement and
pregnancy and
pregnancy and
reference/normal values for
in thyroid cancer
postsurgical
surveillance and
in thyroid nodules
levothyroxine therapy and
in thyroiditis
Thyroid-stimulating 
hormone 
receptor 
antibody
(TSAb/TSH-R Ab[stim]). See also Thyrotropin receptor
antibody
in hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
reference values for
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin
in amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism
Thyroid storm. See Thyroid crisis/storm
Thyroid surgery/thyroidectomy
for goiter
for hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
during pregnancy
toxic multinodular goiter and
toxic solitary thyroid nodule and
hypoparathyroidism after
hypothyroidism after
during pregnancy
prophylactic, in MEN
for thyroid cancer
radioactive iodine treatment after
for thyroid nodules
vocal fold paralysis/recurrent laryngeal nerve damage
and
Thyroid testing
in heart failure
in HIV infection/AIDS
in hyperthyroidism
factors confounding
in hypothyroidism
factors confounding
in thyroid cancer
in thyroid nodules
in thyroiditis
Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), in lung cancer
Thyroidectomy. See Thyroid surgery/thyroidectomy
Thyroiditis
H a s h i m o t o . See 
Hashimoto 
(chronic
lymphocytic/autoimmune) thyroiditis
hepatitis C and
hyperthyroidism and
painless
postpartum/pregnancy and
Riedel
silent
sporadic
subacute. See Subacute (de Quervain) thyroiditis
suppurative
transient autoimmune, postpartum
Thyroperoxidase, 
antibodies 
against. See Antithyroid
(antithyroglobulin/antithyroperoxidase) antibodies
Thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis
Thyrotoxicosis. See also Hyperthyroidism
factitia
Thyrotrophe pituitary adenoma
Thyrotrophe pituitary hyperplasia
Thyrotropin. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone
Thyrotropin-α (rhTSH), RAI therapy/surveillance for thyroid
cancer and
hyperthyroidism and
Thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb)
in Hashimoto thyroiditis
in hyperthyroidism/Graves disease
Thyroxine (T4)
replacement therapy with. See Levothyroxine
serum levels of
in euthyroid sick syndrome
free. See Free thyroxine assay
in goiter
in hyperthyroidism
   amiodarone-induced
   factors affecting
   pregnancy and
   thyroiditis and
   after treatment
in hypothyroidism
   factors affecting
   pregnancy and
total, reference values for
uptake of (resin). See Resin T3/T4 uptake
Thyroxine-binding proteins (TBPs)
Thyroxine (T4) index, free (FT4I). See Free thyroxine index
Thyroxine/triiodothyronine preparations, for hypothyroidism
TIA. See Transient ischemic attacks
Tiagabine
overdose/toxicity of
Tiazac. See Diltiazem
TIBC. See Total iron-binding capacity
Tibial artery, atherosclerotic/occlusive disease of
Tibial nerve, entrapment of (tarsal tunnel syndrome)
Tibiofibular ligament, in ankle sprains
Tibolone
Tic douloureux. See Trigeminal neuralgia
Ticar. See Ticarcillin
Ticarcillin, platelet function affected by
Tick typhus
Ticks
babesiosis transmitted by
Colorado tick fever transmitted by
ehrlichiosis/anaplasmosis transmitted by
encephalitis transmitted by (tick-borne encephalitis)
hemorrhagic fevers transmitted by
Lyme disease transmitted by
relapsing fever transmitted by
removal of
Rocky Mountain spotted fever transmitted by
skin lesions caused by
Southern 
tick-associated 
rash 
illness 
(STARI)
transmitted by
spotted fevers transmitted by (tick typhus)
tularemia transmitted by
Ticlopidine. See also Antiplatelet therapy
platelet function affected by
Tics
in OCD
in Tourette syndrome
Tietze syndrome
TIG. See Tetanus immune globulin
Tigecycline
for abdominal infections
for staphylococcal skin infections
Tilt table testing
g
in dysautonomia
in syncope
Tiludronate, for Paget disease of bone
TIMI Risk Score
Timolol
for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
in combination agents
for migraine prophylaxis
for systemic hypertension
Timoptic/Timoptic-XE/Timoptic GFS. See Timolol
Tincture of opium, for diarrhea
Tinea
acne caused by
circinata/corporis
cruris
manuum
pedis
cellulitis and
pityriasis rosea differentiated from
profunda, furuncles differentiated from
unguium (onychomycosis)
versicolor (pityriasis versicolor)
Tinel sign, in carpal tunnel syndrome
Tinidazole
for amebiasis
for bacterial vaginosis
for giardiasis
in H pylori eradication therapy
for trichomoniasis
Tinnitus
glomus tumors causing
in labyrinthitis
in Ménière syndrome
in pseudotumor cerebri
vertigo and
Tinzaparin
Tioconazole, for vulvovaginal candidiasis
Tiotropium, for COPD
Tipranavir. See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with ritonavir
T IP S . See 
Transvenous 
(transjugular) 
intrahepatic
portosystemic shunts
Tirofiban
for acute coronary syndromes
for myocardial infarction
platelet function affected by
Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA/alteplase). See also
Thrombolytic therapy
for acute arterial occlusion of limb
for myocardial infarction
for pulmonary embolism
for retinal vein occlusion
for stroke
Tissue transglutaminase. See Transglutaminase
TIV influenza vaccine. See also Influenza virus vaccine
Tizanidine
overdose/toxicity of
for spasticity
TLC (total lung capacity). See also Pulmonary function
tests
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
TLS. See Tumor lysis syndrome
TMA. See Thrombotic microangiopathy
TMP-SMZ. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
TNF. See Tumor necrosis factor
TNK-t-PA. See Tenecteplase
TNM staging classification. See also specific type of
cancer
Tobacco use. See also Smoking
cancer and
esophageal cancer
laryngeal cancer
lung cancer
   as co-carcinogen
   screening for
oral cancer
health hazards of
postoperative pulmonary complications and
preventable disease/deaths and
in thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease)
Tobramycin. See also Aminoglycosides
for ophthalmic disorders
Tobrex. See Tobramycin
Tocilizumab, for rheumatoid arthritis
Tocolytics
adverse ophthalmic effects of
Toe amputations, in lower leg/foot occlusive disease
Toe web (interdigital) tinea pedis
cellulitis and
Toenails, disorders of. See Nail disorders
Toes
callosities and corns of
in diabetes/vascular disorders
in gout
thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger disease) involving
Tofranil. See Imipramine
Tolazamide
Tolazoline, clonidine overdose and
Tolbutamide
in insulinoma diagnosis
Tolcapone, for parkinsonism
Tolectin. See Tolmetin
Tolerance (drug). See also Substance use disorders
in opioid therapy
in stimulant abuse
Tolinase. See Tolazamide
Tolmetin
Tolterodine, for urinary incontinence
Toluene toxicity/abuse
anion gap and
Tolvaptan, for hyponatremia/SIADH
Tomographic coronary calcium, in chest pain evaluation
Tonal tinnitus
Tongue disorders (glossitis/glossodynia)
Tonic-clonic (grand mal) seizures. See also Seizures
Tonic-clonic status epilepticus
Tonic seizures. See also Seizures
Tonicity
Tonsillectomy
for peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
Tonsillitis. See also Pharyngitis
Tooth disorders. See Dental disorders
Tophus (tophi)/tophaceous arthritis
rheumatoid nodule differentiated from
Topical therapy, for skin disorders
complications of
Topiramate
for alcohol use/abuse
for migraine prophylaxis
for obesity
overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
for pseudotumor cerebri
for seizures
Topoisomerase inhibitors, in cancer chemotherapy
for breast cancer
Topotecan
Toprol XL. See Metoprolol
Toradol. See Ketorolac
Torcetrapib
Toremifene
Torisel. See Temsirolimus
Torsades de pointes
in poisoning/drug toxicity
antiarrhythmics in
antipsychotics/phenothiazines in
droperidol in
opioids in
Torsemide
for heart failure
for hypertension
Torsion dystonia
focal
idiopathic
Torticollis
Tositumomab
for non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Total body iron
Total body water. See Body water
Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC)
in anemia of chronic disease
Total lung capacity (TLC). See also Pulmonary function
tests
in COPD
in cystic fibrosis
Total parenteral nutrition. See Central vein nutritional
support
Total protein. See Protein
Tourette syndrome
OCD and
Toxic adenoma (toxic solitary thyroid nodule)
in MEN
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
drugs causing
Toxic erythema, drugs causing
Toxic lung injury
aspiration and
smoke inhalation and
Toxic megacolon
acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie syndrome)
differentiated from
in ulcerative colitis
Toxic multinodular goiter
Toxic myocarditis
Toxic neuropathies
Toxic psychosis
Toxic shock syndrome
clostridial
diaphragm/cervical cap use and
staphylococcal
streptococcal
Toxic solitary thyroid nodule (toxic adenoma)
in MEN
Toxicology screen, in poisoning/drug overdose
Toxins. See also Poisoning/drug overdose
anion gap affected by
in C difficile colitis
in food poisoning/gastroenteritis
liver disease caused by. See also Hepatotoxicity
osmolar/osmol gap affected by
screening for
Toxocara canis/cati (toxocariasis)
Toxoplasma/Toxoplasma gondii (toxoplasmosis)
in HIV infection/AIDS
prevention/chemoprophylaxis and
myocarditis in
during pregnancy (congenital)
uveitis caused by
TP53 gene mutations. See also P53 gene mutations
gallbladder cancer and
hepatocellular carcinoma and
pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma and
TPHA test
TPMT. See Thiopurine methyltransferase
TPN (total parenteral nutrition). See Central vein nutritional
support
TPPA test, for syphilis
TRAb. See Thyrotropin receptor antibody
Trabeculectomy, for glaucoma
Trabeculoplasty, laser, for glaucoma
Trace elements, in nutritional support
Trachea
foreign body in
obstruction of
stenosis of
Tracheal 
intubation. See also Intubation; Mechanical
ventilation
in ARDS
for respiratory failure
Tracheobronchitis, RSV
Tracheostomy/tracheotomy. See also specific disorder
for sleep apnea
Trachoma
Tractional retinal detachment
Traditional serrated adenoma
TRALI. See Transfusion-related acute lung injury
TRAM flap (trans-rectus abdominis muscle flap), for breast
reconstruction
Tramadol
MAOI interactions and
for neuropathic pain
overdose/toxicity of
Trandate. See Labetalol
Trandolapril
with verapamil
Tranquilizers. See specific agent and Antipsychotic drugs
Trans fatty acids, preventable disease/deaths caused by
high intake of
Transarterial 
chemoembolization 
(TACE), 
for
hepatocellular carcinoma
Transarterial chemoinfusion (TACI), for hepatocellular
carcinoma
Transarterial radioembolization (TARE), for hepatocellular
carcinoma
Transbronchial lung biopsy. See Lung biopsy
Transcobalamins, in polycythemia
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
for depression
for tinnitus
Transdermal contraceptive patch
Transesophageal 
echocardiography. See
Echocardiography
Transesophageal echocardiography-guided cardioversion,
for atrial fibrillation
Transferrin
in anemia of chronic disease
carbohydrate deficient, alcohol use/abuse and
in hemochromatosis
in iron deficiency anemia
reference values for
in sideroblastic anemia
Transferrin receptor, soluble
Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), mutations in
receptor for
idiopathic pulmonary hypertension and
Marfan syndrome and
Transfusion (blood/blood products). See also specific type
acute lung injury caused by
for aplastic anemia
for autoimmune hemolytic anemia
for bleeding disorders
g
for chemotherapy-associated anemia
contaminated blood and
for DIC
disease transmission and
arbovirus encephalitides
Chagas disease
donor screening programs and
erythrovirus (parvovirus)
hepatitis
HIV
HTLV
variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
for fluid management/volume replacement
in GI bleeding/variceal hemorrhage
in shock
graft-versus-host disease caused by
for myelodysplastic syndromes
preoperative
purpura associated with
for sickle cell anemia
pregnancy and
for sideroblastic anemia
for thalassemia
for thrombotic microangiopathies
Transfusion graft-versus-host disease
Transfusion reactions
compatibility testing in prevention of
contaminated blood causing
hemolytic
y
hypersensitivity reactions
leukoagglutinin
leukocyte-poor blood in prevention of
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
Transglutaminase/tissue transglutaminase (tTG), in celiac
disease/dermatitis herpetiformis
Transient autoimmune thyroiditis, postpartum
Transient elastography, in liver disease/cirrhosis
Transient ischemic attacks
atrial fibrillation and
carotid
cerebrovascular occlusion/embolization and
patent foramen ovale and
seizures differentiated from
strokes/stroke risk and
vertebrobasilar
Transient monocular blindness
Transjugular 
intrahepatic 
portosystemic 
shunts. See
Transvenous (transjugular) intrahepatic portosystemic
shunts
Transketolase activity coefficient, in thiamine deficiency
Translocational hyponatremia
Transmetatarsal amputation, in lower leg/foot occlusive
disease
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE)
Transnasal ventilation, for COPD
Transplantation. See also specific type ororgan and
Immunocompromised host
fever/FUO and
hyperuricemia/gout and
immunization in recipients and
infections following. See also Opportunistic infections
adenoviruses causing
arbovirus encephalitides
CMVes causing
erythrovirus (parvovirus)
fungal
hepatitis
herpes simplex
Pneumocystis
pneumonia
prevention of
toxoplasmosis
lymphoproliferative disorder after
organ donation for
rabies transmitted by
squamous cell carcinoma after
Transrectal ultrasound. See Ultrasonography
Trans-rectus abdominis muscle flap (TRAM flap), for breast
reconstruction
Transsexualism
Transthoracic needle aspiration/biopsy (TTNA/TTNB)
in lung cancer
in solitary pulmonary nodule
Transthyretin (TTR) hereditary amyloidosis
Transtracheal oxygen, for COPD
Transtubular potassium concentration gradient (TTKG)
p
g
(
)
Transudates, pleural fluid
Transurethral electrovaporization of prostate, for benign
prostatic hyperplasia
Transurethral incision of prostate (TUIP), for benign
prostatic hyperplasia
Transurethral laser-induced prostatectomy (TULIP), for
benign prostatic hyperplasia
Transurethral needle ablation of prostate (TUNA), for
benign prostatic hyperplasia
Transurethral resection of bladder, for bladder cancer
Transurethral resection of prostate (TURP), for benign
prostatic hyperplasia
Transurethral resection syndrome
Transvaginal sonography/ultrasound. See Ultrasonography
Transvenous (transjugular) intrahepatic portosystemic
shunts (TIPS)
for cirrhotic ascites
for esophageal varices
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
rebleeding prevention and
for GI bleeding
for hepatic hydrothorax
for hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
for hepatorenal syndrome
Transvestism
Tranxene. See Clorazepate
Tranylcypromine
Trastuzumab
for breast cancer
for gastric adenocarcinoma
Trauma
auricular (traumatic auricular hematoma)
cardiac injury and
sudden death of athlete and
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
complex regional pain syndrome and
corneal
fat necrosis of breast caused by
head injury and. See also Head injury
headache associated with
hearing loss associated with
hypokalemia and
middle ear
nasal
epistaxis and
ocular
pneumothorax and
prevention of
psychologic/psychiatric disorders after (posttraumatic
stress disorder)
abuse victims and
rape and
substance use and
rhabdomyolysis/renal failure and
seizures caused by
spinal
subarachnoid hemorrhage and
syringomyelia associated with
vertigo caused by
Travatan. See Travoprost
Travel. See also Air travel
immunizations recommended for
hepatitis A
hepatitis B
infectious disease and
during pregnancy
retinal detachment and
SARS transmission and
tick typhus and
Traveler's diarrhea
coccidial and microsporidial
during pregnancy
Travoprost, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Travoprost/timolol, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Trazodone. See also Antidepressants
for depression
for insomnia
in dementia
MAOI-induced
overdose/toxicity of
priapism caused by
Treanda. See Bendamustine
Treatment refusal/withdrawal
advance directives and
Trelstar. See Triptorelin
Trematode (fluke) infections. See also specific type
Tremor
benign essential (familial)
parkinsonism differentiated from
drug-induced
fragile-X tremor-ataxia syndrome and
in parkinsonism
in pheochromocytoma
Trench fever
Trench (immersion) foot/hand
Trench mouth
Trendelenburg test
Treponema
carateum
non-sexually transmitted diseases caused by
pallidum. See also Syphilis
endemicum
pertenue
Treponemal antibody tests, for syphilis
Treponemal tests, rapid
Treprostinil, for pulmonary hypertension
Tretinoin. See also Retinoic acid
for acne
for acute myeloid leukemia
for acute promyelocytic leukemia
adverse ophthalmic effects of
for cancer chemotherapy
for hyperpigmentation
teratogenicity of
Trexall. See Methotrexate
Triad asthma
Triamcinolone. See also Corticosteroids
for acne
for alopecia
for asthma
intra-articular injection of
Triamterene
for heart failure
with hydrochlorothiazide, for hypertension
hyperkalemia caused by
lithium interactions and
Triatomine bugs, Chagas disease transmitted by
Triazenes, in cancer chemotherapy
Triazolam
overdose/toxicity of
Trichiasis, in trachoma
Trichinella/Trichinella spiralis (trichinosis/trichinellosis)
myocarditis in
Trichloroethylene, toxicity of
Trichoderma longibrachiatium, in opportunistic infection
Trichomonas vaginalis (trichomoniasis)
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
Trichophyton/Trichophyton rubrum
tinea corporis/circinata caused by
tinea pedis caused by
tinea unguium caused by
Trichosporon, in opportunistic infection
Trichotillomania
Trichuris trichiura (trichuriasis/whipworm)
Triclabendazole, for fascioliasis
Tricor. See Fenofibrate
Tricuspid regurgitation
Tricuspid stenosis
Tricyclic antidepressants. See also Antidepressants
drug interactions of
in elderly
for neuropathic pain/painful diabetic neuropathy
nephritic spectrum. See also Nephritic syndrome
arrhythmias and
hypotension and
ophthalmic effects and
seizures and
suicidal
Trientine, for Wilson disease
Trifascicular block
Trifluoperazine
Trifluridine, for ophthalmic disorders
Trigeminal nerve
herpes zoster ophthalmicus and
postherpetic neuralgia and
Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux)
chemotherapy-induced
headache and
Trigeminy
Triglycerides
antiretroviral therapy and
elevated levels of. See Hypertriglyceridemia
in insulin resistance syndrome/diabetes mellitus
lowering levels of
reference values for
thiazolidinedione use and
Trihexyphenidyl, 
for 
parkinsonism. See 
also
Antiparkinsonism drugs
Triiodothyronine (T3)
serum levels of
in euthyroid sick syndrome
free
in hyperthyroidism
   amiodarone-induced
   factors affecting
   thyroiditis and
in hypothyroidism
   factors affecting
   levothyroxine therapy and
reference values for
total
TSH/T4 levels affected by
uptake of (resin). See Resin T3/T4 uptake
Triiodothyronine (T3) toxicosis
Triiodothyronine/thyroxine preparations, for hypothyroidism
Trilafon. See Perphenazine
Trilasate. See Choline magnesium salicylate
Trilpix. See Fenofibric acid
Trimethaphan, for hypertensive urgencies/emergencies
Trimethobenzamide. See also Antiemetics
Trimethoprim
hyperkalemia caused by
for P jiroveci infection
Trimethoprim/polymyxin B, for ophthalmic disorders
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
for actinomycetoma
for bacterial rhinosinusitis
for cyclosporiasis
for isosporiasis
for malaria
for Pneumocystis infection
resistance to
for toxoplasma treatment/prophylaxis
for urinary tract infection
Trimetrexate, for P jiroveci infection
Trimipramine
Trinucleotide repeats
in fragile X mental retardation
in Friedreich ataxia
in Huntington disease
in X-linked bulbospinal neuronopathy
Triple A (Allgrove) syndrome
Triptans, for migraine headache
Triptorelin pamoate
Trisenox. See Arsenic trioxide
Trismus
in cervicofacial actinomycosis
in mumps
in tetanus
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
prenatal screening for
Trivalent inactivated (TIV) influenza vaccine. See also
Influenza virus vaccine
Trivalent live-inactivated (LAIV) influenza vaccine. See also
Influenza virus vaccine
Trizivir. See Abacavir, with zidovudine and lamivudine
TRK gene mutation, in papillary thyroid carcinoma
Trochanteric bursitis
Troglitazone, withdrawal of from market
Trombiculid mite larvae
scrub typhus transmitted by
skin lesions caused by
Trondane. See Pramoxine
Tronothane. See Pramoxine
Tropheryma whipplii. See also Whipple disease
Trophoblastic 
disease. See Gestational trophoblastic
disease
Tropical anhidrosis and asthenia
Tropical pancreatitis
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Tropical spastic paraparesis
Tropisetron. See also Antiemetics
Troponins
in acute coronary syndromes/STEMI
in chest pain evaluation
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
in infectious myocarditis
reference values for
Trospium, for urinary incontinence
Trousseau sign (carpal spasm)
in hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
malabsorption and
Trousseau syndrome
True vocal fold (glottic) cancer
Trusopt. See Dorzolamide
Truvada. See Tenofovir, with emtricitabine
Truvia. See Rebiana
Trypanosoma (trypanosomiasis)
African
American (Chagas disease)
achalasia and
heart disease/myocarditis in
brucei gambiense
brucei rhodesiense
cruzi
Trypsinogen, mutant gene for, in chronic pancreatitis
Tryptophan, MAOI interactions and
TSC1/TSC2 genes, in tuberous sclerosis
TSE. See Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
Tsetse flies. See Flies
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone
TSH receptor antibody (TSH-R Ab [stim]). See Thyroid-
stimulating hormone receptor antibody
TSI. See Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin
TSP. See Tropical spastic paraparesis
Tsutsugamushi fever (scrub typhus)
TT virus (TTV)
TT677 mutation
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
TTF-1. See Thyroid transcription factor-1
tTG. See Transglutaminase/tissue transglutaminase
TTKG. See Transtubular potassium concentration gradient
TTNA/TTNB. See Transthoracic needle aspiration/biopsy
TTP. See Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
TTV. See TT virus
Tubal ligation/sterilization
Tubal pregnancy. See also Ectopic pregnancy
Tube enterostomies. See also Enteral nutritional support
Tube feedings. See Enteral nutritional support
Tube thoracostomy (chest tube drainage)
for empyema
for hemothorax
for malignant effusions
for parapneumonic effusion
for pneumothorax
Tuberculin skin test
BCG vaccine affecting
in HIV infection/AIDS
in intestinal tuberculosis
in pregnancy
in spinal tuberculosis
in tuberculous meningitis
in tuberculous peritonitis
Tuberculin skin test conversion
Tuberculoid leprosy. See also Leprosy
in syphilis. See also Neurosyphilis
Addison disease caused by
ascites in
blood test for exposure to
bone and joint infection in
drug-resistant
in drug users
extrapulmonary. See also specific type or site
fever/FUO in
in HIV infection/AIDS
chemoprophylaxis/prevention and
drug use and
intestinal involvement and
treatment of
intestinal
latent
meningitis and
musculoskeletal involvement and
pericarditis and
peritoneal involvement in
pleural effusion in
during pregnancy/lactation
prevention/control of
HIV infection/AIDS and
primary
progressive primary
pulmonary
reactivation
anti-TNF agents and
renal manifestations of
as reportable disease
salpingitis and
silicosis and
skin test for. See Tuberculin skin test
spinal (Pott disease)
treatment of. See also Antituberculous drugs
Tuberculous arthritis
Tuberculous lymphadenitis
Tuberculous meningitis
Tuberculous pericarditis
Tuberculous peritonitis
Tuberculous salpingitis
Tuberin gene, in tuberous sclerosis
Tuberous sclerosis
angiomyolipoma of kidney in
Tuberous sclerosis complex, neuroendocrine tumors in
Tubo-ovarian abscess
anaerobic
appendicitis differentiated from
Tubular acidosis. See Renal tubular acidosis
Tubular necrosis, acute
in pancreatitis
rhabdomyolysis and
Tubular proteinuria
Tubulointerstitial diseases
TUIP. See Transurethral incision of prostate
Tularemia
TULIP. See Transurethral laser-induced prostatectomy
Tumefactive chronic pancreatitis
Tumor embolization, pulmonary metastases and
Tumor lysis syndrome
allopurinol for
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF/cachectin)
agents inhibiting. See Anti-TNF agents
in fever
insulin action in obesity and
Tumor plop
Tumor suppressor gene mutations. See also specific type
in breast cancer
in colorectal cancer
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
Tumoral calcinosis, in mineral bone disorders of chronic
kidney disease
Tums 
(calcium 
carbonate). See 
Calcium,
dietary/supplementary
TUNA. See Transurethral needle ablation of prostate
Tungiasis (Tunga penetrans)
Tuning fork tests, of hearing
Turcot 
syndrome. See also Familial adenomatous
polyposis
Turner syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis)
amenorrhea caused by
thyroid dysfunction and
TURP. See Transurethral resection of prostate
TVS 
(transvaginal 
sonography/ultrasound). See
Ultrasonography
12-lead ECG. See Electrocardiogram
Twinrix (hepatitis A and B vaccine)
TwoDay method of contraception
Twynsta. See Telmisartan, with amlodipine
Ty21a vaccine. See Typhoid vaccine
Tygacil. See Tigecycline
Tykerb. See Lapatinib
Tylenol. See Acetaminophen
Tylox. See Oxycodone
Tympanic membrane
in acute otitis media
in chronic otitis media/cholesteatoma
in eustachian tube dysfunction
in external otitis
perforation of
in acute otitis media
cerumen removal and
in chronic otitis media
ototoxic ear drops contraindicated in
traumatic
underwater diving contraindicated in
reconstruction of
in serous otitis media
Tympanocentesis, in otitis media
Typhoid (enteric) fever
prevention/immunization and
Typhoid vaccine
Typhus. See also specific type
Tyramine, MAOI interactions and
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
for chronic myeloid leukemia
hypothyroidism caused by
Tyrosine phosphatases, antibodies to, in type 1 diabetes
Tyrosinemia, hepatocellular carcinoma and
U-Lactin
U waves, antipsychotic drugs causing
Ubiquitin, in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
“Ugly duckling sign,”
UGT 1A1 (uridine diphosphoglucuro-nosyltransferase 1A1)
variants, clinical relevance of testing for
Uhl disease
UIP. See Usual interstitial pneumonia
UKPDS (United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study)
Ulcer perforation
Ulcerative colitis. See also Inflammatory bowel disease
arthritis in
colorectal cancer and
diarrhea in
drug therapy for
fulminant
GI bleeding and
primary sclerosing cholangitis and
social support and
Ulcerative stomatitis. See Stomatitis, ulcerative
Ulcers. See also Peptic ulcer disease
amebic
anal fissures
aphthous. See Aphthous ulcer
Buruli
contact, of arytenoid cartilage
corneal. See also Keratitis
contact lens wear and
genital/genitourinary. See Genital ulcers
intraoral
in Behçet syndrome
chemotherapy-induced
herpes simplex esophagitis and
in HIV infection/AIDS
skin. See Skin disorders, ulcers
Ulipristal, for emergency/postcoital contraception
Ulnar nerve lesions
in leprosy
Ultram. See Tramadol
Ultrarapid detoxification, for heroin/opioid withdrawal
Ultrasonography/Doppler 
ultrasonography/duplex
ultrasonography. See also Echocardiography
in abdominal aortic aneurysm screening/diagnosis
in abnormal premenopausal bleeding
in acute arterial occlusion
in aortic regurgitation
in aortic stenosis
in aortoiliac occlusive disease
in appendicitis
in ascites
in atrial septal defect/patent foramen ovale
neurologic involvement in. See also Neurosyphilis
in cardiomyopathy
in carotid occlusive disease
in cerebrovascular occlusive disease
in chronic kidney disease
in chronic venous insufficiency
in cirrhosis
in coarctation of aorta
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
in ectopic pregnancy
fetal
maternal diabetes and
in gastric adenocarcinoma
in gastric lymphoma
in gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors
in gestational trophoblastic disease
in heart disease. See Echocardiography
in infertility workup
intravascular, in angina
in leiomyoma of uterus
in liver cancer
in liver disease/jaundice
in mesenteric ischemia
in mitral regurgitation
in mitral stenosis
musculoskeletal
in myocardial infarction
for ovarian cancer screening/evaluation
in pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
in pancreatitis
in patent ductus arteriosus
in polycystic kidney disease
in postmenopausal bleeding
during pregnancy
in prostate cancer
for biopsy guidance
in pulmonary hypertension
in pulmonary stenosis
in renal artery stenosis/renal vascular hypertension
in renal cell carcinoma
in spontaneous abortion
in testicular cancer
in tetralogy of Fallot
in thyroid disorders
hyperthyroidism
thyroid cancer
thyroid nodules
thyroiditis
in tricuspid regurgitation
tricuspid stenosis
in urinary stone disease
in valvular heart disease
in varicose veins
in ventricular septal defect
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome/gastrinoma
Ultravate. See Halobetasol
Ultraviolet (actinic) keratitis
Ultraviolet light/sunlight
exposure to
actinic keratoses and
basal cell carcinoma and
herpes simplex recurrence and
hyperpigmentation and
hypersensitivity 
to 
(photodermatitis). See also
Photodermatitis/photosensitivity
in lupus/SLE
for osteoporosis/osteomalacia
in porphyria cutanea tarda
protection from
in cancer prevention
in lupus/SLE
in porphyria cutanea tarda
in rosacea
sunscreens for
squamous cell carcinoma and
vitamin D and
with psoralen. See PUVA therapy
Umbilical cord blood, stem cells in, for transplantation
Unasyn. See Ampicillin-sulbactam
Uncinate (temporal lobe) lesions
Undernutrition. See also Malnutrition; Nutritional disorders
in elderly
Underwater diving. See Scuba/deep sea diving
Undescended testes. See Cryptorchism
Undifferentiated schizophrenia
Unicuspid aortic valve
Unilateral fold paralysis
Unipolar disorder, endogenous. See also Depression
Uniretic. See Moexipril, with hydrochlorothiazide
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS)
Unithiol, for mercury poisoning
Univasc. See Moexipril
Universal precautions. See also Body substance isolation
HIV infection/AIDS prevention and
Unlawful sexual intercourse (statutory rape)
Unoprostone, for glaucoma/ocular hypertension
Unstable angina. See also Acute coronary syndromes
β-blockers for
calcium channel blockers for
chest pain in
clopidogrel for
revascularization procedures/PCI for
Unstable hemoglobins
“Up and Go Test,”
Upper airway cough syndrome (postnasal drip)
Upper airway/respiratory tract disorders
asthma differentiated from
foreign body
hemoptysis and
obstruction
obstructive sleep apnea
thermal injury, smoke inhalation and
Upper endoscopy. See Endoscopy
Upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding. See also Gastrointestinal
bleeding
Upper gastrointestinal series
in gastric adenocarcinoma
in peptic ulcer disease
Upper motor neuron lesions
spasticity and
weakness caused by
Upper 
respiratory 
tract 
infection. See 
Upper
airway/respiratory tract disorders
UPPP. See Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
Urates/urate crystals. See also Uric acid
in chronic urate nephropathy
in gout
Urate (uric acid) nephropathy
Urea
hyperosmolality caused by
lithium interactions and
Urea breath testing, in H pylori infection
Urea clearance, GFR measurement and
Urea nitrogen. See Blood urea nitrogen
Ureacin. See Urea
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Uremia. See also Hemolytic-uremic syndrome; Kidney
disease/injury; Renal failure
coma in diabetic patient and
neuropathy associated with
platelet function affected in
pruritus in
Uremic acidosis
Uremic encephalopathy
Uremic fetor
Uremic frost
Uremic pericarditis
Ureter
cancer of
obstruction of. See also Urinary tract obstruction
postrenal acute kidney injury and
stones causing
Ureteral stones. See also Urinary stone disease
tubulointerstitial nephritis caused by
Ureteroscopic stone extraction
Urethra, incompetence/obstruction of
postrenal acute kidney injury and
urinary incontinence and
Urethral discharge
in chlamydial urethritis
in epididymitis
in gonorrhea
STDs causing
Urethritis
adenovirus causing
atrophic, urinary incontinence and
chlamydial
dysuria caused by
in epididymitis
gonococcal
postgonococcal
STDs causing
Trichomonas causing
Urethrocele
Urge incontinence
Urgencies, 
hypertensive. See 
also 
Hypertensive
emergencies
Urgency, urinary. See Irritative voiding symptoms; Urge
incontinence
Uric acid. See also Hyperuricemia
acute tubular necrosis/kidney injury and
calcium nephrolithiasis and
chronic kidney disease and
in gout
reducing levels of
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
in psoriatic arthritis
reference values for
in tumor lysis syndrome
uric acid nephrolithiasis/nephropathy and
Uric acid crystals. See Urates/urate crystals
Uric acid (urate) nephropathy
Uric acid urinary stones (calculi)
Uricosuric drugs
Uridine 5′-diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase, gene for,
chronic pancreatitis and
Uridine diphosphoglucurono- syltransferase 1A1 (UGT
1A1) variants, clinical relevance of testing for
Urinalysis. See also specific disorder
for drug detection
in dysuria evaluation
in fluid and electrolyte disorders
in glomerulonephritis/nephritic spectrum disorders
in nephrotic spectrum disorders
Urinary anion gap. See also Anion gap/anion gap acidosis
in hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis/renal tubular
acidosis
Urinary bladder. See Bladder
Urinary calculi. See also Urinary stone disease
Urinary casts. See also specific type
in acute kidney injury/tubular necrosis
in chronic kidney disease
in glomerulonephritis
in interstitial nephritis
Urinary chloride, in metabolic alkalosis
Urinary cytology
in bladder cancer
in ureteral/renal pelvic cancer
Urinary diversion, after cystectomy
Urinary frequency. See Irritative voiding symptoms
Urinary incontinence
biofeedback in management of
in elderly
enuresis
estrogen replacement therapy and
in pelvic organ prolapse
spinal trauma and
Urinary retention, in acute bacterial prostatitis
Urinary sphincter, dysfunction of, in spinal trauma
Urinary stone disease. See also Nephrolithiasis
calcium nephrolithiasis and
Crohn disease and
cystine stones and
medical treatment/recurrence prevention and
metabolic analysis and
in polycystic kidney disease
in renal tubular acidosis
struvite stones and
tubulointerstitial nephritis caused by
uric acid stones and
Urinary tract infection. See also Cystitis; Pyelonephritis
chronic prostatitis and
dysuria and
E coli causing
health care (hospital)-associated
incontinence and
kidney injury and
in polycystic kidney disease
during pregnancy
in schistosomiasis
struvite calculi and
Urinary tract obstruction
kidney injury and
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Urinary urgency. See Irritative voiding symptoms; Urge
incontinence
Urination. See Voiding
Urine
acidification of, in poisoning/drug overdose
alkalinization of
for cystine calculi
for lithium overdose/toxicity
in poisoning/drug overdose
for salicylate toxicity
for uric acid calculi
candida in
ketones in. See Ketonuria
osmolality of. See Osmolality, urine
pH of
calcium stones and
cystine calculi and
in 
hyperchloremic 
metabolic 
acidosis/tubular
acidosis
manipulation of in poisoning/drug overdose
stone disease and
struvite calculi and
uric acid calculi and
sodium in. See Sodium, urine
for toxicology screening
Urine culture, in dysuria evaluation
Urine output
in acute tubular necrosis
in diabetes insipidus
incontinence in elderly and
monitoring
in burn care
in heat stroke
in oliguria
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
Urine protein-to-creatinine ratio. See also Proteinuria
Urodynamic studies
in interstitial cystitis
in prostatodynia
Urofollitropins, for male infertility
Urokinase. See also Thrombolytic therapy
for pulmonary embolism
Urolithiasis. See also Nephrolithiasis; Urinary stone
disease
Urologic 
disorders. See also Genitourinary system,
disorders of
Uropathy, obstructive
postrenal
tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Uroporphyrins, in porphyria cutanea tarda
Urosepsis. See also Urinary tract infection
Urothelial cell carcinoma
of bladder
of ureter/renal pelvis
Ursodeoxycholic acid
for biliary cirrhosis
for cholelithiasis/gallstones
for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
for primary sclerosing cholangitis
Urticaria
ACE inhibitor/angiotensin II receptor antagonist
therapy and
antihistamines for
cholinergic
cold
drugs causing
insect bites/stings causing
transfusion causing
Urticating hairs, skin lesions caused by
Ustekinumab, for psoriasis
Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP)
Uterine bleeding. See Menstruation; Vaginal bleeding
Uterine suspension, for pelvic organ prolapse
Uterine tubes, ligation of
Uterus
cancer of. See Endometrial carcinoma
disorders of, amenorrhea in
gravid. See Pregnancy
leiomyoma (fibroid tumor) of
perforation of by IUD
peripartum infection of
UVA therapy, with psoralen. See PUVA therapy
UVB therapy. See also Phototherapy
for atopic dermatitis
for lichen planus
for psoriasis
Uveitis
in ankylosing spondylitis
anterior (iritis)
in Behçet syndrome
immune recovery
in leptospirosis
posterior
in syphilis
in toxoplasmosis
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty, for sleep apnea
V617F mutation
in hepatic vein obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome)
in noncirrhotic portal hypertension
V/Q scans. See Ventilation-perfusion scans
V1/V2 vasopressin receptors, in diabetes insipidus
V2 
vasopressin 
receptor 
antagonists, 
for
hyponatremia/SIADH
v wave
in constrictive pericarditis
in heart failure
VA. See Visual acuity
vacA gene, in H pylori gastritis
Vaccine bacillus Calmette-Guérin. See BCG vaccine
Vaccine-derived polio virus (VDPV)
Vaccine-preventable infections. See also specific type
Vaccines. See specific type and Immunization
Vaccinia
in atopic dermatitis/eczema patients
monkeypox prevention and
smallpox vaccination and
Vaccinia immune globulin
Vaccinia syndrome, acute
Vacuum erection device, for erectile dysfunction
VADT (Veteran Administration Diabetes Trial)
Vagal nerve. See Vagus nerve
Vagal nerve stimulation
for depression
for seizures
Vagifem. See Estradiol vaginal tablets
Vagina. See also under Vaginal
anaerobic flora/infection of
inflammation/infection of. See Vaginitis/vulvovaginitis
Vaginal atrophy. See Atrophic vaginitis
Vaginal bleeding
abnormal premenopausal
in polycystic ovary syndrome
in cervical cancer
in endometrial carcinoma
leiomyomas causing
normal menstrual. See also Menstruation
postmenopausal
during pregnancy
ectopic pregnancy and
gestational trophoblastic disease and
third-trimester
in spontaneous abortion
Vaginal cancer, Pap smear in screening for
Vaginal discharge. See also Vaginitis/vulvovaginitis
STDs causing
Vaginal dryness. See Atrophic vaginitis
Vaginal estrogen
Vaginal hernias (pelvic organ prolapse)
Vaginal pessary. See Pessary
Vaginal ring
contraceptive
for estrogen replacement therapy
Vaginal ultrasound. See Ultrasonography
Vaginal vault suspension, for pelvic organ prolapse
Vaginal warts. See also Venereal (genital) warts
Vaginismus
Vaginitis/vulvovaginitis. See also Vulvovaginal candidiasis
atrophic. See Atrophic vaginitis
dysuria and
gonococcal
STDs causing
Trichomonas vaginalis causing
Vaginosis, bacterial
rape/sexual assault in transmission of
Vagus nerve
hiccups caused by irritation of
lesion/damage of, vocal fold paralysis and
stimulation of. See Vagal nerve stimulation
Valacyclovir
for herpes simplex infections
for herpes zoster
prophylactic/suppressive
Valcyte. See Valganciclovir
Valganciclovir
Community-acquired pneumonia. See also Pneumonia
Valgus stress test
Valium. See Diazepam
Valproic acid/valproate
for bipolar disease/mania
lithium interactions and
for migraine prophylaxis
overdose/toxicity of
hemodialysis for
for panic attacks
for seizures
pregnancy and
status epilepticus and
teratogenic effects of
Valsalva maneuver
heart murmurs affected by
palpitations affected by
for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
response to in syncope
Valsartan
for heart failure
for hypertension
with aliskiren
with amlodipine
with amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide
with hydrochlorothiazide
for myocardial infarction
Valtrex. See Valacyclovir
Valturna. See Aliskiren, with valsartan
Valve replacement
anticoagulation after
endocarditis and
pregnancy and
for aortic regurgitation
for aortic stenosis
choice and management of prosthetic valves for
coagulase-negative staphylococcal infection and
for endocarditis
for mitral stenosis
before planned noncardiac surgery
for pulmonary stenosis
for pulmonic regurgitation
for secondary mitral regurgitation
for tricuspid regurgitation
for tricuspid stenosis
Valves
cardiac. See also Prosthetic heart valves; Valve
replacement; Valvular heart disease
endocarditis affecting. See also Endocarditis
venous, incompetence of
chronic venous insufficiency and
varicose veins and
Valvular heart disease. See also specific type
in alkaptonuria
endocarditis and. See also Endocarditis
in Marfan syndrome
pregnancy and
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management
and
Q fever endocarditis and
rheumatic fever/rheumatic heart disease and
in Turner syndrome
Valvular papillary fibroelastoma
Valvular rupture
Valvuloplasty
for aortic stenosis
for mitral stenosis
before planned noncardiac surgery
during pregnancy
for pulmonary stenosis
Vancocin. See Vancomycin
Vancomycin
for anthrax
for antibiotic-associated colitis
for endocarditis
for meningitis
for pneumonia
red man syndrome caused by
resistance to
burn-associated infection and
Vanicream
Vanillylmandelic acid, urinary, reference
values for
Vaniqua. See Eflornithine
Vantin. See Cefpodoxime
VAP. See Ventilator-associated pneumonia
Vaqta. See Hepatitis A vaccine
Vardenafil
for erectile dysfunction
antidepressant-induced
in diabetics
nitrate/nitroglycerin contraindications and
Varenicline, for smoking cessation
Variant (Prinzmetal) angina
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See also Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease
Varicella (chickenpox)
during pregnancy/congenital
prevention/immunization and. See Varicella vaccine
reactivation of. See also Herpes zoster
Varicella vaccine
adverse effects/contraindications and
in immunocompromised host/HIV infection/AIDS
postexposure
pregnancy and
Varicella-zoster immune globulin
for newborn
during pregnancy
Varicella zoster virus. See also Herpes zoster; Varicella
Bell palsy caused by
immunization against. See Herpes zoster vaccine;
Varicella vaccine
infection with during pregnancy
reactivation of. See also Herpes zoster
Varicocele, in infertility
Varicose veins (varicosities/varices)
esophageal. See Esophageal varices
GI bleeding from
portal hypertension/portal hypertensive gastropathy
causing
leg ulcers and
venous insufficiency/stasis and
Variegate porphyria
Varilrix. See Varicella vaccine
Variola (smallpox)
Variola (smallpox) vaccination
atopic dermatitis/eczema and
VARIVAX. See Varicella vaccine
VariZIG. See Varicella-zoster immune globulin
Varus stress test
Vas deferens
absence of, in cystic fibrosis/infertility
obstruction of, in male infertility
Vasa previa, third-trimester bleeding caused by
Vascular 
access. See 
also 
Arterial 
lines;
Catheters/intravenous lines
in burn care
Vascular dementia
hypertension and
Vascular disorders (vascular occlusion/anomalies). See
also specific type or vesselaffected and Vasculitis
arterial aneurysms
atherosclerotic
homocysteine/hyperhomocysteinemia and
in diabetes mellitus
aspirin in prevention of
foot ulcers/gangrene and
glycemic control and
hypertension control and
erectile dysfunction and
GI bleeding and
headache and
hepatic vein
Budd-Chiari syndrome
sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
nonatherosclerotic
osteomyelitis and
in preeclampsia-eclampsia
pregnancy and
seizures caused by
shock and
in sickle cell syndromes
spinal
venous
Vascular ectasias (angiodysplasias), GI bleeding in
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), inhibitors of.
See Anti-VEGF therapy
Vascular loops, vertigo caused by
Vascular reconstruction. See Bypass grafting
Vasculitis. See also specific disorder
allergic, drugs causing
brain and spinal cord involvement and (primary angiitis
of central nervous system)
coronary artery involvement and
pulmonary
asthma differentiated from
retinal. See also Uveitis
retinal artery occlusion and
in rheumatoid arthritis
in SLE
urticarial
Vasectomy
Vaseretic. See 
Enalapril, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
hydrochlorothiazide
Vasoactive drug therapy
for dysautonomia
in erectile dysfunction
diagnosis and
for esophageal varices
for shock
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP), tumors secreting
(VIPoma)
Vasodepressor syncope
Vasodilator therapy
for heart failure
left ventricular (infarct-related)
for hypertension
in urgencies/emergencies
for pulmonary hypertension
Vasodilatory (distributive) shock
Vasography, in male infertility
Vasomotor disorders
in menopause (hot flushes)
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
rhinitis
syncope (vasovagal syncope)
Vaso-occlusive episodes, in sickle cell syndromes
pregnancy and
Vasopressin. See 
also 
Antidiuretic 
hormone;
Desmopressin
in diabetes insipidus
for shock
in volume overload
Vasopressin challenge test, in diabetes insipidus
Vasopressin-resistant diabetes insipidus
Vasopressin V1/V2 receptors, in diabetes insipidus
Vasopressin 
V2 
receptor 
antagonists, 
for
hyponatremia/SIADH
Vasopressinase, diabetes insipidus caused by
Vasospasm. See also Vasomotor disorders
coronary
in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
in Raynaud phenomenon
subarachnoid hemorrhage and
Vasotec. See Enalapril; Enalaprilat
Vasovagal syncope
Vater, ampulla of. See Ampulla of Vater
VATS. See Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
VC (vital capacity), forced. See FVC
vCJD. See Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
VDPV. See Vaccine-derived polio virus
VDRL test
on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF-VDRL)
in HIV infection/AIDS
in HIV infection/AIDS
for rape victim
Vectibix. See Panitumumab
Vegetarians/vegans
diet in pregnancy/lactation and
dietary vitamin B12 deficiency in
Vegetative state, persistent
Vegetectomy, for endocarditis
Vein stripping, for varicose veins
Veins
deep, thrombosis of. See Deep venous thrombosis
disorders of. See also under Venous and Veno-
occlusive disease
superficial, thrombophlebitis involving
varicose. See Varicose veins
Velban. See Vinblastine
Velcade. See Bortezomib
VEMPs. See Vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials
Vena cava, superior, obstruction of
in lung cancer
Vena 
cava 
filters/interruption, 
for 
deep 
venous
thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test. See VDRL
test
Venereal infections. See Sexually transmitted diseases
during pregnancy. See also Preeclampsia-eclampsia
anorectal involvement and
cervical/vaginal/vulvar
HPV vaccination in prevention of
imiquimod for removal of
podophyllum resin for removal of
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
Venlafaxine
for anxiety
in elderly
MAOI interactions and
for neuropathic pain
overdose/toxicity of
during pregnancy
Venography
in deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
in superior vena caval obstruction
Venomous insect bites/stings
anaphylaxis caused by
Venomous snake bites
Veno-occlusive disease
hepatic
Budd-Chiari syndrome
sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
pulmonary hypertension and
Venous access. See Catheters/intravenous lines
Venous blood gases, in acid-base disorders
Venous catheterization. See Catheters/intravenous lines
Venous 
disease. See also specific type and Veno-
occlusive disease; Venous insufficiency/stasis
Venous insufficiency/stasis
deep venous thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism and
hypertension and. See also Preeclampsia-eclampsia
osteomyelitis and
lower extremity edema and
varicose veins and
Venous pressure
central. See Central venous pressure
elevated, in superior vena cava obstruction/syndrome
in lower extremity
edema and
normal
Venous reflux
in chronic venous insufficiency
correction of
in varicose veins
Venous sinus thrombosis
cancer-related
in pseudotumor cerebri
Venous stasis. See Venous insufficiency/stasis
Venous thromboembolic disease
air travel and
in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
cancer-associated
chest pain and
of deep veins. See Deep venous thrombosis
detection of
pulmonary embolism diagnosis and
in essential thrombocytosis
estrogen replacement therapy and
in 
granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(Wegener
granulomatosis)
in homocystinuria
hypercoagulability and
intracranial. See also Stroke
oral contraceptive use and
prevention of
thromboembolism. See also Pulmonary venous
thromboembolism
risk stratification for
treatment of
Venous thrombophlebitis, superficial
Venous valves, incompetence of
chronic venous insufficiency and
varicose veins and
Venovenous/continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration, for
poisoning/drug overdose
Ventilation
disorders of control of. See also Hyperventilation;
Hypoventilation
mechanical. See Mechanical ventilation
Ventilation-perfusion scans
in COPD
in pulmonary embolism
chest pain evaluation and
in pulmonary hypertension
Ventilator-associated pneumonia
Ventricular aneurysm, myocardial infarction and
Ventricular arrhythmias. See also specific type
in cardiomyopathy
differentiation 
of 
from 
aberrantly 
conducted
supraventricular beats
in myocardial infarction
antiarrhythmic prophylaxis and
in poisoning/drug overdose
Ventricular assist devices
for cardiomyopathy
Ventricular cysts, in cysticercosis
Ventricular 
dysfunction/failure. See Congestive heart
(cardiac) failure
Ventricular fibrillation
catheter ablation for
in myocardial infarction
antiarrhythmic prophylaxis and
sudden death caused by
Ventricular gallop. See Heart sounds
Ventricular noncompaction
Ventricular 
premature 
beats 
(ventricular
extrasystoles/premature ventricular contractions)
in myocardial infarction
in poisoning/drug overdose
Ventricular rate control. See Rate control
Ventricular reduction surgery, for heart failure
Ventricular septal aneurysm
Ventricular septal defect
Ventricular tachycardia
catheter ablation for
driving recommendations and
in heart failure
in myocardial infarction
antiarrhythmic prophylaxis and
palpitations and
in poisoning/drug overdose
preoperative evaluation/perioperative management of
Ventriculoencephalitis, CMV
Vepesid. See Etoposide
Verapamil. See also Calcium channel blocking drugs
for acute coronary syndromes
for angina
for arrhythmias
atrial fibrillation
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
for hypertension
with trandolapril
for islet cell tumors/insulinomas
for migraine prophylaxis
overdose/toxicity of
Verbal utterances, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Verbigeration, in schizophrenia/psychotic disorders
Verelan. See Verapamil
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis
Verner–Morrison syndrome
Verocell rabies vaccine
Verrucae. See Warts
Versed. See Midazolam
Vertebrae. See Spinal cord; Spine
Vertebral artery occlusion, in stroke
Vertebral compression/fracture
back pain caused by
in osteoporosis
in Paget disease
Vertebral osteomyelitis
back pain and
epidural abscess and
injection drug use and
Vertebrobasilar insufficiency/obstruction
stroke caused by
transient ischemic attacks caused by
vertigo caused by
Vertigo
in audiovestibular disorders
barotrauma and
benign paroxysmal positioning (BPPV)
central causes of
cervical
in labyrinthitis
in Ménière syndrome
migrainous
mixed central and peripheral causes of
in multiple sclerosis
in perilymphatic fistula
peripheral causes of
in superior semicircular canal dehiscence
traumatic
vascular compromise causing
in vestibular neuronitis
vestibular schwannoma (acoustic neurinoma) causing
Very-low-calorie diets, in obesity management
Very-low-density lipoproteins/cholesterol
in atherosclerosis/heart disease
lowering levels of. See Lipid-lowering therapy
Vesanoid. See Tretinoin
Vesicoureteral reflux, tubulointerstitial disease caused by
Vesicular dermatoses. See also specific type
Vesiculobullous hand eczema/vesiculobullous dermatitis of
palms and soles (pompholyx)
tinea differentiated from
Vestibular disorders (vestibulopathy)
autoimmune hearing loss and
central
nausea and vomiting caused by
neuronitis
peripheral
schwannoma. See Schwannoma, vestibular
vertigo in. See also Vertigo
Vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials (VEMPs), in vertigo
Vestibulitis
nasal
vulvar
Veteran Administration Diabetes Trial (VADT)
Vexol. See Rimexolone
VFend. See Voriconazole
VHL. See von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
VHL gene, in pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma
Vi CPS vaccine. See Typhoid vaccine
Viagra. See Sildenafil
Vibration sense, disorders of, in tabes dorsalis
Vibrio
alginolyticus
cholerae. See also Cholera
immunization against
pulmonary embolism and. See also Pulmonary venous
thromboembolism
parahaemolyticus
vulnificus
Vicodin. See Hydrocodone
Victoza. See Liraglutide
Vidarabine
Vidaza. See Azacitidine
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
for hepatic hydrothorax
in lung cancer diagnosis
in mesothelioma diagnosis
for pulmonary effusion/tamponade
for solitary pulmonary nodule
Videoesophagography
Videx. See Didanosine
Vidian nerve, in vasomotor rhinitis
Vigabatrin, overdose/toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
Vigamox. See Moxifloxacin
Vildagliptin
VIN. See Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia
Vinblastine
for Kaposi sarcoma
for renal cell carcinoma
Vinca alkaloids
neuropathy caused by
Vincent angina (necrotizing ulcerative/fusospirochetal
gingivitis)
Vincristine
adverse ophthalmic effects of
neuropathy caused by
Raynaud phenomenon caused by
Vinorelbine
Vinyl chloride exposure, liver cancer and
Vioform. See Iodoquinol
Violence. See also Rape
alcohol use/abuse and
anabolic steroid use and
domestic
elder abuse and
prevention of
phencyclidine use/abuse and
prevention of
VIP. See Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
VIPomas
Vira-A. See Vidarabine
Viracept. See Nelfinavir
Viral diseases. See also specific type
adenovirus
arthritis and
blood transfusion in transmission of
conjunctivitis
diarrhea/gastroenteritis
drug therapy for
enterovirus
exanthematous
hepatitis. See Hepatitis
herpesvirus
meningitis. See Aseptic meningitis
myocarditis in
neurotropic
pericarditis
respiratory
rhinosinusitis (common cold)
bacterial rhinosinusitis and
cough in
systemic
vaccine-preventable
Viral load tests (HIV). See HIV viral load tests
Viramune. See Nevirapine
Virchow node
Virchow triad
Viread. See Tenofovir
Viridans streptococci
endocarditis caused by
Virilization
in polycystic ovary syndrome
Viroptic. See Trifluridine
Virtual colonoscopy
in colorectal cancer screening and evaluation/polyp
identification
in diverticular disease
Viruses. See Viral diseases
Visceral artery endarterectomy, for
visceral ischemia
Visceral artery insufficiency
Visceral hypersensitivity (heightened visceral nociception)
chest pain and
irritable bowel syndrome and
Visceral ischemia
Visceral larva migrans
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar)
dermal leishmaniasis after
in HIV infection/AIDS
Viscerotropic disease
leishmaniasis. See also Visceral leishmaniasis
yellow fever vaccine-associated
Viscocanalostomy, for glaucoma
Visicol. See Sodium phosphate
Vision
double. See Diplopia
impaired/blurred. See Visual impairment/loss
Visken. See Pindolol
Vistaril. See Hydroxyzine
Visual acuity
assessment of in elderly
in optic neuritis
reduced. See Visual impairment/loss
in retinal artery occlusion
in retinal vein occlusion
in vitreous hemorrhage
Visual field defects/loss. See also Visual impairment/loss
in glaucoma
in headache
intracranial tumors causing
in ischemic optic neuropathy
in retinal artery occlusion
in retinal detachment
in stroke
in Sturge-Weber syndrome
in transient monocular blindness
Visual impairment/loss. See also Visual field defects/loss
in age-related macular degeneration
in blood dyscrasias
in botulism
cataract causing
in diabetes
in elderly
episodic, in transient monocular blindness
in giant cell arteritis
in glaucoma
in headache
in ischemic optic neuropathy
onchocerciasis causing
in optic neuritis
in pseudotumor cerebri
refractive errors causing
in retinal artery occlusion
in retinal detachment
in retinal vein occlusion
in Sturge-Weber syndrome
in thyroid disease. See Dysthyroid eye disease
in trachoma
in transient monocular blindness
in uveitis
in vitamin A deficiency
in vitreous hemorrhage
Visuospatial impairment, in dementia
Vital capacity, forced. See FVC
Vitamin A. See also Beta-carotene
deficiency of
toxicity of
ophthalmic effects and
Vitamin B1. See Thiamine
Vitamin B2. See Riboflavin
Vitamin B3. See Niacin
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)
deficiency of
homocystinuria/hyperhomocysteinemia and
for isoniazid overdose/toxicity
toxicity of
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin)
deficiency of
in bacterial overgrowth
fish tapeworm infection and
neuropathy associated with
pernicious anemia and
short bowel syndrome/ileal resection and
subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord
caused by
thrombocytopenia associated with
homocystinuria/hyperhomocysteinemia and
serum levels of
in polycythemia
reference values for
in vitamin B12 deficiency
supplemental
for short bowel syndrome
for subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord
Vitamin B12 absorption test (Schilling test), short bowel
syndrome/ileal resection and
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
in chemoprevention
deficiency of
toxicity of
Vitamin D
adverse ophthalmic effects of
deficiency of/resistance to
in chronic kidney disease (renal osteodystrophy)
in cirrhosis
in hyperparathyroidism
in hypocalcemia
in osteomalacia
in osteoporosis
dietary/supplementary
hypercalcemia and
for hyperparathyroidism
for hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism/tetany
for mineral bone disorders of chronic kidney
disease
for osteomalacia
for osteoporosis prevention/management
in hypercalcemia
in hypercalciuria
hypophosphatemia/hypophosphatemic rickets and
phosphate metabolism and
receptors for
reference values for
Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol/ergosterol). See also Vitamin D
for hypoparathyroidism
for osteomalacia
Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol). See also Vitamin D
in hypercalcemia
for hypoparathyroidism
Vitamin D analogs, for psoriasis
Vitamin D-dependent rickets
Vitamin D-resistant (hypophosphatemic) rickets
Vitamin E
in chemoprevention
deficiency of
toxicity of
Vitamin K
for anticoagulant overdose
in coagulation
deficiency and
for esophageal varices
for hypoprothrombinemia, in cirrhosis
Vitamin K antagonists. See also Warfarin
Vitamin K epoxide reductase complex (VKORC1) variants,
clinical relevance of testing for
Vitamin supplements, in HIV infection/AIDS
Vitamins. See also specific vitamin
adverse ophthalmic effects of
deficiency of, in alcoholic liver disease/cirrhosis
disorders of metabolism of
prenatal
requirements for in nutritional support
Vitiligo
in Addison disease
tinea versicolor differentiated from
Vitrectomy
for diabetic retinopathy
for retinal detachment
for retinal vein occlusion
Vitreous hemorrhage
Vivactil. See Protriptyline
Vivelle/Vivelle-Dot. See Estradiol transdermal systems
VKORC1 (vitamin K epoxide reductase complex) variants,
clinical relevance of testing for
VLDL. See Very-low-density lipoproteins/cholesterol
VLP vaccine. See Human papillomavirus (HPV) virus-like
particle (VLP) vaccine
VMA. See Vanillylmandelic acid
Vo2 (maximal oxygen uptake), lung cancer surgery and
Vocal fold cysts
Vocal fold dysfunction
Vocal fold nodules
laryngitis and
Vocal fold polyps
Vocal folds
cancer of
in hoarseness
leukoplakia of
paralysis of
thyroid surgery and
traumatic lesions of
laryngitis and
Voglibose
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
Voice, abnormal
in lung cancer
in squamous cell carcinoma of larynx
in vocal fold paralysis
Voice rehabilitation, after laryngeal surgery
Voiding. See also Irritative voiding symptoms; Obstructive
voiding symptoms
dysfunctional, in prostatodynia
increased. See Polyuria
involuntary. See also Urinary incontinence
during sleep (enuresis)
painful (dysuria)
Voltaren/Voltaren-XR. See Diclofenac
Volume depletion. See also Dehydration
kidney injury and
saline-responsive metabolic alkalosis and
Volume overload
Volume reduction surgery, for COPD
Volume replacement. See Fluid management/hydration
Volume status
acute kidney injury and
hypernatremia and
hyperosmolality and
hyponatremia and
metabolic alkalosis and
Volutrauma. See Barotrauma
Vomiting. See also Nausea and vomiting
in cholecystitis
with diarrhea/food poisoning/gastroenteritis
in gastric outlet obstruction
in gastroparesis
induced
in bulimia nervosa
for poisoning/drug overdose
in intracerebral hemorrhage
Mallory-Weiss syndrome/tears and
palliation of
of pregnancy
gestational trophoblastic disease and
Wernicke encephalopathy and
radiation exposure and
Vomiting center
von Graefe sign
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
neuroendocrine tumors in
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma in
renal cell carcinoma in
von Recklinghausen disease
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma in
von Willebrand disease
type 2B
von Willebrand factor
reference values for
in thrombotic microangiopathies
von 
Willebrand 
factor 
cleaving 
protease
(vWFCP/ADAMTS-13), in thrombotic microangiopathies
von Willebrand factor concentrate
von Willebrand factor-containing factor VIII concentrate
von Willebrand factor receptor, in Bernard-Soulier
syndrome
Voriconazole
for aspergillosis
for candidiasis
for ophthalmic disorders
for paracoccidioidomycosis
prophylactic
Votrient. See Pazopanib
Voyeurism
VPBs. See Ventricular premature beats
VSD. See Ventricular septal defect
VTE. See Venous thromboembolic disease
Vulvar carcinoma
Vulvar dystrophy
Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN)
Vulvar vestibulitis
Vulvar warts. See also Venereal (genital) warts
Vulvectomy
Vulvodynia
Vulvovaginal candidiasis
in diabetes mellitus
in HIV infection/AIDS
rape/sexual assault and
Vulvovaginitis. See Vaginitis
vWD. See von Willebrand disease
vWF. See von Willebrand factor
vWFCP. See von Willebrand factor cleaving protease
VX poisoning
VZIG. See Varicella zoster immune globulin
VZV. See Varicella zoster virus
VZV vaccine. See Herpes zoster vaccine
Waldenström macroglobulinemia
cold agglutinin disease and
Walking program
for COPD
for osteoarthritis
Warfarin
for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
in SLE
for atrial fibrillation
in hyperthyroidism
in mitral stenosis
benzodiazepine interactions and
after cardiac valve replacement surgery
for deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
(venous 
thromboembolic 
disease)
prevention/treatment
for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
overdose/toxicity of
perioperative
postinfarction
pregnancy and
SSRI interaction and
for transient ischemic attacks
Warts (verrucae)
venereal. See Venereal (genital) warts
Washout time, in antidepressant drug therapy
Wasting
in HIV infection/AIDS
in protein–energy malnutrition
Watchful waiting/surveillance
for benign prostatic hyperplasia
after orchiectomy for testicular cancer
for prostate cancer
Water
body. See Body water
contaminated
amebiasis and
cholera and
coccidial/microsporidial infection and
cyclosporiasis and
diarrhea and
dracunculiasis and
enteric (typhoid) fever and
fascioliasis and
fasciolopsiasis and
giardiasis and
gnathostomiasis and
Legionnaires disease and
leptospirosis and
paragonimiasis and
schistosomiasis and
Water deficit. See also Dehydration
calculation of
Water drinking. See Psychogenic polydipsia; Water/fluid
intake
Water fleas, dracunculiasis transmitted by
Water/fluid intake. See also Fluid management/hydration
in diabetes insipidus
disorders of/inappropriate
genetic disorders and
hypernatremia caused by
hyponatremia caused by
heat exposure prevention and
requirements for in nutritional support
restriction of
for chronic kidney disease
for hyponatremia
urinary stone formation and
withholding, in terminally ill/dying patient
Water-hammer pulse
Water shifts, hyperosmolality with and without
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
Waterston-Cooley shunt, for tetralogy of Fallot
WDHA
Weakness/muscle 
weakness. See also Myopathies;
Myositis; Paralysis
in diabetes
differential diagnosis of
drugs causing
in Guillain-Barré syndrome
in inclusion body myositis
in motor neuron diseases
in multiple sclerosis
in muscular dystrophy
in myasthenia gravis
in myasthenic (Lambert-Eaton) syndrome
in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
spinal trauma causing
in stroke
Web space tinea pedis
Weber test
Webs, esophageal. See Esophageal webs
Weeping/crusted skin lesions. See also specific type
drying agents for
   tuberculosis. See also Tuberculosis
Pulmonary tuberculosis. See also Tuberculosis
microscopic polyangiitis differentiated from
nose and paranasal sinus involvement in
pulmonary involvement in
warts. See also Venereal (genital) warts
Weight
changes in. See also Weight gain; Weight loss
water balance and
exercise/activity in maintenance of
normal
Weight gain. See also Obesity
drugs causing
antipsychotic agents
lithium
thiazolidinediones
in pregnancy
prevention of, exercise/activity and
smoking cessation and
Weight loss (involuntary/unintended). See also specific
disorder and Weight reduction
in anorexia
in diabetes
diabetic neuropathic cachexia and
in elderly
in HIV infection/AIDS
malabsorption and
in protein–energy malnutrition
in Whipple disease
Weight reduction
in arthritis prevention/management
exercise/activity in
in GERD management
in hypertension management/prevention
for obese patient
obesity-hypoventilation (Pickwickian) syndrome and
with type 2 diabetes
for polycystic ovary syndrome
for sleep apnea
for snoring
Weil-Felix test, in relapsing fever
Weil syndrome
WelChol. See Colesevelam
Wellbutrin. See Bupropion
“Wells rule,”
Wenckebach (Mobitz type I) atrioventricular block
in myocardial infarction
Werdnig-Hoffmann disease
Wermer 
syndrome. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN), type 1
Wernicke aphasia, stroke causing
Wernicke encephalopathy
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
West African trypanosomiasis
West Nile fever/encephalitis
screening blood for virus causing
Westermark sign, in pulmonary embolism
Western blot assay
in HIV infection/AIDS
reference values for
in Lyme disease
Western (equine) encephalitis
Wet drowning
Wharton duct, calculus formation in
Wheals. See Urticaria
Wheat procedure, for aortic regurgitation
Wheezes
in asthma
dyspnea and
in heart failure (cardiac asthma)
in pulmonary embolism
Whiplash injuries
neck pain in
Whipple disease
arthritis in
Whipple resection, for pancreatic/periampullary carcinoma
Whipple triad
Whipworm infections (trichuriasis)
Whispered voice test
White blood cell count (leukocyte count)
ascitic fluid
in bacterial peritonitis
in peritoneal carcinomatosis
in tuberculous peritonitis
cerebrospinal fluid
chemotherapy dosage modification and
in cholecystitis
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in chronic myeloid leukemia
in essential thrombocytosis
joint fluid
in gonococcal arthritis
in nongonococcal acute bacterial (septic) arthritis
in myelofibrosis
in myeloproliferative disorders
pleural fluid
in polycythemia
reference values for
White blood cells. See Leukocytes
White cell casts
in interstitial nephritis
Whitewater Arroyo virus
Whitlow, herpetic
Whole blood. See Fresh whole blood
Whole bowel irrigation, for poisoning/drug overdose
Whooping cough (pertussis). See Pertussis
Wickham striae
Wide QRS complex. See QRS complex, wide
Wilson disease (hepatolenticular degeneration)
movement disorders in
parkinsonism differentiated from
WinRho. See Anti-D
Winterbottom sign
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Withdrawal. See also specific substance
cognitive disorders/delirium caused by
seizures caused by
Withdrawal response, in coma or stupor
Withdrawal/withholding of curative effort, in terminally
ill/dying patient
advance directives and
Wolbachia bacteria
filariasis and
onchocerciasis and
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
palpitations in
Wolfram syndrome
Wood alcohol. See Methanol
Wood light
in erythrasma diagnosis
in pigmentary disorder evaluation
in rape victim examination
Woody (Riedel) thyroiditis
Word-finding difficult, in dementia
Word recall, three-item, in dementia screening
Wound botulism
in drug users
Wound care
for bite wounds
rabies and
in burn injuries
for frostbite
for lymphangitis/lymphadenitis
for pressure ulcers
tetanus prophylaxis/treatment and
Wound infections
clostridial
botulism
   in drug users
myonecrosis/gas gangrene
tetanus. See also Tetanus
surgical
antibiotic prophylaxis of
in diabetic patients
Wrestlers, epidemic herpes in (herpes gladiatorum)
Wrist
in carpal tunnel syndrome
examination of
in lateral and medial epicondylosis
ulnar nerve lesions at
Writer's cramp
WT1, in mesothelioma
Wuchereria bancrofti
eosinophilic pulmonary syndromes and
Wytensin. See Guanabenz
X chromosome
in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
in Duchenne muscular dystrophy
fragile site on, mental retardation and
in idiopathic torsion dystonia
in Klinefelter syndrome
in Turner syndrome
X chromosome mosaicism
premature ovarian failure and
in Turner syndrome
x descent, in tricuspid regurgitation
X-inactive-specific transcriptase (XIST), in Klinefelter
syndrome
X-linked bulbospinal neuronopathy
X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets
X-ray studies. See also specific disorder and under
Radiation
radiation exposure and
cancer risk and
Xalacom. See Latanoprost/timolol
Xalatan. See Latanoprost
Xanax. See Alprazolam
Xanthine oxidase inhibitors, for gout
Xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis
Xanthomas
in biliary cirrhosis
eruptive
in diabetes mellitus
tendinous
Xeloda. See Capecitabine
Xerosis
in HIV infection/AIDS
in vitamin A deficiency
Xerostomia, in Sjögren syndrome
Xgeva. See Denosumab
Xibrom. See Bromfenac
XIST. See X-inactive-specific transcriptase
XO karyotype, in Turner syndrome
Xp-, in Turner syndrome
XXY karyotype. See also Klinefelter syndrome
XY gonadal dysgenesis
XY karyotype, hirsutism/virilization and
Xylitol
Xyloprim. See Allopurinol
d-(14C) Xylose breath test, in bacterial overgrowth
Y chromosome, in Klinefelter syndrome
Y chromosome microdeletions, in male infertility
Yaws (frambesia)
Yellow fever
prevention/immunization and
Yellow fever virus vaccine
Yellow top tubes
enterocolitica, diarrhea/gastroenteritis caused by
pestis
Yoga, for back pain
Yohimbine, toxicity of
Yttrium-90 
ibritumomab 
tiuxetan, 
for 
non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Yttrium-90 ibritumomab tiuxetan. See Ibritumomab tiuxetan
Z score
Zaditor. See Ketotifen
Zafirlukast, for asthma
Zalcitabine (ddC). See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
Zaleplon
overdose/toxicity of
Zanamivir, for influenza
prophylactic
ZAP-70, in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Zaroxolyn. See Metolazone
ZEBRA antibodies, in mononucleosis
Zegrid, for stress gastritis
Zelnorm. See Tegaserod
Zemplar. See Paricalcitol
Zenker diverticulum
Zerit. See Stavudine
Zestoretic. See 
Lisinopril, 
for 
hypertension, 
with
hydrochlorothiazide
Zestril. See Lisinopril
Zeta-associated protein (ZAP-70), in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia
Zetia. See Ezetimibe
Zevalin. See Ibritumomab tiuxetan
Ziac. See Bisoprolol, with hydrochlorothiazide
Ziagen. See Abacavir
Zidovudine (AZT). See also Antiretroviral therapy/HAART
with lamivudine
postexposure
with lamivudine and abacavir
myopathy caused by
for prevention of HIV transmission
to fetus/newborn
postexposure/after needle stick
resistance to
ZIFT. See Zygote intrafallopian transfer
Zileuton, for asthma
Zinacef. See Cefuroxime
Zinc
parenteral nutritional support and
toxicity of
for viral rhinosinusitis (common cold)
for Wilson disease
Zinc-finger protein-9 gene, in myotonic dystrophy
Zinc transporter 8 antibodies, in type 1 diabetes
Zinecard. See Dexrazoxane
Ziprasidone
overdose/toxicity of
Zirgan. See Ganciclovir
Zithromax. See Azithromycin
ZnT8 antibodies, in type 1 diabetes
Zocor. See Simvastatin
Zoladex. See Goserelin
Zoledronate/zoledronic acid. See also Bisphosphonates
in breast cancer management
for chemotherapy-induced toxicity/bone pain
for hypercalcemia/hyperparathyroidism
for osteoporosis prevention/management
corticosteroid use and
for Paget disease of bone
for thyroid bone metastases
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma)
carcinoid tumors and
GERD and
in MEN
peptic ulcer disease and
Zolmitriptan
for cluster headache
for migraine headache
Zoloft. See Sertraline
Zolpidem
overdose/toxicity of
Zometa. See Zoledronate/zoledronic acid
Zona-free hamster egg penetration tests, in infertility
workup
Zonalon. See Doxepin
Zonisamide
for obesity
overdose/toxicity of
Zostavax. See also Herpes zoster vaccine
Zoster. See Herpes zoster
Zoster ophthalmicus
Zoster sine herpete
“Zoster vaccine.” See Herpes zoster vaccine
Zostrix. See Capsaicin
Zosyn. See Piperacillin-tazobactam
Zovirax. See Acyclovir
Zygomycosis (mucormycosis)
rhinocerebral
Zygote intrafallopian transfer (ZIFT)
Zymar. See Gatifloxacin
Zyprexa. See Olanzapine
